




THE NEWGATE CALENDAR


Edited by Donal Ó Danachair

Volume 1








Published by the Ex-classics Project, 2009
http://www.exclassics.com
Public Domain


 
The anxious Mother with a Parents Care, 
Presents our Labours to her future Heir 
"The Wise, the Brave, the temperate and the Just,  
Who love their neighbour, and in God who trust 
Safe through the Dang'rous paths of Life may Steer, 
Nor dread those Evils we exhibit Here".




CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION TO THE EX-CLASSICS EDITION	10
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE	11
PREFACE To the 1780 Edition	15
PREFACE To Knapp and Baldwin's edition	17
THOMAS DUN Head of a Gang of Outlaws, on Account of whom King Henry I. is 
credibly supposed to have built Dunstable. Executed Piecemeal.	20
SIR GOSSELIN DENVILLE Head of a Gang of Robbers who had the audacity, so it 
is said, to hold up King Edward II.	24
ALICE ARDEN of FEVERSHAM Executed with her lover Mosbie and Others in the 
Year 1551 for the Murder of her Husband	27
LORD STOURTON AND FOUR OF HIS SERVANTS Executed 6th of March, 1556, 
for the Murder Of William Hartgill, Esq., and his Son John, of Kilmington, Somerset, 
after an implacable Persecution	34
THOMAS WYNNE  Housebreaker and Palacebreaker, whom Conscience made 
confess a Murder twenty years afterwards. Executed in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth
	37
ALISTER MACGREGOR  Who, for slaughtering the Laird of Luss's Friends, caused 
the Name of Macgregor to be abolished. Executed in 1604	40
ROBERT CREIGHTON, BARON OF SANQUIRE  Executed in 1612 for the Murder 
of John Turner, who had accidentally put out one of his Eyes	41
SAWNEY BEAN An incredible Monster who, with his Wife, lived by Murder and 
Cannibalism in a Cave. Executed at Leith with his whole Family in the Reign of 
James the First	42
THOMAS WITHERINGTON, JONATHAN WOODWARD AND JAMES 
PHILPOT Who, in the Reign of King James I. were the first to hear the Exhortation of 
the Bellman of St Sepulchre's	46
ARTHUR NORCOTT AND MARY NORCOTT, HIS MOTHER  Executed in 1629 
for the Murder of the former's Wife after the Test of touching the Body	49
WALTER TRACEY  To whom is attributed a poetic Encounter with Ben Jonson. 
Executed in 1634 after a Robbery on the Duke of Buckingham	52
SAWNEY CUNNINGHAM An abandoned Villain who inveigled and murdered his 
Wife's Lover, murdered his Uncle, terrorised the Country-side, and was executed at 
Leith, 12th of April,1635	55
ISAAC ATKINSON A Highwayman who specialised in robbing Lawyers. Hanged at 
Tyburn in 1640	67
WILLAM BRANDON ALIAS JACK KETCH Who beheaded King Charles the First.
	71
PATRICK FLEMMING An Irish Highwayman who held Sway near the Bog of Allen 
and, after numerous Murders, was executed on 24th of April, 1650	73
CAPTAIN ZACHARY HOWARD A Royalist who lost his Estates and turned 
Highwayman. Executed 1652.	76
CAPTAIN JAMES HIND A Famous Highwayman who robbed Roundheads and even 
made an Attempt on Cromwell. Executed 24th of September, 1652	81
CAPTAIN PHILIP STAFFORD Whose Patrimony being sequestered by the 
Roundheads took to the Highway and was hanged at Reading	89
MAJOR GEORGE STRANGWAYES Executed 28th of February, 1658, for the 
Murder of the Man who married his Sister	97
GILDER-ROY A most barbarous Murderer of his Mother and Sister, who led a 
bloodthirsty Gang of Outlaws in Scotland and hanged a Judge. Executed in April, 
1658	102
THOMAS GRAY  Nephew to the Exeter Hangman, who turned Thief and 
Highwayman, and ended by marrying an Heiress. His Autobiography written about 
1660	106
JOHN, RICHARD AND JOAN PERRY Mother and Sons, executed in 1661 on the 
false Statement of the First for the alleged Murder of Mr William Harrison, who 
appeared alive two Years later after strange Adventures.	117
COLONEL JAMES TURNER A Spendthrift London Merchant, against whom three 
Robberies from other Merchants were proved. Executed 21st of January, 1663	122
MOSES DRAYNE Ostler, hanged at Brentwood in 1667 for the Murder (by a 
Chelmsford Innkeeper and his Family some Years before) of Thomas Kidderminster, a 
Guest.	124
MARY FRITH OTHERWISE MOLL CUTPURSE A famous Master-Thief and an 
Ugly, who dressed like a Man, and died in 1663.	129
SAWNY DOUGLAS  A Scottish Highwayman who laid England under toll, and took 
a Copy of "Chevy Chase" to Tyburn when he was hanged on 10th of September, 1664.
	135
JAMES BATSON A Rogue who became a pretty Soldier and saw much of Europe, 
finally dying by the Rope at home in 1666	137
THOMAS SAVAGE A Profligate Apprentice who murdered a Fellow-Servant, was 
executed twice, and finally buried 28th of October, 1668	149
THE REV. ROBERT HAWKINS The Subject of a foul Conspiracy on the Part of 
Henry Larrimore and Sir John Croke that failed at Aylesbury Assizes, 11th of March, 
1669	153
STEPHEN EATON, GEORGE ROADES AND SARAH SWIFT Executed 14th of 
July, 1669, for the Murder of the Rev. John Talbot; their Accomplice, Henry 
Prichard, being reprieved	157
CLAUDE DU VALL A Frenchman who, coming to England, became by his 
Politeness and Gallantry on the Road the Romantic Darling of the Ladies. Executed 
21st of January, 1670	161
THOMAS WILMOT A Notorious Highwayman who hated and maltreated Women. 
Executed 30th of April, 1670	168
THOMAS BLOOD, GENERALLY CALLED COLONEL BLOOD Who stole the 
Crown from the Tower of London on 9th of May, 1671	175
MARY CARLETON, THE GERMAN PRINCESS A Kentish Adventuress who 
travelled the Continent, acquired several Husbands, and was executed on 22nd of 
January, 1673, for returning from Transportation	179
ANDREW RUTHERFORD OF TOWNHEAD Executed for the Murder of James 
Douglass, Brother to Sir William Douglass of Cavers, on 25th of November, 1674	190
GEORGE CLERK AND JOHN RAMSAY Executed 1st of March, 1675, for 
poisoning John Anderson, an Edinburgh Merchant; Kennedy, the Chemist's 
Apprentice who supplied them, being banished	191
PHILIP, EARL OF PEMBROKE AND MONTGOMERY Tried for the Murder of 
Nathaniel Cony by his Brother Peers in 1678 and found guilty of Manslaughter later
	193
THE REV. ROBERT FOULKES Executed 31st of January, 1679, for the Murder of 
his newly-born Babe	195
CAPTAIN RICHARD DUDLEY [Note: The two versions of this man's life given in 
different editions are so dissimilar that they may be two different men. Both are given 
here]	196
CAPTAIN VRATZ, JOHN STERN AND GEORGE BOROSKY Foreigners who 
murdered Thomas Thynn, Esq., in Pall Mall, on behalf, it was alleged, of Count 
Coningsmark. Executed 10th of March, 1682	202
WILLIAM NEVISON A Highwayman who, dying Of the Plague as was thought, 
reappeared as his own Ghost, and was finally executed at York in 1684	205
JOHN COTTINGTON ALIAS MUL-SACK Chimney-Sweep, Pickpocket and 
Highwayman, who brought off some big Coups. Executed in April, 1655	211
EDWARD AND JOAN BRACEY Who robbed on the Highway together, the Woman 
being executed in 1685 and the Man being killed by a Gunshot Wound	216
JONATHAN SIMPSON A Highwayman who was witty with a Halter round his Neck 
and, being reprieved, found that Newgate would not have him. Executed 8th of 
September, 1686	219
WILLIAM CADY A Highwayman who shot a Woman before the Eyes of her 
Husband for the Wedding-Ring she had swallowed. Executed in 1687	221
PHILIP STANSFIELD, SON OF SIR JAMES STANSFIELD Executed 15th of 
February, 1688, for the Murder of his Father and for High Treason	226
JOHN CHISLIE OF DALRY Hanged 3rd of April, 1689, for the Murder of the Right 
Hon. Sir George Lockhart, of Cornwath, Lord President of the Court of Sessions, 
after being tortured under a Special Act	229
WILLIAM BEW Who practised the Art of Flattery on the Highway. Executed 17th of 
April, 1689	231
PATRICK O'BRYAN Hanged once for Highway Robbery, but lived to rob and 
murder the Man for whom he had been executed. Finally hanged 30th of April, 1689
	232
THOMAS RUMBOLD Who, if all the Stories about him be true, was a very notable 
Cheat. Executed in 1689	235
WILLIAM DAVIS, THE GOLDEN FARMER Who was Farmer and Highwayman 
for Forty-two Years without his Neighbours suspecting. Executed 20th of December, 
1689	246
JACK BIRD A Highwayman who boxed an Earl's Chaplain for Twenty Guineas. 
Executed 12th of March, 1690	250
OLD MOBB A Highwayman who took to cheating the Citizens of London. Executed 
30th of May, 1690	253
TOM KELSEY An audacious young Thief who robbed the Tent of King William in 
Flanders and stabbed a Newgate Turnkey. Executed 13th Of June, 1690	262
SIR JOHN JOHNSTON Executed at Tyburn, 23rd of December, 1690 , for assisting 
to steal an Heiress	265
JACK WITHRINGTON One of five Brothers, all of whom were hanged. He earned 
Fame for his Courage, challenged the Captain of his Regiment; turned Gamester, 
Thief and Highwayman. Executed 1st of April, 1691	267
JACOB HALSEY The Quaker Highwayman, who after being fooled by a "Spirit" led 
a Life of Crime, and was executed at Maidstone in April, 1691	270
WILL MACQUEER Who stole the Lord Chancellor's Mace and delighted in robbing 
Army Officers on the Highway. Executed at Tyburn, 1st of May, 1691	273
TOM COX A Handsome Highwayman who robbed the King's Jester and even held up 
men of his own Trade. Executed 3rd of June, 1691	275
JACK COLLET ALIAS COLE Highwayman, who robbed in the Habit of a Bishop. 
Executed at Tyburn, 5th of July, 1691, for Sacrilegious Burglary	277
TOM WATERS Highwayman, who held up Gipsies, robbed a Vice-Admiral, and was 
executed on 17th of July, 1691	278
MOLL JONES Who became a Shoplifter for Love of her Husband. Executed at 
Tyburn 18th of December, 1691	280
TOM TAYLOR Who, getting literally hooked as a Pickpocket, turned House-breaker. 
Executed 18th of December, 1691, for using Arson as a means to Theft	281
HENRY HARRISON, GENT. Sentenced to Death 6th of April, 1692, for strangling 
Dr Clenche in a Coach	283
JOCELIN HARWOOD Highwayman, who committed such Barbarous Murders that 
his Associates gave him up to Justice. Executed in 1692	285
SIMON FLETCHER A most expert Pickpocket, who captained the Thieves of London. 
Executed in 1692	287
MADAM MARY BUTLER Mistress of the Duke of Buckingham, fined Five Hundred 
Pounds for forging a Bond for Forty Thousand Pounds, and died in Newgate Prison 
in 1692	288
WILLIAM JONES (ALIAS GOODWIN) AND JOHN BARBER Two Highwaymen 
caught at the same Robbery and &executed together on 26th of July, 1693	289
JAMES LEONARD Eighteen-year-old Highwayman, who tried to cut the Fatal Rope, 
and died with a Laugh in 1693	291
EDWARD HINTON Highwayman, who was such a Danger to Society that he was 
condemned and executed on the same Day, in 1694	292
TOM AUSTIN Highwayman, guilty of unparalleled Butchery. He murdered his Aunt, 
Wife and Seven Children. Executed in August, 1694	294
JAMES WHITNEY Notorious Highwayman, who believed in dressing well. Executed 
at Smithfield, 19th of December, 1694	296
GEORGE SEAGER A Rogue of a Soldier, who deserted from Johnny Gibson's 
Regiment and turned Burglar. Executed 27th of January, 1697	298
WILLIAM JOYCE A Chawbacon who, coming to London, was fleeced, so took to 
fleecing others. Executed in July, 1696	300
DR FRANCIS SALISBURY AND THOMAS HOUGHTON Executed at Tyburn, 3rd 
of November, 1697, for forging a Sixpenny Stamp	302
WILL HOLLYDAY Captain of the Ragged Regiment of the Black Guards, which 
Commission he threw up to take to the Highway. Executed 22nd of December, 1697
	303
JOHN SHORTER Highwayman, who conspired a Revolt in Newgate and saw the 
Ghost of another Malefactor there. Executed 22nd of December, 1697	305
SPENCER COWPER, ESQ.; JOHN MARSON, ELLIS STEVENS AND WILLIAM 
ROGERS, GENTS. Tried for murder at Hertford Assizes and acquitted, 16th of July, 
1699	306
TOM ROWLAND Who worked the Highway disguised as a Woman for Eighteen 
Years. Executed 24th of October, 1699	309
JOHN BELLINGHAM Son of a Justice, who took to the Highway, and was executed 
27th of October, 1699, for Forgery	310
WILLIAM MORELL A "Cavalier" Doctor and Fraudulent Impersonator, who 
continued his Cheats even after his Death in 1700	312
JOHN LARKIN Who committed so many Forgeries and Cheats that he had not Time 
to confess them all before he died, on 19th of April, 1700	317
MICHAEL VAN BERGHEN, CATHERINE VAN BERGHEN AND DROMELIUS, 
THEIR SERVANT, PUBLICANS Executed 10th of July, 1700, for the Murder of 
their Guest, Mr Oliver Norris	319
GEORGE CADDELL Executed for the Cruel Murder of Miss Price, Whom he had 
Seduced and Promised Marriage	321
JOHN HOLLIDAY OR SIMPSON Housebreaker and Highwayman, who robbed a 
King at Hertford, and a Church, and was hanged at Tyburn in 1700	323
GEORGE GRIFFITHS Who courted his Master's Daughter and then robbed him. 
Hanged at Tyburn on 1st of August, 1700 .	325
THE REV. THOMAS HUNTER, M.A. Executed on 22nd of August, 1700, near 
Edinburgh, for the diabolical Murder out of Revenge of the Two Children of Mr 
Gordon	328
JOHN COWLAND, GENTLEMAN Who suffered Death on 20th of December, 1700, 
for stabbing Sir Andrew Slanning, Baronet, near Drury Lane Theatre	331
CAPTAIN JOHN KIDD Known as the "Wizard of the Seas," who suffered for Piracy, 
at Execution Dock, 23rd of May, 1701	333
HERMAN STRODTMAN Executed at Tyburn, 18th of June, 1701, for the Murder of 
Peter Wolter, his Fellow-Apprentice	336
MARY ADAMS Executed for privately stealing, 16th June, 1702	340
MARY CHANNEL Famous for her Wit and Beauty, compelled to marry a Man she 
detested, poisoned him, and was executed in 1703, at the age of 18	342
TIM BUCKLEY Highwayman, who fell after a hot Battle, and was hanged in 1701
	345
TOM JONES Highwayman, executed at Launceston, 25th of April, 1702, for robbing 
a Farmer's Wife	347
DICK BAUF Who executed his own Parents, and from a Pickpocket became a Cat 
Burglar, and then a Highwayman. Executed at Dublin, 15th of May, 1702	349
ALEXANDER BALFOUR A Man of noble Family, who was convicted for the 
Murder of Mr Syme, escaped from Prison, and lived Fifty Years after the Day fixed 
for his Execution by the "Maiden" or Guillotine	352
THOMAS ESTRICK Executed for housebreaking on the 10th of March, 1703.	353
JACK WITHERS A sacrilegious Villain who murdered a Footman and was executed 
on the 16th of April, 1703	355
JOHN PETER DRAMATTI Executed at Tyburn, on 21st of July, 1703, for the 
Murder of his Wife, who said she was allied to the French Royal Family	357
THOMAS COOK Murdered a Constable during a Riot in Mayfair, and was executed 
on 11th of August, 1703	359
MOLL RABY Who robbed many Houses, and was hanged at Tyburn on 3rd of 
November, 1703	361
MOLL HAWKINS A "Question Lay" Thief, whose End was at Tyburn, on 22nd of 
December, 1703	363
HARVEY HUTCHINS Apprenticed as a Thief and became an expert Housebreaker. 
Executed at Tyburn in 1704	364
TOM SHARP Resourceful Thief, Coiner and Trickster. Executed in Long Acre on 
22nd September, 1704	366
JOHN SMITH Who proved that a Peruke-Maker does not make a good Highwayman, 
for his Career lasted only a Week. Executed 20th of December, 1704	369
EDWARD JEFFERIES Murderer, executed at Tyburn, on the 21st Of September, 
1705.	370
JOHN SMITH Convicted of Robbery, reprieved while actually hanging upon the 
Scaffold, 24th of December, 1705, and afterwards had two other Escapes from Death
	371
ROGER LOWEN Executed for Murder, 25th October, 1706	373
ARTHUR CHAMBERS A Master of Thieves' Slang, who was full of Artful Tricks, 
which, however, did not save him from the Gallows at Tyburn, where he found himself 
in 1706	375
JACK GOODWIN ALIAS PLUMP A young but expert Thief, who was executed at 
Tyburn in 1706 for Burglary	379
WILLIAM ELBY OTHERWISE DUNN An Armed Criminal, who was hanged for 
Burglary and Murder at Fulham on the 13th of September, 1707	381
JOHN HERMAN BRIAN Executed for robbing and burning the House of Peter 
Persode, Esq., St James's Street, Westminster, in October, 1707	382
JACK HALL Who, with two Associates named Bunce and Low, committed many 
Robberies, and was executed at Tyburn in 1707	384
DICK LOW Who started thieving at the Age of Eleven. Executed at Tyburn in 1707, 
when twenty-five years old	386
WILLIAM GREGG Spy, executed at Tyburn on the 28th of April, 1708	388
JOHN MORGRIDGE Murderer, executed at Tyburn, on the 28th of April, 1708.	392
JACK OVET An amorous Highwayman, who was executed at Leicester in May, 1708
	393
ANNE HARRIS Although only Twenty when she was executed at Tyburn, on 13th of 
July, 1708, she was a notorious Shoplifter, and her two Husbands had already 
suffered the Death Penalty	395
MADAM CHURCHILL Who with three Men committed a Murder, and was executed 
at Tyburn on 17th of December, 1708	396
CAPTAIN EVAN EVANS Clerk to Sir Edmund Andrews, in Guernsey, and later 
Highwayman in England. Executed in 1708	398
DICK HUGHES A Robber whose thoughtful Wife bought the Rope to hang him. 
Executed at Tyburn in June, 1709.	400
CHRISTOPHER SLAUGHTERFORD Executed at Guildford, July 9, 1709, for the 
murder of Jane Young	401
GRACE TRIPP Convicted of Murder on Evidence of the actual Perpetrator of the 
Crime, and executed at the Age of Nineteen at Tyburn, 27th of March, 1710	404
DANIEL DAMAREE, GEORGE PURCHASE, and FRANCIS WILLIS Tried for 
High-Treason.	405
JACK ADDISON Committed fifty-six Highway Robberies, and was executed at 
Tyburn in March, 1711	408



INTRODUCTION TO THE EX-CLASSICS EDITION

	The Newgate Calendar was one of those books, along with a Bible, Foxe's 
Book of Martyrs and the Pilgrim's Progress, most likely to be found in any English 
home between 1750 and 1850. Children were encouraged to read it because it was 
believed to inculcate principles of right living — by fear of punishment if not by the 
dull and earnest morals appended to the stories of highwaymen and other felons. The 
editors of one version even included as a frontispiece a picture of a devoted mother 
giving a copy to her son (who seems to be about eight years of age) while pointing out 
the window at a body hanging on a gibbet. They waxed lyrical on this theme, as 
follows:
The anxious Mother with a Parents Care, 
Presents our Labours to her future Heir 
"The Wise, the Brave, the temperate and the Just,  
Who love their neighbour, and in God who trust 
Safe through the Dang'rous paths of Life may Steer, 
Nor dread those Evils we exhibit Here".
	Thus most writers, like most literate people of any occupation, would have 
read it as children. And whatever the moral effects, it certainly provided them with 
plenty of material. Charles Dickens's Barnaby Rudge, Bulwer Lytton's Eugene Aram, 
Henry Fielding's Jonathan Wild and Gerald Griffin's The Collegians are only a few of 
the many novels directly based on stories in the Newgate Calendar. Even the illiterate 
would have seen stage versions of the stories, which were a staple of the popular 
drama of the time. Many of Sam Weller's comments of the "as the — said ven —" 
type are derived from such plays. Some of them - e.g. Dick Turpin, Sawney Bean, 
Captain Kidd — are seen even today in pantomimes. There is, or any rate was in 
1995, a restaurant in Dumfries called Sawney Bean's(!!)



BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE

1.	History and Early editions
	There is no single book called The Newgate Calendar. The first readily 
available accounts of crimes and criminals in England were broadsheets and 
chapbooks, produced in significant numbers from the beginning of the eighteenth 
century. A broadsheet was a single sheet of paper with typically four pages printed on 
each side in such a way that the buyer could fold, stitch and cut it to form a booklet; a 
chapbook was one of these sold ready made up. Both were very cheap — a penny or 
so — and were sold at fairs, by itinerant pedlars, and particularly, at executions. Many 
of these included accounts of the execution itself, including the last words of the 
condemned man before he had even spoken them.
	The first "Newgate Calendars" were collections of these accounts, and as the 
eighteenth century progressed, more and more crimes were added; the various 
collections plagiarized their predecessors shamelessly. Some of them added prosy 
morals to the stories. It was because of these that they were considered uplifting 
reading and few literate homes would have been without one; often the only book 
apart from a bible.
	The name "Newgate Calendar" can refer to all or any of the following:
*	The Tyburn Calendar, or Malefactors Bloody Register, published by G. 
Swindell (c. 1705)
*	A Compleat History of the Lives and Robberies of the Most Notorious 
Highwaymen, Foot-Pads, Shop-Lifts and Cheats of both sexes, in and about 
London and Westminster, and all parts of Great Britain, for above an hundred 
years past, continued to the present time by Captain Alexander Smith (1719)
*	The Chronicle of Tyburn, or Villainy Display'd in all its Branches (1720)
*	A General and True History of the Lives and Adventures of the Most Famous 
Highwaymen, Murderers, Street-Robbers etc. To which is added a genuine 
Account of the Voyages and Plunders of the Most Noted Pirates, Interspersed 
with several remarkable Tryals of the most Notorious Malefactors, at the 
Sessions-House in the Old Bailey, London by Captain Charles Johnson (1734)
*	Lives of the nost remarkable criminals condemned and executed for Murder, 
Highway Robberies, Housebreaking, Street Robberies and other Offences by 
John Osborn (1735)
*	The Tyburn Chronicle (1768)
*	The Newgate Calendar or or MALEFACTORS' BLOODY REGISTER 
containing: Genuine and Circumstantial Narrative of the lives and 
transactions, various exploits and Dying Speeches of the Most Notorious 
Criminals of both sexes who suffered Death Punishment in Gt. Britain and 
Ireland for High Treason Petty Treason Murder Piracy Felony Thieving 
Highway Robberies Forgery Rapes Bigamy Burglaries Riots and various 
other horrid crimes and misdemeanours on a plan entirely new, wherein will 
be fully displayed the regular progress from virtue to vice interspersed with 
striking reflexions on the conduct of those unhappy wretches who have fallen a 
sacrifice to the laws of their country. (3 vols., 1774-1778) - the first to bear 
this title.
*	THE MALEFACTOR’S REGISTER; OR, New NEWGATE and TYBURN 
CALENDAR. CONTAINING THE AUTHENTIC LIVES, TRIALS, ACCOUNTS 
OF EXECUTIONS, DYING SPEECHES, AND OTHER CURIOUS 
PARTICULARS, Relating to ALL the most notorious VIOLATERS OF THE 
LAWS OF THEIR COUNTRY; WHO HAVE Suffered DEATH, and other 
exemplary PUNISHMENTS, in England, Scotland, and Ireland, from the 
commencement of the Year 1700, to the MIDSUMMER SESSIONS of next 
Year. Together with NUMEROUS TRIALS in EXTRAORDINARY CASES, 
where the Parties have been ACQUITTED. This Work also comprehends all 
the most material Passages in the SESSIONS-PAPERS for a long Series of 
Years, and complete NARRATIVES of all the Capital TRIALS for BIGAMY, 
HIGH-TREASON, RIOTS, BURGLARY, HORSE-STEALING, STREET-
ROBBERY, FELONY, MURDER, UNNATURAL CRIMES, FORGERY, 
PETIT-TREASON, FOOTPAD-ROBBERY, PIRACY, HIGHWAY-ROBBERY, 
RAPES, And various other OFFENCES, and MISDEMEANORS. To which is 
added, A correct List of all the Capital Convictions at the Old Bailey, &c. &c. 
&c. since the Commencement of the present Century; which will be of the 
highest Use to refer to on many Occasions. The Whole tending, by a general 
Display of the Progress and Consequence of Vice, to impress on the Mind 
proper Ideas of the Happiness resulting from a Life of strict Honor and 
Integrity: and to convince Individuals of the superior Excellence of those Laws 
framed for the Protection of our Lives and Properties. Offered not only as an 
Object of Curiosity and Entertainment, but as a Work of real and substantial 
Use. Dedicated to Sir JOHN FIELDING, Knight. (1780)
*	The Criminal Recorder (1804)
*	The New and Complete Newgate Calendar or Malefactor's Universal Register, 
Comprising INTERESTING MEMOIRS of the MOST NOTORIOUS 
CHARACTERS who have been convicted of outrages on the LAWS OF 
ENGLAND, with SPEECHES, CONFESSIONS, and LAST EXCLAMATIONS 
of SUFFERERS by William Jackson (1818)
*	The Newgate Calendar Improved; Being interesting memoirs of notorious 
characters who have been convicted of Offence against the laws of England, 
During the seventeenth century; and continued to the present time, 
chronologically arranged; comprising Traitors, Murderers, Incendiaries, 
Ravishers, Pirates, Mutineers, Coiners, Highwaymen, Footpads, 
Housebreakers, Rioters, Extortioners, Sharpers, Forgers, Pickpockets, 
Fraudulent Bankrupts, Money droppers, Impostors, and Thieves of every 
Description. And Containing a number of interesting cases never before 
published: with Occasional remarks on Crimes and Punishments, Original 
Anecdotes, Moral reflections and Observations on particular Cases; 
Explanations of the Criminal Laws, the Speeches, Confessions and Last 
Exclamations of Sufferers. To which is added a Correct Account of the 
Various Modes of Punishment of criminals in Different Parts of the World by 
George Theodore Wilkinson, esq. (1822)
*	Celebrated Trials, and remarkable cases of Criminal Jurisprudence from the 
earliest Records to the Year 1825 by George Borrow (1825)
*	The Newgate Calendar by Andrew Knapp and William Baldwin (1826)
*	The Chronicles of Crime or the New Newgate Calendar, being a series of 
memoirs and anecdotes of notorious characters who have outraged the laws of 
Great Britain from the earliest period to 1841 by Camden Pelham. (1841, 
reprinted 1886)
Taken together, these contain considerably over one thousand cases. Every editor of 
the many subsequent collections and abridgements has chosen those he regarded as 
most interesting or important, discarding the rest, so there is no complete edition. This 
Ex-Classics edition is based chiefly on the Navarre Society 1926 edition (see below) 
supplemented with other material collated from various sources, and contains 717 
cases.

2.	20th and 21st Century printed editions of the Newgate Calendar
*	Trials from The Newgate Calendar. Edited by Charles Tibbits. London, Sisley 
Books. Undated, but apparently early 20th century. No Illustrations. Contains 
15 cases, from an unidentified source — possibly Camden Pelham's 
1841/1886 edition.
*	The Complete Newgate Calendar. Edited by J.L. Rayner and G.T Crook. 
London, Navarre Society, 5 vols., 1926. Illustrated. Despite its name, it is not 
at all complete; about half the cases have been omitted, and many of the ones 
included have been abridged, some very heavily. However it contains 512 
cases collated from various editions, an index and appendices.
*	The Newgate Calendar, Comprising INTERESTING MEMOIRS of the MOST 
NOTORIOUS CHARACTERS who have been convicted of outrages on the 
LAWS OF ENGLAND, with SPEECHES, CONFESSIONS, and LAST 
EXCLAMATIONS of SUFFERERS. Edited by Edwin Valentine Mitchell. 
London, John Lane The Bodley Head, 1928. Illustrated. Introduction by Henry 
Savage. Contains 43 cases, taken from Knapp and Baldwin's 1826 edition.
*	The Newgate Calendar, or Malefactors' Bloody Register. Edited by B. Laurie. 
London, T. Werner Laurie, 1933. Illustrated. No editorial details. Contains 151 
cases, all from the 18th Century, taken from Knapp and Baldwin's 1826 
edition. The best 20th century edition.
*	The Newgate Calendar and The New Newgate Calendar. London, Folio 
Society, 1951 & 1960 respectively; also republished as a two-volume set in 
1992. Edited by Sir Norman Birkett / Lord Birkett (he evidently got promoted 
in between the two editions). Illustrated. The first contains 28 cases taken from 
The Malefactors Register of 1780. The second has 23 cases from an 
unidentifed source — possibly Camden Pelham's 1841 edition. Introduction 
and afterwords to each case by the editor.
*	The Newgate Calendar, or Malefactor's Bloody Register. New York, 
Capricorn Books, 1962. Ilustrated. Edited by Sandra Lee Kerman. Contains 36 
cases, taken from the 1774 edition.
*	The Newgate Calendar, London, Panther Books. 3 vols, 1962-1963. Contains 
95 cases from Wilkinson's 1822 edition. No illustrations, but lurid and 
inauthentic cover pictures — one shows a man being racked, a form of torture 
not used in Britain during the period covered by the Calendars.
*	Tales from the Newgate Calendar by Rayner Heppenstal. London, Constable, 
1981. A retelling of about 25 cases, mostly from Jackson's 1818 edition. 
Also interesting is a work by the same author —
*	Reflections on the Newgate Calendar by Rayner Heppenstal. London, W. H. 
Allen, 1975. A series of essays on various aspects of 18th Century crime and 
punishment, including extensive quotations from the calendar. Very good 
illustrations.
*	The Newgate Calendar. London, Cardinal/Sphere books, 1991. Introduction 
by Christopher Hibbert. Illustrated. Contains 42 cases from Wilkinson's 1822 
edition. The worst 20th Century edition.
*	The Newgate Calendar. London, Wordsworth Classics, 1997. Introduction by 
Clive Emsley. No editorial details. Contains 49 cases.

3.	Electronic Editions
*	The Complete Newgate Calendar at the Unbiversity of Texas web site. 
tarlton.law.utexas.edu/lpop/etext/completenewgate.htm. A html version of the 
Navarre Society edition (See above)
*	Newgate Calendar. Archive CD Books Project, 2004. A Data CD containing a 
facsimile in Adobe Acrobat format of the first two volumes only (of five) of a 
reprint of Knapp and Baldwin's 1826 edition.
*	The Newgate Calendar at the Ex-classics web site. 
http://www.exclassics.com/newgate/ngintro.htm. This edition, readable online 
or can be downloaded in various formats.  
*	Google Books has various versions and odd volumes. The following (at 
September 2009) are full readable versions: 
http://books.google.com/books?id=NnUcWYZG5C4C&pg=PA1&dq=newgat
e+calendar#v=onepage&q=&f=false – Page image facsimile of volume 4 only 
of Knapp and Baldwin's edition, 
http://books.google.com/books?id=JZcuAAAAYAAJ&printsec=frontcover&d
q=newgate+calendar&lr=#v=onepage&q=&f=false Page image facsimile of 
volume 1 only of Camden Pelham's edition. Illustrated by "Phiz"



PREFACE 
To the 1780 Edition

 
Highwaymen Labouring on the Highway

	IN an age abandoned to dissipation, and when the ties of religion and morality 
fail to have their accustomed influence on the mind, the publication of a New Work of 
his nature makes its appearance with peculiar propriety.
	It has not been unusual, of late years, to complain of the sanguinary 
complexion of our laws; and if there were any reason to expect that the practice of 
felony would be lessened by the institution of any laws less sanguinary than those 
now in force, it would be a good argument for the enacting of such laws.
	Wise and virtuous legislators can wish nothing more ardently than the general 
welfare of the community; and those who have from time to time given birth to the 
laws of England, have indisputably done it with a view to this general welfare. But as 
the wisest productions of the human mind are liable to error, and as there is visibly an 
increasing depravity in the manners of the age, it is no wonder that our laws are 
found, in some instances, inadequate to the purposes for which they were enacted: 
and, perhaps, if, in a few instances they were made more, and in others less severe 
than they are at present, the happiest consequences might result to the public.
	It is with the utmost deference to the wisdom of their superiors, that the editors 
of this work offer the following hints for the improvement of the police of this 
country, and the security of the lives and properties of the subject: and,
	1stly. If his majesty would be graciously pleased to let the law operate in its 
full force against every convicted house-breaker, it would probably greatly lessen the 
number of those atrocious offenders; and consequently add to the repose of every 
family of property in the kingdom. What can be conceived more dreadful than a band 
of ruffians drawing the curtains of the bed at midnight, and presenting the drawn 
dagger, and the loaded pistol? The imagination will paint the terrors of such a 
situation, in a light more striking than language can display them.
	2dly. If the same royal prerogative was exerted for the punishment of women 
convicts, it would indisputably produce very happy effects. It is to the low and 
abandoned women that hundreds of young fellows owe their destruction. They rob, 
they plunder, to support these wretches. Let it not seem cruel that we make one 
remark, of which we are convinced experience would justify the propriety. The 
execution of ten women would do more public service than that of an hundred men; 
for, exclusive of the force of example, it would perhaps tend to the preservation of 
more than an hundred.
	3dly. Notorious defrauds, by gambling, or otherwise, should he rendered 
capital felonies by a statute; for, as the law now stands, after a temporary punishment, 
the common cheat is turned loose to make fresh depredations on the public.
	4thly. Forgery, enormous as the crime is, in a commercial state, might perhaps 
be more effectually punished and prevented than at present, by dooming the convict to 
labour for life on board the ballast-lighters. Forgers are seldom among the low and 
abandoned part of mankind. Forgery is very often the last dreadful refuge to which the 
distressed tradesman flies. These people then are sensible of shame, and perpetual 
infamy would be abundantly more terrible to such men than the mere dread of death.
	5thly. Highwaymen, we conceive, might with propriety be punished by 
labouring on the high-way, chained by the legs, agreeable to a design we have given 
in a plate in this work. Many a young fellow is hardened enough to think of taking a 
purse on the highway, to supply his extravagancies, who would be terrified from the 
practice, if he knew he could not ride half a dozen miles out of London, without 
seeing a number of highwaymen working together, under the ignominious 
circumstances above-mentioned.
	With regard to murderers, and persons convicted of unnatural crimes, we 
cannot think of altering the present mode of punishment. 'Him that sheddeth man's 
blood, by man shall his blood be shed:' as to the other wretches, it is highly to be 
lamented that their deaths cannot be aggravated by every species of torment!
	Having said thus much, we submit our labours to the candid revision of the 
public, nothing doubting that, on a careful perusal, they will be found to answer the 
purpose of guarding the minds of youth against the approaches of vice; and, in 
consequence, of advancing the happiness of the community.


PREFACE 
To Knapp and Baldwin's edition

	THE penal laws of the British empire are, by foreign writers, charged with 
being too sanguinary in the cases of lesser offences. They hold that the punishment of 
death ought to be inflicted only for crimes of the highest magnitude; and 
philanthropists of our own nation have accorded with their opinion. Such persons as 
have had no opportunity of inquiring into the subject will hardly credit the assertion 
that there are above one hundred and sixty offences punishable by death, or, as it is 
denominated, without benefit of clergy. The multiplicity of punishments, it is argued, 
in many instances defeat their own ends; for the object is alone the prevention of 
crime.
	One of these writers says, "The injured, through compassion, will often 
forbear to prosecute: juries, through compassion, will sometimes forget their oaths, 
and acquit the guilty, or mitigate the nature of their offence; and judges, through 
compassion, will rescue one half of the convicts, and recommend them to royal 
mercy;" yet, from the great population of the British islands, and the extensive 
commerce carried on by its subjects, it is absolutely necessary that every means of 
protection of persons and property should be adopted. The finger of God pointed at 
Cain the first murderer, and because, at the creation of the world, it contained but one 
family, he did not doom the guilty man to death; but we are taught that a mark was set 
upon him, as a terror to others in the like case offending. When mortals increased, 
laws were enacted to punish the murderer with death; and, when empires were 
formed, they extended to treason against the state: the introduction of commerce 
caused them to be inflicted on forgers and thus, as luxury increased the catalogue of 
crimes, they have progressively reached the number already mentioned.
	The Roman empire never flourished so much as during the era of the Portian 
law, which abrogated the punishment of death; and it fell soon after the revival of the 
utmost severity of its penal laws. But Rome was not a commercial nation, or it never 
could, under such an abrogation, have so long remained the mistress of Europe. In the 
present state of society it has become indispensably necessary that offences which in 
their nature are highly injurious to the community, and where no precept will avail, 
should be punished with the forfeiture of life: but those dreadful examples should be 
exhibited as seldom as possible; for while, on the one hand, such punishment often 
proves inadequate to its intended effect, by not being carried into execution; so, on the 
other, by being often repeated, the minds of the multitude are rendered callous to the 
dreadful example.
	Mr. Colquhoun observes, "Can it be thought a correct system of jurisprudence, 
which inflicts the penalty of death for breaking down the mound of a fish-pond, 
whereby the fish may escape; or cutting down a fruit-tree in a garden or orchard; or 
stealing a handkerchief or any trifle from a person's pocket, above the value of 
twelve-pence; while the number of other crimes, of much greater enormity, are only 
punished with transportation and imprisonment; and while the punishment of murder 
itself is, nd can be, only death, with circumstances of additional ignominy?"
	The punishment awaiting this most dreadful of all crimes, from the earliest 
ages of civilized nations, has been the same as that inflicted by the laws of the British 
empire, varying alone in the mode of putting the sentence into execution. We find the 
murderer punished by death in the ancient laws of the Jews, the Romans, and the 
Athenians; in nations of heathens and idolaters. The Persians, who worship the sun as 
their deity, press murderers to death between two stones. Throughout the Chinese 
empire, and the vast dominions of the east, they are beheaded; a death in England 
esteemed the least dishonourable; but here considered the most ignominious. 
Mahometans impale them alive, where they long writhe in agony before death comes 
to their relief. In Roman Catholic countries the murderer expiated his crime upon the 
rack. Several writers on crimes and punishments deny the right of man to, take away 
life, given to us by God alone; but a crime like murder, however sanguinary they may 
find our laws in regard to lesser offences, unquestionably calls loudly for death. 
"Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed," saith Holy Writ; 
but with the life of the murderer the crime should be fully expiated. The English law 
on this head goes still further — the effects of the murderer revert to the state, thus, as 
it were, carrying punishment beyond the grave, and involving in its consequences the 
utter ruin of many a virtuous widow and innocent children. Yet may we be thankful 
for laws, the dread of which affords us such ample security for our lives and property. 
Our Saxon ancestors afforded themselves no such protection. In Britain, one of the 
last nations of Europe emerging from a state of barbarity, this crime was suffered to 
be expiated by private revenge, or by such pecuniary composition as the friends of the 
murdered were base enough to accept. Hence resulted the most pernicious 
consequences, rather adding blood to blood, than serving as an example to evil-doers. 
The dreadful passion of revenge, knowing no bounds, oft fell upon the innocent, while 
the guilty escaped with impunity. On the other hand, the security of a compromise 
was, in those days of brutal ferocity, but a weak barrier against the passion, hatred, or 
caprice, of the rich and powerful. We have much reason to revere those laws, which 
make no discrimination of rank, wealth, or power; and, however corrupt our 
parliaments may be, our judges remain upright, and, in every case of doubt, ever 
inclining to mercy. Of this we have a striking instance in the execution of Laurence 
Earl Ferrers, a peer of the realm, descended from the royal blood of the Plantagenets, 
and who had been convicted of the crime of murder. Interest, rank, and wealth, could 
not save him from death, ignominious as the execution of the meanest criminal; even 
his suit to King George the Second, to receive his death from the axe instead of the 
halter, was refused. That upright monarch answered by observing, that, though 
ennobled, he should die according to the strict letter of the law; and he was 
consequently hanged at Tyburn. The powerful but unsuccessful interest exerted for 
the lives of Doctor Dodd, the Perreaus, Ryland, Fauntleroy, and many others, cuts off 
all hopes of mercy in this world on conviction of the commission of heinous crimes.
	The end of punishment is no other than to prevent the criminal from doing 
further injury to society, and to deter others from committing the like offence. Such 
punishments, therefore, and such modes of inflicting them, ought to be chosen, as will 
make the strongest and most lasting impression on the minds of others, with the least 
torment to the body of the criminal.
	The more immediately, after the conviction of a crime, a punishment is 
inflicted, the greater will be the lesson to mankind. It will also be more just, because it 
spares the criminal the superfluous torments of uncertainty. The time alone necessary 
to make his peace with God should be granted; and respites, unless they eventually 
prove the royal mind entirely inclined to mercy, are little better than torment to the 
malefactor. "An immediate punishment," says another commentator, is, in this 
respect, more useful, because the smaller the interval of time between the punishment 
and the crime, the stronger and more lasting will be the association of the two ideas of 
CRIME and PUNISHMENT so that they may be considered, one as the cause and the 
other as the unavoidable and necessary effect. It is demonstrated that an association of 
ideas is the cement which unites the fabric of the human intellect, without which 
pleasure and pain would be simple and ineffectual sensations. Men who have no 
general ideas, or universal principles, act in consequence of the most immediate and 
familiar associations; but the more remote and complex only present themselves to the 
minds of those who are passionately attached to a single object or to those of a greater 
understanding, who have acquired a habit of rapidly comparing together a number of 
objects and of forming a conclusion; and the result, that is, the action, in consequence, 
by these means becomes less dangerous and uncertain.
	It is, then, of the greatest importance that punishment should succeed the 
crime as immediately as possible, if we intend that in the rude minds of the multitude 
the picture of the crime shall instantly awaken the attendant idea of punishment, 
delaying which serves only to separate these two ideas; and thus affects the minds of 
the spectators rather as a terrible sight than the necessary consequences of a crime. 
The horror should contribute to heighten the idea of the punishment.
	Next to the necessary example of punishment to offenders is the record of such 
examples, in order that such as are unhappily moved with the sordid passion of 
acquiring wealth by violence, or stimulated by the heinous sin of revenge to shed the 
blood of a fellow-creature, may have before them a picture of the torment of mind and 
bodily sufferings of such offenders. In this light the following Criminal Chronology 
must prove highly acceptable to all ranks and conditions of men; for we shall find, in 
the course of these volumes, that even the sacred character, the noble, and the 
wealthy, are not free from those passions, which are in them more unworthy, because 
education ought to have taught them better, than in the lowest individual.


THOMAS DUN 
Head of a Gang of Outlaws, on Account of whom King Henry I. is credibly 
supposed to have built Dunstable. Executed Piecemeal.

	THIS person was of very mean extraction, and born in a little village between 
Kempston and Elstow, in Bedfordshire. It is said he had contracted thieving so much 
from his childhood, that everything he touched stuck to his fingers like birdlime, and 
that, the better to carry on his villainies, he changed himself into as many shapes as 
Proteus, being a man that understood the world so well — I mean the tricks and 
fallacies of it — that there was nothing which he could not humour, nor any part of 
villainy that came amiss to him. To-day he was a merchant, on the morrow a soldier, 
the next day a gentleman, and the day following a beggar. In short, he was every day 
what he pleased himself. When he had committed any remarkable roguery his usual 
custom was to cover his body all over with nauseous and stinking sear cloths and 
ointments, and his face with plasters, so that his own mother could not know him. He 
would be a blind harper to commit one villainy, and a cripple with crutches to bring 
about another; nay, he would hang artificial arms to his body. Besides, his natural 
barbarity and cruel temper was such, that two or three men together durst scarcely 
meet him; for one day, being upon the road, he saw a wagoner driving his wagon full 
of corn to Bedford, which was drawn by five good horses, the sight of which inflamed 
him to put the driver to death; accordingly, without making any reflection on the 
event, he falls on the wagoner, and with two stabs killed him on the spot, boldly took 
so much time as to bury him, not out of any compassion for the deceased, for he never 
had any, but the better to conceal his design; and then, mounting the wagon, drives it 
to Bedford, where he sells it, horses and all, and marched off with the money. Dun at 
first thought it the best way to commit his robberies by himself, but finding, upon 
trial, the method not so safe as where they were a company together, he betook 
himself to the woods, where he was soon joined by gangs of thieves as wicked as 
himself. These woods served them as a retreat on all occasions, and the caverns and 
hollow rocks for hiding places, from whence, night and day, they committed a 
thousand villainies. The report of their barbarity diffusing itself round about, caused 
all the country to keep off from them, and more especially to avoid the road leading 
from St Albans to Towcester, betwixt which they every day acted insupportable 
mischiefs, murdering and robbing all travellers they met, insomuch that King Henry I. 
built the town of Dunstable, in Bedfordshire, to bridle the outrageousness of this Dun, 
who gave name to the aforesaid place. However this precaution of the King was no 
impediment to Dun's designs, who still pursued his old courses, and though the age he 
lived in was not so ripe for all manner of villainy as it is now, yet the gang under his 
command consisted of several sorts of artists, who were made to serve different 
purposes and uses, just as he observed which way every man's particular genius 
directed him. Some of these being very expert in making false keys and betties, he 
never suffered them to remain idle or without business; others were ingenious at 
wrenching of locks and making deaf files, which wasted the iron without noise, 
making the strongest bolts give way for their passage. His fraternity being thus 
composed of lifters, pickpockets and filers, he refines, corrects, augments and 
establishes their laws, and one day having read to them some few comments on the art 
and mystery of robbing on the highway, he for a while leaves them, but in a short time 
returns. Dun having intelligence that the Sheriff of Bedford with his men were in 
search of him, and that they had determined to beset the wood where he then was, 
obliged him to be upon his defence, which, however, did not make him lose his usual 
courage; wherefore, to prevent any danger that might happen, he musters up his 
company of grand rogues and retires into the thickest part of the wood, to a place in 
his opinion the most advantageous; where, having left necessary orders, he sent out 
scouts; but judging it not safe to put his confidence in spies, in a case of such 
importance, he puts on a canvas doublet and breeches, old boots without spurs, and a 
steeple crowned hat on his head, and so draws near them, where taking notice that 
they were unequal to him, both in number and strength, he comes back to his 
companions, makes them stand to their arms, and so encourages them, by words and 
example, that in setting upon them, as they did immediately, they were presently 
routed; and pursuing them closely, they took eleven prisoners, whom they stripped of 
their liveries, and hanged them on several trees in the wood, after which they made 
their coats serve them to commit several robberies in. For Dun, going one night to a 
castle near this wood, ordered, in the King's name, the gates to be opened, pretending 
that Dun and his companions had hid themselves there. Accordingly the gates were 
opened without the least suspicion of what afterwards fell out. Dun made a pretence 
of searching into every corner for thieves, bustling everywhere throughout the castle 
with the greatest eagerness imaginable; but happening to find none, he would needs 
persuade the waiters that they had concealed themselves in the trunks. Upon this he 
gave orders for the keys to be immediately brought him; when, opening the trunks, 
and having loaded himself and companions with everything that was any way 
valuable, he returns back to the wood. Meantime the lord of the castle was extremely 
enraged at this proceeding, and could not brook to think that he should be thus robbed, 
concluding that the sheriff's men, under colour of searching for thieves, had thus 
pillaged him. Upon this he addresses the King and Parliament, giving an account by 
whom he thought he was thus robbed, who immediately issued out an order for 
examining the sheriff's men, one of whom was hanged to see what influence it would 
have on the other; but they persisting (as well they might) on their innocency, and 
discovering how eleven of their companions had been used by Dun and his associates, 
were set at liberty. By this time the person we are speaking of was become formidable 
to all; for not only the peers and other great personages of the kingdom stood in awe 
of him, but also those of the lower rank durst not frequent the roads as usual. What a 
melancholy circumstance in his conduct was his generally committing murder; and we 
find but one instance, among the several particulars of his life, in which he refrained 
from this barbarity. We shall draw now to his last period and only endeavour to show 
the extraordinary struggles he made to obtain his usual liberty and preserve his life, 
without being called to give an account of his actions or answer the laws of his 
country what he was indebted to them for the many villainies and barbarities he had 
committed. He had continued in his wild and infamous course of life for above twenty 
years, and about the River Ouse in Yorkshire was the general scene where he played 
his pernicious and destructive pranks, where men, women and children fell a prey to 
his attempts, for he went constantly attended with fifty horse, and the men of the 
country round about were so much terrified at his inhuman cruelties, and the number 
of his partisans, that very few had the courage or even durst venture to attack him, in 
order to apprehend and bring him to justice. We may venture to affirm that if his life 
contained many unaccountable and strange exploits, yet that his death was as 
remarkable. He having transacted things beyond imagination, his fame, or rather 
infamy, increased every day, so that the country was determined to put up with his 
insolencies no longer. It seems threatenings against him came from all parts, but 
these, instead of working a reformation, or making him reflect on his past conduct, 
only the more inflamed his audacious and villainous temper. A stout fellow, we are 
told, about Dunstable, had made five or six of the sheriff's officers to come to his 
house with a design to apprehend Dun, who sometimes would venture to walk out by 
himself. But Dun, having got previous information of this design against him, came in 
the night-time with his partisans to the man's house, and filled it with a thousand oaths 
and curses, which presently got wind throughout the town, and among the sheriff's 
men, who came and pursued him with all their forces. The fellows, his partisans, 
finding they were closely pursued, divided themselves into separate companies, and 
fled away to what places they could come to; but Dun got out into a certain village, 
where he took up his quarters for that time. However, the pursuit still continued very 
warm, and his adversaries, arriving at the house where he had concealed himself, 
asked where he was hid, and at last found that he was concealed there. Immediately 
on this report, the people in crowds gathered together about the house, and two 
especially posted themselves in the threshold of the door to apprehend him; but Dun, 
with an insurmountable courage, started up, with his dagger in his hand, from the 
table, and laid one dead that instant, and then dispatched his companion, who 
ventured to oppose him. But what was the most surprising, he had the boldness to 
bridle his horse in the very midst of this confused uproar, mount and force his way out 
of the inn. The people no sooner saw this but they fell upon him to the number of one 
hundred and fifty, armed with clubs, forks, rakes and what else they could next come 
at. With these weapons they forced him from his horse, but this was so far from 
dismaying our adventurer that he mounted again, in spite of all oppositions and made 
his way clear through the crowd that opposed him, with his sword. The countrymen 
upon this found there was more difficulty than they at first apprehended in taking him; 
but, fresh supplies coming in to their assistance, they gave him chase still. Our 
adventurer, now finding the last period of his life drawing on, made all the haste he 
was able, and got among the standing corn, and then taking to his heels (for by this 
time be was forced to quit his horse) outstripped his pursuers a matter of two miles, a 
circumstance that seems almost incredible. Dun having procured this advantage, as he 
thought, would have lain him down to rest, and composed himself a while, but was 
presently, to his exceeding surprise, hemmed in with no less a number than three 
hundred men. Thus was he brought into as great a dilemma as before, but, resuming 
his wonted courage, he pushed valiantly through them, and got to some valleys, 
where, considering there was but one expedient left to save himself, he presently 
undressed himself, and then, taking his sword between his teeth, plunged into the river 
below, and fell a-swimming. Instantly were all the banks covered with multitudes of 
people, some of whom were drawn together merely out of curiosity to be eye-
witnesses of the event; while others got ready boats, with a design to give him chase, 
and try if they could take him. It was an astonishing sight to behold him, with the 
sword all the time between his teeth, swimming so many cross and various ways as 
still to elude his pursuers. At length he got upon a little island which was in the river, 
where he sat down to get breath a while; but his adversaries, having determined not to 
let him have any rest, followed him in their boats, but were forced to return back 
wounded in the attempt. After this he jumps in again, falls to swimming, and tries to 
gain the shore at another place; but ill-fortune attends him, and the people, crowding 
thither, make at him with all their oars, when they found it no way possible to take 
him without blows. Several times they struck him on the head, and, the blows 
stunning him, it was no hard matter then to apprehend him, which they did, and 
conveyed him to a surgeon, in order to have his wounds cured and care taken of him. 
When his wounds were dressed, he was conducted before a magistrate, who, with 
very little examination, sent him to Bedford Jail, under a strong guard, to hinder his 
being rescued by his companions. Within a fortnight after this, being tolerably well 
cured, he was brought into the market-place at Bedford, without being put to the 
trouble of undergoing a formal trial, where a stage was erected for his execution and 
two executioners appointed to finish his last scene of life. Dun, on beholding these 
dreadful men, was so far from giving in to the least concern or dismay, that he warned 
them, with an unconcerned air, not to approach him for fear of the consequences, 
telling them he would never suffer himself to undergo the punishments determined 
him from their hands. Accordingly, to convince the spectators round him that his 
usual intrepidity and greatness of mind had not left him, he grasped both the 
executioners, and struggled so long with them that he was seen nine times 
successively upon the scaffold, and the men upon him. However, he had still strength 
to rise up from them, and taking his solemn walks from one end of the stage to the 
other, all which time he cursed the day of his birth, vented a thousand imprecations on 
those who had been the cause of his being apprehended, but chiefly on him who had 
been the first to beset him. But his cruel destiny is determined not to leave him; he 
finds his strength diminish, and that he cannot, in spite of himself, defend himself any 
longer. He yields, and the executioners chop off his hands at the wrists, then cut off 
his arms at the elbows, and all above next, within an inch or two of his shoulders; next 
his feet were cut off beneath the ankles, his legs chopped off at the knees, and his 
thighs cut off about five inches from his trunk, which, after severing his head from it, 
was burnt to ashes. So after a long struggle with death, as dying by piecemeal, he put 
a period to his wicked and abominable life; and the several members cut off from his 
body, being twelve in all, besides his head, were fixed up in the principal places in 
Bedfordshire, to be a terror to such villains as survived him.


SIR GOSSELIN DENVILLE 
Head of a Gang of Robbers who had the audacity, so it is said, to hold up 
King Edward II.

	THE gentleman we are going to give an account of was descended of very 
honourable parents at Northallerton, a market-town in the North Riding of Yorkshire. 
The family was very ancient, and came into England with William the Conqueror, 
who assigned them lands for the services done him in the North of England, where 
they lived in great esteem, and the successors after them for several ages, till the time 
of Sir Gosselin. The father of this gentleman, being a pious and devout man, sent his 
son to Peter College, in Cambridge, where for some time he pursued his studies with 
great warmth, and to outward appearance gave signs of making a fine man. This gave 
the ancient father extreme joy, who began to think of placing his son in the 
priesthood; but it seems Gosselin sat at his books purely to amuse his father and to 
gain some advantage he had in view by it. It was found out afterwards that a religious 
life, as his father had designed for him, was not the thing he relished; but that the 
prosecution of amours and love intrigues had the greatest ascendant over his mind; 
nay, he began now to display his natural propensity to a luxurious and profligate life.
	These steps creating great discontent in the breast of the father, he took the 
violent courses of his son so much to heart that it was not long before he died, leaving 
our gentleman in full possession both of the dignity of the family and his estate, 
valued at twelve hundred pounds per annum, a considerable fortune in those days. 
Thus our gentleman becomes a knight, rolls in a plentiful fortune, and gives a loose 
more extravagant than ever to his ill course. He associates a brother of his, named 
Robert, with him, and they two together, by their profuseness, soon made an end of 
the estate.
	Being now out of the reach of maintaining themselves as usual, and finding 
the poverty of their circumstances still increasing upon them, they perceived there was 
no other way of supporting themselves than by raising contributions on the highway. 
To this end, being men of extraordinary valour and courage, they equipped 
themselves out for a daring enterprise, which was to rob two cardinals, sent into this 
kingdom by the Pope to mediate a peace between England and Scotland and terminate 
the differences then on foot between Edward II. and the Earl of Lancaster.
	One Middleton and Selby, two robbers of these times, having heard of 
Denville's design, came and joined him with all the forces under their command, 
which were no inconsiderable number. In short, the cardinals were robbed, and a very 
large booty taken from them, which put our bravo into a tolerable way of subsistence 
for some time; but there happening some difference between Middleton and him, with 
regard to the sharing of this booty, the former left the association, and went some time 
on the road by himself; but being soon apprehended, was brought up to London, and 
there executed.
	All this while Sir Gosselin pursued his illegal practices; the valour of his arm 
and the continual preys he and his men made on all travellers put the whole country 
into a terrible panic; for there was no such thing as travelling with any safety; and the 
great number of persons, of whom his gang was composed, plainly showed that they 
defied the laws, and everything else. What they could not obtain on the highway, they 
sought for in houses, monasteries, churches and nunneries, which were rifled without 
any distinction, and the most valuable and sacred things carried off. The men under 
Sir Gosselin's conduct led a most licentious life, and, like their master, committed the 
worst of villainies and barbarities. Persons were murdered in their houses when their 
goods might have been taken without using bloodshed: so that killing and doing 
havoc rather looked like sport or pastime with these desperadoes. Our countryman 
Tom Shadwell seems to point at our knight in his play called The Libertine; nay, to 
have founded the main plot of that piece upon his barbarous and licentious conduct. 
They who have a mind to be further informed in this particular may, by perusing that 
dramatic performance, see how near the whole conduct of the libertine squares with 
that of the person we are speaking of.
	A while after, our knight and his associates marching on the road between 
Marlow in Buckinghamshire and Henley-upon-Thames, met with a Dominican monk, 
named Andrew Sympson, who not only was obliged to deliver what little gold he had 
to them, but also to climb into a tree and preach them a sermon, which he did with a 
great deal of judgment and good sense, though pronounced extempore. This sermon is 
at the very time recorded in the Bodleian Library as a piece containing sound divinity 
and a great deal of wit.
	This sermon was vastly well received by Sir Gosselin and his associates, who 
returned the monk their extraordinary thanks for the excellent sermon he had made; in 
short, they gave back not only the gold they had taken from him, but, making a 
collection among themselves, presented to him a purse (above his money) by Sir 
Gosselin, their spokesman, who, after a few ceremonies on either side, left the monk 
to descend out of the tree quietly, and go home in peace.
	If accounts be true that are transmitted down to us concerning this knight and 
his confederates, whole parties of horse and foot sent out to suppress their career were 
several times defeated; at which the whole kingdom was put into so much terror and 
amazement that none durst take a journey or appear on the roads. The King then 
reigning having acquainted his nobles of his intention to make a progress through the 
north of England, Sir Gosselin came timely to heat of it, and accordingly put himself 
and his whole gang in priests' habits. Now the King being on his progress, and near 
Norwich, our adventurers, being a considerable number, drew up to him in their 
venerable habits, which making the King halt to observe them a little more closely, 
Sir Gosselin closed up with him. The King upon this seemed desirous to hear what he 
had to say, which Sir Gosselin observing, after a low obeisance made to his Majesty, 
he told him that he was not come to discourse about religious matters, but secular 
affairs, which was to lend him and his needy brothers what money he had about him, 
otherwise not all the indulgences he could obtain from the Pope should save him from 
being exposed to a very hard and rigid penance. The King, having but about forty to 
attend him, found it impossible to get clear of his adversary, or save his money, but 
was obliged to surrender all, nay, look on while his noblemen's pockets were 
searched; after which Sir Gosselin and his associates left them to perform the 
remaining part of their progress.
	This attempt upon the King was highly resented; and several proclamations, 
with considerable rewards inserted, were issued to apprehend any of the persons 
concerned in this robbery, alive or dead. In less than six months above sixty were 
treacherously taken by people in order to obtain the premium. Notwithstanding, this 
change of fortune was so far from working any reformation in our knight, that he and 
his brother robbed with greater boldness; so that those noblemen and gentlemen who 
had seats in the country were afraid to reside at them, and were obliged to secure 
themselves and their effects in the fortified cities and towns of the kingdom.
	The last adventure which we have on record of this knight was this: Sir 
Gosselin and the remaining part of the associates being in the north of England were 
determined to see what the rich Bishop of Durham could afford them; accordingly 
they got into his palace, which they rifled from top to bottom of all the valuable things 
in it; and, not content with the spoil they found, bound the reverend prelate and his 
servants hand and foot, while they went down into the cellar, drank as much wine as 
they could well digest, and then let the rest run out of the barrels; after which they 
departed, leaving the ecclesiastic to call upon God to deliver him in his necessities.
	But fortune now weighs down the scale of our knight's iniquities It seems a 
man kept a public house in a by-place in Yorkshire, where Sir Gosselin frequently 
went, not so much for the liquors there, as the beauty of the woman of the house. A 
freer acquaintance than consisted with decency had been kept up very openly some 
time between the knight and the landlady; which the husband at first connived at, 
through a notion his dignified customer, and the company he brought to his house, 
would be of considerable advantage to his trade. But Sir Gosselin and his wife 
pursuing their love intrigues in broad daylights to the small scandal of his family, and 
he beginning too late to think himself injured, found no other resource to repair the ill 
name thrown upon him by the people in the neighbourhood than by removing the 
knight out of the way. To which end he goes to the sheriff of the county, and 
acquaints him how Sir Gosselin might be apprehended with little difficulty at his 
house, provided he came that night. The sheriff rejoiced at the opportunity, but 
considered that the knight and his associates were men of desperate fortunes, vast 
courage, and resolved to hazard the last rather than surrender or be taken; upon which 
he mustered up between five and six hundred men-at-arms, came privately at night 
with them to the house, which they vigorously attacked as our knight and his company 
were revelling over their cups. Now or never was an important battle, or rather siege, 
to be determined. The persons within resolutely defended themselves for some time, 
and the men-at-arms without were not less valiant. Good fortune seemed to incline to 
our knight's side, who, in conjunction with his men, laid two hundred of his 
adversaries dead on the spot; but being tired with the slaughter, and fresh enemies 
pouring in upon him he was presently hemmed in on every side, and obliged to 
surrender, though not without fighting to the last. The sheriff, exasperated to think of 
losing so many men, took care to put the captive knight, and three and twenty of his 
comrades, who were made prisoners at the same time, under a very strong guard, who 
safely conducted them to York, where, without any trial, or other proceedings had 
upon them, they were executed, to the joy of thousands, the satisfaction of the great, 
and the desire of the common people, who waited upon them to the gallows, 
triumphing at their ignominious exit.


ALICE ARDEN of FEVERSHAM 
Executed with her lover Mosbie and Others in the Year 1551 for the Murder 
of her Husband

	THOMAS ARDEN was but a private gentleman, living at Feversham, in the 
county of Kent; yet the circumstance of his murder, the detection of it, and the 
punishment of the offenders were so exceeding remarkable, that they may very well 
be inserted in this place. He was a tall and comely person, and married a gentlewoman 
who was young, well shaped, and every way handsome; who having unhappily 
contracted an unlawful familiarity with one Mosbie, a black swarthy fellow, servant to 
Lord North, it happened by some means or other that they fell out, and so continued at 
variance for some time: but she being desirous of a reconciliation, and to use her 
former familiarity with him, sent him a pair of silver dice by the hands of one Adam 
Fowle, living at the Flower-de-Luce, in Feversham, for a present.
	This brought them together again, so that Mosbie lay often in Arden's house, 
and in a short time the intercourse between them was so open that Mr Arden could not 
but perceive it; although common report says that he winked at it, for fear of 
disobliging her relations, from whom he had some great expectations. Having 
continued their lewd practices for a considerable time, the woman doted more and 
more upon Mosbie, and began to loathe her husband extremely; insomuch that she 
would have been glad to have found out a way to get rid of him. There was a painter 
at Feversham who was reported to be versed in the art of poisoning; to him she 
applied herself, and asked him whether he had any skill in that or not. The man 
seeming to own it, she told him she would have such a dose prepared as would make a 
quick dispatch. "That I can do," said he. So he presently went to work, and gave it her, 
with directions to put it into the bottom of a porringer and so to pour milk upon it; but 
the woman, forgetting the direction, put in the milk first, and then the poison. Now her 
husband designing that day to take his horse and ride to Canterbury, his wife brought 
him his breakfast, which was usually milk and butter. Having taken a spoonful or two 
of the milk, and liking neither the taste nor colour of it, he said: "Mrs Alice, what sort 
of milk is it you gave me?" Upon which she threw down the dish and said: "I find 
nothing can please you." Upon which he went away for Canterbury, and by the way 
vomited extremely, so that he escaped for that time.
	Arden's wife became afterwards acquainted with one Green, of Feversham, a 
servant of Sir Anthony Agers; from which Green, Arden had wrested a piece of 
ground lying on the back side of the abbey of Feversham; about which some blows 
and many menacing expressions had passed between them; and therefore the woman 
knowing that Green hated her husband, she began to concert with him how to make 
away with Arden. The agreement at last was thus: that if they could procure anyone to 
murder her husband, he should have ten pounds for his wicked pains. Now Green 
having some business to be transacted at London for his master Sir Anthony, set out 
for that city, where his master then was, and having a charge of money about him, he 
desired one Bradshaw, a goldsmith of Feversham and his neighbour, to go with him as 
far as Gravesend, and he would satisfy him for his trouble. When they had got as far 
as Rainhan Down they saw some gentlemen coming; Bradshaw discerned a man 
coming up the hill from Rochester, armed with a sword and buckler, and another with 
a huge staff upon his shoulder, and thereupon said to Green: "It is well that there is 
some company coming after us, for there is coming up against us as murdering a 
villain as any in England; and were it not for the other people we should scarce be 
able to come off without the loss of our lives and money." Green, as he afterwards 
confessed, imagining that such a one was fit for his purpose, asked the other "Which 
is he?" "That's he," quoth Bradshaw, "who has the sword and buckler; his name is 
Black Will." "How do you know that?" said Green. Bradshaw answered: "I knew him 
at Boulogne, where he was a soldier and I was Sir Richard Cavendish's man, and there 
he committed several robberies and horrid murders between the passes of that town 
and France." By this time the company having overtaken them, they advanced all 
together and met Black Will and his companion. Some of the strangers, knowing 
Black Will, asked him how he did, and whither he was going. He answered by his 
blood, for he accented almost every word with an oath, "I know not, neither do I care; 
I'll set up my stick and go as it falls." Then said they to him, "If you will go back with 
us to Gravesend we will give you a supper." "By my blood," said he, "I care not, I'll 
go along with you." As they travelled on, Black Will claimed an acquaintance with 
Bradshaw, saying, "Friend Bradshaw, how dost thou do?" Bradshaw having no mind 
to renew his acquaintance, or to have anything to do with such a horrid fellow, 
replied: "Why, do you know me?" "Yes, that I do," said he; "did we not serve together 
at Boulogne?" "I beg your pardon," said Bradshaw, "I had forgot you."
	Then Green entered into discourse with Black Will and said: "When you have 
supped, come to my quarters at such a sign, and I will give you some sack and sugar." 
"By my blood," said he, "I thank you." Thither he went, according to his promise, and 
was well treated. Then Green and he went and talked together, aside from Bradshaw, 
and the former proposing to give the other ten pounds to kill Mr Arden, he answered, 
with a great oath, he would if he could but know him. "I'll show him to you to-
morrow in St Paul's," said Green. When they had done talking, Green bade him go 
home to his quarters; and then, sitting down, he wrote a letter to Mrs Arden, wherein, 
among others, he made use of these expressions: "We have got a man for our purpose; 
we may thank my brother Bradshaw for it." Bradshaw, knowing nothing of the matter, 
took the letter, and went the next morning and delivered it to Mrs Arden, while Green 
and Black Will bent their course to London.
	Green, at the time appointed, showed Black Will Mr Arden walking in St 
Paul's; upon which Black Will asked him: "Who is he that follows him?" "Marry," 
said Green, "one of his men." "By my blood," quoth Will, "I'll kill them both." "Nay," 
said Green, "do not do that, for he is in the secret." "By my blood, I care not for that, I 
will kill them both," replied he. "By no means," said Green. Then Black Will 
proposed to murder Mr Arden in Paul's Churchyard, but there were so many 
gentlemen with him that he could not affect it. Green imparted the whole discourse to 
Arden's man, whose name was Michael, and who ever after was afraid lest Black Will 
should kill him. The reason why Michael conspired with the rest against his master 
was because he should marry a kinswoman of Mosbie's.
	Mr Arden taking up his lodgings in a certain parsonage-house which he had in 
London, Michael and Green agreed that Black Will should go thither in the night-
time, where he should find the doors left open for him to go in and murder Mr Arden. 
Michael having put his master to bed, left the doors open according to agreement, 
though Mr Arden, after he was in bed, asked him if he had made them all fast, to 
which he answered Yes. But afterwards growing afraid when he had got to bed, lest 
Black Will should kill him as well as his master, he rose, shut the doors, and bolted 
them very fast; insomuch that when Black Will came thither, and could find no 
entrance, he returned in great fury that he should be so disappointed, and in that mood 
he went next day to Green, swearing and staring like a madman, and with many 
horrible oaths and execrations threatened to kill Arden's man first, wherever he met 
him. "Nay," said Green, "pray forbear that; let me first know the reason why the doors 
were shut." Green having found out Arden's man, and expostulated the matter with 
him about his not leaving the doors open, according to his promise, Michael, who had 
framed his answer before, said: "Marry, I will tell you the reason: my master last night 
did that which I never found him to do before; for, after I was in bed, he got up 
himself and shut the doors, and chid me severely in the morning for my carelessness 
in leaving them open." This pacified Green and Black Will.
	Now Arden having done his business in London, and being ready to return 
home, his man went to Green and informed him his master would go down that night. 
Upon this they agreed that Black Will should kill him on Rainham Down. When Mr 
Arden had got to Rochester, his man growing apprehensive that Black Will would 
murder him as well as his master, he pricked his horse on purpose, and made him go 
lame, that so he might protract the time and stay behind. His master observing the 
lameness of his horse, and asking him the reason of it, Michael said he did not know. 
"Well," quoth his master, "when we come to the smith's forge, which is between 
Rochester and the foot of the hill over against Chatham, let him take off his shoe and 
search, and then come after me." So that his master rode on; but before he came to the 
place where Black Will lay in wait for him he was overtaken by several gentlemen of 
his acquaintance, so that the assassin failed here also to accomplish his bloody design.
	After Mr Arden had got home he sent his man to the Isle of Sheppey, to Sir 
Thomas Cheney, then Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, about some business; by 
whom Sir Thomas sent a letter back to his master. But when he came home, his good 
mistress took and concealed the letter, and ordered the fellow to tell his master that he 
had a letter for him from Sir Thomas Cheney, but that he had unfortunately lost it; and 
added withal, that he thought it would be his best way to go in the morning himself to 
Sir Thomas's, because he knew nothing of the contents of it. Having resolved to do so, 
he ordered his man to be up betimes in the morning. In the meanwhile Black Will and 
one George Shakebag, his companion, were, by Green's appointment, concealed in a 
storehouse of Sir Anthony Agers, at Preston, to which place Mrs Arden went to see 
him, who brought and sent him victuals and drink several times. He was charged very 
strictly to be up early in the morning to waylay Mr Arden in a broom-close between 
Feversham and the Ferry, and there to murder him. Now Black Will was up in the 
morning betimes, but, missing his way, he tarried in a wrong place.
	Arden and his man, early in the morning, riding towards Shoreham, where Sir 
Thomas Cheney lay, when they were come near the broom-close, Michael, who was 
ever afraid that Black Will would murder him with his master, pretended he had lost 
his money purse. "Why," said his master," thou foolish fellow, couldst thou take no 
more care of thy purse? How much was there in it?" "Three Pounds,'' said he. "Go 
back, you fool," quoth his master, "and look for it! it is so early that there is nobody 
yet stirring; thou mayst be sure to find it, and so make haste and over take me at the 
ferry." But Arden nevertheless escaped this time by reason of the mistake of Black 
Will, who thought he was sure of him in his return home. But whether some of the 
lord warden's servants attended him back to Feversham, or that he considered it was 
too late for him to go through the broom-close and so took another way, Black Will 
once more failed to execute his murdering designs. St Valentine's Day being near, the 
villainous crew thought it a proper time to perpetrate their wicked devices. Mosbie 
intended to pick some quarrel or other with Arden at the fair, and so fight with him, 
saying he could not find in his heart to murder a gentleman in such a manner as his 
wife would have it; though they had made mutual promises to each other to be 
altogether as man and wife, and had there upon received the sacrament at London 
openly together. But this project of quarrelling with Mr Arden would not do, for 
though he had been often before and was then also highly provoked by Mosbie, he 
would not fight. Mosbie had a sister who lived in a tenement of Arden's near his 
house in Feversham, so that Black Will, on the eve of the fair, was sent for to come 
thither. Green was the man who brought him, and met Mrs Arden, accompanied with 
Michael her man and one of her maids; there were also present Mosbie and George 
Shakebag, and here the plot was laid to murder Arden in the manner they afterwards 
perpetrated the horrid fact.
	Mosbie indeed at first would not consent to so base and cowardly an act, but 
flung away in a fury, and went up Abbey Street towards the Flower-de-Luce, the 
house of Adam Fowle, whither he often resorted; but before he got thither he was 
overtaken by a messenger sent after him by Mrs Arden, importuning him by all means 
to return, which he did accordingly; and then she fell down upon her knees before 
him, and pressed him to go through with the business if he had any manner of love for 
her, and as she had several times told him, he might be assured there was nobody that 
would be concerned at his death, or make any search after them that dispatched him.
	The importunity of the wicked woman at length prevailing, he was brought to 
a compliance with the accursed project, and thereupon Black Will was conveyed into 
Mr Arden's house, and hid in a closet at the end of the parlour, before which they had 
sent all the servants out upon some pretence or other, except those who were privy 
and consenting to the villainous design. Mosbie went and stood at the door in a silk 
night-gown tied about him, between the hours of six and seven at night; soon after 
which Arden, who had been at a neighbour's house called Dunding, and had cleared 
some accounts that were between them, went home, and finding Mosbie at the door, 
asked him if it was not supper-time. "I think not," said he; "I believe it is not yet 
ready." "Then," quoth Mr Arden, "let us in the meantime go and play a game at 
tables"; and so going directly into the parlour through the hall where his wife was 
walking, Mr Arden said to her: "How now, Mrs Alice?" but she made him little or no 
answer. In the meantime the wicket door of the entry was chained by somebody, and 
when they had got into the parlour Mosbie sat down on the bench, facing the closet 
wherein Black Will was hid; Michael, Arden's man, stood behind his master, with a 
candle in his hand to shadow Black Will, that his master might by no means perceive 
him come out of the closet. In their play Mosbie said (and that was the signal for 
Black Will to come out): "Now, sir, I can take you if I please." "Take me!" said 
Arden. "Which way?" With that Black Will rushed out of the closet and threw a towel 
about his neck to stop his breath and strangle him; then Mosbie having a pressing 
iron, weighing fourteen pounds, at his girdle, struck him so on the head with it that he 
knocked him down, upon which he gave a loud groan, which made them believe he 
was killed. From the parlour they carried him into the counting-house, where, as they 
were about to lay him down, the pangs of death came upon him, and groaning in a 
most grievous manner, he extended himself, and Black Will, giving him a terrible 
gash in the face, slew him outright; then he laid him along, took his money out of his 
pocket and the rings off his fingers, and coming out of the counting-house said: "The 
business is over, give me my money." Upon which Mrs Arden gave him ten pounds, 
and then he went to Green's, borrowed a horse of him, and rode away. After Black 
Will was gone, Mrs Arden went into the counting-house and with a knife stuck the 
corpse seven or eight times in the breast; then they cleaned the parlour, wiped away 
the blood with a cloth, and strewed the rushes which had been disordered during the 
struggle. The cloth and the bloody knife wherewith she had wounded her husband 
they threw into a tub by the well's side, where they were afterwards both found. This 
done, she sent for two Londoners then at Feversham to come to supper, to which they 
had been invited before the horrid murder was committed. They were grocers by 
trade, and their names were Prune and Cole. When they came she said: "I wonder 
where Mr Arden is? He will not stay long. Come, let us sit down, he will be quickly 
with us." Then Mosbie's sister was sent for, and sat down with them, and they were all 
very merry. When supper was over, Mrs Arden made her daughter play on the 
virginals, and they danced, and she amongst them, frequently saying, "I wonder Mr 
Arden stays so long; come, let us sit down, he will surely soon be with us; let us play 
a game at tables." But the Londoners said they must go to their lodgings, or else they 
should be locked out and so took their leave of the company and departed. As soon as 
they were gone, the servants who were not privy to the murder were sent into the 
towns some to look for their master, and others upon other errands; then Michael, a 
maid, Mosbie's sister, and one of Mrs Arden's own daughters took the dead body, and 
carried it out into a field adjoining to the churchyard, and to his own garden wall, 
through which he went to church. In the meantime it began to snow, and when they 
came to the garden door they had forgot the key, so that one of them was sent to fetch 
it. It was brought at last, and the door being unlocked, they conveyed the corpse into 
the field, about ten paces from the door of that garden, and laid it down on its back, in 
its night-gown and slippers, between one of which and the foot stuck a long rush or 
two.
	Having by this management effectually secured themselves, as they imagined, 
from all manner of discovery, they returned the same way into the house; the doors 
were opened, and the servants, who had been sent into the town, being come back, it 
was by this time grown very late. However, the wicked woman sent her people out 
again in search for their master, directing them to go to such places where he mostly 
frequented, but they could hear no manner of tidings of him; then she began to 
exclaim, and wept like a crocodile. This brought some of her neighbours in, who 
found her very sorrowful, and lamenting her case, that she could not find out what 
was become of her husband. At last the mayor of the town and others went upon the 
search for him. Here we are to observe that the fair was wont to be kept partly in the 
town and partly in the abbey, but Arden procured it to be wholly kept in the abbey 
ground, of which he had made a purchase; and by this means, being like to have all 
the benefit of it, to the prejudice of the town and inhabitants, he was bitterly cursed 
for it. After they had searched other places up and down, they came at length to the 
ground where the dead body was laid; where Prune, the London grocer above 
mentioned, happening to spy it first, called to the rest of the company, who, narrowly 
viewing the same, found it to be the corpse of Arden, and how it was wounded. They 
found the rushes sticking in his slippers, and found some footsteps of people in the 
snow between the place where he lay and the garden door. This causing suspicion, the 
mayor ordered everybody to stand still, and then appointed some of the company to 
go about to the other side of the house and get in that way, and so through into the 
garden, towards the place; where, finding the prints of people's feet all along before 
them in the snow, it appeared very plain that he was conveyed that way, through the 
garden into the place where they had laid him.
	The mayor and the company hereupon went into the house, and being no 
strangers to the ill conduct of Mrs Arden, they very strictly examined her about her 
husband's murder. She defied them and said: "I would have you to know I am no such 
woman"; but they having found some of his hair and blood near the house, in the way 
he was carried out, as also the bloody knife she had thrust into his body, and the cloth 
wherewith the murderers had wiped off the blood spilt in the parlour — these things 
were so urged home, that she confessed the murder, and upon beholding her husband's 
blood, cried out: ''Oh! the blood of God help me, for this blood have I shed." She then 
discovered her guilty associates.
	Mrs Arden, her daughter, Michael, and the maid were seized and sent to 
prison; then the mayor and the rest that attended him went to the Flower-de-Luce, 
where they found Mosbie in bed. They soon discovered some of the murdered 
person's blood upon his stockings and purse, and when he asked them what they 
meant by coming in that manner, they said, "You may easily see the reason"; and 
showing him the blood on his purse and hose, "these are our evidences." He thereupon 
confessed the horrid fact, and was committed to prison, as well as all the rest of the 
bloody crew, except Green, Black Will, and the painter, which last was never heard of 
after.
	Some time after, the assizes were held at Feversham, where all the prisoners 
were arraigned and condemned. There are no parts extant that we can possibly meet 
with of the formality of their trials; the confession they had made of the cruel fact 
could not admit much of it; only there was one unhappy circumstance which attended 
it — that an innocent man should suffer with the guilty; for Mrs Arden accused 
Bradshaw, upon the account of the letter sent by Green from Gravesend about Black 
Will, as before related. All the business was, that by the description Bradshaw gave of 
Black Will's qualities, he judged him to be a proper instrument for the perpetration of 
the intended murder; to which, as Green some years after at his death declared, he was 
no way privy. Nevertheless the man, upon Mrs Arden's accusation, was presently 
taken up and indicted as a procurer of Black Will to murder Mr Arden. The man made 
all the defence he could for his life, and desiring to see the condemned persons, he 
asked if they knew him, or ever had any conversation with him, and they all said No. 
Then the letter was produced and read. Here the prisoner told the Court the very truth 
of the matter, and upon what occasion he had told Green what he said of Black Will, 
but it availed him nothing; condemned he was, and suffered death for a murder he had 
no manner of knowledge of, and which he denied to the last.
	As for the real bloody criminals, they were executed in several places; for 
Michael, Mr Arden's man, was hanged in chains at Feversham, and one of the maid 
servants was burned there, most bitterly lamenting her condition, and loudly 
exclaiming against her mistress, who had brought her to that deplorable end, for 
which she would never forgive her. Mosbie and his sister were hanged in Smithfield, 
at London. As for Mrs Arden, the founder of all the mischief, she was burnt at 
Canterbury. Green returned some years after, was apprehended, tried, condemned, and 
hanged in chains in the highway between Ospringe and Boughton, over against 
Feversham; but before his death he proclaimed the innocence of Bradshaw, though it 
was then too late. Black Will was burnt on a scaffold at Flushing, in Zeeland. Adam 
Fowle, who lived at the Flower-de-Luce, in Feversham, was brought into trouble 
about this unhappy affair; he was carried up to London with his legs tied under the 
horse's belly, and committed to the Marshalsea. The chief ground for this was 
Mosbie's saying is that had it not been for Adam Fowle, he had not been brought into 
that trouble -meaning the silver dice he had brought for a token from Mrs Arden to 
him; but when the matter was thoroughly searched into, and Mosbie had cleared him 
of any manner of privity to the murder, he was at length discharged.


LORD STOURTON AND FOUR OF HIS SERVANTS 
Executed 6th of March, 1556, for the Murder Of William Hartgill, Esq., and 
his Son John, of Kilmington, Somerset, after an implacable Persecution

	On the 28th of February, 1556, Lord Stourton was arraigned at Westminster 
Hall before the judges and several of the council. It was long before he would answer 
to the charge laid against him, till at last the Lord Chief Justice declared to him that he 
must be pressed to death, according to the laws of the land, if he would not answer; 
after which he made answer, and was convicted, and condemned to be hanged, 
together with his four men, for the following murders. In the reign of Edward VI., 
William Lord Stourton, having charge of one of the King's places near Boulogne, 
died; and shortly after his death, Charles Lord Stourton, his son and heir, went to 
Kilmington, to the house of William Hartgill, Esq., where Dame Elizabeth, late wife 
to Lord William and mother to the said Charles Lord Stourton, sojourned, and 
earnestly persuaded William Hartgill to be a means that Dame Elizabeth should enter 
into a bond to him, in a great sum of money, that she should not marry; which the said 
William Hartgill refused, unless Lord Stourton would assign some yearly portion for 
his mother to live upon.
	In discoursing on this matter Lord Stourton quarrelled with William Hartgill; 
and on Whitsunday, in the morning, he went to Kilmington Church with several men, 
with bows and arrows, and guns; and when he arrived at the church door, John 
Hartgill, son of William, being told of the said Lord Stourton's coming, went out of 
the church, drew his sword, and ran to his father's house adjoining the churchyard 
side. Several arrows were shot at him in passing, but he was not hurt. His father and 
mother were forced to go up into the tower of the church with two or three of their 
servants for safety. When John Hartgill arrived at his father's house he took his long-
bow and arrow, bent a cross bow, charged a gun, and caused a woman to bring the 
cross-bow and gun after him, and he with his long-bow came forth and drove away 
the said Lord Charles and his men from the house, and from about the church, except 
half-a-score that had entered the church, among whom one was hurt in the shoulder 
with a hail shot. His father advised him to take his horse and ride up to the court, and 
tell the council how he had been used. On Monday, towards evening, he reported to 
the honourable council how his father had been dealt with, whereupon they sent down 
Sir Thomas Speak, the High Sheriff of Somerset, not only to deliver the captives, but 
to bring with him the said Charles Lord Stourton, who, when he came, was committed 
to the Fleet, where he remained but for a short time.
	It appeared that as soon as John Hartgill had set off towards London, Lord 
Stourton's men returned to the church of Kilmington, and about Mr Hartgill's house, 
and continued about there till the arrival of the sheriff, which was on Wednesday; 
during which time William Hartgill's wife was permitted to go home on Whitsunday, 
towards night. But in the meantime Lord Stourton's men went to the pasture of 
William Hartgill, took his riding gelding, and carried him to Stourton Park pales and 
shot him with a cross bow, reporting that Hartgill had been hunting in his park upon 
the gelding. Thus Lord Stourton continued his malice throughout King Edward's 
reign, and with violence took from William Hartgill all his corn, cattle, etc.
	On the death of King Edward, William Hartgill and his son petitioned Queen 
Mary and her council for redress, her Majesty being then at Basing End, in 
Hampshire. The council called Lord Stourton and William Hartgill before them, and 
Lord Stourton promised that if William Hartgill and his son would come to his house, 
and desire his good will, they should not only have it, but also be restored to their 
goods and cattle; where upon his promise, made in such presence, they took John 
Dackcombe, Esq., with them to witness their submission. When they came near 
Stourton House, in a lane half-a-dozen of Lord Stourton's men rushed forth, and 
letting Mr Dackcombe and William Hartgill pass them, they stepped before John 
Hartgill, and when he turned his horse to ride away, six others of the said lord's men 
beset him before and behind; and, before he could draw his sword and get from his 
horse, wounded him in three or four places, and left him for dead. Nevertheless, in 
half-an-hour, he recovered himself, got upon his horse, and took refuge in the house 
of Richard Mumpesson, of Maiden Bradley, gent.
	This at last became a subject of Star Chamber inquiry, and Lord Stourton was 
fined in a certain sum to be paid to the Hartgills, and imprisoned in the Fleet, whence 
he obtained licence, upon some pretence, to retire to his house in the country, and 
took an opportunity to murder both the Hartgills.
	Within three or four days after his arrival at Stourton Caundle he sent advice 
to the Hartgills that he was ready to pay them the sums of money as ordered by the 
Star Chamber, and to end all disputes between them.
	They agreed to meet him at Kilmington church on Monday after Twelfth Day, 
at ten o'clock; and Lord Stourton came accordingly to Kilmington, accompanied by 
fifteen or sixteen of his servants, sundry tenants, and some gentlemen and justices, to 
the number of sixty. He went to the church house and sent word to the Hartgills, who 
were in the church, that the church was no place to talk of worldly matters, and that he 
thought the church house a fitter place. The Hartgills came out of the church; but 
fearing ill, refused to enter into any covered place, the church excepted; whereupon it 
was proposed that a table should be set upon the open green, which was done 
accordingly.
	Lord Stourton laid thereupon a cap-case and a purse, as though he intended to 
make payment, and calling the two Hartgills, said that the council had ordered him to 
pay them a certain sum of money, every penny of which they should have. Marry, he 
would first know them to be true men; and then laid hands upon them, saying, "I 
arrest you of felony"; on which his men, to the number of ten or twelve, by violence 
thrust them into the church house, where, with his own hand, the lord took from them 
their purses. Then having in readiness two cords, he delivered them to his man to bind 
the Hartgills; and to the younger of the Hartgills, when bound, he gave a blow in his 
face, and coming out of the house with his sword, and finding at the door young 
Hartgill's wife, he kicked at her, and gave her such a stroke with his sword between 
her neck and head, that she fell to the ground nearly dead. From hence he caused the 
two Hartgills to be conveyed to the parsonage of Kilmington, where they were kept 
with their arms bound behind them, and without meat or drink. About one o'clock in 
the morning they were conveyed to a house called Bonham near Stourton; and 
arriving on Tuesday about three in the morning, they were laid, fast bound, in separate 
places, without meat, drink, or fire, or anything to lie upon.
	About ten o'clock Lord Stourton sent to Bonham, William Farree, Roger 
Gough, John Welshman and Macute Jacob, commanding them to convey to the 
Hartgills to a place appointed, and warning them, that in case they should make any 
noise, to kill them at once. These four brought them into a close adjoining Stourton, 
and knocked them on the head with two clubs, till the murderers thought they had 
been dead (his lordship in the meantime standing at the gallery door, which was but a 
small distance from the place). This done, they wrapped themselves in their own 
gowns, and carried the bodies through a garden into his lordship's gallery, and from 
thence into a place at the end, his lordship bearing the candle before them. Being not 
quite dead, they groaned much, especially old Hartgill. When William Farree, one of 
the murderers, swearing by God's blood they were not yet dead, his lordship himself 
ordered their throats to be cut, lest a French priest, lying near to the place, might hear 
them; and William Farree took out his knife and cut both their throats, Lord Stourton 
standing by with the candle in his hand. One of the murderers then said: "Ah! my lord, 
this is a pitiful sight. Had I thought what I now think before the thing was done, your 
whole land should not have won me to consent to such an act." His lordship answered: 
"What a fainthearted knave is this: is it any more than ridding us of two knaves that, 
living, were troublesome both to God's love and man's? There is no more account to 
be made of them than the killing of two sheep." Then their bodies were tumbled into a 
dungeon; and after Henry Sims and Roger Gough had been let down with cords, for 
there were no steps, they dug a pit and buried them together; Lord Stourton often 
calling to them from above to make speed.
	The bodies were afterwards taken up by Sir Anthony Hungerford, and were 
found in the same apparel that they were taken in, buried very deep, covered first with 
earth, then two courses of thick paving, and finally with chips and shavings of timber, 
above the quantity of two cartloads.
	In the examination of the atrocities of Lord Stourton it appeared that he had 
caused, not long before, a barn of one Thomas Chaffin to be set on fire by three of his 
servants; and then against Chaffin, for saying it was not done without the knowledge 
of the said Lord Stourton, or some of his servants, he brought an action, and 
recovering a hundred pounds damage, he took for the payment out of his pasture by 
force twelve hundred sheep, with the wool upon their backs, and all the oxen, kine, 
horses and mares that he could find. On another occasion, from one Willoughby he 
caused to be taken, for his pleasure, a whole team of oxen, whereof two were found 
fatting in the stall of his house when he was apprehended.
	On the 2nd of March Lord Stourton and four of his servants rode from the 
Tower with Sir Robert Oxenbridge, the lieutenant, with certain of the guards, through 
London towards Salisbury. The first night they lay at Hounslow, the next day they 
went to Staines, thence to Basingstoke, and to Salisbury.
	Lord Stourton was accordingly executed on the 6th of March, in the market 
place at Salisbury, and his four men in the country near the place where the murder 
was committed; and previous to his death he made great lamentation for his wilful and 
impious deeds.


THOMAS WYNNE  
Housebreaker and Palacebreaker, whom Conscience made confess a 
Murder twenty years afterwards. Executed in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth

	THIS notorious criminal was born at Ipswich in Suffolk, where, for aught we 
find to the contrary, he continued till he was between fifteen and sixteen, at which age 
he betook himself to the sea, which he followed between eight and nine years. 
Happening then to come to London, and habituating himself with ill company, 
especially lewd women, he left no villainy unperpetrated for the support of himself 
and them in their extravagances, till at last he became so expert in housebreaking, and, 
in short, all sorts of theft, that he was reckoned the most notable artist in his way of 
those times.
	It was in the reign of that glorious monarch, Queen Elizabeth, that our artist 
flourished; accordingly we find that, scorning a meaner prey, he had once the 
boldness, or rather impudence, to rob the royal lodgings at Whitehall Palace of as 
much plate as amounted to above four hundred pounds; for which he had the ill-luck 
to be taken and committed to Newgate. But, fortunately for him, her Majesty's Act of 
Grace coming out soon afterwards, granting a free pardon for all offences, except 
treason, murder, and some other notorious crimes, he was allowed the benefit thereof, 
and obtained his liberty, amongst many other criminals, whom their evil courses had 
brought into the same condition.
	But Wynne, making a very ill use of the royal mercy, and taking no warning, 
still pursued his vicious ways, till at last, being in imminent danger of being 
apprehended, he got into the service of the Earl of Salisbury, into whose kitchen he 
was received in the capacity of a scullion.
	Whilst he was in this post he had the impudence to pretend love to the 
countess's woman, who, admiring such insolence in a fellow of his rank, returned his 
addresses with the greatest scorn and contempt. This exasperating Wynne, his 
pretended love turned to hatred, and he vowed revenge, which he effected soon after 
in this manner.
	As she was coming downstairs one night after undressing her lady and putting 
her to bed, he used her so roughly that the poor gentlewoman was immediately put to 
bed very ill; and the earl being next day made acquainted with the whole story, took 
upon himself to be his judge, and ordered him to be forthwith stripped, and severely 
lashed by his coachman, which was executed to some tune upon the spot. However 
his lordship, not thinking this a sufficient punishment, threatened to have it repeated 
once a week for a month together, but Wynne, not liking his sentence, thought proper 
to seek out fresh quarters, and accordingly packed up his awls and went off. But 
resolving to be revenged on his prosecutors, before he took his final leave of the 
family, he broke open the trunk of the coachman who had flayed him, and robbed him 
of nine pounds. He borrowed likewise fifteen pounds of the master cook's, a silver 
dish of his lord's, and all the best clothes of the poor woman whom he had handled so 
unmercifully; after which he set out in quest of new adventures.
	It seems that in Wynne's time innkeepers were not so sharp as they are at 
present; wherefore our artist would frequently dress himself in a porter's habit, with a 
knot and cord, and going to one of the best inns, fix his eye on any bundle or parcel 
which seemed to be of value, and throwing it upon his shoulders, when he saw the 
coast clear, walk off with it directly, without the servants having the least suspicion of 
him, although they met him, each of them thinking he was known by one of his 
fellow-servants.
	He followed this course about two years, in which time he got above two 
hundred pounds, which fell heavy on the carriers, who were obliged to make good 
what was lost. But dear-bought experience making them look better after what they 
were entrusted with for the future, he had no opportunity of supporting himself any 
longer that way, which obliged him to have recourse to other methods.
	One day then, hearing a man, as he was going out of his house, tell his wife he 
should not be back again in less than five or six hours, he dogged him to the place 
whither he went, and going to an ale-house hard by, inquired the name of the people 
of the house. This done, he went back into the tradesman's neighbourhood, and getting 
his name after the same manner, goes to his wife and tells her that he was sent by Mr 
Such-a-one, where her husband was taken on a sudden so violent ill that it was 
questioned whether he would live or die; wherefore she was desired to make all the 
haste she could thither. At this the poor wife fell a-shrieking terribly, and after bidding 
the maid take care of the house, hurried away with the sham messenger, either to 
assist her husband or take her leave of him before he departed this world.
	They had not gone very far together before Wynne pretended business another 
way, left the woman to pursue her journey by herself, and returning to the house 
again, told the maid her mistress had sent him to acquaint her that if she did not come 
back by such an hour she might go to bed, for she should not come home all night. As 
Wynne pretended to be mightily tired with having made so much haste, the maid 
asked him very civilly to walk into the kitchen and rest himself, which being what he 
wanted, he readily accepted. In the meanwhile, the poor wench going to fetch him 
something to eat, whilst her back was turned he knocked her down suddenly, and 
binding her hand and foot, and gagging her, he rifled all the trunks, boxes, chests of 
drawers and cupboards, carrying off to the value of two hundred pounds in plate and 
money.
	He had now reigned about eight years in his villainy when, taking notice of an 
old man who had formerly been a linen-draper, but being rich had left off trade and 
lived on what he had, together with his wife, in Honey Lane, near Cheapside, he had 
for a long time a strong desire of robbing them. Accordingly one night he resolved to 
put it in execution, and broke into their house; but not content with robbing them, he 
determined also to murder them, to prevent a discovery, which he did by cutting their 
throats in a most barbarous manner, as they were sleeping in their bed together. This 
done, he robbed the house to the value of two thousand five hundred pounds, and fled 
away, with his wife and four children he had by her, to Virginia
	Next day, the old people being not seen by their neighbours either to go out or 
in as usual, and the house being close shut up from morning to nights they began to be 
surprised at the meaning of it; and some among them suspecting some foul play, a 
constable was sent for and the door broken open, when upon entering the chamber the 
old couple were found in their bed, to their great astonishment and horror, with their 
throats cut from ear to ear, and weltering in their blood.
	A great inquiry and search was then made after the murderer; and a poor man 
who begged his bread, having been observed to walk to and fro about the door, and 
sometimes to sit on a bench belonging to the house, the day before the murder was 
perpetrated, he was apprehended on suspicion, and being carried before a justice of 
peace, was by him committed to Newgate. The poor wretch was afterwards brought 
upon his trial; and though there was no other proof against him than some suspicious 
circumstances, he was cast for his life, and sentenced to be hanged before the door of 
the murdered persons; which was accordingly executed, though he denied the fact to 
the last, as well he might, and he was afterwards hanged in chains at Holloway.
	In the meanwhile Wynne was safe enough with his family beyond sea, where 
it pleased God that he thrived prodigiously with his ill-got money, the price of 
innocent blood. But having now been absent from his native country twenty years, 
and being very desirous of seeing it once before he died, designing afterwards to 
return back and lay his bones in Virginia, he took his leave of his wife, children and 
grandchildren (or his family had multiplied as well as his riches), and came over to 
England. But mark how Providence pursued him.
	Being one day at a goldsmith's shop in Cheapside to buy a parcel of plate, 
which he designed to carry with him to Virginia, whilst he was bargaining for it and 
the master of the shop was weighing it, a great uproar arose in the street — some 
sergeants having arrested a gentleman, and he breaking from the catchpoles who were 
in pursuit of him. Hereupon Wynne ran out of the shop the same way as the mob, and 
some that were behind him crying out, "Stop him! Stop him!" his conscience flew in 
his face, so that he stopped short, and said: "I am the man." "You the man!" cried the 
people. "What man?" "The man," replied Wynne, "that committed such a murder in 
Honey Lane twenty years ago, for which a poor man was hanged wrongfully. "
	Upon this confession he was taken into custody and carried to a magistrate, 
before whom he again owned the same; and being committed to Newgate, was tried, 
condemned and executed also before the house where he had perpetrated the murder; 
after which he was carried to Holloway and hanged in chains.
	Thus the just judgment of God at last overtook him for shedding innocent 
blood, when he thought himself secure from the stroke of justice. Neither was it 
wanting to punish his wife and posterity for being privy thereunto, and living upon the 
fruits thereof, for his wife ran distracted upon receiving the news of his shameful end, 
and died so. Two of his sons also were hanged in Virginia, for a robbery and murder 
they committed there; and what plantations he had purchased were seized upon for the 
Queen's use, as forfeited by his conviction of murder and felony; so that his posterity 
were reduced to beggary ever after, and died very miserable.


ALISTER MACGREGOR  
Who, for slaughtering the Laird of Luss's Friends, caused the Name of 
Macgregor to be abolished. Executed in 1604

	THIS trial, relating to the Clan Gregor, affords characteristic evidence of the 
barbarous state of the Highlands in those times, of the lawless manners of the people, 
and the despicable imbecility of the executive arm.
	The crimes with which the prisoner was charged resemble more the outrage 
and desolation of war than the guilt of a felon. He was accused of having conspired 
the destruction of the name of Colquhoun, its friends and allies, and the plunder of the 
lands of Luss; of having, on the 7th of February preceding, invaded the lands of Sir 
Alexander Colquhoun of Luss, with a body of four hundred men, composed partly of 
his own clan and of the clan of Cameron, and of lawless thieves and robbers, equipped 
in arms, and drawn up on the field of Lennox, in battle array; of having fought with 
Sir Alexander, who, being authorised by a warrant from the Privy Council, had 
convocated his friends and followers to resist this lawless host; of having killed about 
one hundred and forty of Sir Alexander's men, most of them in cold blood, after they 
were made their prisoners; of having carried off eighty horses, six hundred cows, and 
eight hundred sheep; and of burning houses, corn-yards, etc.
	The Jury unanimously convicted the prisoner, who, in consequence of the 
verdict, was condemned to be hanged and quartered at the Cross of Edinburgh, his 
limbs to be stuck up in the chief towns, and his whole estate, heritable and movable, 
to be forfeited.
	Four of the Laird of Macgregor's followers who stood trial along with him 
were convicted and condemned to the same punishment, eleven on the 17th of 
February, and six on the 1st of March. A statute was passed in the year 1633 
ordaining that the whole of the Clan Macgregor, which should be within the realm on 
the 15th of March thereafter, should appear before the Privy Council, and give surety 
for their good behaviour; that each of the clan, on arriving at the sixteenth year of his 
age, should appear before the Privy Council on the 24th of July and find surety as 
above required; that the surname of Macgregor should be abolished, and the 
individuals adopt some other; that no minister should baptize a child, or clerk or 
notary subscribe a bond or other security, under the name of Macgregor under pain of 
deprivation; but this Act was rescinded at the Restoration.


ROBERT CREIGHTON, BARON OF SANQUIRE  
Executed in 1612 for the Murder of John Turner, who had accidentally put 
out one of his Eyes

	THE indictment charged the prisoner, as accessory before the fact, to the 
murder of John Turner, fencing-master.
	Robert Creighton, Baron of Sanquire (or Sanchar, in Scotland), while playing 
at foils with John Turner, about five years before the murder, had an eye thrust out by 
one of Turner's foils; whereupon the baron, resolving to be revenged, tampered with 
several assassins to murder Turner.
	He had not an opportunity of effecting it till the year 1612, when he prevailed 
on Gilbert Gray, one of his servants, and Robert Carliel, a dependent, both Scotsmen, 
to undertake it; but Gray afterwards declining the attempt, Robert Carliel associated 
himself with one James Irweng, another Scotsman, and these two, on the 11th of May, 
1612, about seven in the evening, went to a public-house in the Friars, which Turner 
frequented as he came from his school, and finding Turner there they saluted him, and 
fell into conversation with him; when Carliel, on a sudden, fired a pistol at Turner, 
and shot him in the breast; and he immediately dropped down dead, saying only, 
"Lord have mercy upon me, I am killed."
	After this, Carliel fled to Scotland, Lord Sanquire absconded, but Irweng and 
Gray were taken while endeavouring to make their escape; and Gray was afterwards 
made an evidence against the rest.
	At length, Lord Sanquire surrendering himself, and Carliel, the principal 
assassin, being brought back from Scotland, Carliel and Irweng were tried at the old 
Bailey, London, and being convicted of the murder, they were executed in Fleet 
Street, near the Friars; and Lord Sanquire being afterwards arraigned at the King's 
Bench bar as accessory before the fact, confessed the indictment, and was thereupon 
condemned, and executed in Palace Yard.


SAWNEY BEAN 
An incredible Monster who, with his Wife, lived by Murder and Cannibalism 
in a Cave. Executed at Leith with his whole Family in the Reign of James the 
First

 
Sawney Bean at the Entrance to his Cave

	THE following account, though as well attested as any historical fact can be, is 
almost incredible; for the monstrous and unparalleled barbarities that it relates; there 
being nothing that we ever heard of, with the same degree of certainty, that may be 
compared with it, or that shews how far a brutal temper, untamed by education, may 
carry a man in such glaring and horrible colours.
	Sawney Bean was born in the county of East Lothian, about eight or nine 
miles eastward of the city of Edinburgh, some time in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, 
whilst King James I. governed only in Scotland. His parents worked at hedging and 
ditching for their livelihood, and brought up their son to the same occupation. He got 
his daily bread in his youth by these means, but being very much prone to idleness, 
and not caring for being confined to any honest employment, he left his father and 
mother, and ran away into the desert part of the country, taking with him a woman as 
viciously inclined as himself. These two took up their habitation in a cave, by the 
seaside on the shore of the county of Galloway, where they lived upwards of twenty-
five years without going into any city, town, or village.
	In this time they had a great number of children and grandchildren, whom they 
brought up after their own manner, without any notions of humanity or civil society. 
They never kept any company, but among themselves, and supported themselves 
wholly by robbing; being, moreover, so very cruel, that they never robbed anyone 
whom they did not murder.
	By this bloody method, and their living so retiredly from the world, they 
continued such a long time undiscovered, there being nobody able to guess how the 
people were lost that went by the place where they lived. As soon as they had robbed 
and murdered any man, woman or child, they used to carry off the carcass to the den, 
where, cutting it into quarters, they would pickle the mangled limbs, and afterwards 
eat it; this being their only sustenance. And, notwithstanding, they were at last so 
numerous, they commonly had superfluity of this their abominable food; so that in the 
night time they frequently threw legs and arms of the unhappy wretches they had 
murdered into the sea, at a great distance from their bloody habitation. The limbs were 
often cast up by the tide in several parts of the country, to the astonishment and terror 
of all the beholders, and others who heard of it.
	Persons who had gone about their lawful occasions fell so often into their 
hands that it caused a general outcry in the country round about, no man knowing 
what was become of his friend or relation, if they were once seen by these merciless 
cannibals.
	All the people in the adjacent parts were at last alarmed at such a common loss 
of their neighbours and acquaintance; for there was no travelling in safety near the 
den of these wretches. This occasioned the sending frequent spies into these parts, 
many of whom never returned again, and those who did, after the strictest search and 
inquiry, could not find how these melancholy matters happened. Several honest 
travellers were taken up on suspicion, and wrongfully hanged upon bare 
circumstances; several innocent innkeepers were executed for no other reason than 
that persons who had been thus lost were known to have lain at their houses, which 
occasioned a suspicion of their being murdered by them and their bodies privately 
buried in obscure places to prevent a discovery. Thus an illplaced justice was 
executed with the greatest severity imaginable, in order to prevent these frequent 
atrocious deeds; so that not a few innkeepers, who lived on the Western Road of 
Scotland, left off their business, for fear of being made examples, and followed other 
employments. This on the other hand occasioned many great inconveniences to 
travellers, who were now in great distress for accommodation for themselves and their 
horses when they were disposed to refresh themselves and their horses, or put up for 
lodging at night. In a word, the whole country was almost depopulated.
	Still the King's subjects were missing as much as before; so that it was the 
admiration of the whole kingdom how such villainies could be carried on and the 
perpetrators not discovered. A great many had been executed, and not one of them all 
made any confession at the gallows, but stood to it at the last that they were perfectly 
innocent of the crimes for which they suffered. When the magistrates found all was in 
vain, they left off these rigorous proceedings, and trusted wholly to Providence for the 
bringing to light the authors of these unparalleled barbarities, when it should seem 
proper to the Divine wisdom.
	Sawney's family was at last grown very large, and every branch of it, as soon 
as able, assisted in perpetrating their wicked deeds, which they still followed with 
impunity. Sometimes they would attack four, five or six foot men together, but never 
more than two if they were on horseback. They were, moreover, so careful that not 
one whom they set upon should escape, that an ambuscade was placed on every side 
to secure them, let them fly which way they would, provided it should ever so happen 
that one or more got away from the first assailants. How was it possible they should 
be detected, when not one that saw them ever saw anybody else afterwards? The place 
where they inhabited was quite solitary and lonesome; and when the tide came up, the 
water went for near two hundred yards into their subterraneous habitation, which 
reached almost a mile underground; so that when people, who had been sent armed to 
search all the places about had passed by the mouth of their cave, they had never 
taken any notice of it, not supposing that anything human would reside in such a place 
of perpetual horror and darkness.
	The number of the people these savages destroyed was never exactly known, 
but it was generally computed that in the twenty-five years they continued their 
butcheries they had washed their hands in the blood of a thousand, at least, men, 
women and children. The manner how they were at last discovered was as follows.
	A man and his wife behind him on the same horse coming one evening home 
from a fair, and falling into the ambuscade of these merciless wretches, they fell upon 
them in a most furious manner. The man, to save himself as well as he could, fought 
very bravely against them with sword and pistol, riding some of them down, by main 
force of his horse. In the conflict the poor woman fell from behind him, and was 
instantly murdered before her husband's face; for the female cannibals cut her throat 
and fell to sucking her blood with as great a gust as if it had been wine. This done, 
they ripped up her belly and pulled out all her entrails. Such a dreadful spectacle made 
the man make the more obstinate resistance, as expecting the same fate if he fell into 
their hands. It pleased Providence, while he was engaged, that twenty or thirty from 
the same fair came together in a body; upon which Sawney Bean and his bloodthirsty 
clan withdrew, and made the best of their way through a thick wood to their den.
	This man, who was the first that had ever fallen in their way and came off 
alive, told the whole company what had happened, and showed them the horrid 
spectacle of his wife, whom the murderers had dragged to some distance, but had not 
time to carry her entirely off. They were all struck with stupefaction and amazement 
at what he related, took him with them to Glasgow, and told the affair to the provost 
of that city, who immediately sent to the King concerning it.
	In about three or four days after, his Majesty himself in person, with a body of 
about four hundred men, set out for the place where this dismal tragedy was acted, in 
order to search all the rocks and thickets, that, if possible, they might apprehend this 
hellish crew, which had been so long pernicious to all the western parts of the 
kingdom.
	The man who had been attacked was the guide, and care was taken to have a 
large number of bloodhounds with them, that no human means might be wanting 
towards their putting an entire end to these cruelties.
	No sign of any habitation was to be found for a long time, and even when they 
came to the wretches' cave they took no notice of it, but were going to pursue their 
search along the seashore, the tide being then out. But some of the bloodhounds 
luckily entered this Cimmerian den, and instantly set up a most hideous barking, 
howling and yelping; so that the King, with his attendants, came back, and looked into 
it. They could not yet tell how to conceive that anything human could be concealed in 
a place where they saw nothing but darkness. Never the less, as the bloodhounds 
increased their noise, went farther in, and refused to come back again, they began to 
imagine there was some reason more than ordinary. Torches were now immediately 
sent for, and a great many men ventured in through the most intricate turnings and 
windings, till at last they arrived at that private recess from all the world, which was 
the habitation of these monsters.
	Now the whole body, or as many of them as could, went in, and were all so 
shocked at what they beheld that they were almost ready to sink into the earth. Legs, 
arms, thighs, hands and feet of men, women and children were hung up in rows, like 
dried beef. A great many limbs lay in pickle, and a great mass of money, both gold 
and silver, with watches, rings, swords, pistols, and a large quantity of clothes, both 
linen and woollen, and an infinite number of other things, which they had taken from 
those whom they had murdered, were thrown together in heaps, or hung up against the 
sides of the den.
	Sawney's family at this time, besides him, consisted of his wife, eight sons, six 
daughters, eighteen grandsons, and fourteen granddaughters, who were all begotten in 
incest.
	These were all seized and pinioned by his Majesty's order in the first place; 
then they took what human flesh they found and buried it in the sands; afterwards 
loading themselves with the spoils which they found, they returned to Edinburgh with 
their prisoners, all the country, as they passed along, flocking to see this cursed tribe. 
When they were come to their journey's end, the wretches were all committed to the 
Tolbooth, from whence they were the next day conducted under a strong guard to 
Leith, where they were all executed without any process, it being thought needless to 
try creatures who were even professed enemies to mankind. The men had their privy-
members cut off and thrown into the fire; their hands and legs were severed from their 
bodies; by which amputations they bled to death in some hours. The wife, daughters 
and grandchildren, having been made spectators of this just punishment inflicted on 
the men, were afterwards burnt to death in three several fires. They all in general died 
without the least signs of repentance; but continued, to the very last gasp of life 
cursing and venting the most dreadful imprecations upon all around, and upon all 
those who were instrumental in bringing them to such well merited punishments.


THOMAS WITHERINGTON, JONATHAN WOODWARD 
AND JAMES PHILPOT 
Who, in the Reign of King James I. were the first to hear the Exhortation of 
the Bellman of St Sepulchre's

	WITHERINGTON was the son of a very worthy gentleman of Carlisle, in the 
county of Cumberland, who possessed a plentiful estate, and brought up his children 
handsomely and suitably to his condition. Thomas, of whom we are going to speak, 
had extraordinary education given him, and was designed for a gentleman, to live at 
his ease, free from the toil and hazard of business. The good old gentleman dying, 
Thomas came into possession of a considerable estate, which soon procured him a 
rich wife; but she proving loose, and violating his bed, pushed him on, in revenge, to 
extravagances, which otherwise he had no inclination to. Her falsehood to his bed was 
a mortification to his thoughts he could never reconcile to his mind, and being 
resolved to requite her perfidy and treachery, he abandoned himself to the company of 
all manner of women. These by degrees perverted all the good qualities he possessed. 
Nor was his estate less subject to ruin and decay; for the mortgages he made of it, in 
order to support his profusion and luxury, soon reduced his circumstances to a low 
ebb, and made him miserably poor. What should a gentleman of Mr Witherington's 
late affluent fortune do in this wretched case? He was above the mean submission of 
stooping to either relations or friends for a dependence; and to ask charity or crave the 
benevolence of his brother men was a circumstance his soul abhorred. One way he 
must do to live; to starve presented nothing but frightful and melancholy ideas to the 
mind. Collecting money on the road was judged the best, though not the surest, 
expedient of raising his fortune. And with this view he committed robberies in most 
parts of England for six or seven years with admirable success.
	But between Acton and Uxbridge he committed a robbery on the highway for 
which he was sent to Newgate, where he lived a very profligate life to the very day of 
his execution.
	At the same time flourished one Jonathan Woodward and one James Philpot, 
two most notorious housebreakers, who, in the cities of London and Westminster, the 
suburbs thereof, Southwark, and most towns and villages in the counties of Middlesex 
and Surrey, had committed daily robberies for some years, for which they were sent to 
the Marshalsea, and condemned to be hanged upon St Margaret's Hill, in the borough 
of Southwark; but King James I. happening that year to come to the throne of 
England, they were both pardoned upon an Act then put out for all criminals, 
excepting for high treason and wilful murder. However, these villains, not making 
good use of this mercy, still pursued their old wicked courses, and committed frequent 
burglaries and robberies, till at last, being apprehended again, and sent to Newgate, 
they were tried, with the above-mentioned Thomas Witherington, at the Sessions 
House in the old Bailey, and with eight other malefactors were condemned; but only 
these three, being most notorious offenders, were appointed for death. And while they 
continued in the condemned hold they led abominable lives, abandoning themselves 
to all manner of cursing and swearing, notwithstanding the extraordinary pains and 
cares of the ordinary to reclaim them.
	At the same time there was living one Mrs Elizabeth Elliot, who having a son 
that about two or three years before was condemned to be hanged for the like 
practices, but received mercy, and became a good man, in compassion for other 
criminals, and in acknowledgement of the King's royal favour, on her death-bed 
willed two hundred and fifty pounds to the parish of St Sepulchre's in London to find 
a man who should for ever, betwixt the hours of eleven and twelve of the clock of the 
night before any prisoners were to die, go under Newgate, and giving them notice of 
his being come, by a solemn ringing of a hand-bell,* should then put them in mind of 
their approaching end, by repeating several godly expressions, tending to instruct 
them for a true preparation for death. After which he says to the prisoners appointed 
for death: "Gentlemen, are you awake?" Who from the condemned hold answering 
"Yes," he then proceeds thus:
	"Gentlemen, I am the unwelcome messenger who brings you the fatal news 
that you must to-morrow die. Your time is but short, the hours slide away apace, the 
glass runs fast, and the last sand being upon dropping, when you must launch out into 
boundless eternity, give not yourselves to sleep, but watch and pray to gain eternal 
life. Repent sooner than St Peter, and weep before the cock crows, for now repentance 
is the only road to salvation; be fervent in this great duty, and without doubt to-
morrow you may be with the penitent thief on the cross in Paradise. Pray without 
ceasing. Quench not the Spirit. Abstain from all appearance of evil. As your own 
wickedness has caused all this evil to fall upon you, and brought the day of tribulation 
near at hand, so let goodness be your sole comfort, that your souls may find perpetual 
rest with Your blessed Saviour, Who died for the sins of the world; He will wipe all 
tears from your eyes, remove your sorrows, and assuage your grief, so that your sin-
sick souls shall be healed for evermore. I exhort you earnestly not to be negligent of 
the work of Your salvation, which depends upon your sincere devotion betwixt this 
and to-morrow, when the sword of justice shall send you out of the land of the living. 
Fight the good fight of faith, and lay hold of eternal life whilst you may, for there is 
no repentance in the grave. Ye have pierced yourselves through with many sorrows, 
but a few hours will bring you to a place where you will know nothing but joy and 
gladness. Love righteousness, and hate iniquity, then God, even your God, will anoint 
you with the oil of gladness, above your fellows. Go now boldly to the throne of 
grace, that ye may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need. The God of 
peace sanctify you wholly, and I pray God your whole spirits, and souls, and bodies 
may be preserved blameless unto the meeting of your blessed Redeemer. The Lord 
have mercy upon you; Christ have mercy upon you! Sweet Jesus receive your souls; 
and to-morrow may you sup with Him in Paradise."
	To all which the spectators cry "Amen."
	Next day, on which they are to die, the bell in the steeple is to toll for them, 
and under St Sepulchre's churchyard wall, the cart or carts stopping, the aforesaid 
man, after ringing his hand-bell again from over the wall, repeats again some religious 
exhortations to the prisoners, which are as follows: —
SAID BY THE BELLMAN OVER ST SEPULCHRE'S CHURCH WALL
	"Gentlemen, consider now you are going out of this world into another, where 
you will live in happiness or woe for evermore. Make your peace with God Almighty, 
and let your whole thoughts be entirely bent upon your latter end. Cursed is he that 
hangeth on a tree; but it is hoped the fatal tie will bring your precious souls to a union 
with the great Creator of heaven and earth, to Whom I recommend your souls in this 
your final hour of distress. Lord have mercy upon you; Christ look down upon you, 
and comfort you. Sweet Jesus receive your souls this day into eternal life. Amen."
	I thought inserting these particulars would not be unacceptable to the candid 
reader, since the three persons above mentioned were the first to whom these 
exhortations and warnings were given.
	And thus ended the life of our adventurer, Thomas Witherington.
* This bell is still preserved in the church, hanging in a glass case on the north side.


ARTHUR NORCOTT AND MARY NORCOTT, HIS 
MOTHER  
Executed in 1629 for the Murder of the former's Wife after the Test of 
touching the Body

	THE following relation was found among the papers of Sir John Maynard, an 
eminent lawyer, and formerly one of the Commissioners of the Great Seal of England. 
We think proper to give it in his own words.
	The case, or rather history of a case, that happened in the county of Hertford, I 
thought good to report here, though it happened in the fourth year of King Charles I., 
that the memory of it may not be lost, by miscarriage of my papers, or otherwise. I 
wrote the evidence that was given, which I and many others did hear; and I wrote it 
exactly according to what was deposed at the trial, at the bar of the King's Bench — 
viz.
	Joan Norcott, wife of Arthur Norcott, being murdered, the question was, How 
came she by her death? The coroner's inquest, on view of the body, and depositions of 
Mary Norcott, John Okeman, and Agnes his wife, inclined to find Joan Norcott felo-
de-se, they informed the coroner and jury that she was found dead in her bed, the 
knife sticking in the floor, and her throat cut. That the night before, she went to bed 
with her child, her husband being absent; and that no other person, after such time as 
she was gone to bed, came into the house. That the examinants, lying in the outer 
room, must needs have seen or known if any stranger had come in.
	The jury, upon these evidences, gave up their verdict to the coroner that she 
was felo-de-se. But afterwards, upon rumour among the neighbourhood, and their 
observation, divers circumstances, which manifested that she did not, nor, according 
to those circumstances, could not possibly, murder herself, the jury, whose verdict 
was not yet drawn up in form by the coroner, desired the coroner that the body, which 
was buried, might be taken out of the grave, which the coroner assented to. So that 
thirty days after her death she was taken up in the presence of the jury and a great 
number of people; whereupon the jury changed their verdict. The persons, being tried 
at Hertford Assizes, were acquitted; but so much against the evidence, that judge 
Harvey let fall his opinion that it were better an appeal were brought than so foul a 
murder escape unpunished. Whereupon, Pascha 4 Car., they were tried on the appeal 
which was brought by the young child against his father, grandmother, aunt and her 
husband, Okeman; and because the evidence was so strange, I took exact and 
particular notice, and it was as follows: —
	After the matters above mentioned were related, an ancient and grave person, 
minister of the parish where the fact was committed (being sworn to give evidence 
according to custom), deposed that the body being taken out of the grave thirty days 
after the party's death, and lying on the grass, and the four defendants pressed, they 
were required each to touch the dead body. Okeman's wife fell on her knees and 
prayed God to show some token of her innocency, or to that purpose; her very words I 
have forgot. The appellees did touch the dead body, which was before of a livid and 
carrion colour (that was the verbal expression in terminis of the witness), whereupon 
the brow of the dead began to have a dew, or gentle sweat, arise on it, which increased 
by degrees, till the sweat ran down by drops on her face. The brow changed to a lively 
colour, and the dead opened one of her eyes and shut it again; and this opening of the 
eye was done three several times. She likewise thrust out the ring - or wedding-finger 
three times, and pulled it in again, and the finger dropped blood from it on the grass.
	Sir Nicholas Hyde, Lord Chief justice, seeming to doubt the evidence, asked 
the witness: "Who saw this besides you?"
	WITNESS: I cannot swear what others saw; but, my Lord, I do believe the 
whole company saw it; and if it had been thought a doubt, proof would have been 
made of it, and many would have attested with me.
	Then the witness, observing some admiration in the auditors, spake further:
	"My Lord, I am minister of the parish, and have long known all the parties, but 
never had any occasion of displeasure against any of them, nor anything to do with 
them, or they with me, but as I was their minister. The thing was wonderful to me, but 
I have no interest in the matter; only as I am called upon to testify the truth, I have 
done it."
	This witness was a very reverend person, as I guessed, about seventy years of 
age; his testimony was delivered gravely and temperately, but to the great admiration 
of all the auditory; whereupon, applying himself to the Lord Chief justice, he said 
further:
	"My Lord, my brother here present is minister of the next parish adjacent, and 
I am assured he saw all done that I have affirmed."
	Here that person was also sworn to give evidence, and deposed the same in 
every point — viz. the sweating of the brow, the change of the colour, the opening of 
the eye, the thrice moving of the finger and drawing it in again. Only the first witness 
added that he himself dipped his finger in the blood which came from the dead body, 
to examine it, and he swore that he believed it was blood.
	I conferred afterwards with Sir Edward Powel, barrister-at-law, and others, 
who all concurred in the observation; and for myself, if I were upon my oath, I can 
testify that these depositions, especially the first witness, are truly reported in 
substance.
	The other evidence was given against the prisoners — viz. the grandmother of 
the plaintiff, and against Okeman and his wife — that they confessed that they lay in 
the next room to the dead person that night, and that none came into the house till they 
found her dead in the morning. Therefore, if she did not murder herself, they must be 
the murderers.
	To prove that she did not murder herself it was further deposed:
	Firstly, that she lay in a composed manner in her bed, the bed-clothes nothing 
at all disturbed, and her child by her in bed.
	Secondly, that her neck was broken, and she could not possibly break her neck 
in the bed if she first cut her throat, nor contra.
	Thirdly, that there was no blood in the bed, saving a tincture of blood on the 
bolster whereon her head lay, but no substance of blood at all.
	Fourthly, that from the bed's head there was a stream of blood on the floor, 
which ran along till it ponded in the bending of the floor in a very great quantity; and 
that there was also another stream of blood on the floor at the bed's foot, which 
ponded also on the floor, to another great quantity, but no continuance or 
communication of blood, at either of these two places, from one to the other, neither 
upon the bed; so that she bled in. two places severally. And it was deposed, that upon 
turning up the mat of the bed, there were found clots of congealed blood in the straw 
of the mat underneath.
	Fifthly, that the bloody knife was found in the morning sticking in the floor, at 
a good distance from the bed; and that the point of the knife, as it stuck, was towards 
the bed, and the haft from the bed.
	Lastly, that there was the print of a thumb and four fingers of a left hand.
	Sir Nicholas Hyde, Lord Chief justice, said to the witness: "How can you 
know the print of a left hand from the print of a right in such a case?
	WITNESS: My Lord, it is hard to describe; but if it please that honourable 
judge to put his left hand upon your left hand , you cannot possibly place your own 
right hand in the same posture. This was tried and approved.
	The prisoners had now time to make their defence, but gave no evidence to 
any purpose; whereupon the jury departed out of the court; and returning, acquitted 
Okeman and found the other three guilty; who being severally demanded what they 
could say why judgment should not be pronounced, they only cried out after one 
another: "I did not do it, I did not do it."
	Judgment was given, and the grandmother and the husband executed; but the 
aunt, being with child, had the privilege to be spared execution.
	I inquired if they confessed anything at the gallows, but could not hear that 
they did.


WALTER TRACEY  
To whom is attributed a poetic Encounter with Ben Jonson. Executed in 
1634 after a Robbery on the Duke of Buckingham

	THIS person was the younger son of a gentleman worth nine hundred pounds 
per annum in the county of Norfolk. He was sent to the university to qualify him for 
divinity, and had a hundred and twenty pounds left him by his father when he died. 
But his studies not having a relish pleasing enough to his mind, and his estate being 
too little to support his extravagances, he, to uphold himself in his profuse expenses, 
would now and then appear well accoutred on the highway, and make his collections. 
But happening once to rob some persons who knew him, he was obliged to leave the 
college, and directly went down into Cheshire, where he put himself into the service 
of a wealthy grazier in the country, whose daughter he married and then, having 
obtained her estate, decamped.
	Tracey made his way to Ware, where, taking up his lodgings for that night, he 
got into the company of a young Oxonian, who had brought a large portmanteau 
behind him. The student seemed very well pleased at his friend's conversation, as he 
thought, and, to increase a better understanding betwixt them, they supped together, 
and drank a couple of bottles of wine afterwards. They lay together in the same bed, 
and an hour or two before they went to sleep had a great deal of conversation about 
the ways of mankind, which terminated at last about the university, which Tracey 
pretended to be an entire stranger to. In the morning both drank sack posset, mounted, 
and pursued their journey together. Tracey endeavoured to amuse his fellow-traveller 
with a series of foreign adventures which he had never performed; the scholar, on his 
part, laid open the wicked practices of the colleges, so that both seemed to be fit and 
choice companions for each other. Tracey would now and then take hold of the 
student's portmanteau and tell him it was very heavy, and wondered he did not bring a 
servant along with him, so much undervaluing his profession by being master and 
man himself. The student constantly answered that the times were exceeding hard, 
and he travelled by himself to save charges. "How," replies the other, "charges!" 
"Why, the charges of a servant are vastly insignificant in comparison of the loss you 
may probably sustain on the road for want of one. I hope, sir, you have not got any 
great charge of money within your portmanteau, for I think you act a very unwise part 
if you carry much about you without having someone or other in company with you." 
The student told him he had no less than threescore pounds within it, which he was 
carrying to the university to defray the customary fees for taking up his degrees of 
Master of Arts. "Ah," says Tracey, "that's a round sum, on my word! and it is a 
thousand pities so much should be given to persons that no way deserve a far thing of 
it. If I had known of Your having threescore pounds about you when we were at the 
inn, I could have procured you a chap that would have sold you a place for it much 
more beneficial than anything you hope for by being a Master of Arts; but as we are 
too far a distance off from Ware to return in time, you shall be eased of your money 
and portmanteau presently; for I have an occasion at this very conjuncture for such a 
quantity of money, and there's no better person myself you can lend it to." After 
which words Tracey unloosens the straps, takes the portmanteau, and puts it on own 
horse. The student observing this, immediately cried aloud: "Oh, dear sir, I hope your 
design is not to rob me; I shall lose a pretty good parsonage that is offered me in 
Essex if you take away my money from me. Pray, sir, consider the crime you are 
going to act, for the loss of my threescore pounds will not only deprive me of a 
competent means of livelihood, but also the Almighty will lose a minister of His 
Word. And for the sake of heaven, I beseech you to be compassionate, and not so 
severe on a poor man who was obliged to borrow this money of several persons, who 
would not have lent it but through a view of being soon repaid. Sir, you commit a 
thing against the laws of your country, and the precepts of humanity, to wrest thus by 
force what belongs to another man, and I dare say you are not so much a stranger to 
the injustice of it but you know it is an error and a great one. The sin, too, is vastly 
enlarged when a specious pretence of friendship made use of for such a dishonourable 
deed; for how will any man know he is safe in travelling if everyone he meets with on 
the road converses with him in the sincere manner (I mean outwardly) as you have 
pretended to me. But, sir, not to enlarge further, let me entreat you over and over 
again not to take my all from me; for if so, I am inevitably ruined, and am an undone 
man for ever." Tracey seemed to mind the student's desire of having his portmanteau 
again with a grave attention; but the thought of having obtained such a considerable 
booty made him banish every compassionate sentiment out of his breast, till, no 
longer able to bear with the tedious importunities of the scholar, he pulled out of his 
breeches pocket a leathern purse with four pounds odd money in it, and gave it the 
collegian, saying: "Friend, I am not yet so much lost to the sense of compassion but I 
can extend my charity and generosity; it is not customary for a gentleman of my 
fortune to give money, but your intercession has won me over to it. Here are four 
pounds odd money to bear your expenses to the university, so that you will not be all 
the loser, and when you come to the college, acquaint all those whom it may concern 
that you have paid your Master of Arts fees already to a collector on the road, who 
had a thousand times more occasions for the money than a parcel of old mollies, who 
live by whoring and stealing out of other authors' works." And so saying, he bid the 
poor collegian farewell, leaving him to pursue his journey and obtain his degree as 
well as he could, while he himself made the nearest way to the next village; where 
opening the portmanteau, he found nothing but two old shirts, half-a-dozen dirty 
bands, a threadbare student's torn gown, a pair of stockings without feet, a pair of 
shoes but with one heel to them, some other old trumpery, and a great ham of bacon, 
but not one farthing of money; which set him a-swearing and cursing like a devil, to 
think he should be such a preposterous ass, to give four pounds and more for that 
which was not worth forty shillings.
	We have but two adventures more of Tracey which we find on record; the first 
relating to a robbery he committed on the famous poet, Ben Jonson, the other to 
another on the Duke of Buckingham, who was slain by Fenton as he was going to 
embark at Portsmouth.
	Ben Jonson had been down in Buckinghamshire to transact some business, but 
in returning to London happened to meet with Tracey, who, knowing the poet, bid 
him stand and deliver his money. But Ben, putting on a courageous look, spoke to him 
thus:
"Fly, villain, hence, or by thy coat of steel 
I'll make thy heart my leaden bullet feel, 
And send that thrice as thievish soul of thine 
To Hell, to wean the devil's valentine."
	Upon which Tracey made this answer:
"Art thou great Ben? or the revived ghost 
Of famous Shakespeare? or some drunken host 
Who, being tipsy with thy muddy beer, 
Dost think thy rhymes will daunt my soul with fear? 
Nay, know, base slave, that I am one of those 
Can take a purse, as well in verse, as prose, 
And when thou art dead write this upon thy hearse, 
'Here lies a poet who was robbed in verse.'"
	These words alarmed Jonson, who found he had met with a resolute fellow: he 
endeavoured to save his money, but to no purpose, and was obliged to give our 
adventurer ten jacobuses. But the loss of these was not the only misfortune he met 
with in this journey; for, coming within two or three miles of London, it was his ill 
chance to fall into the hands of worse rogue, who knocked him off his horse, stripped 
him, and tied him neck and heels in a field, wherein some other passengers were 
enduring the same hard fate, having been also robbed. One of them cried out that he, 
his wife and children were all undone, while another who was bound, overhearing, 
said, "Pray, if you are all of you undone, come and undo me." This made Ben, though 
under his misfortunes, burst out into a loud laugh, who, being delivered in the 
morning from his bands by some reapers, made the following verses: —
"Both robbed and bound as I one night did ride, 
With two men more, their arms behind them tied, 
The one lamenting what did them befall, 
Cried, ' I'm undone, my wife and children all '; 
The other hearing it, aloud did cry, 
'Undo me then, let me no longer lie '; 
But to be plain, those men laid on the ground 
Were both undone, indeed, but both fast bound."
	The last robbery he committed was on the Duke of Buckingham above 
mentioned; but some say he endeavoured to commit many more. Now as we have 
neither the place nor in what manner this attempt was made, nor how much he took 
from his Grace, nor any other circumstances to help us to a discovery of this 
adventure, we are obliged to be silent, and only say that he suffered for it at 
Winchester in 1634, aged thirty-eight years.


SAWNEY CUNNINGHAM 
An abandoned Villain who inveigled and murdered his Wife's Lover, 
murdered his Uncle, terrorised the Country-side, and was executed at Leith, 
12th of April,1635

  
Sawney Cunningham with the Astrologer

	THIS person had no reason to say he was come of mean parents, or that good 
education or tuition was denied him, whereby he might have avoided the several 
pernicious actions and villainies he committed, as will presently be shown in the 
sequel. His family lived in tolerable good repute at Glasgow in Scotland, where he 
was born; but, in spite of all the learning his parents had given him, or good examples 
they had set before him to regulate his passions and direct his conduct right, he 
abandoned himself, from his earliest acquaintance with the world, to little shuffling 
and pilfering tricks; which growing habitual to him as he advanced in age, he 
increased in his wicked practices, till at last he became a monster of profaneness and 
wicked living. However, these (which one would take to be) great disadvantages 
hindered him not from making a very honourable match in wedlock. As his parents 
could not be blamed with any misconduct, but still kept up an honest and genteel 
character in the neighbourhood where they lived; and as it would have been infamous 
to have reproached them for those miscarriages in the son which they had strove all 
they could to root out of his mind, and could not help, so an old gentleman, who had 
preserved for a long time an inviolable friendship for the family, entered into an 
alliance with Mr Cunningham the elder, which at last terminated in giving his 
daughter to Sawney, and an estate in portion with her of above one hundred and forty 
pounds per annum, thinking that marriage might be a means to reclaim our adventurer 
from his ill course of life, and at last settle his mind, to the mutual satisfaction of both 
families, for which he thought his daughter's portion would be a good purchase, and 
well laid out. But how are mankind deceived, and, in short, all our foresight and 
consultation. Sawney no sooner found himself in possession of an estate able to 
support his extravagances but he immediately gave a more violent loose to his 
passions than he had hitherto done. He made taverns and alehouses the frequent 
places of his resort; and, not content idly to waste the day in debauches and 
drunkenness, the night too must come in to make up the reckoning. These destructive 
steps could not be attended but with hurtful consequences, and he was too soon an 
eye-witness of some of them; for not having always wherewithal to indulge his usual 
expenses and method of living, he was forced to have recourse to indirect measures, 
which ended in pawning everything he had, not only of his wife's but of his own. 
Melancholy things were unavoidably to follow, if some redress or care was not taken 
to put a restraint on this destructive course. Sawney laughed at his follies, and could 
not bring himself to believe he should ever want while he had either hands or heart to 
support him. He was determined to enter upon business as soon as possible — I mean 
such business as generally brings so many unhappy men to the gallows. His wife, who 
was vastly beautiful and handsome, saw this, but with a prudence that became her sex 
stifled her uneasiness so long, till, no longer able to bear the torment upon her mind, 
she first began with kind entreaties, since all they had in the world was gone, to fall 
into some honest way of livelihood to support themselves, for it was much and more 
commendable to do so than for him to give his countrymen every day so many 
instances of his riotous and profuse living.
	Had Sawney been so good to himself as to have given ear to this 
remonstrance, without doubt things had succeeded well, and we should never have 
read the miserable end he suffered. But all admonition was lost on a man abandoned 
to wickedness, and determined to support his usual extravagances at any rate. The 
poor young gentlewoman, instead of being answered civilly for her love and affection 
to him, met with nothing but harsh and terrifying words, attended with a thousand 
oaths and imprecations. The parents on both sides, observing this, were in extreme 
grief and concern, and determined, after a serious consultation, to dissolve the couple; 
but the young and handsome wife would never consent to part from her husband, 
though so base to her.
	Before we enter upon the first remarkable transaction of Sawney's life, we 
think ourselves under an obligation to lay before our readers some account of this 
young bride's rare qualifications. In the first place, as I have taken notice above, she 
was extremely beautiful, not only in a perfect symmetry of features, but likewise to 
these were joined an exquisite person. She was tall, finely shaped, full-breasted, and 
had all the other exterior ornaments of her sex. For her temper and the qualifications 
of her interior part or soul, she was sincere in her love to the last, ever patient under 
the greatest difficulties, and ready at all times to extricate her husband out of the 
misfortunes he involved himself in, by lawful and justifiable methods; she had a nice 
conduct, and an extraordinary restraint upon every passion that might betray her into 
unforeseen miscarriages. In Glasgow, where a university was, and consequently 
young gentlemen of fortune and address, it was impossible for Mrs Cunningham to 
hide the charms of her face and person so as not to be taken notice of. Several 
immediately offered their respects, and money was not wanting to promote their suits; 
but all were below the prudent sentiments of her mind. She could not endure to think 
of dishonouring the bed of her husband by a base compliance with the richest man in 
the kingdom, and always she put off her suitor with a frown and a seemingly 
disdainful air. But this only served to animate her lovers the more, who now seemed 
to attack her with a resolution not to quit the siege till she had either capitulated or 
surrendered herself. Amongst the rest was a certain lawyer, who was so frequent in 
his importunities that she was quite tired out. However, she was so discreet all the 
while as to conceal from her husband Sawney the importunities of her several lovers; 
but their solicitations increasing, and being determined to be delivered of them as 
soon as possible, she one night, as she lay in bed with her husband, began to discourse 
to him in words to the following effect: "You are sensible, my dear, of the inviolable 
love I have, from the first day of my marriage to you, preserved for you, which shall 
still, let whatever will happen, be as chastely maintained; for the infernal regions shall 
sooner open and receive me alive than I will dare to break the laws of your bed, or 
bring dishonour to my person, by a shameless prostitution of my person in the 
embraces of any man alive. As a proof of what I tell you, you need only be acquainted 
that for these several months I have been strongly importuned by Mr Hamilton the 
lawyer to consent to his embraces, but still I have warded off from his addresses, yet 
cannot be free from him; which makes me now discourse thus, in order to hear your 
opinion in the matter, and see which will be the safest and best expedient to be 
delivered of his company." Here she ended, and Sawney, being thoroughly convinced 
of his wife's loyalty and fidelity, first answered her with a desire she should forget all 
his irregularities, confessing their present poverty had been the immediate 
consequences of his too liberal and profuse livings but that for the future she should 
see a good alteration in his conduct, and he would make one of the best of husbands. 
"As for Mr Hamilton," said he, "it is my advice that you do not give him an absolute 
refusal, but pretending a kind of love at a distance, make him think that a considerable 
sum of money will finish his expectations, and gain him what he so much longs for. 
You have youth and beauty on your side, and you may, consequently, command him 
as you please: for I am not so much a stranger to Mr Hamilton's temper and 
inclination but that I know love will influence him to perform generous things. My 
dear, I have no occasion to acquaint you with our poverty at this time, which, to my 
extreme grief, has been the consequence of my irregular and profane living; but our 
wants and necessities may be amply made up by dextrously managing this adventure, 
the prosecution of which I leave to your own prudence and conduct; and for my part, I 
shall take effectual care to extricate you and myself out of any consequences that may 
happen upon it."
	Mrs Cunningham, after this conference with her husband, had a thousand 
thoughts in her head how to manage this scheme so as to make the most advantage of 
it. She saw that the want of money in her family must oblige her to it, though never so 
much against the bent of her inclination to the contrary, and therefore, determining to 
put it in execution as soon as possible, she composed herself to rest for that night. The 
next day Sawney got purposely out of the way, but not without a longing expectation 
of receiving extraordinary matters from his wife's conduct. Hamilton appeared as 
usual; and, protesting his love for her was the sincerest in the world, said that it was 
impossible for him to enjoy a moment's rest without tasting those joys she could so 
easily afford him. Mrs Cunningham at first reproved him for such a bare declaration 
of his desires, and said that so long as her husband lived she could not, without the 
most manifest breach of conjugal fidelity, and an eternal infamy to herself, give way 
to comply with his demands. "Your person, Mr Hamilton," said she, "is none of the 
worst, neither is your sense to be despised; but, alas! heaven has decreed it that I am 
already another man's wife, and therefore deprived from gratifying you as I would 
were the case otherwise. And I have apprehensions of my husband, who is a choleric 
person, and presently urged into a passion upon the most trifling affairs, which either 
he doth not like, or squares not with his happiness or interest." "Interest!" replied 
Hamilton. "Why, if that be the case, neither your husband nor you shall have any 
reason to complain; for, let me tell you once and for all, I do not require a gratification 
from anyone without making a suitable return. Your circumstances, madam, are not 
unknown to me; and I am sorry to think that, after having brought Mr Cunningham so 
plentiful a fortune, I should have a just occasion to say that you are poor. But mistake 
me not, I scorn to make a handle of your circumstances; neither do I believe Mrs 
Cunningham would ever consent to my desires on such servile terms." Upon this 
madam answered him with a great deal of prudence and art: she told him that he 
pleaded handsomely for himself, and if she was not a married woman there should be 
nothing to obstruct their desires. Mr Hamilton, finding this, made her a long harangue, 
in which he endeavoured to show how weak her objection was, with respect to her 
husband, concluding that what they did might be so artfully contrived that neither Mr 
Cunningham nor the world should know anything of it. In fine, the lawyer pleaded as 
if it were for life for her consent, which madam observing, and not caring to prolong 
the time too far, but dispatch a great deal of business in a little time, she artfully told 
him that since her stars had so directed the actions of her life that she had no power of 
herself to contradict them, she resigned herself to him, and said that it was to no 
purpose to stifle her inclinations for him any longer; for, to be plain with him, she had 
loved him from their first acquaintance together, before all the men she had ever seen, 
and that she hoped there was no transgression in an affair which her destiny 
overruled; and if the world proved censorious, she did not care, and left her cause to 
be determined by the stars, who, together with Mr Hamilton's fine person, had 
influenced her to it. To be short, an assignation was made, and a porch of one of the 
churches in Glasgow designed to be the place where these two lovers were to meet. 
Nothing in the world gave the lawyer so much satisfaction as the thought of having 
obtained the consent of his fair mistress, who had declared her love to him, and 
resigned herself up to his arms. Hamilton promised to make her a present of a purse of 
a hundred pounds sterling before anything was done, and she on her side assured him 
she would please him to the utmost, and acquainted him that he might expect all the 
kindness she was able to afford him. Here they parted, and the lawyer thought the 
time contained a thousand days till the hour appointed was come, and he in the arms 
of his mistress. It arrives, and both appear in the porch; they caress and toy, but no 
further than the laws of modesty permitted. Hamilton wants to know where Mr 
Cunningham, her husband, is, and is acquainted that he has gone a short journey into 
the country, which, however, will take him up eight days; whereas madam has posted 
him, or he has done it himself, in a private place in his chamber at home. Hamilton 
seems extraordinarily pleased at his success, and the repose he should find in 
humouring his appetites now his antagonist was out of the way, as he thought. In a 
little time both these lovers come to Sawney's house, and having entered his bed-
chamber, where he was concealed, and a good fire burning, Mr Hamilton pulls out 
two purses of gold and gives them to her; and then, going to undress himself, Sawney 
springs out from his secret place, and with one stroke lays Mr Hamilton flat on the 
floor with a club he had in his hand; for, not contented with his wife's having received 
the two purses of gold, he must have the lawyer's clothes too; and therefore, to make 
sure of them, he redoubles his blows, till the poor gentleman gave up the ghost at Mrs 
Cunningham's feet. This was a sacrifice to love with a witness. The lawyer had 
contributed handsomely before for a night's lodging, and must he give his life into the 
bargain? I know not how mankind may think on it; but the affair was carried to a 
desperate length. Now Mrs Cunningham, not dreaming her husband would have 
carried matters to such an issue, seemed frightened to the last extreme at what had 
been done; but Sawney endeavoured to give her ease by telling her that he would 
work himself out of the scrape immediately, and, so saying, hoisted the body on his 
shoulders and went out at a back door which led directly to Hamilton's house, which 
easily opening, as a profound sleep in the family and the darkness of the night 
favoured him, he carried the lawyer to the vault, and placed him upright upon the seat, 
to the end that the first who found him there might conclude he had died in that place 
and posture.
	Now it seems Mr Hamilton, the day before, had acquainted a particular friend 
who lived in his house with his success, and how he was to have a meeting with Mrs 
Cunningham that night. This friend had had the gripes upon him for three or four 
days, which made him have a very violent looseness, and being obliged to untruss a 
point about midnight, rises in his night-gown and steps down to the vault, where, 
opening the door, he spies Mr Hamilton sitting, as he supposed; and taking it that he 
was come there on the very same errand as himself, stays without a while to let him 
have a quiet play. But finding he made no motion to stir, after having waited a 
considerable time, to his own uneasiness, he opens the door again, and taking him by 
the sleeve of his coat was surprised to find him fall down. He stoops to take him up, 
but finds him dead; at which, being in a thousand perplexities, and fearing to be 
thought the murderer, he brings to mind his acquainting him with the assignation 
between him and Mrs Cunningham; upon which he concludes his friend had found no 
fair play there, knowing the husband to be none of the easiest of men. What should 
this lodger do in this case? Why, he takes up the body, throws it upon his shoulders, 
and carries it to Sawney's house door, where he sets it down. Madam, a little after 
midnight, having occasion to discharge, gets out of bed and, opening the door, lets the 
body of her late lover tumble into the house, which putting her into a fright, she runs 
upstairs into the chamber and tells Sawney how that the lawyer has come back. "Aye, 
aye," says he (just waking out of his sleep), "I'll warrant he shall come back no more, 
I'll secure him presently "; and so saying, gets immediately out of bed, puts on his 
clothes, and hoists the dead lawyer once more on his shoulders, with a design to carry 
him to the river and throw him in; but seeing some persons at some distance coming 
towards him, he steps up to the side of the street till they were got by, fearing his 
design might be discovered, and consequences were dangerous. But what should these 
persons be but half-a-dozen thieves, who were returning from a plunder they had 
made of two large flitches of bacon out of a cheese-monger's shop, and as they came 
along were talking of a vintner hard by, who sold a bottle of extraordinary wine. 
Sawney was somewhat relieved from his fears (for fears he could not miss from 
having) at hearing this conversation. He had not been in his post long before he had 
the satisfaction of seeing this company put their bacon, which was in a sack, into an 
empty cellar, and knock the master of the tavern up to let them in. The coast being 
now clear, Sawney conveys the dead lawyer into the cellar, and taking out the 
purloined goods, put his uneasy cargo in the room, and then marches home. 
Meanwhile the thieves were carousing, little dreaming what a change they should 
presently find in their sack. Little or no money was found amongst them, and the 
flitches were to answer the full reckoning, so that they continued drinking till they 
thought the bacon was become an equivalent for the wine they had drank. One of 
them, who pretended to be spokesman, addressing the landlord, told him that he must 
excuse him and his comrades for bringing no money in their pockets to defray what 
they had expended, especially at such an unseasonable time of night, when he had 
been called out of his bed to let them in; "but, landlord, in saying this, we have no 
design of doing you any wrong, or drinking your wine for nothing. For if we cannot 
answer the shot with the ready cole, we will make it up by an exchange of goods. 
Now we have got two flitches of bacon in a cellar hard by, which will more than 
answer our expenses, and if you care to have them, they are at your service; otherwise 
we must be obliged to leave word with you where we live, or you lie under a necessity 
of trusting us till the morning, when, on sending anybody along with us, you may 
depend on receiving the money." "Gentlemen," says the vintner, "you are all mere 
strangers to me, for to my eyes and knowledge I cannot say I ever saw one of you 
before; but we will avoid making any uneasiness about my reckoning. I do not care to 
purchase a commodity I never saw, or, as the saying is, to buy a pig in a poke. If the 
flitches of bacon you say you have are good, I'll take them off your hands, and quit 
scores with you so they but answer my demands." Immediately one of them, who had 
drunk more plentiful than the rest, said he would go and fetch them, and accordingly 
coming into the cellar, strove to hoist the sack up. "Zounds," says he, "why, I think 
the bacon's multiplied, or I am damnably deceived. What a pox of a load is here to 
gall a man's shoulders! Tom might well complain they were heavy, and, by gad! 
heavy and large ones they are, and the vintner will have a rare bargain of them; much 
good go along with them!" And, so saying, he lugs the corpse on his shoulders to the 
tavern. On coming to open the mouth of the sack, lord! what a surprise were all in to 
see a man's head peep out. Mr Dash presently knew the lineaments of the deceased's 
face, and cried out: "You eternal dogs! did you think to impose a dead corpse on me 
for two flitches of bacon? Why, you rascals, this is the body of Mr Hamilton the 
lawyer, and you have murdered him, have you, you miscreants! But your merits shall 
soon be soundly rewarded, I'll warrant you." At this all the six were in the saddest 
plight that could be imagined; nothing but horror and dismay sat on their looks, and 
they really appeared as the guilty persons. But the vintner, observing them bustling to 
get away, made such a thundering noise of murderers, murderers, murderers, that 
immediately all the family were out of their beds, and the watch at the house door to 
know the reason of such an alarm. The thieves were instantly conveyed to a place of 
durance for that night, and in the morning were sent to the main prison, when after a 
little time they took their trials, were found guilty (though innocent) of Mr Hamilton's 
death, and executed accordingly.
	Sawney came off very wonderfully from this matter, though neither his wife's 
admonitions nor his own frequent asseverations to her to leave off his irregular course 
of life were of any force to make him abandon it. The bent of doing ill, and living 
extravagantly, was too deeply rooted within him ever to suppose now that any 
amendment would come; nay, he began to show himself a monster in iniquity, and 
committed every wickedness that could exaggerate the character of a most profane 
wretch. For it is impossible to enumerate, much more to describe, the quantity and 
qualities of his villainies, they being a series of such horrid and incredible actions, that 
the very inserting them here would only make the reader think an imposition were put 
upon him in transmitting accounts so shocking and glaring. The money he had 
obtained of Mr Hamilton was a dear purchase; it was soon played away with and 
consumed, which made him throw himself on other shifts to support his pockets; to 
which end he visited the highway, and put those to death who offered to oppose him. 
His character was too well known in the west of Scotland to want any further 
information about him, which obliged him to retract towards Edinburgh, where, 
meeting with a gang of his profession who knew him to be most accomplished in their 
way, he was constituted generalissmo of their body, and each man had his particular 
lodging in the city. But Sawney, who ever chose to act the principal part in all 
encounters, industriously took lodgings at a house noted for entertaining strangers, 
where he was not long in insinuating himself into their acquaintance, by making them 
believe that he was a stranger as well as they, and was come to Edinburgh on no other 
account than purely to see the city, and make his observations upon its public 
buildings and other curiosities; and that his ambition has been always to procure 
honest and genteel acquaintance. Sawney, indeed, had a most artful method to conceal 
the real sentiments of his mind and hide his actions, which in a little time so gained 
upon the belief of these strangers, that they could not help taking him for one of the 
sincerest men breathing. For it was his custom sometimes to take them along with him 
two or three miles out of the city to partake of some handsome dinner or supper, when 
he was sure never to let them be at a far thing expense, but generously discharge the 
reckoning himself. The design of all this was to make his advantage of them, and 
force them to pay an extravagant interest for the money he had been out of pocket in 
treating them. For constantly were persons planted in one place or other of the road by 
his immediate direction, who fell upon them as they returned to the city, and robbed 
them of what they had. But the cream of all was, that to avoid suspicion they always 
made Sawney their first prize, and rifled him, who was sure in the morning to obtain 
his own loss back again, and a considerable share of the other booty into the bargain.
	Some time after this our adventurer, with two of his companions, meeting on 
the road with three citizens of Edinburgh, affronted them in a very audacious manner, 
and threw such language at them as plainly discovered that either death or bloodshed 
was near at hand. He had the impudence to tell the person who seemed the genteellest 
and best dressed of the three that the horse he rode on was his, and had been lately 
stolen from him, and that he must return it to him, or else the sword he wore should 
do him right. Sawney's companions began with the others after the same manners and 
would needs force them to believe that the horses they rode upon were theirs. The 
citizens, astonished at this gross piece of impudence, endeavoured to convince them 
the horses they rode on were their own, and they had paid for them, and wondered 
how they durst pretend to dispute an affair which was so essentially wrong; but these 
words were far from having any effect on Cunningham, and the citizens, in the 
conclusion, were forced to dismount and give them their horses, and money into the 
bargain, being somewhat satisfied they had suffered no worse consequences, for 
Sawney, by this time, was drenched in all manner of villainy, and bloodshed was now 
accounted a trifle, so little value did he set on the lives of any persons.
	Sawney having run a merry course of roguery and villainy in and about 
Edinburgh for some time, where he made a considerable advantage to himself, so that 
fortune seemed to have requited him for all the poverty and want he had before 
endured, determined now to go home to his wife, and spend the remainder of his days 
agreeably with her, on the acquisitions and plunder he had made on his countrymen. 
Accordingly he came to Glasgow, where, among a few acquaintances he conversed 
with, for he did not care to make himself too public, he gave signs of amendment, 
which struck those who knew him with such astonishment that at first they could 
hardly be brought to believe it.
	One night, being in bed with his wife, they had a close discourse together on 
all their foregoing life, and the good woman expressed an extraordinary emotion of 
joy at the seeming alteration and change in her husband; she could not imagine what 
reason to impute it to, for she had been so much terrified from time to time with his 
barbarities that she had no room to think his conversion was real; neither, on 
reflecting on the many robberies and murders he had committed, could she persuade 
herself that he could so soon abandon his licentious and wicked courses; for she 
supposed, if his altered conduct (as she thought) was real, it was miraculous, and an 
original piece of goodness hardly to be met with. The sequel will prove that this 
woman had better notions of her husband than the rest of his acquaintance and those 
who knew him, and that she built all her fears on a solid and good foundation. The 
proverb says: "What is bred in the bone wiIl never be out of the flesh"; and this will 
be remarkably verified in Cunningham, as we shall endeavour to show in its proper 
place. For all the signs he gave of an altered conduct, and all the plausible hints to 
rectify his former mistaken steps, were no other than only to amuse the world into a 
good opinion of him, that so he might make his advantage, through this pretended 
conversion, with the greater freedom and impunity. And he was not out in his aim; for 
it seems, whenever he committed anything sinister, or to the disadvantage of any of 
his countrymen, and he was pitched on as the transgressor, the town would say: "It 
could not be, for Mr Cunningham was too much reclaimed from his former courses 
ever to give in to them again." I shall insert a very notable adventure Sawney had with 
a conjurer, or fortune-teller, to which end I shall trace it up from the fountain-head, 
and give my readers the first cause that induced him to it. When Sawney was an 
infant, he was put out to nurse to a poor countrywoman in a little village a mile or two 
out of Glasgow. The woman, as the boy grew up, could not help increasing in her love 
for him, and he being an exceeding snotty child, would often say to her neighbours: 
"Oh, I shall see this lad a rich man one day!" This saying coming to the ears of his 
parents, they would frequently make themselves merry with it, and thought no more 
of it than as a pure result of the nurse's fondling. Sawney, having enriched himself 
with the spoils about Edinburgh, actually thought his old nurse's words were verified, 
and sent for her to give her a gratification for her prediction. She came, but Sawney 
had changed his clothes, so that the poor woman did not know him at first. He told her 
that he was an acquaintance of Mr Cunningham's, who, on her coming, had ordered 
him to carry her to Mr Peterson the astrologer's, where she would be sure to see and 
speak to him; for he was gone there to get some information about an affair that 
nearly concerned him. The nurse and her pretended conductor went to the fortune-
teller's, where, desiring admittance, Peterson thought they were persons who wanted 
his assistance, and bade them sit down when Sawney, taking a freedom with the 
reverend old gentleman, as he was known to use with all mankind, began to give a 
harangue about astrology, and the laudable practice of it. "I and this old woman," said 
he, "are two of the most accomplished astrologers or fortune-tellers in Scotland; but I 
would not, reverend sir, by so saying, seem to depreciate from your knowledge and 
understanding in so venerable a science. I came to communicate a small affair to you, 
to the end that, not relying on my judgment and this woman's, I might partake of 
yours. You are to know, sir, that from six years of age I have led a very untoward life, 
and been guilty of many egregious sins, too numerous to tell you at present, and what 
your ears would not care to hear; for my employment has been to lie with other men's 
wives, make a share of other people's money, bilk my lodging, and ruin the vintners; 
for a whore and a bottle I have sold the twelve signs in the zodiac, and all the houses 
in a horoscope; neither sextile, quartile, nor trine ever had power over me to keep my 
hands out of my neighbours' pockets; and if I had not a profound respect for the 
persons of my venerable order and profession, I should call Mercury the ascendant in 
the fourth house at this minute, to lug half-a-score pieces of yours. By my exceeding 
deep knowledge in astrology I can perfectly acquaint all manner of persons, except 
myself, with every occurrence of their lives; and were it not to frighten yourself, I 
would conclude, from the appearance and conjunction of Saturn and Vulcan, that your 
worship would be hanged for your profession. But, sir, though destiny hangs this 
unfortunate death over your head, it is at some distance from it, and may be some 
years before it strikes you. Is it not surprising that a man shall be able to read the fates 
of mankind, and not have any preknowledge of his own? And is it not extremely 
afflicting to think that one who has done so much good in his generation, and assisted 
so many thousands to the recovery of things that would have been inevitably lost, 
without his advice, should come at last to meet with an ignominious halter, as a fit 
recompense for his services? Good heavens! where is the equity of all this? Certainly, 
sir, if we are to measure the justice of things by the laws of reason, we must naturally 
conclude that laudable and good actions deserve a laudable and good recompense; but 
can hanging be said to be this good recompense? No: but the stars will have it so, and 
how can mankind say to the contrary?" Cunningham paused here a while, and the 
astrologer and old nurse wondered who in the devil's name they had got in company 
with. Mr Peterson could not help staring, and well he might, at the physiognomy of 
our adventurer, And, in spite of himself, began to be in a panic at his words, which so 
terribly frightened him. The nurse was in expectation of seeing Sawney come in every 
minute, little dreaming the person she was so near was the man she wanted. 
Cunningham's harangue was a medley of inconsistencies and downright banter. It is 
true the man had received tolerable education in his youth, and consequently might 
obtain a jingle in several sciences, as is evinced from the foregoing. "Well, venerable 
sir," says he, "do not be terrified at my words, for what cannot be avoided must be 
submitted to. To put you out of your pain, I'll tell you a story. A gentleman had a son 
who was his darling and consequently trained up in all the virtuous ways that either 
money could purchase or good examples teach. The youth, it seems, took to a kind 
and laudable course of life, and gave promising signs of making a fine man; nor 
indeed were their expectations deceived, for he led a very exemplary life of prudence, 
excellent conduct and good manners, which pleased the parents so much, that they 
thought everything they could do for him too little. But the mother, out of an 
inexpressible fondness for him, must needs go to an astrologer, and inquire how the 
remaining part of his life must succeed. Accordingly the horoscope is drawn, but a 
dismal appearance results from it; it acquaints the mother that her son shall remain 
virtuous for two and thirty years, and then be hanged. 'Monstrous and incredible,' says 
she, 'but I'll take care to secure him in the right way; or all my care will be to no 
purpose.' Well, the family are all soon acquainted with this threatening warning. The 
person determined to be the sacrifice is already nine and twenty years old, and surely 
they suppose they can easily get the other three years, when all shall go well with their 
kinsman. But what avails all the precaution of mankind? This same son obtains a 
commission of a ship, goes to sea, and, acting quite contrary to his orders, turns pirate, 
and in an encounter happens to kill a man, for which, on his return to his native 
country, he is tried, condemned and hanged. What think you of this, venerable 
brother? Is not he a sad instance of an overruling influence of the stars? But, not to 
prolong too much time on a discourse of this nature, let us come to the purpose. You 
are now, as I cannot do it myself, to tell me my fortune, and this old woman is to 
confront you if you tell me a lie. There is no excuse to be made in the matter; for, by 
heavens, on your refusal, I'll ease this room of your damnable trumpery, and send you 
packing to the devil after them!" These words were enough to frighten any man out of 
his senses; nor could Peterson well discover the intention or drift of his talkative and 
uneasy visitant. "What would you be at?" says the astrologer. "Why, do not you see 
what a terror you have put that good woman into, who trembles like an aspen leaf? I 
am not used, friend, to have persons come into my house and tell me to my face that I 
am to be hanged, and then to confirm it, as you pretend, tell me an old woman's cock-
and-bull story of a young man who went to sea, and was hanged for robbing, for 
which he certainly deserved the punishment he met with. As for telling your fortune, 
I'll be so plain with you, that you'll swing in a halter, as sure as your name is "Sawney 
Cunningham." "Sawney Cunningham!" quoth the mawk, who straight way throwing 
her arms about his neck, began to kiss him very eagerly, and then, looking earnestly in 
his face, cried aloud: "O laird! and art thou Sawney Cunningham? Why, I thought 
thou wouldst come to be a great man, thou wast such a Scotty lad!" "Do you see 
now," says Sawney, "what a damnable lie you have told me, in impudently 
acquainting me that I shall be hanged, when my good prophetess here tells me, I am a 
great man; for great men can never be hanged." "I do not care for what she says, nor 
you neither, for hanged you'll be, and that in a month's time, or else there never was a 
dog hanged in Scotland." "Pray, brother, how came you to know this, without 
consulting my horoscope?" "Know it! Why, your very condition tells me you have 
deserved hanging these dozen years, but the laws have been too favourable to you, 
else Mr Hamilton's death had been revenged before this time of day. Now, to 
convince you of my superior knowledge in astrology, I mean in telling how far their 
influence extends over any man's actions, I will point to you the very action and 
persons that will bring you to the gallows. This very day month you shall go, in spite 
of all your foresight and endeavour to the contrary, to pay a visit to Mr William Bean, 
your uncle by the mother's side, who is a man of an unblamable character and 
conversation. Him shall you kill, and assuredly be hanged." Was there ever such a 
prophetic or divining tongue, especially in these modern days, heard of? For the 
sequel will presently discover how every circumstance of this prediction fell out 
accordingly. Sawney, having observed the air of gravity wherewith Mr Peterson 
delivered his words, could not help falling into a serious reflection about them, and 
thinking the place he was in not convenient enough to indulge the thought he found 
rising within him, abruptly left the fortune-teller, and giving his old nurse five 
shillings returned home.
	But what does he determine on now? After having seriously weighed on the 
several particulars of Peterson's words, he could not for his heart but think that the old 
man, in order to be even with him for telling him of being hanged, had only served 
him in his own coin; so that, after a few hours, every syllable was vanished out of his 
mind, and he resolved to keep up to his usual course of life.
	King James I. sitting on the throne of Scotland at this time, and keeping his 
Court at Edinburgh, the greatest part of the Scottish nobility resided there, when our 
adventurer used frequently to go to make the best hand he could of what spoil he 
found there. The Earl of Inchiquin, having a considerable post under the King, and 
several valuable matters being under his care, had a sentinel assigned, who constantly 
kept guard at this lord's lodgings' door. Guards were not much in fashion at this time, 
and about two or three hundred in the same livery were kept only on the 
establishment. Cunningham having a desire of breaking into this minister's lodgings, 
and having no way so likely to succeed as by putting on a soldier's livery, went in that 
dress to the Sentinel, and after some little talk together they dropped accidentally into 
some military duty and exercise; which Cunningham so well displayed that the 
sentinel, seeming to like his brother's notions, and smile extraordinarily, it made 
Cunningham stay a considerable time, till in the end he asked the sentinel to partake 
of two mugs of ale, and put sixpence into his hand to fetch them from an ale-house at 
some distance from his post, giving some reason for it that it was the best drink in the 
city, and none else could please his palate half so well as that. Hereupon the sentinel 
acquainted him that he could not but know the consequences that attended leaving his 
post, and that he had rather enjoy his company without the ale, than run any risk by 
fetching it. "Oh!" says our adventurer, "I am not a stranger to the penalties we incur 
on such an action, but there can no harm come of it if I stand in your place while you 
are gone." And with that the sentinel gives Cunningham his musket, and goes to the 
place directed for the drink; but, on returning, he must needs fetch a pennyworth of 
tobacco from the same place, during which some of our adventurer's companions had 
broken into the lord's apartments, and rifled the same of three hundred pounds' value. 
Cunningham was, however, so generous as to leave the sentinel his musket. The poor 
soldier returns in expectation of drinking with his friend, and enjoying his company 
some time longer; but alas! the bird has flown, and he is taken up to answer for his 
forthcoming, and committed to the Tolbooth Prison, where he was kept nine months 
in very heavy irons, and had only bread and water all the while allowed him to subsist 
on. At length he is tried, condemned and hanged. Thus did several innocent persons 
suffer death for that which ought to have been the portion of our adventurer.
	We draw on to his last scene now, which shall be dispatched with all the 
brevity we are masters of. Sawney having thus escaped so many dangers, and run 
through so many villainies with impunity, must needs go to his Uncle Bean's house, 
who was a very good Christian, and a reputable man, as we have before observed, to 
pay him a visit, with no other design than to boast to him of his late successes, and 
how fortune had repaired the injuries his former misconduct and remissness had done 
him. He went, and his uncle, with his moral frankness, bade him sit down, and call for 
anything his house could afford him. "Nephew," says he, "I have desired a long time 
to see an alteration in your conduct, that I might say I had a nephew worthy of my 
acquaintance, and one to whom I might leave my estate, as deserving of it; but I am 
acquainted from all hands that you go on worse and worse, and rather than produce an 
amendment, abandon yourself to the worst of crimes." The good old man followed 
this with a long exhortation, after which he issued a flood of tears, which pity and 
compassion had forced from his eyes; nor could Sawney forbear shedding a tear or 
two at hearing. But it was all pretence, and an imitation of the crocodile; for he was 
determined to take this reverend old gentleman out of the world to get possession of 
his estate, which, for want of male issue, was unavoidably to devolve upon him after 
his death. With this view, after he had made an end of his exhortation, he steps up 
and, without once speaking, thrusts a dagger to his heart, and so ends his life. Thus 
fell a venerable old uncle for pronouncing a little seasonable advice to a monster of a 
nephew who, finding the servant maid come into the room at the noise of her master's 
falling on the floor, cut her throat from ear to ear, and then to avoid a discovery being 
made, set fire to the house, after he had rifled it of all valuable things in it. But the 
divine vengeance was resolved not to let this barbarous act go unpunished; for the 
neighbourhood, observing a more than ordinary smoke issuing out of the house, 
concluded it was on fire, and accordingly unanimously joined to extinguish it, which 
they effectually did, and then going into the house, found Mr Bean and his maid 
inhumanly murdered. Our adventurer was got out of the way, and no one could be 
found to fix these cruelties upon; but it was not long before justice overtook 
Cunningham, who being impeached by a gang of thieves that had been apprehended, 
and were privy to several of his villainies, was taken up and committed a close 
prisoner to the Tolbooth, where so many witnesses appeared against him that he was 
condemned and hanged for his tricks at Leith, in company with the same robbers that 
had sworn against him. When he went to the place of execution he betrayed no signs 
of fear, nor seemed any way daunted at his approaching fate. As he lived, so he died, 
valiantly and obstinately to the last, unwilling to have it said that he, whose hand had 
been the instrument of so many murders, proved pusillanimous at the last.


ISAAC ATKINSON 
A Highwayman who specialised in robbing Lawyers. Hanged at Tyburn in 
1640

	ISAAC ATKINSON was the only son of a gentleman of a good estate at 
Faringdon in Berkshire. His father took care to put him to the most celebrated schools 
in the country, where, with the doctrines, he imbibed the vices which are too apt to 
prevail in large seminaries. At sixteen years of age he was sent to Brazen Nose 
College in Oxford, together with others of his school-fellows, where he soon learned 
to rail at the statutes of the university and lampoon the rulers, to wear his clothes after 
the mode, to curse his tutor, and sell his books. In a word, he forgot in the second year 
after his admittance what, for form's sake, he had condescended to learn in the first, 
concluding still that he had knowledge enough for himself and his posterity after him 
for ever.
	Everyone may imagine the grief which the good old gentleman went through. 
There were no hopes, after such a discovery as this, that his son would ever get any 
advantage by being at school; so that, though he would have given half his estate to 
make young Isaac what in reality he once took him to be, he thought it was better to 
take him home and employ him in the management of his rural affairs, than suffer him 
to spend such a large income to no purpose. Accordingly he sent to the heads of the 
college, and procured his discharge, taking him now into his own care, and 
constituting him steward in ordinary.
	Had there been the least spark of grace left in young Atkinson, his father's 
indulgence in not punishing his neglect at the university more severely must have had 
some effect on him, and have made him at least more dutiful for the future; but he had 
hardened himself, before he was aware, against every tender sentiment, as is 
frequently the case with young extravagants; so that this removal from the academy 
was but the forerunner of greater misfortunes to this unhappy youth. In the country he 
gave himself up to all manner of sports and diversions, to the entire neglect of his 
father's affairs. Nor did he only pursue pastimes in themselves innocent to excess, but 
abandoned himself to all manner of lawless delights. Not a maidservant could live 
with the old gentleman for the son's importunities, unless she gave up her honour to 
his desires. Not a handsome wife or daughter in the neighbourhood but either 
submitted to his pleasure or complained of him to his father. The scandal of these 
things was not all; for the old gentleman perceived (what with bastard children, and 
paying for other mischievous actions, besides a continual round of expenses) he 
should let his son spend all the substance of the family before his eyes, unless he 
found some way to put a stop to these unwarrantable courses.
	The last resource of an injured, abused father was the only one left for poor 
old Atkinson, which was to turn his only son out of doors, and disinherit him. This, to 
be sure, was hard work to a parent who hardly knew till lately what it was to be angry 
with his child. However, after frequent unsuccessful remonstrances, rather than be 
entirely ruined, he put the first part of this sentence in execution upon him, and 
threatened him very hardly with the other; though in his mind he was determined to 
defer it till he saw what effect his exile would have upon Isaac's behaviour.
	Now was our young hero turned into the wide world, with but a very small 
matter of money in his pocket, and not a friend to apply to; such was the character 
which his extravagances had procured him amongst his relations. These desperate 
circumstances determined him, when the little he had was gone, to get possessed of 
more by any means whatsoever, whether lawful or unlawful. Atkinson came up to 
London, where the vices of the place soon drained him of all his money. Now was he 
so put to his shifts again, that he was obliged to return into the country, where he 
committed several petty robberies to support him till he came to his father's house. He 
had been long sensible that he must never expect to re-enter those once hospitable 
doors with his father's consent, at least till he had given manifest proof of a thorough 
reformation.
	To enter the windows therefore, without asking any leave at all, was now his 
resolution. In order to this, he skulked about unobserved till the family was gone to 
bed, and then very easily got into the kitchen, as there were no shutters to oppose him. 
He found means here to get possessed of about fifty pounds in silver, and one hundred 
and twenty broad-pieces of gold; five of the latter he wrapped up in a copy of verses, 
which were ready written in his pocket, and put them into his father's clasped Bible. 
The verses were:
Sir, you your son did often bully, 
Because he never read in Tully; 
What parents teach they ought to practise, 
And I confess your test exact is  
'Tis just to turn it on yourself 
Your Bible stands upon the shelf; 
The gold is yours, if you unclose it; 
Else I shall find the dear deposit 
Safe in a place by all forgotten, 
When you, good man, are dead and rotten."
	What a graceless, hopeless young heir was here! — first to rob his father, and 
then to banter him in this ludicrous manner. Anyone may imagine what was the 
consequence of all this, as soon as the old gentleman discovered the writing. A lawyer 
was sent for, and the estate was given, after old Atkinson's demise, to a near kinsman, 
who had a very large income before, and knew how to make use of it to his own 
advantage as well as any man in England. Shortly after this the old gentleman died 
with grief, and Isaac had the mortification to see another in possession of what he had 
forfeited by his extravagances.
	Besides the money, he took the best horse in his father's stable to bring him to 
London. It happened to be Sunday when he came through Uxbridge, and a whim 
came into his head that he would put up his horse and go to church. The parson took 
for his text these words of the Apostle Paul: "For ye know that the day of the Lord 
cometh as a thief in the night" (i Thes. V. 2). The sermon was full of zealous and 
pious exhortations to a timely preparation for the great and terrible day; so that any 
man less hardened in impiety than Atkinson was, must have gone away deeply 
affected. But he, instead of that, made it his business to dog the parson home after 
church was done; and was very well pleased when he saw him go across the fields 
alone. About half-a-mile out of town Isaac stops the reverend priest and demands his 
money. The good man was sufficiently surprised, and desired to know his meaning. "I 
mean," says Isaac, "to let you know that all thieves do not come in the night; so the 
next time you preach, you may tell the people that the day of the Lord cometh like a 
thief at noon, which, in my opinion, is a much better simile. For at night we are apt to 
expect thieves; but who the devil ever feared being robbed at noonday so near a 
town?" The parson, notwithstanding his logic, was obliged to concede both to his 
argument and demand. A good silver watch and about one pound eighteen shillings 
were delivered. After which Atkinson carried his reverence as far as he could out of 
the path, and there bound him, and left him, while he got off towards London 
unsuspected.
	Another time he met with the famous Noy, Attorney-General to King Charles 
I., on horseback. As he knew him very well, he was resolved to accost him in his own 
language: "Sir," says he, "I have a writ of Capias ad Computandum against you, 
which requires an account of all the money in your pocket." Noy was a merry man 
naturally, and he was sure it would do him little service to be sour upon this occasion, 
so he pleasantly asked our desperado by what authority he acted. Isaac, upon this, 
pulled out a brace of pistols, and told him that those weapons had as much authority in 
them as any tipstaff in England, which he should be convinced of, if he made any 
delays. The Attorney-General had no more to say, but very contentedly gave him a 
purse well lined, and then they parted with mutual compliments.
	Atkinson was in general the greatest plague to the lawyers of any highwayman 
that ever was in England. He had the impudence to follow the circuits, and rob all of 
that profession that ever came in his way. It is reported that once in less than eight 
months he stopped above one hundred and sixty attorneys only in the county of 
Norfolk, and took from them upwards of three thousand pounds. He was so intrepid as 
frequently to assault three, four or five men himself, and so successful as always to 
escape, till the unfortunate action that brought him to Tyburn. But almost all our 
celebrated robbers have been taken in a very silly manner.
	He met a market-woman upon Turnham Green, with a bag of halfpence in her 
lap. He eyed the bag as he passed by her, and supposing it to be a larger booty than it 
really was, returned and bid her deliver. The woman, being of a bold daring spirit, 
immediately tossed the bag over a hedge on the roadside, and made the best of her 
way towards Brentford. Atkinson thought it much better to secure the money than to 
be revenged on the woman; so alighting, and hanging his horse's bridle to a stump, he 
went over the hedge. It seems his horse had taken a fancy to the poor woman's mare, 
for he instantly got loose and ran after her, neighing and snuffing up the wind. The 
market-woman looked back, and observed the particulars, which she related as soon 
as she came into Brentford. Half-a-score of men immediately went out after poor 
Isaac, and it was not long before they found him in a field, unable to make his escape 
by reason of a great pair of jack-boots which he could not get off; nor had he any 
knife to cut them down. When he saw himself surrounded he pulled out several 
pocket-pistols and discharged them; so that he killed four of the men on the spot, and 
afterwards mortally wounded another with a hanger, which he wore by his side. But 
there were still enough left to secure him, which at last they did.
	Being carried before a magistrate, he was committed to Newgate, where, and 
at the Old Bailey, he behaved with intolerable insolence. After condemnation he 
continued to scoff at the ordinary, and turn all his wholesome admonitions into 
ridicule.
	When the day for his execution was come, he desperately stabbed himself with 
a pen-knife; but the wound not proving mortal he was afterwards carried to Tyburn, 
and hanged, in the year 1640, being twenty-six years of age.
	As he was such a noted highwayman, and was besides known to be a 
gentleman and a scholar, it was generally expected he would at least have left a 
speech behind him in writing; but instead of that, he only stood up at the gallows and 
said: "Gentlemen, there's nothing like a merry life, and a short one."


WILLAM BRANDON ALIAS JACK KETCH 
Who beheaded King Charles the First.

	IN various instances, it will be observed, that as we handle ancient records, 
and turn over musty leaves of books, which treat of the final sentence of the law, we 
seize upon each scrap which can possibly interest our readers,. Though the present 
case goes beyond the time in which we first date our chronology, yet so remarkable a 
historical anecdote, cannot, we think, be deemed an intrusion.
	When King Charles I. was doomed to death by the mock tribunal, and self-
created judges, the tools of the usurper, Oliver Cromwell, a man named Richard 
Brandon was the common executioner in London; and, as it were, to heap additional 
degradation on the head of the royal martyr, he was ordered to perform the bloody 
work.
	Brandon survived the death of the king but a very short time, having, as it was 
said, been seized with such severe compunction for being the instrument of the fatal 
deed, that he could never after look up and smile in the face of heaven. He, died on 
Wednesday the 20th of June, 1649, being within five months of the day of the 
martyrdom.
	"The Sunday before Brandon's death," said the old accounts, " a young man of 
his acquaintance being to visit him, asked him how he did; and if he was not troubled 
in conscience, for cutting off the King's head. Brandon replied; yes, because he was at 
the King's trial, and heard the sentence denounced against him; which caused the said 
Brandon to make this solemn vow or protestation, viz. "Wishing God to perish his 
body and soul, if he ever appeared on the scaffold to do the act, or lift up his hand 
against him." And he further declared, that "he was no sooner on the scaffold (to do 
that wicked act) but he immediately felt a trembling, and ever since, to his death, 
continued. in the like agony."
	"He likewise confessed, that he had thirty pounds* for his pains, and all paid 
him in half crowns, within an hour after the fatal blow was struck, and that he took an 
orange stuck full of cloves, and a handkerchief, out of the King's coat-pocket. As soon 
as he had descended from the scaffold, he was proffered twenty shillings for that 
orange, by a gentleman in Whitehall, but he refused the same, and afterwards sold it 
for ten shillings in Rosemary-lane.
	"About six o'clock that evening, he returned to his wife, living in Rosemary-
lane, and gave her the money, saying, it was the dearest money he ever earned in his 
life, which prophetical words were soon made manifest. About three days before his 
death, he lay speechless, uttering many a sigh and heavy groan, and in a most 
deplorable manner departed his bed of sorrow.
	"For his burial, great store of wine was sent by the sheriffs of the city of 
London, and a great multitude of people stood waiting, to see his corpse carried to the 
church-yard; some crying out, hang him, the rogue, bury him in a dung-hill; others 
pressed upon the coffin, saying, 'they would quarter him, for executing the King;' 
insomuch that the church-wardens and overseers were fain to come for the 
suppressing them, and with great difficulty he was at last carried to Whitechapel 
church-yard, having a bunch of rosemary at the end of the coffin, and on the top 
thereof, a rope, tied across, from one end to the other.
	"The man who waited on this executioner, when he gave the fatal blow to the 
King, was a rag-man in Rosemary-lane."
	[*Note: According to the present difference of the value of money, this was an 
enormous fee, and may be calculated not much short of one hundred pounds; and this 
shews the difficulty which the regicides found to get a man to do so foul a deed.]
	Editor's Note: For an alternative identification of the executioner, see the 
appendix on the Maiden, or Scottish Guillotine.


PATRICK FLEMMING 
An Irish Highwayman who held Sway near the Bog of Allen and, after 
numerous Murders, was executed on 24th of April, 1650

	PATRICK FLEMMING was a native of Ireland, and born at Athlone, which is 
remarkably situated in the counties of East and West Meath, as well as in the 
provinces of Leinster and Connaught. His parents rented a potato garden of about 
fifteen shillings per annum, upon the produce of which, and the increase of their 
geese, hens, pigs, etc., they wholly depended for the subsistence of themselves and 
nine children. They, and their whole family of swine, poultry and progeny, all took up 
their lodging at night not only under the same roof, but in the same room; according to 
the practice of abundance of their country-people, who build only for necessity, 
without any idea of what we call beauty and order. One may guess from the 
circumstances of the father that the son had small share of liberal education, though he 
had the most claim to it of any one of the children, as he was the eldest. But what he 
wanted in acquirements was made up with impudence, a quality which in most 
ignorant people happily fills up their void of knowledge.
	When he was about thirteen years of age the Countess of Kildare took him into 
her service, in the capacity of foot-boy; and finding him so utterly destitute of 
learning, she was so indulgent as to put him to school. But instead of being grateful to 
her ladyship in improving his time to the best advantage, he was entirely negligent, 
and discovered no inclination to his book. His lady admonished him frequently, but to 
no purpose; for he grew not only careless but insolent, till at last, being found 
incorrigible, he was discharged from the family.
	It was not long, however, before he was so fortunate as to get to be a domestic 
of the Earl of Antrim's; but here his behaviour was worse than before. He was a 
scandal to the whole family, for the little wit he had was altogether turned on 
mischief. His Lord bore it a pretty while, notwithstanding the repeated complaints of 
his fellow servants, and took no notice so long as he could avoid it; but at last this 
nobleman also was obliged to turn him out of doors; and this was the occasion. The 
Earl of Antrim was a Roman Catholic, and kept a priest in the house as his chaplain 
and confessor, to whom every one of the servants was required to pay great respect. 
Patrick, on account of his disorderliness, was often reproved by this gentleman, and 
he received it very well, till one day he happened to find the holy father asleep in 
some private part of the house in a very indecent pose, whereupon he went and got all 
the family to that place, and showed them what he had discovered as a revenge upon 
the parson, who at that instant awoke. With respect to the servants this had the desired 
effect, and exposed the priest to ridicule. But the earl, when he heard it, took the part 
of his chaplain, believed the story a slander, and immediately gave Flemming a 
discharge, as desired. Patrick found means, however, before he entirely left the 
neighbourhood, to rob his lordship of money and plate to the value of about two 
hundred pounds, with which he fled to Athenrea, in the province of Connaught.
	He hid himself here in a little hut that he found for ten or twelve days, till he 
imagined the hue and cry after him might be over, and then made the best of his way 
to Dublin, where he soon entered into a gang of housebreakers, and during the space 
of six years was concerned in more robberies than had ever before been committed in 
that city in the memory of man.
	While he continued in Dublin he was twice in danger of being hanged for his 
offences, which were so great as to make him the subject of public conversation all 
over the city. He now perceived he began to be too well known to stay there any 
longer in safety, and so he retired into the country and turned highwayman. The chief 
place of his haunt was about the Bog of Allen, where he attacked almost all who 
passed that way, of whatever quality; telling them that he was absolute lord of that 
road, and had a right to demand contribution of all that travelled it, and to punish 
those with death who refused to comply; therefore, if they had any regard for their 
lives, he advised them to deliver what they had peaceably, and not put him to the 
trouble of exerting his prerogative. By these means he became more dreaded in the 
counties where he robbed than any thief of his time, for he not only threatened those 
with death who disputed with him, but actually murdered several, and used many 
others with abundance of barbarity.
	It is reported that in a few days he robbed one hundred and twenty five men 
and women upon the mountain of Barnsmoor, near which is a wood which they call 
Colorockedie, where he had assembled a numerous gang, out of which not a few at 
several times were taken and executed. Persons of quality he usually addressed in 
their own style, and told them he was as well bred as they, and therefore they must 
subscribe towards maintaining him according to his rank and dignity.
	Among the principal persons whom he stopped and robbed were the 
Archbishop of Armagh and the Bishop of Rapho, both in one coach; the Archbishop 
of Tuam; and the Lady Baltimore, with her young son, a child of four years old, 
whom he took from her, and obliged her to send him a ransom within twenty four 
hours, or else, he told her, he would cut the young puppy's throat and make a pie of 
him. From the Archbishop of Tuam he got a thousand pounds. After this he fled into 
Munster, and continued the same trade there, till he was apprehended for robbing a 
nobleman of two hundred and fifty pounds, or which fact he was carried to Cork and 
committed to prison.
	But even now they were far from having him so safe as they imagined; for the 
county jail was not strong enough to hold him. He was no sooner confined than his 
eyes were about him, and his head plotting an escape. At last he found means to get 
up a chimney and, by removing some few obstacles, to get out at the top, and so avoid 
hanging for that offence.
	He followed his villainies for some years after his breaking out of prison, 
during which time he murdered five men, two women and a boy of fourteen years old. 
Besides which he mangled and wounded a great many others; in particular, Sir 
Donagh O'Brien, whose nose, lips and ears he cut off, for making some small 
resistance while he robbed him. At last he was apprehended by the landlord of a house 
where he used to drink, near Mancoth. The landlord sent advice to the sheriff of the 
county when he would be there with several of his associates, and the sheriff, 
according to the instruction, came one evening with a strong guard, and beset the 
house. Patrick and his company would have defended themselves, but the landlord 
had taken care to wet all their fire arms and prevent their going off, by which means 
they became useless; and our desperado, with fourteen more, was taken, carried to 
Dublin, and there executed, on Wednesday, the 24th of April, in the year 1650. After 
which Patrick Flemming was hanged in chains on the high road a little without the 
city.


CAPTAIN ZACHARY HOWARD 
A Royalist who lost his Estates and turned Highwayman. Executed 1652.

	THIS unhappy person was a gentleman born and bred. He came to an estate in 
Gloucestershire, of fourteen hundred pounds per annum, just about the breaking out of 
the Civil War in 1641, his father dying that year. A sincere love of loyalty and 
allegiance inspiring him with the gallantry of fighting for his King and country, he 
soon mortgaged his estate for twenty thousand pounds, with which he raised a troop 
of horse for the service of King Charles I., who gave him the command of them. He 
remained in the army till the republican party became sole conqueror, and triumphed 
over religion and monarchy, when he, with many other Cavaliers, was obliged to 
retire into exile, for fear of the prevailing power.
	It was not long that he continued abroad before he returned to England with 
King Charles II., on whom he attended at Worcester fight, where he performed 
wonders to the honour of the Royal army, and more especially to his own glory and 
praise; for he was even taken notice of and applauded by his Majesty himself, who 
also that day showed himself worthy of the crown he fought for, by his uncommon 
courage. Everyone knows that the Parliamentarians carried the field in this 
engagement, and that his Majesty escaped with much difficulty, by hiding himself in 
an oak in Warwickshire, whence, after six weeks' wandering up and down, he at 
length found a passage into France. We need not add that he continued twelve years in 
foreign countries, and that he was afterwards restored to the throne of his ancestors by 
the general consent of the nation. Zachary Howard, in the meantime, remained in 
England, and having lost his estate, and being out of all employment, he could find no 
other way of supporting himself than by robbing on the highway — a very indifferent 
method indeed, but what a great many gentlemen in those days were either obliged to 
take to, or to want bread.
	It is said of Howard that when he resolved on this course of life, he did like 
Hind, and some others of his contemporaries, in swearing he would be revenged, as 
far as lay in his power, on all persons who were against the interest of his Royal 
master. Accordingly we are told that he attacked all whom he met and knew to be of 
that party. It appears too by the following accounts that he succeeded in hunting out 
those regicides.
	The first whom he assaulted on the road was the Earl of Essex, who had been 
general-in-chief of all the Parliament's forces. His lordship was riding over Bagshot 
Heath, with five or six in retinue; nevertheless Zachary rode boldly up to the coach 
door, commanded the driver to stand, and my lord to deliver, adding, that if he did not 
comply with his demand without words, neither he nor any of his servants should 
have any quarter. It was unaccountable how a general, who had been always used to 
success, with so many attendants, should be terrified at the menaces of a single 
highwayman. But so it was, that his Honour gave him twelve hundred pounds which 
he had in the coach, and which had been squeezed out of forfeited estates, church 
lands and sequestrations, not being willing to venture his life for such a trifle at a time 
when the party had such a plentiful harvest to reap. Zachary was so well contented 
with his booty that he let the rebellious nobleman pass without punishing him any 
further for his disloyalty, only desiring him to get such another sum together against 
meeting him again in some other convenient place. Another time he overtook, on 
Newmarket Heath, the factious Earl of P — —-, so famous for his comical speeches 
in the House of Commons. Only one footman attended his Honour, and Zachary, 
going in company with them, held his lordship in discourse for about half-a-mile, 
when, coming to a place proper for his design, he pulled out a pistol, and spoke the 
terrifying precept, with the addition of a whole volley of oaths, what he would do to 
him if he did not surrender that minute. "You seem," says the earl, "by your swearing, 
to be a ranting Cavalier. Have you taken a lease of your life, sir, that you dare venture 
it thus against two men?" Howard answered: "I would venture it against two more, 
with your idol Cromwell at the head of you, notwithstanding the great noise he has 
made." "Oh," says P — —-, "he's a precious man, and has fought the Lord's battles 
with success." Zachary replied with calling Oliver and all his crew a company of 
dastardly cowards; and putting his lordship in mind that talking bred delays, and 
delays are dangerous. "Therefore," says he, "out with your purse this moment, or I 
shall out with your soul, if you have any."
	The earl still delaying, Howard dismounted him, by shooting his horse, and 
then took from him a purse full of broad-pieces of gold, and a rich diamond ring; then 
making him mount behind his man, he tied them back to back, and in that condition 
left them. My lord rode swearing, cursing and damning to the next town, with his face 
towards the horse's tail, when a great multitude of people gathered about him; some 
laughing, others wondering at his riding in that preposterous manner, till he declared 
the occasion, and the people very civilly released him.
	One time Fairfax, who was also general of the Parliament army after Essex, 
being with some forces in the county of Northumberland, took up his own quarters at 
Newcastle-upon-Tyne at the same time that Howard chanced to be in the same town. 
It came to the captain's ear that Fairfax was about to send a man to his lady with some 
plate which had been presented to him by the mayor and aldermen of that corporation, 
so that when the day came that the fellow set out with the prize, our highwayman also 
took leave of Newcastle, and rode after the Roundhead servant. He overtook him on 
the road, and fell into deep discourse with him about the present times, which Howard 
seemed as well pleased with as the other, who took him really for an honest fellow, as 
he seemed, and offered still to bear him Company. They baited, dined, supped and lay 
together, and so continued in this friendly manner till the messenger came within a 
day's journey of the seat where his lady resided. Next morning being the last day they 
were to be together, Howard thought it was now high time to execute his design, 
which he did with a great deal of difficulty. Being come to a place proper to act his 
part in, Zachary pulled out his commission, and commanded the fellow to deliver the 
portmanteau, in which was the plate, to the value of two hundred and fifty pounds. 
The other, being as resolute to preserve as Howard was to take it from him, refused to 
comply; whereupon a sharp combat ensued between them, in which the captain had 
his horse shot under him, after a discharge of two or three pistols on either side. The 
encounter still listed, for our highwayman continued to fire on foot, till he shot his 
adversary through the head, which occasioned him to fall, and breathe his last in a 
moment.
	When Howard saw the man dead, he thought it his best way to get off the 
ground as fast as he could; so nimbly mounting the remaining horse, which carried the 
treasure, he rode about five miles from the place where the fact was committed, and 
then deposited the portmanteau in a hollow tree, and went to dinner at the next town. 
From thence he made the best of his way to Faringdon in Berkshire, where Madam 
Fairfax was, and whither the fellow he had killed was bound. He reached thither that 
evening, and delivered the following letter to the lady, which he had found in the 
pockets of the deceased.
	NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE, Aug. 12, 1650. 
	MY DEAR, Hoping that you and my daughter Elizabeth, are in good health, 
this comes to acquaint you that my presence is so agreeable to the inhabitants of this 
place, that the mayor and aldermen have presented me with a large quantity of plate, 
which I have sent to you by my man Thomas, a new servant; whom I would have you 
treat very kindly, he being recommended to me by several gentlemen as a very honest, 
worthy man. The Lord be praised, I am very well, and earnestly long for the happiness 
of enjoying your company, which I hope to do within this month or five weeks at 
farthest. In the meantime, I subscribe myself, your loving husband, till death, 
	FAIRFAX.
	The lady, learning by the contents that a parcel of plate was sent by the bearer, 
inquired of him where it was. Her supposed man readily told her that he was in danger 
of being robbed of it on such a heath by some suspicious persons, and that therefore, 
lest he should meet with the same men again, or others like them, he had lodged his 
charge in the hands of a substantial innkeeper at such a town; from whence he could 
fetch it in two days. This pretence of his carefulness pleased his new mistress very 
much, and confirmed the character which her husband had sent; so that she made very 
much of him, and desired him to go to bed betimes, that he might rest from the 
fatigues of his journey.
	The whole family at this time consisted only of the lady, her daughter, two 
maids, and two men-servants. No sooner were all these gone to their repose than 
Howard arose, dressed himself, and with sword and pistol in hand went into the 
servants' apartments, whom he threatened with present death if they made the least 
noise. All four of these he tied with the bed-cords, and gagged them. Having secured 
these, whom he most feared, he went into Mrs Fairfax's chamber, and served her and 
her daughter as he had done the servants: then he ravished them both, beginning with 
the daughter, and next proceeded to make a strict scrutiny into the trunks, boxes and 
chests of drawers finding in all two thousand broad-pieces of gold and some silver, 
with which he departed to his portmanteau in the tree, which he also carried off.
	After he had committed this robbery and murder there was a proclamation 
issued out by the Commonwealth, promising five hundred pounds to anyone who 
should apprehend him; whereupon, to avoid being taken, he fled into Ireland, where 
he continued his former courses till, being grown as notorious there as in England, he 
thought it advisable to return. He landed at Highlake, and came to the city of Chester 
at the same time that Oliver Cromwell lay there with a party of horse, putting up in 
the same inn where that arch-traitor had taken up his quarters. Here he passed for a 
gentleman who was going to travel into foreign countries for his improvement, and 
behaved himself agreeably to such a character, spending his money with a great deal 
of profuseness.
	He moreover counterfeited himself a Roundhead, and frequently spoke against 
the Royal family, applauding the murder of King Charles I. up to the skies. By this 
means he got familiar with Cromwell, who was so taken with his conversation that he 
would seldom dine or sup without him, or hardly suffer him to be ever out of his 
company. About a fortnight after this acquaintance between them was confirmed, 
Howard went one morning very early to pay old Nol a visit in his bedchamber, which 
was on the same floor with his own. He found an easy admittance, and the 
hypocritical villain desired, that as he had come before he had been at prayers, would 
he please to join with him in that exercise. Zachary consented; but no sooner was 
Cromwell down upon his marrow-bones than he knocked him down with the butt-end 
of a pistol, presenting it afterwards to his breast, and swearing that if he did but 
attempt to make the least noise he would shoot him through the heart, though he were 
sure to be hanged for it the next minute on the sign-post before the door. These 
terrifying words struck the republican hero with such a panic fear that he permitted 
the assaulter to do what he pleased, who thereupon gagged him, and bound him hand 
and foot. After this he rifled a couple of trunks, out of which he took about eleven 
hundred jacobuses, and then taking the pan out of a close-stool that stood in the room, 
which happened to be pretty well filled, he clapped it on the head of the rebel, 
crowning him in such a manner as he deserved. Having finished what he designed, he 
went hastily downstairs and mounted his horse, which he had before ordered to be 
ready, under pretence of some urgent business a few miles out of town.
	By this means he got clear off before Oliver, who fell to knocking as soon as 
he thought the enemy safe, could make anybody hear him.
	At last several of the family went upstairs, and were guided by their noses to 
where the poor general sat, in the miserable pickle we have described, unable to move 
out of the place. Some of them, at first sight, thought he had put his headpiece on, till 
the nauseous filth, which ran down his face and shoulders convinced them of their 
mistake, and made them speedily unbind him.
	As soon as he was loose, and pretty well wiped, he fell upon his knees to give 
thanks for so signal a deliverance from the fury of a wicked Cavalier, for such he now 
believed Howard to be.
	Within a week after this, Howard sent Oliver a letter, wherein he signified that 
he was in good health, and that what he had done was only to make him reflect that, 
notwithstanding his great successes, his life was still in the power of any single man 
who would be bold enough to execute justice. Then he made very merry with the old 
villain about the condition he had left him in, adding that he would have him for the 
future be more cautious how he entered into friendship with a man before he knew 
him. "For," says he, "the cruelties of you and your party have made us like yourselves; 
so that the bravest gentlemen in the kingdom are glad to turn hypocrites, either to 
secure themselves, or be nobly revenged, as I have been."
	Our captain enjoyed his liberty but a very little time after this exploit, for 
venturing one day to attack half-a- dozen republican officers together, as they were 
riding over Blackheath, he was overpowered by their number; and though he 
vigorously defended himself, so as to kill one and wound two more of them, he was at 
last taken by the remaining three. These were soon assisted by several passengers who 
came by, and joined in carrying this bold robber before a magistrate, who forthwith 
committed him to Maidstone jail. Thither Oliver went to see him, and insulted him 
with a great many reproaches. To all which Howard replied with his usual bravery and 
wit, to the utter confusion of poor Nol.
	When he came on his trial at the ensuing assizes he had evidences enough 
appear against him to have convicted him if he had had twenty lives to have lost. Not 
only the officers who took him, but even Cromwell himself, and General Fairfax's 
wife and daughter gave in their depositions, besides a vast number of others whom he 
had robbed at several times. So that he was sentenced for two rapes, two murders, and 
as many robberies, to be hanged till he was dead.
	When he came to the place of execution, apparelled all in white, he confessed 
himself guilty of everything he stood charged with; but declared he was sorry for 
nothing but the murders he had committed. Yet even these, he said, appeared to him 
the less criminal when he considered the persons on whom they were acted. He 
professed further, that if he were pardoned, and at liberty again, he would never leave 
off robbing the Roundheads, so long as there were any of them left in England.
	What was most remarkable at Howard's death was his smiling on Oliver, who 
came into the country on purpose to see the last of him, with an air of scorn and 
contempt, telling him that if he had had his reward he had been in the same 
circumstances as he himself was now in several years ago.
	He ended his life in 1652, being thirty-two years of age.


CAPTAIN JAMES HIND 
A Famous Highwayman who robbed Roundheads and even made an Attempt 
on Cromwell. Executed 24th of September, 1652

  
Hind robbing Colonel Harrison in Maidenhead thicket.

	THE father of Captain Hind was a saddler, an inhabitant of Chipping-Norton 
in Oxfordshire, where the captain was born. The old man lived there many years in 
very good reputation among his neighbours, was an honest companion, and a constant 
churchman. As James was his only son, he was willing to give him the best education 
he was able, and to that purpose sent him to school till he was fifteen years of age, in 
which time he learned to read and write very well, and knew arithmetic enough to 
make him capable of any common business.
	After this he was put apprentice to a butcher in his native town, where he 
served about two years of his time, and then ran away from his master, who was a 
very morose man, and continually finding something or another to quarrel with him 
about.
	When he made this elopement he applied immediately to his mother for 
money to carry him up to London, telling her a lamentable story of the hardships he 
had suffered from his master's severity. Mothers are generally easily wrought upon 
with stories of that kind; she therefore very tenderly supplied him with three pounds 
for his expenses, and sent him away with tears in her eyes.
	He had not been long in London before he got a relish of the pleasures of the 
place (pleasures I call them in compliance with the opinion of gentlemen of the 
captain's taste) — I mean the enjoyment of his bottle and his mistress; both which, as 
far as his circumstances would allow, he pursued very earnestly. One night he was 
taken in company with a woman of the town, who had just before picked a 
gentleman's pocket of five guineas, and sent with her to the Poultry Compter till 
morning, when he was released for want of any evidence against him, he having in 
reality no hand in the affair. The woman was committed to Newgate. The captain by 
this accident fell into company with one Thomas Allen, a noted highwayman, who 
had been put into the Compter upon suspicion of some robbery, and was released at 
the same time with Hind, and for the same reason. These two men going to drink 
together after their confinement, they contracted a friendship which was the ruin of 
them both.
	Their first adventure was at Shooters Hill, where they met with a gentleman 
and his servant. Hind being perfectly raw and inexperienced, his companion was 
willing to have a proof of his courage, and therefore stayed at some distance while the 
captain rode up and, singly, took from them fifteen pounds; but returned the 
gentleman twenty shillings, to bear his expenses on the road, with such a pleasant air 
that the gentleman protested he would never hurt a hair of his head if it should at any 
time be in his power. Allen was prodigiously pleased both with the bravery and 
generosity of his new comrade, and they mutually swore to stand by one another to 
the utmost of their power.
	It was about the time that the inhuman and unnatural murder of King Charles 
I. was perpetrated at his own palace gate, by the fanatics of that time, when our two 
adventurers began their progress on the road. One part of their engagement together 
was like Captain Stafford's resolution, never to spare any of the regicides that came in 
their way. It was not long before they met the grand usurper, Cromwell, as he was 
coming from Huntingdon, the place of his nativity, to London. Oliver had no less than 
seven men in his train, who all came immediately upon their stopping the coach and 
overpowered our two heroes; so that poor Tom Allen was taken on the spot, and soon 
after executed, and it was with a great deal of difficulty that Hind made his escape, 
who resolved from this time to act with a little more caution. He could not, however, 
think of quitting a course of life which he had just begun to taste, and which he found 
so profitable.
	The captain rode so hard to get out of danger after this adventure with 
Cromwell that he killed his horse, and he had not at that time money enough to buy 
another. He resolved, therefore, to procure one as soon as possible, and to this purpose 
tramped it along the road on foot. It was not long before he saw a horse hung to a 
hedge with a brace of pistols before him; and looking round him, he observed on the 
other side of the hedge a gentleman untrussing a point. "This is my horse," says the 
captain, and immediately vaults into the saddle. The gentleman calling to him, and 
telling him that the horse was his — "Sir," says Hind, "you may think yourself well 
off that I have left you all the money in your pockets to buy another, which you had 
best lay out before I meet you again, lest you should be worse used." So he rode away 
in search of new adventures.
	There is another story of the captain's getting himself remounted, which I have 
seen in a printed account of his life. Being reduced to the humble capacity of a 
footpad, he hired a common hack from a man who made it his business to let out 
horses, and took the road on his back. He was overtaken (for he was not able to 
overtake anybody) by a gentleman well mounted, with a portmanteau behind him. 
They fell into discourse upon such topics as are common to travellers, and Hind was 
very particular in praising the gentleman's horse, till the gentleman repeated 
everything his horse could do. There was upon the side of the road a wall, over which 
was another way, and the gentleman told Hind that his horse could leap that wall. 
Hind offered to lay a bottle of it; upon which the gentleman attempted and 
accomplished what he proposed. The captain confessed he had lost his wager, but 
desired the gentleman to let him try if he would do the same with him upon his back, 
which the gentleman consenting to, the captain rode away with his portmanteau, and 
left him to return his horse to the owner.
	Another time Captain Hind met the celebrated regicide, Hugh Peters, in 
Enfield Chase, and commanded him to deliver his money. Hugh, who had his share of 
confidence, began to lay about him with texts of Scripture, and to cudgel our bold 
robber with the eighth commandment. "It is written in the Law," says he, "that thou 
shalt not steal. And furthermore, Solomon, who was surely a very wise man, speaketh 
in this manner: 'Rob not the poor, because he is poor.'" Hind was willing to answer the 
finished old cant in his own strain; and for that end began to rub up his memory for 
some of the scraps of the Bible which he had learned by heart in his minority. 
"Verily," said Hind, "if thou hadst regarded the divine precepts as thou oughtest to 
have done, thou wouldst not have wrested them to such an abominable and wicked 
sense as thou didst the words of the prophet, when he saith, 'Bind their kings with 
chains, and their nobles with fetters of iron.' Didst thou not, thou detestable hypocrite, 
endeavour from these words to aggravate the misfortunes of thy Royal master, whom 
thy accursed republican party unjustly murdered before the door of his own palace?" 
Here Hugh Peters began to extenuate that horrid crime, and to allege other parts of 
Scripture in his defence, and in order to preserve his money. "Pray, sir," replied Hind, 
"make no reflections on my profession; for Solomon plainly says, 'Do not despise a 
thief'; but it is to little purpose for us to dispute. The substance of what I have to say is 
this: deliver thy money presently, or else I shall send thee out of the world to thy 
master in an instant."
	These terrible words of the captain frightened the old Presbyterian in such a 
manner that he gave him thirty broad-pieces of gold, and then they parted. But Hind 
was not thoroughly satisfied with letting such a notorious enemy to the Royal cause 
depart in so easy a manner. He therefore rode after him, full speed, and overtaking 
him, spoke as follows: — "Sir, now I think of it, I am convinced that this misfortune 
has happened to you because you did not obey the words of the Scripture, which say 
expressly, 'Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses for your journey '; 
whereas it is evident that you had provided a pretty deal of gold. However, as it is 
now in my power to make you fulfil another command, I would by no means slip the 
opportunity. Therefore pray give me your cloak." Peters was so surprised that he 
stood neither to dispute nor to examine what was the drift of Hind's demand; but Hind 
soon let him understand his meaning when he added: "You know, sir, our Saviour has 
commanded, that if any man take away thy cloak, thou must not refuse thy coat also; 
therefore I cannot suppose you will act in direct contradiction to such an express 
direction, especially now you, can't pretend you have forgot it, because I have 
reminded you of your duty." The old Puritan shrugged his shoulders for some time 
before he proceeded to uncase them; but Hind told him his delay would do him no 
service, for he would be punctually obeyed, because he was sure what he requested 
was consonant to the Scripture. Accordingly Hugh Peters delivered his coat, and Hind 
carried all off.
	Next Sunday when Hugh came to preach he chose an invective against theft 
for the subject of his sermon, and took his text in the Canticles, chap. v, 3: "I have put 
off my coat, how shall I put it on." An honest Cavalier who was present, and knew the 
occasion of his choosing these words, cried out aloud: "Upon my word, sir, I believe 
there is nobody here can tell you, unless Captain Hind was here!" Which ready 
answer to Hugh Peter's scriptural question put the congregation into such an excessive 
fit of laughter that the fanatic parson was ashamed of himself, and descended from his 
prattling box without proceeding any further in his harangue.
	It has been observed before that Hind was a professed enemy to all the 
regicides; and, indeed, fortune was so favourable to his desires as to put one or other 
of those celebrated villains often into his power.
	He met one day with that arch-traitor, Sergeant Bradshaw, who had some time 
before the insolence to sit as judge of his lawful Sovereign, and to pass sentence of 
death upon his Majesty. The place where this rencounter happened was upon the road 
between Sherborne and Shaftesbury, in Dorsetshire. Hind rode up to the coach side 
and demanded the sergeant's money; who, supposing his name would carry terror with 
it, told him who he was. Quoth Hind: "I fear neither you nor any king-killing son of a 
whore alive. I have now as much power over you as you lately had over the King, and 
I should do God and my country good service if I made the same use of it; but live, 
villain, to suffer the pangs of thine own conscience; till Justice shall lay her iron hand 
upon thee, and require an answer for thy crimes in a way more proper for such a 
monster, who art unworthy to die by any hands but those of the common hangman, 
and at any other place than Tyburn. Nevertheless, though I spare thy life as a regicide, 
be assured that, unless thou deliverest thy money immediately, thou shalt die for thy 
obstinacy."
	Bradshaw began to be sensible that the case was not now with him, as it had 
been when he sat at Westminster Hall, attended with the whole strength of the 
rebellion. A horror, naturally arising from a mind conscious of the blackest villainies, 
took possession of his soul, upon the apprehensions of death, which the pistol gave 
him, and discovered itself in his countenance. He put his trembling hand into his 
pocket and pulled out about forty shillings in silver, which he presented to the captain, 
who swore he would that minute shoot him through the heart if he did not find coin of 
another species. The sergeant at last, to save a miserable life, pulled out that which he 
valued next to it, as of two evils all men choose the least, and gave the captain a purse 
full of jacobuses.
	Hind, having thus got possession of the cash, made Bradshaw yet wait a 
considerable time longer, while he made the following eulogium on money; which, 
though in the nature of it, it be something different from the harangues which the 
sergeant generally heard on a Sunday, contains, nevertheless, as much truth, and 
might have been altogether as pleasing had it come from another mouth: — "This, sir, 
is the metal that wins my heart for ever! O precious gold, I admire and adore thee as 
much as either Bradshaw, Pryn, or any other villain of the same stamp, who, for the 
sake of thee, would sell their Redeemer again, were He now upon earth. This is that 
incomparable medicament which the republican physicians call 'The Wonder- 
working Plaster.' It is truly Catholic in operation, and somewhat of a kin to the Jesuits' 
powder, but more effectual. The virtues of it are strange and various: it makes justice 
deaf as well as blind, and takes out spots of the deepest treason as easily as Castile 
soap does common stains; it alters a man's constitution in two or three days, more than 
the Virtuoso's transfusion of blood can do in seven years. It is a great alexipharmic, 
and helps poisonous principles of rebellion, and those that use them. It miraculously 
exalts and purifies the eyesight, and makes traitors behold nothing but innocence in 
the blackest malefactors. It is a mighty cordial for a declining cause; it stifles faction 
and schism as certainly as the itch is destroyed by butter and brimstone. In a word, it 
makes fools wise men, and wise men fools; and both of them knaves. The very colour 
of this precious balm is bright and dazzling. If it be properly applied to the fist — that 
is, in a decent manner and a competent dose — it infallibly performs all the abovesaid 
cures, and many others too numerous to be here mentioned."
	The captain, having finished his panegyric, pulled out his pistol and said 
further:
	"You and your infernal crew have a long while run on, like Jehu, in a career of 
blood and impiety, pretending that zeal for the Lord of Hosts has been your only 
motive. How long you may be suffered to continue in the same course, God only 
knows. I will however, for this time, stop your race in a literal sense of the words." 
With that he shot all the six horses which were in the sergeant's coach and then rode 
off in pursuit of another booty.
	Some time after, Hind met a coach on the road between Petersfield and 
Portsmouth, filled with gentlewomen. He went up to them in a genteel manner, told 
them that he was a patron of the fair sex, and that it was purely to win the favour of a 
hard-hearted mistress that he travelled the country. "But, ladies," added he, "I am at 
this time reduced to the necessity of asking relief, having nothing to carry me on in 
my intended prosecution of adventures." The young ladies, who had most of them 
read a pretty many romances, could not help conceiting they had met with some 
Quixote or Amadis de Gaul, who was saluting them in the strain of knight-errantry. 
"Sir Knight," said one of the pleasantest among them, "we heartily commiserate your 
condition, and are very much troubled that we cannot contribute towards your 
support; but we have nothing about us but a sacred depositum, which the laws of your 
order will not suffer you to violate." Hind was pleased to think he had met with such 
agreeable gentlewomen, and for the sake of the jest could freely have let them pass 
unmolested if his necessities at this time had not been very pressing. "May I, bright 
ladies, be favoured with the knowledge of what this sacred depositum, which you 
speak of, is, that so I may employ my utmost abilities in its defence, as the laws of 
knight-errantry require?" The lady who spoke before, and who suspected the least of 
any one in the company, told him that the depositum she had spoken of was three 
thousand pounds, the portion of one of the company, who was going to bestow it upon 
the knight who had won her good will by his many past services. "My humble duty be 
presented to the knight," said he, "and be pleased to tell him that my name is Captain 
Hind; that out of mere necessity I have made bold to borrow part of what, for his sake, 
I wish were twice as much; and that I promise to expend the sum in defence of injured 
lovers and the support of gentlemen who profess knight-errantry." At the name of 
Captain Hind they were sufficiently startled, there being nobody then living in 
England who had not heard of him. Hind, however, bid them not be affrighted, for he 
would not do them the least hurt, and desired no more than one thousand pounds out 
of the three. This the ladies very thankfully gave in an instant (for the money was tied 
up in separate bags), and the captain wished them all a good journey, and much joy to 
the bride.
	We must leave the captain a little, to display the corruption of human nature in 
an instance which the captain has often protested was a great trouble to him. The 
young lady, when she met her intended husband, told him all that had passed upon the 
road, and the mercenary wretch, as soon as he heard of the money that was lost, 
adjourned the marriage till he had sent to her father to ask whether or no he would 
make up the original sum agreed upon, which he refusing (partly because he had 
sufficiently exhausted his substance before, and partly because he resented the sordid 
proposal), our fervent lover entirely broke through all his vows, and the unfortunate 
young lady died of grief and indignation.
	Another time Hind was obliged to abscond for a considerable time in the 
country, there being great inquiries made after him; during this interval his money 
began to run short, and he was a great while before he could think of a way to 
replenish his purse. He would have taken another turn or two on the highway, but he 
had lived so long here that he had spent his very horse. While he was in this 
extremity, a noted doctor in his neighbourhood went to receive a large sum of money 
for a cure which he had performed, and our captain had got information of the time. It 
was in the doctor's way home to ride directly by Hind's door, who had hired a little 
house on the side of a common. Our adventurer took care to be ready at the hour the 
doctor was to return, and when he was riding by the house he addressed himself to 
him in the most sub missive style he was master of, telling him that he had a wife 
within who was violent bad with a flux, so that she could not live without present 
help; entreating him to come in but two or three minutes, and he would show his 
gratitude as soon as he was able. The doctor was moved with com passion at the poor 
man's request and immediately alighted, and accompanied him in, assuring him that 
he should be very glad if it was in his power to do him any service. Hind conducted 
him upstairs, and, as soon as they were got into the chamber, shut the door and pulled 
out a loaded pistol and an empty purse, while the doctor was looking round for his 
patient. "This," quoth Hind, holding up the purse, "is my wife; she has had a flux so 
long, that there is now nothing at all within her. I know, sir, you have a sovereign 
remedy in your pocket for her distemper, and if you do not apply it without a word, 
this pistol shall make the day shine into your body." The doctor would have been glad 
to have lost a considerable fee, provided he might have had nothing to do with the 
patient; but when he saw there was no getting off, he took forty guineas out of his 
pocket, and emptied them out of his own purse into the captain's, which now seemed 
to be in pretty good health. Hind then told the doctor that he would leave him in full 
possession of his house, to make amends for the money he had taken from him. Upon 
which he went out and locked the door upon poor Galen, mounting his horse, and 
riding away as fast as he was able, to find another country to live in, well knowing 
that this would now be too hot to hold him.
	Hind has often been celebrated for his generosity to all sorts of people, more 
especially for his kindness to the poor, which it is reported was so extraordinary, that 
he never injured the property of any person who had not a complete share of riches. 
We shall give one instance, in stead of a great many which we could produce, which 
will sufficiently confirm this general opinion of his tenderness for those who were 
needy.
	At a time when he was out of cash (as he frequently was, by reason of his 
extravagance), and had been upon the watch a pretty while, without seeing any worth 
his notice, he at last espied an old man jogging along the road upon an ass. He rode up 
to meet him, and asked,, him very courteously where he was going. "To the market," 
said the old man, "at Wantage, to buy me a cow, that I may have some milk for my 
children." "How many children," quoth Hind, "may you have?" The old man 
answered ten. "And how much do you think to give for a cow?" said Hind. "I have but 
forty shillings, master, and that I have been saving together these two years," says the 
poor wretch. Hind's heart asked for the poor man's condition, at the same time that he 
could not help admiring his simplicity; but being in so great a strait as I have 
intimated, he thought of an expedient which would serve both him and the old man 
too. "Father," said he, "the money you have got about you I must have at this time; but 
I will not wrong your children of their milk. My name is Hind, and if you will give me 
your forty shillings quietly, and meet me again this day sevennight at this place, I 
promise to make the sum double. Only be cautious that you never mention a word of 
the matter to anybody between this and that." At the day appointed the old man came, 
and Hind was as good as his word, bidding him buy two cows, instead of one, and 
adding twenty shillings to the sum promised, that he might purchase the best in the 
market.
	Never was highwayman more careful than Hind to avoid bloodshed; yet we 
have one instance in his life that proves how hard it is for a man to engage in such an 
occupation without being exposed to a sort of wretched necessity some time or other 
to take away the life of another man, in order to preserve his own.
	Hind had one morning committed several robberies in and about Maidenhead 
Thicket, and, among others, had stopped Colonel Harrison, a celebrated regicide, in 
his coach and six, and taken from him seventy odd pounds. The colonel immediately 
procured a hue and cry for taking him, which was come into that country before the 
captain was aware of it. However, he heard at a house of intelligence, which he 
always had upon every road he used, of the danger he was in, and thereupon he 
instantly thought of making his escape, by riding as fast as he could from the pursuers, 
until he could find some safer way of concealing himself.
	In this condition, as anyone would imagine, the captain was apprehensive of 
every man he saw. He had got no farther than a place called Knole Hill, which is but a 
little way of the thicket, before he heard a man riding behind him full speed. It was a 
gentleman's servant endeavouring to overtake his master, who was gone before, with 
something he had forgotten. Hind just now thought of nothing but his own 
preservation; and therefore resolved either to ride off or fire at the man, who, he 
concluded, was pursuing him. As the other horse was fresh, and Hind had pretty well 
tired his, he soon perceived the man got ground of him; upon which he pulls out a 
pistol, and just as the unfortunate countryman was at his horse's heels, he turns about 
and shoots him through the head, so that he fell down dead on the spot. The captain, 
after the fact, got entirely off; but it was for this that he was afterwards condemned at 
Reading.
	After King Charles I. was beheaded, the Scots received and acknowledged his 
son King Charles II., and resolved to maintain his right against the reigning 
usurpation. To this end they raised an army, and marched towards England, which 
they entered with great precipitation. Abundance of gentry, and others, who were 
loyal in their principles, flocked to the standard of their Sovereign, and resolved to 
lose their lives in his service, or restore him to his dignity. Among these Hind, who 
had as much natural bravery as almost any man that ever lived, resolved to try his 
fortune. Cromwell was sent by the Parliament into the north to intercept the Royal 
army, but in spite of that vigilant traitor's expedition the King advanced as far as 
Worcester, where he waited the enemy's coming.
	Oliver came to Worcester soon after, and the consequence of the two armies 
meeting was a very fierce and bloody battle, in which the Royalists were defeated. 
Hind had the good fortune to escape at that time, and came to London, where he 
lodged with one Mr Denzle, a barber, over against St Dunstan's Church in Fleet 
Street, and went by the name of Brown. But Providence had now ordered that he 
should no longer pursue his extravagances; for he was discovered by a very intimate 
acquaintance. It must be granted that he had sufficiently deserved the stroke of justice; 
but there yet appears something so shocking in a breach of friendship that we cannot 
help wishing somebody else had been the instrument.
	As soon as he was apprehended he was carried before the Speaker of the 
House of Commons, who then lived in Chancery Lane, and after a long examination 
was committed to Newgate, and loaded with irons. He was conveyed to prison by one 
Captain Compton, under a strong guard; and the warrant for his commitment 
commanded that he should be kept in close confinement, and that nobody should be 
admitted to see him without orders.
	On Friday, the 12th of December, 1651, Captain James Hind was brought to 
the bar of the sessions house in the Old Bailey, and indicted for several crimes; but 
nothing being proved against him that could reach his life, he was conveyed in a 
coach from Newgate to Reading in Berkshire, where on the 1st of March, 1651, he 
was arraigned before Judge Warberton for killing one George Sympson at Knole, a 
small village in that county. The evidence here was very plain against him, and he was 
found guilty of wilful murder; but an Act of Oblivion being issued out the next day, to 
for give all former offences but those against the State, he was in great hopes of 
saving his life, until by an Order of Council he was removed by habeas corpus to 
Worcester jail.
	At the beginning of September, 1652, he was condemned for high treason, and 
on the 24th of the same month he was drawn, hanged and quartered, in pursuance of 
the same sentence, being thirty-four years of age. At the place of execution he 
declared that most of the robberies which he had ever committed were upon the 
republican party, of whose principles he professed he always had an utter abhorrence. 
He added that nothing troubled him so much as to die before he saw his Royal master 
established on his throne, from which he was most unjustly and illegally excluded by 
a rebellious and disloyal crew, who deserved hanging more than him.
	After he was executed his head was set upon the Bridge Gate, over the River 
Severn, from whence it was privately taken down and buried within a week 
afterwards. His quarters were put upon the other gates of the city, where they 
remained till they were destroyed by wind and weather.


CAPTAIN PHILIP STAFFORD 
Whose Patrimony being sequestered by the Roundheads took to the Highway 
and was hanged at Reading

	CAPTAIN STAFFORD was born about the year 1622, at a small village in 
Berkshire, about seven miles from New bury. His father was a sort of gentleman 
farmer, having about fifty pounds a year of his own estate; upon which, by the help of 
his industry, he lived in a very comfortable manner. Our Philip was an only child, 
which made the farmer very careful to bring him up as handsomely as he was able. He 
sent him to school first in the country, afterwards to the free school at Reading, at 
both of which places his improvements were as considerable as could be expected 
from one of his age; and indeed might have been much greater had his application 
been equal to the sprightliness of his wit and the uncommon vivacity of his temper. 
These qualifications, however, showed themselves more to advantage in the other 
parts of his life than they did in a sedentary course of study. His conversation, even 
almost in his childhood, was very agreeable, as his resentment was generally fatal to 
those of his own age and stature. Never a lad in all the parishes round but would 
shudder at the name of Philip Stafford, and if he was not always the best scholar, he 
was indisputably the head boy in every school he went to.
	His father designed him for the heir of his industry, as well as of his estate, 
and therefore put him out to no trade; but when the time generally allotted for the 
education of young men of a moderate fortune was expired, he took him home to the 
plough, and, as soon as he conceived him equal to the burden, gave him the whole 
management of his affairs. Philip was a tolerable good farmer, but a much better 
ringer, wrestler and back-sword player; in all which exercises he was looked upon as 
the hero of the whole country.
	He had imbibed in his infancy such principles of religion and loyalty as are 
common to men in his father's circumstances; these were strengthened by the 
company he afterwards kept, and the manly amusements he daily followed; so that 
when the Civil war broke out between King Charles I. and his Parliament, Stafford 
was one of the first of his country who voluntarily entered into the service of his 
Sovereign. He continued in the army through the whole series of that unnatural 
rebellion; and we have no reason to doubt but he behaved with a great deal of bravery, 
though his actions are buried and lost in the universal confusion of the times. We have 
not only all the other particulars of his life which are recorded to support such a 
presumption, but the military honours he received are an undeniable proof that he 
distinguished himself on some extraordinary occasion; for the title of Captain, which 
he afterwards bore, was really conferred on him while he was in the service.
	Everyone is acquainted with the dismal catastrophe of those unhappy troubles. 
As soon as the King was dead, and the rebels had got all into their hands, the 
Royalists were obliged to shift from place to place all over the nation, and to use all 
the cautionary means they could invent to secure themselves. The small patrimony of 
Mr Stafford was sequestered, among the many larger estates of gentlemen who had 
continued in their duty to the last; and he soon found himself in no capacity of getting 
a moderate subsistence. What was to be done in such a situation as this? He looked 
every way and could see no prospect of an honest livelihood. This at last determined 
him in the course which he immediately fell into, and which entitles him to a place in 
this collection. The resolution he set out with was to raise contributions among the 
enemies of his master only, whom he vowed never to spare in anything wherein he 
had an opportunity of doing any damage either to their persons or estates.
	He first cast his eyes upon an old republican who had drunk deep in the 
troubled stream of the times, and had married a young lady in order to obtain her 
fortune. In the character of a servant, and assuming the dress and the language of the 
party, he succeeded in hiring himself as a servant into that family. By his insinuating 
address and engaging manners, he won the affections of his master, and was soon 
admitted to enter into conversation with his master and mistress, and in the most 
dexterous manner imitated the religious phrases and sentiments of that party. But he 
soon employed language of a different kind to his mistress; alienated her affections 
from her lawful husband, and so grossly imposed upon him, that when he would 
sometimes unexpectedly find them alone and in close conversation, he would 
conclude that religion was the subject of their earnest conversation. Under the 
disguise of religion, and emboldened by the credulity of the old husband, Stafford 
remained with increasing favour in that family, until an heir was born to enjoy the 
fortune of the good old republican.
	Indifferent to all the ties of honour and of religion, Stafford and the lady 
carried on their criminal correspondence; and often amused themselves with the 
credulity of the husband, and his unabated attachment to Stafford. In the moments of 
wanton levity, the lady had made him a present of a ring, and also of some jewels, and 
had not only informed him of a quantity of jewels which her husband had collected, 
but actually showed him the place where they were deposited. The violent passion of 
avarice now assumed the superiority in his criminal mind, and he formed the 
resolution to seize the cabinet of jewels, and even to abandon his favourite mistress in 
quest of new adventures.
	But his plan could not be effected without the aid of some other person, and he 
was long doubtful whom he could trust in so delicate and important a matter. At last 
he fixed upon one of the name of Tom Pretty, the son of a French refugee, whom he 
had formerly known at school, and with whose temper and disposition he was 
thoroughly acquainted. He accordingly provided a key to the door of the place where 
the jewels were deposited, took care to have the window so broke and injured that it 
appeared to have suffered violence from without, and a ladder brought and laid at the 
foot of the window, and such noise made as might be heard by some of the servants. 
Stafford, always attentive to his duty and master's interest, was the first to give the 
alarm in the morning. The rest of the servants were called, they remembered to have 
heard the noise, they saw the ladder, and suspicion could rest upon none of them, far 
less upon the faithful Stafford.
	Tom Pretty was successful in disposing of the jewels at a good price, received 
such a gratuity as was sufficient to retain him in the service of his new employer, who 
remained for some time in his station to prevent the shadow of guilt staining the fair 
character which he had so dexterously maintained.
	Fully convinced that he could always render the ladies subservient to the 
accomplishment of his plans, Stafford next directed his attack upon the virtue of a 
very handsome lady who had been two years married. To his no small mortification, 
however, he found that she estimated its value at the sum of one hundred guineas. 
When all his attempts to alter her first proposal were unsuccessful, his inventive mind 
devised the following scheme to effectuate his purpose. Being upon friendly terms 
with the husband, and frequently visiting in the family, he one day took an 
opportunity to borrow an hundred guineas, under the pretence that he stood in need of 
that sum to complete a L.500 purchase, in the meantime showing him L.400 which he 
had in reserve from the late sale of the jewels. He readily obtained his request, and 
having arranged matters with the lady, he came, according to appointment, one day to 
her house, when several persons were at dinner, and the husband absent. He 
immediately pulled out his purse, and addressed her, saying, "I have borrowed one 
hundred guineas from your husband, and as he is not here, I will leave the money with 
you, and those here present will be witnesses to the payment." The good lady, 
unacquainted with the fact, that he had borrowed that sum from her husband, only 
supposed that this was a dexterous manoeuvre to prevent suspicion, received the 
money with all good humour. It is unnecessary to relate the sequel of the adventure.
	In a few days after, Stafford took an opportunity, when the husband was 
present, to inform him, that, in the presence of several guests at his table, he had 
repaid the hundred guineas to his wife that he had lately borrowed from him. The lady 
changed colour, but could not deny the fact, and the husband was satisfied with the 
punctual repayment of his money. Nor was Stafford contented with the success of his 
adventure, but took care to have the same whispered all over the neighbourhood.
	It happened that Stafford was riding along very solitary on the Western Road 
one miserable cold day. His design was only to go and see his relations, having at that 
time money enough; and it was not customary with him to rob anybody while the 
stock was high. But fortune threw a very considerable prize in his way in the 
following manner.
	Just as he came to the entrance of Maidenhead Thicket he espied an old formal 
gentleman trotting before him. As he looked upon him, by his plain coat and broad-
brimmed hat, to be one of the godly, as they were then universally called, he 
immediately resolved, contrary to his intention in travelling, to take hold of the 
opportunity, and try the depth of the old man's pocket. He soon came up with Mr 
Primitive, and began such conversation as is common to travellers, more particularly 
the severity of the season occasioned pretty many reflections, as they both felt it to a 
high degree. "I hope," says Stafford, "after such a terrible journey as this, I shall meet 
with a very good lodging at night, or else I shall think the stars are against me 
indeed." The old man upon this assumes an air of piety, and begins to reprehend the 
captain for his profaneness in mentioning the stars as if they had any influence over a 
man's circumstances. He told him it was a heathenish manner of expressing himself, 
and very unwelcoming the mouth of a Christian. "For my part," says he, "I ascribe 
everything that befalls me to a wise Providence, and am always content with any lot, 
as being assured in myself that all things are for the best, and work together for the 
good of the elect." "And do you believe yourself to be one of those elect? "says 
Stafford." It is the earnest desire of my soul," replied the old man, "to find the 
evidences of it in myself; it is what I pray for earnestly day and night; and I truly hope 
that my prayers ascend with a savour sweet-smelling and acceptable, and that I shall 
receive an answer of joy and peace. of this I am the more confident, as I have hitherto 
found that the pious ejaculations of my heart have not been in vain upon particular 
occasions." Here the captain endeavoured to reform his phiz, and to look as demurely 
as his companion. "Verily, brother," said he, "whoever thou art, thy reproof is just; but 
as I was upon a journey, and uncertain what the company was that I was thus 
providentially fallen into, I was willing to conform myself to it, for the security of the 
outward man. If I had found thee speaking in such a manner as had discovered the 
corruption of thy heart, and proved thee to be one of the unregenerate, I should have 
endeavoured, as far as it would have appeared consistent with my high character as a 
Christian, to have given thee thine own way in conversation. But since, to my 
unspeakable joy and consolation in this desert place, I have found thee such as my 
heart would wish, I make no scruple to unbosom myself unto thee, begging that thou 
wouldst extend thy bowels of Christian compassion unto my weakness, which 
occasioned me to conceal the real sentiments of my soul, through timidity of thy 
person, to me unknown. I would furthermore entreat that thou wouldst endeavour to 
make our journeying together profitable unto our mutual edification, by a relation of 
some of those experiences which thou hast hinted to, as the effect of thy being found 
in the way of thy duty." The old hypocrite was transported to hear such a speech as 
this, and made no question but he was luckily fallen into company with a stone of the 
spiritual building, and a brother member of the sacred body of the Church. 
"Forasmuch," replied he, "as it seemeth to thee thy desire that I should communicate 
unto thee something of what I have done in the course of my duty, and inwardly 
experienced as the return of my humble petitions, know that I have always, since I 
have been made sensible what hard work and the divine influence mean, constantly 
called for a blessing upon what I have undertaken. In an especial manner, when I have 
set out on a journey, as at present, I have been more earnest in entreating that I might 
pass the road in safety; and that at night in a good inn I might take up my quarters, 
and repose upon a bed of down. Not so much that I desire to indulge my tenement of 
clay in the course of this my pilgrimage, as that I look upon it to be typical of that 
eternal rest into which I hope to be received when I shall put off this outward man, 
this earthly tabernacle of flesh. It is, my friend, a help to my meditation on these 
things, when I lie extended at ease in the night; and I never yet found but that every 
particular has been answerable to my desires, and, indeed, proportioned to the degree 
of warmth with which I have expressed them. It is for this reason, that when I have 
been diligent in my duty, and taken such a quantity of money in my pocket as will 
bear my expenses in a comfortable manner, I am under no apprehensions of any 
danger that may attend me." "I hope then," quoth Stafford," thou wert not at all 
wanting this morning in thy exercises, both for thy sake and my own; forasmuch as 
with thy good liking I am determined to accompany thee this evening." Hereupon the 
old man assuring him that he was never in all his life more fervent than that morning, 
the captain seemed pretty contented, till they came to the middle of the thicket, when 
he thought it very proper to take advantage of the place, and ease the old hypocrite of 
his money, which was of more service to him in his getting good lodging than all his 
boasted piety, the latter being only superficial. To this end he addressed him in the 
following manner: — "Brother, I perceive by what you have related that you are a 
man favoured by heaven in an extraordinary degree, and that it is impossible to hinder 
you of anything that you have once prayed for. To what purpose then should you 
carry money with you? Now, for my part, I cannot pretend to any such particular 
token of the divine regard, and therefore I have no room to expect anything out of the 
common way; so that I think what money you have about you will be much more 
serviceable to me than to your who are certain of the best usage wherever you go." 
The old man began to stare upon his new companion, and wondered what he was 
driving at; but he did not remain long in suspense, for Stafford told him very plainly 
that it would be to no purpose for him to make many words, since he was now in 
earnest. "Therefore," says he, "without ceremony deliver your money." At these 
words he clapped a pistol to his breasts which terrified the venerable saint to such a 
degree that he pulled out a purse with forty guineas in it and gave it with a trembling 
hand. It was now plain that, how sure soever our good man was of heaven, he was not 
willing to leave the world on a sudden, which is no uncommon case. Stafford being 
willing to spoil the old man's lodging entirely, shot his horse, after he had rifled him 
of everything that he had which was valuable, and then forced him a considerable way 
into the thicket, where he bound him fast, and left him on the cold ground. In this 
condition he lay till next morning, when he was taken up half dead.
	The captain, after this robbery was very sensible that, how bad soever the 
lodging of his Roundhead companion might be, his own would be as little to his 
satisfaction if he were taken; he therefore thought it most advisable to get out of the 
main road as fast as he could. This he did by crossing the country into 
Buckinghamshire and riding till he thought he was out of all danger for that night.
	Having, upon a certain time, got together a considerable quantity of money, 
and being under some apprehensions of a discovery, he made off into the north of 
England, and took shelter in a country village, so obscure that it was next to 
impossible he should ever be detected. He was afraid in this place to make any great 
figure, or to seem extravagant, because he well knew that country people are apt to be 
very inquisitive into the circumstances of such men; and as he was resolved to be as 
godly as he was able while he resided here, it was not expedient for him to put the 
congregation to any trouble; for he had now joined himself to a people who assembled 
in the neighbourhood, and was customary in those days for a new member, if he was 
in any respect suspicious, to give a very particular account of himself. By this prudent 
management the captain not only avoided their inquisition, but made his ready cash 
last a great deal longer than it otherwise would have done.
	In this place Stafford soon got the reputation of a very good man; he attended 
constantly at public service, and not only that, but also at all their private meetings 
and conferences, when he would frequently exercise his own gift, and pour out a 
tedious rhapsody of unintelligible jargon, with a great deal of seeming warmth and 
affection. As it was no difficult thing for a man of the captain's good sense to be the 
greatest orator in such a congregation as this, it was but a very little while before his 
talents were every where talked of; he was sent for to all the meetings round about, 
and public thanks were frequently returned to Providence, who had sent such an 
eminent Christian among them. It was not above a year that he had been in this place 
before their venerable pastor, who had formerly been an indifferent good tailor, 
departed this life. The sorrow on this melancholy occasion was universal, and the 
cause of religion a thousand times said to be in danger, by the loss of such a 
substantial pillar of the Church (for so they called themselves) as their dear glorified 
minister. When the general lamentation was a little over, the flock began to look 
round for one to feed them in the room of the deceased. All their eyes were 
immediately fixed on Stafford, who was esteemed the most able brother for the 
important charge. The captain had by this time wasted his capital stock pretty 
considerably, and he must very soon have been under an absolute necessity of 
recruiting by some means or other; he durst not as yet appear on the road again, for he 
had made himself so notorious just before his retirement that a large reward had been 
offered for taking him, and his person had been so particularly described that it was in 
vain to think of disguising himself. An offer of forty pounds a year, besides a prospect 
of other acquisitions, was not it may be imagined, at this time very unacceptable; so 
when the elders of the congregation waited on him in a body with their resolution he 
consented, after due form, to accept of the proposal. The ceremony of his ordination is 
foreign to our purpose, and therefore we omit it. Behold Captain Philip Stafford, our 
hero, in a stiff band, a black coat and skull cap, mounted behind a velvet cushion, 
holding forth, with all the eloquence he was master of against all sin, and even the 
very appearance of sin; advising them to crush the first motions of it in their hearts, 
and never suffer it to break forth into practice. Hear him describe the pleasures of a 
good conscience, void of difference towards God and man! What a load of 
accusations he lays upon his friend Satan the grand enemy of souls — enough to 
break the back of any poor devil in Christendom! Never was preaching more 
effectual, or more weeping and repentance than among the old women of Stafford's 
congregation. Everyone exerted herself to the utmost that the circumstances of their 
minister might be as easy as possible, and that such a faithful labourer in the vineyard 
of the church might not go without his reward. Presents were sent him continually, he 
was invited to dinner every day by one or another of the members; and he has often 
protested since that, bating the hypocrisy he was obliged to use, the time he was a 
teacher was the pleasantest part of his life.
	At last, as the revenue did not now answer his purpose, he took an opportunity 
to leave his little flock, without giving them any warning, carrying on with him all the 
sacramental plate and linen, to a pretty large value.
	The last adventure which we shall relate of the captain is that for which he 
suffered. A farmer of considerable note in Berkshire had been at Reading to sell his 
corn at a time when that commodity was very dear. The farmer had the reputation of 
being a very honest good man; but as the price of corn was very advantageous to him 
he could not help being elated by the success he had met with at market, and he was 
now riding home in a very pleasant temper, meditating (as he himself confessed) on 
the riches he was about to get for his family. The captain overtook him about forty 
miles from Reading, and accosted him in a very friendly manner with "Pray farmer, 
what is it o-clock?" The farmer being, as I said before, pretty full of his good fortune. 
immediately thought Mr Stafford had known him, and when he asked him what corn 
was a load he therefore very readily answered: "Sixteen pound ten the best wheat." 
Stafford guessed the honest countryman's mistake; but at that time thought their 
conversation was likely to turn upon a subject that would be to his advantage." And 
have you, farmer," said he, "sold any wheat for that price today?" "Yes," says the 
countryman, "I have sold two loads, and I thank God I have got the money for it in my 
pocket." This was spoken very innocently, for the farmer thought all the while he was 
with somebody who asked him these questions out of kindness; he soon found to the 
contrary, for the captain pulled a pistol out of his pocket, and clapping it to the 
farmer's breast, he made him refund the thirty three pounds he had received a little 
before.
	The captain's good fortune this day began to leave him, for he was scarce got 
three hundred yards from the ground where he committed the robbery before two 
gentlemen came up to the farmer, who told them how he had been used. The 
gentlemen being well mounted rode after him with all the speed they could, and in 
less than a quarter of an hour overtook and dismounted him. The money was all found 
upon him, and several of the pieces were very remarkable; so that he was carried to 
the next Justice of the Peace, and by him committed to the county jail, where he lay 
till the ensuing assizes, which were not for a great while afterwards.
	At the assizes the farmer, who was a very conscientious man, refused to 
appear against the prisoner, because he was not certain whether or no it was the same 
man who had robbed him. The evidence, nevertheless, of the two gentle-men, and the 
money, which answered exactly to the account which the farmer had given of what he 
had lost, together with the bad character of the captain himself in his own country, 
where he now was, were thought sufficient to condemn him; and the sentence passed 
accordingly, and a day was fixed for his execution.
	While Stafford was in prison, before his condemnation, he lived in a very 
grand manner. He had a wicket made before the jail porch to hide his fetters, where he 
used to sit frequently with one of the keepers, and converse with gentlemen of the best 
fashion in the whole town. He had, moreover, settled a correspondence with several of 
his own profession, who came to see him in prison. These, then, undertook to rescue 
him from the gallows, and afterwards to constitute him their head. The report of this 
compact, by some means or other, took wind before the time, and the post-boy was 
ordered what to say if any man should ask him any questions on the road. This charge 
to the post-boy was thought to be the only reason why they did not come as they had 
promised; for two or three men well mounted one day demanded of him when 
Stafford was to be executed, and the boy told them the usual day, which was now 
changed to another purely upon the account of this report.
	The captain had a new light-coloured suit of clothes made to go to the gallows 
(for he did not expect to be hanged), in which he appeared as though he had been 
going to a wedding. He had a nosegay in his bosom, and his countenance was without 
the least appearance of concern all the way. As he passed by a tavern he ordered the 
cart to stop, and called for a pint of wine, which he drank all off, and told the vintner 
he would pay him when he came back. At the gallows he stood up and looked round 
him very wistfully some minutes, still desiring more time. At last, when the sheriff 
bid him prepare, and he saw no remedy, his colour was observed to change, and he 
trembled very much, but said nothing. Just at the instant that the cart was ordered to 
be drawn away he delivered a paper to the sheriff, and then was turned off in a great 
deal of confusion. The contents of the paper were as follows: —
	"It is not merely in compliance with the common custom of malefactors that I 
write anything to leave behind me in the world; if there had not seemed a more than 
ordinary necessity for this declaration from me, upon the account of my having been 
so universally talked of, I should have been contented to have suffered in silence what 
the justice of the law has required.
	"I confess not only the fact for which I die, but also almost all those that are 
laid to my charge by common fame, besides innumerable others of the same nature; 
yet I hope that what I am about to offer will plead a little in my favour, and in some 
measure abate the horror which many sober people are apt to conceive at the bare 
recital of my crimes.
	"I was brought up in principles of honour and virtue by my parents, and I 
continued to act agreeably to those principles for many years, as several worthy 
gentlemen now living can testify. I can moreover call upon a greater witness than any 
mortal to attest that I have always thought in my soul nothing so mean and so 
unworthy of human nature as fraud, of what kind soever it might be. It was only the 
iniquity of the times in which it has been my unhappiness to have lived that 
occasioned my abandoning in practice what my judgment always approved of, 
notwithstanding the pains I have taken to work myself into a belief that virtue is 
nothing but a vain chimera.
	"The cruelty with which all the loyal party was prosecuted during the late 
Civil War gave me a very despicable opinion of those who executed it. This opinion 
was afterwards strengthened when I beheld the same people dividing among 
themselves, and using an equal severity towards each other, as any one party got 
uppermost. I soon found that their religion was but a pretence, and their appearance of 
sanctity nothing more than hypocrisy; that interest was the only point they pursued, 
and their hyperbolical cant concerning another world a mere engine to draw to 
themselves larger possessions in this, which they had the confidence to affirm they 
had learned entirely to despise. These things made me determine, when my estate was 
quartered, and my principles prevented my getting an honourable subsistence, to take 
openly from some of those hypocrites what they unjustly, though more craftily, had 
taken from better people.
	"What lies most heavily upon my conscience is my having ever condescended 
to deal with these men in their own way, by imposing upon them under a show of 
piety. May God forgive me in this particular! I must, however, take the freedom to say 
that I was never able to match several that I have met with, to whom I have not 
thought myself inferior as to my genius in this their darling vice, hypocrisy; and that 
when I most succeeded in my impostures, it was more owing to a fluency of words, 
which I always had, than to my art in counterfeiting their formality in my common 
behaviour.
	" I shall not trouble the world with any more of these things, which only relate 
to my Maker, and my own conscience. Give me leave to say that as I have not been a 
common offender, I would hope my remains will be treated with a little more decency 
than the bodies of the unhappy wretches who suffer at this place commonly are.
	"As I die justly, I have no occasion to say anything concerning the instruments 
of my death, who only exercise what the law demands. If there are any other persons 
who are conscious that they have given me just cause of offence, let them know that I 
forgive them from my very heart; and that I die in peace with all the world to which I 
can very calmly bid farewell."
	In compliance with Mr Stafford's request concerning his body, the sheriff 
ordered him to be buried under the tower of St Mary's Church at Reading. Several 
persons of fashion honoured his funeral with their attendance, and the women in 
particular were observed to shed abundance of tears.


MAJOR GEORGE STRANGWAYES 
Executed 28th of February, 1658, for the Murder of the Man who married 
his Sister

	MR GEORGE STRANGWAYES was the second son of Mr James 
Strangwayes, of Mussen in Dorsetshire, a gentleman of an ancient and unblemished 
family. He was a person that had a brave and generous soul in a stout and active body, 
being tall of stature, and framed to the most masculine proportion of man. The virtues 
of his father he rather seemed to improve than degenerate from, till he was hurried on 
by an ungovernable passion to commit the horrid fact which we are going to relate. As 
his constitution in his youth made him fitter to follow Mars than the Muses, he 
attained to the degree of a major in the service of King Charles I., which military 
office he executed with a great deal of bravery and gallantry during the whole course 
of the Civil War. Yet was he not a stranger to those arts that finish a gentleman; for 
(as Mr Dryden says of my Lord Roscommon) he had made both Miner's his own. In 
the most important consultations he had always a head as dextrous to advise, as a 
heart daring to act. Only in love he appeared either unskilful or unsuccessful, for he 
was never married. The father of Mr Strangwayes died about ten years before the 
unhappy accident happened which brought destruction upon his son. At his death the 
major was left in possession of Mussen Farm, and his eldest sister, Mrs Mabellah 
Strangwayes, was constituted executrix by will. This sister, being then an ancient 
maid, rented her brother's farm, and stocked it at her own cost; engaging herself to 
him in a bond of three hundred and fifty pounds, which she borrowed towards the 
procuring of the said stock. The major, presuming upon her continuance of a single 
life, and expecting that the greatest part, if not all, of her personal estate would in time 
revert to him as her heir, entrusted her not only with the bond, but also with that part 
of the stock, and such utensils of the house, as, by his father's will, properly belonged 
to him. His reason for doing this was, that they would be more secure by passing for 
hers, forasmuch as his whole estate was liable to sequestration; by which, at that time 
of day, a great many thousand gentlemen were ruined. Sad times, indeed, when 
honesty, which, by those who have just notions of Providence, is esteemed a common 
preservative against calamity, was the principal means that made people obnoxious to 
it! But this was not the only age in which that noble principle has been out of fashion. 
His estate being thus in a fair probability of being preserved from those vultures of the 
Commonwealth who had then the administration of public affairs, he lived for some 
time very happily with his sister, of whose prudence and discretion he had a very high 
opinion, at his farm of Mussen. But all of a sudden the scene altered, and she, whom 
he thought sufficiently proof against all inclinations to matrimony began to express 
some affection for Mr Fussel, a gentleman well esteemed at Blandford, the place of 
his residence, and of much repute for his eminent abilities in matters of law. Mrs 
Mabellah Strangwayes had now contracted an intimacy with Mr Fussel, and she made 
it the least part of her care to disguise her sentiments concerning him; so that it was 
not long before her brother came to a perfect knowledge of their mutual resolutions. 
Whether it was that he had any former dislike to the man, or that he imagined one of 
that profession might injure him in his property; or whether it was only the being 
disappointed in the hopes he had conceived of enjoying after his sister the whole 
substance of the family, is not easy to determine; but certain it is, that he no sooner 
heard of a proposal of marriage between this gentleman and his sister than he showed 
himself absolutely against it, and took an opportunity of telling his sister privately 
how much he disapproved her design. Mrs Mabellah as freely told him how steadfast 
she was in her purpose; upon which he broke out into the most violent expressions of 
passion, affirming with bitter imprecations that if ever she married Mr Fussel he 
would certainly be the death of him soon afterwards. These family quarrels soon 
occasioned a separation between our unhappy brother and sister; and the rupture was 
still increased by mutual complaints between them. She pretends that he unjustly 
detains from her much of the stock of the farm, which, either by her father's will, or 
her own purchase, was lawfully hers; at the same time she denies that ever she sealed 
the aforementioned bond, insinuating that it was only a forgery of her brother's. The 
major, on the other hand cried out as loudly against his sister, accusing her with 
nothing less than a design to defraud him of part of his estate, besides the money due 
by the bond. These were the differences which first fomented a rage that was not to be 
quenched but by blood. Soon after their parting Mrs Mabellah and Mr Fussel were 
married, and the grievances between the brother and sister commenced a lawsuit; for 
the prosecuting of which, as well as for the carrying on of several other causes which 
lie was employed in, he being a man of great business, Mr Fussel was come up to 
London, it being Hilary Term, at the unhappy time when he lost his life, in the 
following manner. Mr Fussel lodged up one pair of stairs, at the sign of the George 
and Half Moon, three doors from the Palsgrave's Head Tavern, without Temple Bar, 
opposite to a pewterer's shop. He came in one evening between nine and ten, and 
retired to his study, which fronted the street, sitting behind a desk, with his face 
towards the window, the curtains being so near drawn that there was but just room 
enough left to discern him. In this manner he had not sat above a quarter of an hour 
before two bullets shot from a carbine struck him, the one through the forehead and 
the other in about his mouth; a third bullet, or slug, stuck in the lower part of the 
timber of the window, and the passage by which the two former entered was so 
narrow that little less than an inch over or under had obstructed their passage. He 
dropped down upon his desk without so much as a groan, so that his clerk, who was in 
the room at the same time, did not at first apprehend anything of what was done; till at 
last, perceiving him lean his head, and knowing him not to fall asleep as he wrote, he 
imagined something more than ordinary was the matter. Upon this he drew near to be 
satisfied, when he was suddenly struck with such horror and amazement at the 
unexpected sight of blood that for the present, he was utterly incapable of action. As 
soon as he had recollected himself, he called up some of the family, by whose 
assistance he discovered what an unhappy accident had bereaved him of his master. 
Instantly they all ran down into the street, but could see nothing that might give them 
the least information, everything appearing, as they conceived, more silent and still 
than is usual at that time of night in the public parts of the city. Officers were sent for 
and Mr Fussel's son (for he had been married before) was acquainted with the 
melancholy news; who immediately made use of all the means he could think of to 
discover the authors of this horrid fact. Several places were searched in vain, and a 
barber, who lodged in the same house with Mr Fussel, was apprehended on suspicion, 
he having been absent at the time when the deed was perpetrated. While they were 
considering what could induce anybody to such an action, young Fussel called to 
mind those irreconcilable quarrels which had for some time subsisted between his 
father and his Uncle Strangwayes; and thereupon proposed the apprehending of him 
to the officers, which motion they, in general, approved of. They now proceed to put it 
in execution, and between two and three in the morning the major is apprehended in 
his bed, at his lodging, over against Ivy Bridge in the Strand, at the house of one Mr 
Pym, a tailor, next door to the Black Bull Inn which is now Bull Inn Court. Being in 
the custody of the officers, he was had before Justice Blake, before whom he denied 
the fact with an undaunted confidence. However, as there was so much room for 
suspicion, the justice committed him to Newgate, where remaining till next morning, 
he was then conveyed to the place where Mr Fussel's body was. When he came there, 
he was commanded to take his dead brother-in-law by the hand, and touch his wounds 
before the coroner's inquest — a method mightily relied on by the defenders of 
sympathy. But there having been nothing discovered by this experiment, he was 
remanded back to prison, and the jury proceeded in their inquiry, though with little 
hopes of satisfaction. Several ways were propounded by the foreman for the detection 
of the murderer; one of which was, that all the gunsmiths in London, and the adjacent 
places, should be examined what guns they had either lent or sold that day. This, in 
the opinion of most of the jurymen, was an unpracticable task; and one Mr Holloway, 
a gunsmith in the Strand, who was one of the number, told them all that the men of his 
profession were so numerous that he thought it next to impossible for them to make 
such an inquiry without missing many; that, for his own part, he had that day lent a 
carbine, and did not question but several of the trade did the same every day that 
passed. This saying of Mr Holloway's was presently taken hold of by the foreman, 
who desired him, for the satisfaction of them all, to declare to whom he had lent the 
said piece. Mr Holloway, after some small recollection, answered: "To one Mr 
Thompson in Long Acre, who had formerly been a major in the King's army, and was 
now married to a daughter of Sir James Aston." Upon this a speedy search was made 
after Major Thompson, who being abroad, his wife was taken into custody, and 
detained a prisoner till her husband should be produced, though she cleared herself 
very handsomely from having any knowledge of borrowing or even seeing any such 
thing as a gun. Mr Thompson had that morning gone into the country on some urgent 
occasions; but on the first news of his wife's confinement he returned hastily to 
London, where being examined before a justice of the peace, he confessed that he had 
borrowed a carbine from Mr Holloway at the time mentioned, for the use of Major 
Strangwayes, who told him that all he intended to do with it was to kill a deer; and 
that having loaded it with a brace of bullets and a slug, he delivered it to the said 
Major Strangwayes, in St Clement's churchyard, between the hours of seven and eight 
at night. This was all the certain intelligence they could get of what passed before the 
firing of the gun. Who did the desperate deed was never known; for Mr Strangwayes 
carried that great secret with him to the grave, refusing to confess anything before 
man, and reserving this discovery for the general assize hereafter, when the inmost 
recesses of men's hearts shall be laid open. Thus much further they learned of Major 
Thompson, that between the hours of ten and eleven Major Strangwayes brought back 
the gun to his house, left it, and retired to his lodging. These circumstances were 
enough to increase the suspicion of the inquisitive jury, and when they were told to 
Mr Strangwayes he seemed to be struck with terror, so that he continued some 
moments in a profound silence; afterwards he acknowledged in a very pathetic 
manner that the immediate hand of God was in the affair, for nothing less could have 
brought about such a wonderful detection. He further owned that, the night the murder 
was committed, he left one at his quarters to personate him, whom he took care to 
introduce about seven in the evening, while the people of the house were employed in 
their necessary affairs, and not at leisure to take any notice of his actions. This friend, 
he said, walked about the chamber, so as to be heard by all the family, which 
occasioned them to give a wrong deposition concerning Major Strangwayes being at 
home when he was examined before the magistrate. He added, that when the fact was 
committed (by whom, as we have observed already, he would never confess) he 
returned to his lodging, found means to discharge his friend, then hastened to bed, and 
lay there till he was apprehended at three in the morning. On the 24th of February, 
1658, Major George Strangwayes was brought to his trial at the sessions house in the 
Old Bailey; where, his indictment being read, and he commanded to plead, he 
absolutely refused to comply with the method of the Court unless, he said, he might 
be permitted, when he was condemned, to die in the same manner as his brother-in-
law had done. If they refused this, he told them, he would continue in his contempt of 
the Court, that he might preserve his estate, which would be forfeited on his 
conviction, in order to bestow it on such friends as he had most affection for, as well 
as to free himself from the ignominious death of a public gibbet. Many arguments 
were urged by the Lord Chief Justice Glyn, and the rest of the bench, to induce him to 
plead; particularly the great sin he committed in refusing to submit to the ordinary 
course of the law, and the terror of the death which his obstinate silence would oblige 
them to inflict upon him. But these, and all the other motives they made use of, were 
ineffectual; he still remained immovable, refusing either to plead or to discover who it 
was that fired the gun; only affirming, both then and always afterwards till his death, 
that, whoever did it, it was done by his direction. When the Court perceived they 
could work nothing on him, the Lord Chief justice read the following dreadful 
sentence: — "That the prisoner be sent back to the place from whence he came, and 
there put into a mean room, where no light can enter; that he be laid upon his back, 
with his body bare, save something to cover his privy parts; that his arms be stretched 
forth with a cord, one to one side of the prison, and the other to the other side of the 
prison, and in like manner his legs shall be used; that upon his body be laid as much 
iron and stone as he can bear, and more; that the first day he shall have three morsels 
of barley bread, and the next day he shall drink thrice of the water in the next channel 
to the prison door, but no spring or fountain water; and this shall be his punishment 
till he dies." Sentence being passed upon him, he was remanded back to Newgate, 
where he was attended by several eminent and pious divines till the day of his death 
— namely, Dr Wild, Dr Warmstrey, Mr Jenkins, Mr Watson and Mr Norton. Monday, 
the last day of February, was the fatal day appointed for executing the judgment 
passed on him, when, about eleven o'clock in the forenoon, the Sheriffs of London 
and Middlesex, accompanied with several of their officers, came to the press-yard in 
Newgate. After a short stay, Major Strangwayes was guarded down, clothed all in 
white, waistcoat, stockings, drawers and cap, over which was cast a long mourning 
cloak. From whence he was conducted to the dungeon, the dismal place of execution, 
being still attended with a few of his friends, among whom was the Reverend Dr 
Warmstrey, turning to whom he said: "Sir, will you be pleased to assist me with your 
prayers?" The doctor answered: "Yes, Major, I came on purpose to officiate in that 
Christian work. The Lord strengthen your faith, and give you confidence and 
assurance in Jesus Christ." After they had spent some time in prayers, the major 
addressed himself to the company in general, and with a voice something more 
elevated than ordinary spoke as follows: — "I thank my God I never had a thought in 
my heart to doubt the truth of the religion I profess. I die a Christian, and am assured 
of my interest in Christ Jesus, through whose merits I question not but ere long my 
soul shall triumph over her present afflictions in an eternity of glory, being reconciled 
to God by the blood of my Saviour. The Lord bless you all in this world, and bring 
you at last to a world of blessedness, which is the reward of the elect. The Lord bless 
me in this last and dreadful trial. So let us all pray, Jesus, Jesus, have mercy on me!" 
Having said this, he took his solemn last leave of all his lamenting friends, and 
prepared himself for the dreadful assault of Death, with whom he was speedily to 
encounter. He desired his friends, when he gave the signal, to lay on the weights, and 
they placed themselves at the corners of the press for that purpose. His arms and legs 
were extended, according to the sentence, in which action he cried out: "Thus were 
the sacred limbs of my ever blessed Saviour stretched forth on the Cross, when He 
suffered to free the sin-polluted world from an eternal curse." Then crying with a 
sprightly voice, "Lord Jesus receive my soul," which were the words he had told 
them, his mournful attendants performed their dreadful task. They soon perceived that 
the weight they laid on was not sufficient to put him suddenly out of pain, so several 
of them added their own weight, that they might the sooner release his soul. While he 
was dying, it was horrible to all who stood by, as well as dreadful to himself, to see 
the agonies he was put into, and hear his loud and doleful groans. But this dismal 
scene was over in about eight or ten minutes, when his spirit departed, and left her 
tortured mansion, till the great day that shall unite them again. His body having lain 
some time in the press, was brought forth and exposed to public view, so that a great 
many beheld the bruises made by the press, one angle of which being purposely 
placed over his heart, he was the sooner deprived of life, though he was denied what 
is usual in these cases, to have a sharp piece of timber under his back to hasten the 
execution. The body appeared void of scars, and not deformed with blood, save where 
the extremities of the press came on the breasts and upper part of the belly. The face 
was bloody, not from any external injury, but the violent forcing of the blood from the 
larger vessels into the veins of the face and eyes. After the dead corpse had been thus 
examined it was put into a coffin, and in a cart that attended at the prison door 
conveyed to Christ Church, where it was interred. While he was under sentence he 
wrote the following letter to Major Dewey, a Member of Parliament, who had married 
one of his sisters: —
	DEAR BROTHER, — I hope for forgiveness from you and the rest of my 
friends; for my conscience bears me witness that I was grievously provoked by my 
brother-in-law's wrongs. It was after he had abused me by prosecutions, and refused 
to fight me in single combat, that I suffered myself to be tempted to do what I did, 
though I intended only to have terrified and not killed him. In a word, each hath his 
desert; he fell to my revenge, and I to the law. I suffer willingly, being satisfied that 
my crime is cancelled before the Almighty. From your dying brother,  
	G. STRANGWAYES.
It is said the major had often fallen into most impetuous storms of rage at the sight of 
Mr Fussel, and had offered him odds in length of weapon, to fight with him. Once in 
particular he met him in Westminster Hall, when they had a cause there depending, 
and told him that Calico Sands was a much fitter place for them, who were both 
Cavaliers, to dispute in, than that court, where most of the judges were their enemies. 
But Mr Fussel not only refused that way of deciding their quarrel, but indicted him as 
a challenger, which added fuel to his former rage, and put him upon the dreadful 
manner of satisfying his passion for which he suffered.


GILDER-ROY 
A most barbarous Murderer of his Mother and Sister, who led a bloodthirsty 
Gang of Outlaws in Scotland and hanged a Judge. Executed in April, 1658

	THIS offender was descended of a very good family in the Highlands of 
Scotland. His father died just when he had seen his son reach that age at which the 
law supposes a man capable to manage his own affairs, and left him an estate in 
Perthshire of about eighty marks per annum. But though Gilder-roy was twenty-one 
years old, he was a worse economist than the old gentleman expected; so that in about 
a year and a half all his substance was destroyed, his estate sold, and himself reduced 
to the most extreme necessity, notwithstanding the frequent admonitions of his friends 
against his profuseness, and their honest entreaties that he would reflect upon his 
condition before it would be too late.
	His mother had a small jointure, with the income of which she supplied him, 
till she saw it was to no purpose, he still consuming all she could raise in a little time. 
At last she withheld her hand, and let him for the future shift for himself. This so 
irritated the villain that nothing but the death of the good old woman could pacify 
him; in order to accomplish which, he arose one night and burst into his mother's bed-
chamber violently while she was asleep, who had still been so unhappily tender as to 
let him lodge in her house. The rest of this action is shocking to relate. He cut the 
throat of his indulgent parent from ear to ear, ravished his own sister and a 
maidservant, left them both bound, took everything valuable out of the house, then set 
fire to it, burning that and the two deflowered maidens all together.
	This almost unparalleled piece of barbarity filled the whole country round with 
horror; the author of it was suspected, and a considerable reward was offered in a 
proclamation issued out for apprehending him. The money, with the abhorrence 
everybody had of his crime, made it unsafe for him to stay any longer in his native 
country; so he fled into France, where he lived upon the spoil of his murdered mother 
until it was all spent, and he was obliged to make use of his wits for a livelihood.
	Being once at St Denis, he went to the cathedral, a mausoleum for the kings of 
France, situated not far from the city of Paris, where during the solemnisation of High 
Mass several of the best quality were present. Here he applied himself to one who was 
seated most suitably for his design, and immediately with an air of assurance, as 
though he had known the gentleman, pointed to several of the fairest ladies, and 
endeavoured to make himself pass for a gallant to the ladies; which he might well 
enough do, he being as well dressed as anybody there. The French gentleman had by 
this time directed his attention more to his new acquaintance than to the devotion of 
the day; which Gilder-roy perceiving, he made signs that he intended to take a fine 
gold watch of great value from a lady's side just by, whom he perceived to be 
acquainted with monsieur. There being no mistrust of anything more than a joke (the 
Frenchman little thinking a thief had made him his companion), they whispered 
together where they should meet after service was over, and carry their prize to the 
fair owner, when she had been sufficiently grieved for her loss.
	Satisfied with this fallacy, the French gentleman made the best of his way out 
of the church when High Mass was over, and left Gilder-roy to take care of himself, 
not doubting in the least but his new acquaintance would punctually meet him at the 
place appointed. But Gilder-roy was far enough in two hours' time, and the French 
gentleman did not suspect any treachery before, but imagined his delay might be 
occasioned by meeting a friend, or the like. However, being impatient, he went at last 
in confusion enough to inform the lady of what had passed. It was agreed the sharper 
had outwitted him, and that by his connivance he had stolen the watch in earnest; so 
he humbly asked her ladyship's pardon, and entreated her to accept of another watch 
of equal value from him, which he owned was but a just penance for the folly he had 
been guilty of in so credulously placing too much confidence in a stranger. In short, 
the lady, though full of resentment, accepted of the present, but discarded him from 
his former capacity of being her suitor, telling him she would never have a man so 
tame as to sit by and see her robbed, without taking her part.
	From France he took a tour over the Pyrenean mountains into Spain, 
committing several notorious robberies in divers parts of that kingdom, particularly in 
Madrid. In this capital he found means to get a large quantity of plate from the Duke 
of Medina Celi, when all his servants were busied in an entertainment for foreign 
ambassadors. This trick was performed by a previous acquaintance with the steward, 
who introduced him at his pleasure.
	Gilder-roy, after he had been about three years abroad, had the confidence to 
venture home again, supposing that though the horrible crime he had there committed 
would never be forgotten, yet the heat of inquiry after him was pretty well over. He 
now got together a great company of men, and made his name almost as terrible in 
some of the remote parts of Scotland as that of Robin Hood was formerly about the 
forest of Sherwood in England. Particularly in the counties of Athol, Lockable, 
Angus, Mar, Baquahan, Moray and Sutherland, he was dreaded as much as a common 
enemy in time of war. The confusion of affairs in these kingdoms, we may conclude, 
contributed a great deal towards the establishing him in this manner, and his evading 
the stroke of justice so long as he did. All the common people he laid under 
contribution, and obliged them to allow him so many head of cattle quarterly for his 
protection, which he was so impudent as to grant them in form, by the means of which 
they might travel without molestation from him or any of his gang. It was in vain to 
think of not coming into his articles; for those who were not willing to allow him part 
of their substance were sure to lose it all without any ceremony.
	Among the persons said to be robbed by Gilder-roy we find the Earl of 
Linlithgow, from whom he took a gold watch, a diamond ring, and eighty broad-
pieces. Oliver Cromwell is another mentioned on this occasion; but the writers of that 
time, who endeavoured to throw all the indignities they could on the republican party, 
have probably made this usurper and his friends to be served in this manner much 
oftener than they really were. One gentle man, however, who fell in Gilder-roy's way, 
made a stout opposition with two of his servants, till one of the men was killed, and 
the master himself wounded; Gilder-roy shot all their horses, mounted the gentleman 
upon an ass, and sent him to seek his fortune.
	Three of this company were at last apprehended and sent to the Tolbooth in 
Edinburgh, out of which prison they broke, but were soon retaken, condemned, and 
executed at a distance without the city, where their bodies were left hanging as a 
terror to others, till they should drop down of themselves.
	These three men were part of Gilder-roy's particular favourites; whereupon he 
vowed revenge, and communicated his design to the rest of the gang, who all agreed 
to join with him in the execution of it. Their business was to waylay the judge — or 
Lord of Session, as they are there called — who had passed the sentence, and who 
was soon after so unhappy as to fall into their hands. His coachman and two footmen 
they stripped stark naked, tied them hand and foot, and threw them into a great pond, 
where they were immediately drowned. Then they killed the four coach horses, cut the 
coach all to pieces, and rifled his lordship of everything about him that was valuable. 
This was not, however, half the punishment they designed him, for they kept him 
confined in a wood till dead of night, and then they put him on horseback and brought 
him to the gallows where their comrades were hanging. The form of a gallows or 
gibbet in Scotland is something like our turnstiles, and consists of two beams that 
cross one another upon the top of a high post, so that they point four several ways. It 
was upon such a machine as this that those fellows were hung, and there was one of 
the points vacant. When they arrived at the place, Gilder-roy told the judge that, 
forasmuch as the structure was not uniform without a fourth person, his lordship must 
fill the vacancy, and take a swing upon the empty beam. As soon as he had delivered 
his jest he let the poor judge see that he intended to act in earnest, for a rope was 
instantly put round his lordship's neck, and he was fairly tucked up to keep the 
malefactors company.
	We have not been informed of the name of this judge; but the action, we are 
assured, was the occasion of a law that was soon after passed in Scotland for the 
hanging of a highwayman as soon as ever he was taken. This statute was afterwards 
often put in force against gentlemen of the pad, whom they convicted and condemned 
after their death, to keep up the form of justice.
	A long series of success made Gilder-roy so insolent that he thought nothing 
of killing those who disputed the delivery of their money. He ravished almost all the 
women that he could get into his power, set fire to houses and barns upon the least 
affront, and spread an inexpressible fear in every part where he haunted. The great 
complaints that were raised were the occasion of a second proclamation for the taking 
of him either dead or alive, in which the reward offered was no less than one thousand 
marks. This obliged him again to take a little more care of his conduct, and live 
privately as often and as much as his money would permit.
	One Peg Cunningham, whom he kept for a mistress, hearing of the 
proclamation, and perceiving that it hindered him from bringing her so much money 
as usual, thought it her best way to lay hold of this opportunity, play the downright 
whore, and betray him. This she accomplished in her own house, which she caused to 
be surrounded with a body of men one night when he was with her. Gilder-roy heard a 
noise, and perceived that he was trepanned; nor was he at a loss to think by whom. 
Seeing therefore that he could no way escape, he resolved to be revenged on his 
betrayer; which he was before the guards could seize him. He took a knife and ripped 
up her belly as she lay in bed, where she kept, to prevent his suspecting her. After this 
he made as desperate a defence as ever was heard of, killing several of his adversaries 
as they attempted to come to him. But all this served only to aggravate his crimes; for 
he was taken and put into prison, where his hands, feet and waist were all loaded with 
irons for the greater security. Having been kept three days in this condition, he was 
conveyed to Edinburgh by a strong guard, and there executed, according to the law 
just now mentioned, on a gibbet thirty feet high, in April, 1658. He was thirty-four 
years of age, and died in a sullen temper, without any confession. His body was hung 
in chains on another gibbet erected for that purpose between Edinburgh and Leith.


THOMAS GRAY  
Nephew to the Exeter Hangman, who turned Thief and Highwayman, and 
ended by marrying an Heiress. His Autobiography written about 1660

	WE here present our readers with the remarkable life of a very great thief and 
cheat, as written by himself above fourscore years ago. This witty rogue is much 
talked of at this time in the west of England, where he was born, and where he wrote 
his life and actions — a life famous in those parts, and which we believe will prove 
diverting and agreeable to our readers here. The account which he gives of himself is 
as follows:
	I was born in Exeter, a city in the county of Devon. My father's name was 
Thomas Gray, a native of the same city, and by trade a barber. His wife (who I believe 
was my mother) was a good-natured woman, and one who never denied a handsome 
spark any favour. My father was accused of keeping a younger brother of mine always 
at hand to pick his customers' pockets whilst they were shaving; but the little diver 
was caught, and died in prison under the penance of a discipline applied to him with a 
little too much rigour. My father was much afflicted at it, for he drove a pretty trade 
with him, and he never had been a prisoner before, but always came off with honour. 
As to my own part, after many disputes between my parents about placing me out in 
the world, and they not agreeing to what trade, I was furnished with the first 
rudiments of Art, vulgarly called the Horn Book, and sent to school. I had not been 
there above eight days, before my mistress, who was a likely lass, perceived I was a 
lad of mettle, and might be proper to go her errands, and for that reason was kinder to 
me than the rest of the scholars, which made them envy me. From that time I began to 
keep company with those who were bigger than myself, and became intimate with a 
gentleman's son of the city, whose name was Mr Robert Langdon. Every holiday we 
went to play together; hens' nests and orchards we robbed together. In short, I was 
never out of his company, which made my fellow-scholars either angry that I slighted 
them, or, thinking me presumptuous, they twitted me with my father's trade. One 
would call me Lord of the Razor, another Little Trimmer, and a third Young 
Soapsuds; but these I did not regard, until one of my comrades, with whom I was 
playing, called me son of a whore. Upon which I threw a stone hard at him and broke 
his head, then took to my heels, ran to my mother, and told her the case, who 
commended my valour and rejoiced to see how great an empire honour had already 
obtained over me. Away goes my father to seek out the boy, that he might wipe off 
this reproach, who asking his pardon, and peace being made, I was returned to school 
again.
	Whilst I remained here I was always in company with the scholar before-
mentioned, with whom I had contracted a great friendship, I used to exchange my tops 
and marbles with him, though mine were better. I gave him pictures, and complied so 
with his humours, that at last his father and mother, who knew nothing of the ill-
repute of mine, finding their child took such delight in my company, were very well 
pleased when I dined, supped, or lay with their son, who in a short time was removed 
to a grammar school at Cullumpton, with myself to accompany him, to wean him 
from his parents' fondness, which commonly makes children dunces.
	At this school we remained about five years, during which time nothing 
extraordinary intervened, but such tricks as are usually played at school. I and my 
young master made pretty good progress in our learning, and he being now arrived to 
the age of eighteen, his father took him from the school, and after he had kept him at 
home about three months, desirous of making his son a scholar, resolved to send him 
to Oxford, and I was asked if I thought fit to wait on him. My consent was easily 
obtained. Our clothes were packed up, and we mounted on horseback, accompanied 
by an old servant to carry our portmanteaus, defray the expenses of our journey, and 
bring back the horses. Nothing remarkable happened on the road; we arrived safe at 
Oxford. My young master was entered of B — — College, and I had lodgings at a 
private house (with several other gentlemen's servants), and waited on him only by 
day. My landlady was a mighty woman for what she called country affairs; so that the 
yard was well stocked with fowls of all sorts, sucking-pigs, etc.
	On an evening, being at play in my room with some of the other servants, we 
heard a grunting without the door, which we opened, and presently in came a brace of 
young pigs, which we punished severely for their presumption in coming so near us; 
and that night carried them to an ale-house, and made a brave feast of them. My 
master heard of it, and was very angry, but most of the gentlemen of the college 
laughed at it, and interposed in my behalf. It was not long before my young master 
came into the like opinion with me of now and then borrowing some of our 
neighbours' goods; for he, with three more of his fellow-collegians, being apprised of 
a very fat calf which belonged to a farmer a little way from their college, made bold to 
take it away, but could not for a long time contrive how to get it into the college; for it 
being late, and the gates shut, the porter would inevitably see them. But one more 
cunning than the rest bids two of them lift the calf upon the hind feet, then put his 
gown and cap on it, and thus supported the calf was led in. The porter, inquiring what 
was the reason they supported the gentleman so, was told it was a scholar a little in 
liquor, and by that stratagem they made many good meals on veal.
	These and many other pranks we played there, when my master received a 
letter from his father, wherein was enclosed one for myself from an uncle of mine, the 
most noted man in Exeter; for he was a finisher of the law, alias the hangman. This 
was the person who sent me the letter, a copy of which I have here transcribed, that 
you may see what a great affection he bore me.
	TO MY DEAR NEPHEW, Mr THOMAS GRAY 
	The great employment which I have under his Majesty has hitherto hindered 
me from writing to you. I am much afflicted to be the conveyancer of such news unto 
you as cannot be very welcome. Your father died eight days since, but the most 
generously I ever saw man. I will say this of him everywhere; for I myself trussed him 
up. He mounted the ladder with a good grace; but spying one of the rounds broken, 
and being a lover of order, he turned about to the sheriff and desired it might be 
mended for the next comer, who perhaps might be less active than himself. I cannot 
describe to you how handsomely he appeared in the eyes of all spectators. He sat 
himself down in a most becoming posture, took the cord himself and fastened the knot 
to it, and seeing the parson who attended him beginning to exhort him to repentance 
— "Sir," says he, "I have long since prepared myself for this action. Let us only sing a 
penitential psalm, and make an end, for I would not be troublesome to the company." 
Which done, he threw himself off the ladder, without making any ugly faces, and so 
continued near an hour with a most incomparable gravity. As for your mother, she 
was tried for a bawd, and convicted; was condemned to follow a cart through the city; 
but never received her punishment, dying of the jail distemper. I am extremely 
afflicted she should so dishonour our family, in which I have no small interest, being 
an officer of the King's; for the relation I had unto her is no mean discredit to me 
amongst persons of quality. I have your father's effects in my hands, which he 
bequeathed to you. I believe they will be worth about fourscore pounds. I am your 
uncle, and have no children, and design to resign my office to you. You may therefore 
on sight hereof provide yourself to come hither; for I persuade myself you will make a 
very worthy successor to me. I desire your speedy answer, and am, your affectionate 
uncle,  
	ROGER GRAY.
	I must confess I was out of countenance at the shame and discredit of my 
parents, and the only comfort I had left was that I should shortly receive the money. I 
went to my young master, whom I still found reading his lettcrs, in which his father 
commanded him to turn me off. He told me of it with some concern, and that he did 
not dare to disobey him; but offered to recommend me to a gentleman of his 
acquaintance. "Sir," says I to him, "my thoughts are higher than serving anybody; I 
renounce the meanness of all those conditions. I intend to scale honour, and if hitherto 
I have had one foot upon the ladder, as everyone knows, be pleased to understand that 
my father has mounted to the very top of it." I expounded my meaning to him by 
showing my uncle's letter; for he knowing who I was I might the more freely, and 
with less shame, discover the whole affair unto him. He was sorry at it, and asked me 
what I intended to do. I acquainted him with my designs. He paid me my wages, and 
made me a handsome present besides. I took my leave of him with a great deal of 
reluctance, went to my lodgings, dissembling my grief the best I could. I burnt my 
letter, fearing somebody might find it and discover my shame. Then I resolved to go 
to Exeter and take possession of my legacy, and also to know my relations, that I 
might the better avoid them, and shun the place of their habitation.
	At length the day came when I was to abandon the most pleasant life I had yet 
known. God knows with what regret I bade adieu to so many friends and companions. 
I sold what things I could, and by that and some other means had got above twenty 
pounds in my pocket. I bought a horse for about three pounds, and mounting him, left 
Oxford. Now being at large, I was willing to take a little pleasure, and for that reason 
visited Bath on my way home. There it was I met with a very ignorant self-conceited 
fellow, who called himself a poet. Our acquaintance began at supper, by his asking me 
(according to the custom of travellers) from whence I came. I told him from Oxford. 
"A curse light upon that place," replied he; "there's hardly a man of understanding 
there." "I wonder," says I, "you should so undervalue them; for I assure you there are 
many ingenious men at that university." "Ingenious men, say you!" replied he, all in a 
fury. "Who are they? I am sure I have been a country schoolmaster above these ten 
years, and am the author of several Christmas carols, yet none of your famous 
university ever took any notice of me. To convince you further, I will read one of 
them," Which he accordingly did. The subject was, The Shepherds Meeting at 
Bethlehem; but not one good line in it. However I flattered him, and commended what 
he called verses to the skies, and told him I entirely agreed with him that there was no 
comparison between the Oxonians and him, and asked him if he had ever read the 
Ordinances made lately against poets. He answered in the negative, and desired me to 
let him see them. The company joining with him in his request, I condescended; and 
taking them out of my pocket began to read them as follows: —
ORDINANCES AGAINST A SET OF CRACK-BRAINED FELLOWS, 
COMMONLY CALLED OR KNOWN BY THE NAME OF POETS
	I. Although we are credibly informed that there is a certain kind of vermin, 
called poets, who are much given to idolatry, worshipping ribbons, fans, gloves, shoe-
strings, and the like; as also who daily commit infinite other sins much more heinous, 
as if they were barbarians, or Pagans; yet in regard they are Christians, and our 
neighbours, we are charitably inclined to work their reformation, and do therefore 
ordain that, in Easter Week, they be assembled together in some public space, then 
and there to be admonished of their errors. And in case any are touched with a sense 
of their errors, and willing to renounce their superstition, we shall discharge such with 
a proper certificate, and the rest we shall send with an order to the keeper of some 
eminent madhouse.
	II. Forasmuch as divers have forsaken their idolatrous life (though they yet 
retain some relics of it) and delight in groves and woods, we ordain they leave off 
such foolish notions, or that such as affect to be solitary shall go and build cottages in 
the deserts of Arabia; and as for those who will not submit hereunto, we give them 
liberty to hire themselves out to old nurses, to sing and rock their children asleep in 
their cradles.
	Here the pedant could no longer hold, but up he rose in a fury, and protested 
against the Ordinances, and appealed to Apollo in his Court of Parnassus. I had much 
ado to forbear laughing; but that I might be kept up no longer, for it was pretty late, I 
told him the Ordinances were only made in jest, and that he might choose whether he 
would obey them; which quieted him for the present, and then I proceeded:
	III. We do adjudge that all women who shall fall in love with these kind of 
poets shall be comprised within the number of wilful murderers. And we further 
command that they be not buried in holy ground, but in the highway.
	IV. Considering the great numbers of plays, songs, and miscellanies — of 
which collections have been made of late years — we ordain that all such bundles of 
copies as the pastrycooks' and chandlers' shops have saved shall be forthwith carried 
to the houses of office, there to be used as occasion shall require, any prohibition or 
injunction to the contrary notwithstanding.
	V. Considering that there are three sorts of people in the kingdom who are so 
extremely miserable that they cannot live without poets, as lovers, ballad-singers, and 
stage-players, we, being charitably inclined to supply their wants, do permit that there 
be a certain number of poets tolerated for their use, provided they subscribe their 
works, and give notice of their dwellings, that they be brought to give an account of 
their misdemeanours and detractions, which for the most part they commit against 
persons of honour in their lampoons.
	VI. Lastly, we command all poets in general to correct and amend their style; 
and that for the future they cease profaning of heavenly things, or adopting the names 
of angels, stars, suns and divinities unto such women as are ready for all comers; and 
this under pain of being sentenced to transportation for fourteen years.
	They who heard those Ordinances read, desired copies of them, except our 
exasperated poet, who cried out in a pet that he need not make any defence, but 
appealed to all men of sense. At this passage all the company laughed very heartily, 
which made the jingler ten times worse. He called for the reckoning, paid his share, 
and left us; and for my own part, seeing it was late, I made an end of our liquor, and 
went to bed.
	Day came. I rose and took leave of the company — I mean such as were out of 
their beds — and proceeded on my journey. But nothing extraordinary happened till I 
got to Exeter, where I inquired of several people for my uncle, but could get nothing 
from them but a command to go and look for him, until I accosted a beggar in St 
Peter's churchyard, who informed me where he lived, and that he was for the present 
employed in brushing the shoulders of a brace of females who would not leave other 
people's shirts upon their hedges. I went to a neighbouring ale-house and gave a boy 
twopence to go and tell my worshipful relation I waited for him; for I did not much 
care for his expressions of joy at my arrival in the open streets. In about two hours he 
came, and seemed extraordinary glad to see me, conducting me to his house, which 
was near a very large slaughter-house, the most noisome place in the whole city. "This 
is not a palace," said he, as he went into his house; "but I can assure you, my dear 
nephew, it is very commodious for my office." We went in together to a place he 
called his parlour, which was hung round with the utensils of his trade, as whips, 
cords, branding-irons, etc. Never was galley-slave more astonished than myself. He 
asked me to sit down, which I did without much ceremony. "You are very lucky," 
says he, "in coming to-day. You will meet with a good supper, there being some 
friends of mine to sup with me." In the midst of his discourse in came a certain man in 
a tattered coat, and by what I could find by his discourse he was one of the jail 
solicitors. He laid down a bag he brought with him in a corner, which, instead of 
being filled with papers, was stuffed with goose, roast beef, etc. "Is not old Twister 
come yet?" said he. "No," quoth my uncle; but the word was hardly out of his mouth 
before a great scoundrel fellow entered the room. His face was all chequer-work, flat-
nosed, with a hat the crown of which would have almost cased a steeple, and the 
brims were so large it might have served for a pent-house for three or four in rainy 
weather. "I must needs confess, dear godfather," said he to my uncle, "you have 
served your penitents to-day like good children indeed." With that the twig of the law 
took up the discourse. "They were poor sneaky rascals, who had not anything to buy a 
favour. I gave six shillings to the beadle of Launceston to befriend me as he did when 
I was forced to dance a couranto there." "For my part," said the other, "I did not 
grudge the money I gave at Salisbury, and yet the old thief made me sensible that one 
of more credit than myself had recommended me to him." "These officers," said my 
uncle, interposing, "are not men of honour as I am; for when I treat with anyone, I 
know how to acquit myself as becomes my quality." I listened to their discourse with 
abundance of regret, which one of them perceiving — "Is that one of the young men 
who passed through your hands last?" said he. "No, no," said my uncle, "it is a 
nephew of mine, a Master of Arts at Oxford, and a very ingenious young man." He 
begged my pardon, and proffered me his service; for which I thanked him very kindly, 
he being my uncle's assistant, who helped him at a pinch. In the meantime I was 
almost mad to get my money out of my uncle's hands, that I might be gone from him. 
To be short, the cloth was laid, and a boy they had got to attend them was sent for a 
lusty jug of ale. This boy was an ingenious lad, who knew how to get sixpence clear 
when they sent him for a groat's worth of ale. The case was, he would sell the pitcher 
for twopence, and pretend he had broken it and spilt the liquor.
	They sat themselves down at the table, and I, being a stranger, was placed at 
the upper end. In a word, they stuffed their bellies so full that, what with the meat, and 
what with the wine, the vapours crept up into their pericraniums. They began to see 
double, and some to see such things as were not near them; for the ragamuffin lawyer 
took a plate of fried tripe, which swam in butter as black as ink, and thinking it to be 
broth, clapped it to his mouth to sup it up, saying, "It is good to have something of 
one's own "; and thinking to put it to his mouth, spilt one half in his bosom and the 
other on his clothes. Perceiving himself in that pickle, he rose from the table to clean 
himself, but his head was too heavy for his body, so that at the first step his nose 
kissed the ground; with that he took hold of the leg of the table and, endeavouring to 
rise, upset it upon the other two. My uncle tried to get up, but being as far gone as the 
others, fell upon his colleague, who, finding himself down before he expected it, 
asked my uncle why he pushed him, and whether he was used to entertain his guests 
so; and with that he took up a bone, intending to slay my uncle, who lay at full length 
dead drunk.
	About a fortnight passed much after the above manner, during which time I 
was daily talking to my uncle about the money left by my father; but he, being a man 
who understood little of good behaviour, put me to a great deal of trouble before I 
could bring him to my own bow. But at length he yielded, though with some 
reluctance; for I could only make him bleed three of the four score pounds left me by 
my father, which he got by his industry, and entrusted to a person of honour, who was 
the depository of all the thefts committed within ten miles of Exeter. To her we went, 
who received us with many welcomes, and wishes I might prove as honest and as able 
a man as my deceased father.
	The money was tolled out, and my uncle seeing me take possession of my 
fortune — "My dear nephew," said he, "you will do very ill should you squander 
away this money. Did I not know you to be a person of understanding, and withal 
mindful of the family from whence you are descended, I should be very cautious of 
delivering it into your hands; but you have it, and God give you grace to make good 
use of it, and then, perhaps, you may enjoy part of my labours." I returned him thanks 
for his kind offers, and having drunk sufficiently, took leave of the good woman, and 
with my uncle returned home, where we found his two companions, to whom we gave 
an account of what he had done. I perceived by their countenances and their discourse 
they expected a treat. I accordingly sent for a large jug of ale but not contented with 
that, my uncle was for a walk to Topsham the next day to see the ships, and I was to 
bear the expense of the day.
	The morning being come, my uncle, his two pot-companions and myself took 
a walk to Topsham, and got into company with some sailors, who would have us go 
on board their ship and drink some flip; and my uncle, who was never backward in 
drinking, agreed to it, though in the sequel it proved but bad for him, for here he died 
a watery death, though he never delighted in that element. But the fault was in his 
tongue, and thinking himself as great as a lord (especially when drunk), he gave the 
captain of the ship some very scurrilous language, who, in return, tipped him over the 
side of the ship, and the water, which he had so naturally abhorred whilst living, took 
revenge on him at his death.
	At first we made a great noise, and swore to hang the captain; but he soon 
quieted us, by getting us into his cabin. He plied us well with punch; and applying 
some gold to me and my companions, we signed a paper wherein we acknowledged 
that nobody had hurt my uncle, or touched a hair of his head (which was true, because 
he was bald), but that he, being very much in liquor, had tumbled overboard by 
accident. The coroner summoned a jury the next morning, who, after they had 
separately examined me and the two ragamuffins, found that my uncle's death was by 
accident. All that now remained was to lay him underground, desiring the earth, as it 
conceals so many gross faults committed by doctors, apothecaries, surgeons, etc., to 
hide one small fault of a captain and a little salt water. I shall give no further account 
of my relations or ancestors; but I suppose the latter descended from some great 
Norman who came over with William the Conqueror. Those who desire to know more 
of them may search the Heralds' Office, where, perhaps, they may satisfy their 
curiosity.
	After the funeral was over (at which I did not shed one tear, because I saw 
nobody else do it), I took possession of my uncle's house and effects, the latter of 
which I sold off for about three and twenty pounds; and not caring to stay any longer 
in my native place, I was resolved to make the best of my way to London; and 
accordingly, hearing that the carrier had a spare horse, I hired him, and on we jogged 
the next morning.
	Nothing remarkable happened till I got to Hounslow Heath, where it was my 
ill-fortune to meet as great a rogue as myself. I could not be contented to follow the 
wagon, but being in a hurry to view the metropolis of the kingdom, I rode on before, 
and about the middle of the heath met one of your highway collectors, who 
dismounted me, and robbed me of all my money; and though I told him I was as great 
a rogue as himself, it would not save my money, for he demanded my credentials — 
that is, my pistols — but I had none. However, after much entreaty, he returned me 
about fifteen shillings, and in lieu of it took away the horse with him. The devil had a 
long time owed me a spite, and took this opportunity to pay it. I was left in a sweet 
condition. I did not dare to stay for the carrier, fearing he might stop me for the horse, 
and money I had none to pay him for it, except what the highwayman so charitably 
returned me. I even resolved to foot it the rest of the way, and got to London that 
evening, very weary and heavy-hearted. All I had to depend on was my industry, 
which is the only philosopher's stone, and converts all things to gold.
"A man by art, and by deceit, 
Half a year may live complete. 
By the same deceit and art, 
He may live the other part."
	It was my fortune to take up my quarters in a street pretty famous for 
furnishing young apprentices with women's flesh, and for being the common 
receptacle of bullies. Here in less than four days I got acquainted with as great a rogue 
as ever was hanged, and he was my master of the ceremonies to introduce me to a 
gang of fellows like himself. I found them in a cellar, drinking and carousing, and was 
welcomed by three loud huzzas, and a stool ordered for me. Scarce was I sat down but 
in came one of the fraternity with a good cloak on his back, which he had exchanged 
for his own at a billiard-table, where he made as if he would play, but having the 
industry not to make one, he got to the place where the cloaks lay, and very 
dexterously borrowed the best of them, leaving his own in its stead. This was nothing 
in comparison with the next that came, who was always attended by a number of 
children all troubled with one disease or another.
	That which drew such a rout after him was his pretending to cure and charm 
all diseases, either by saying some magical words, or giving them scrolls of paper to 
carry about them; by which means he got a pretty income.
	After him came another, a grave demure man, who looked like a saint. His 
business was to go about the streets and sell little books of prayers and hymns. He had 
always some text of Scripture ready to vindicate what he said. He was thought to be a 
very holy man by the vulgar, and by this device got good store of money. If in his 
walk he chanced to find any door open, he went in with a great deal of confidence; if 
he found no one within, or if they were asleep, he never came away empty-handed. In 
case he found anyone, or if they happened to awake, he told them he came in, finding 
the door open, to advise of it, and that they had need be careful of night-walkers; and 
always concluded with some hypocritical advice.
	I passed one month in observing the many ways of stealing practised by the 
society, but never went out upon the shark by myself, having always for my 
companion the person who first brought me acquainted with their ways. We two made 
a pretty good hand of it, and brought as much to the common stock as any. We had an 
old woman who sold everything we stole. She used to go from house to house, saying 
she was a poor woman forced to sell her goods by piecemeal to buy bread for herself 
and family. She would weep at every word, and sob and cry like a child, with which, 
and her other industry, she cheated charitable people, and sometimes to good 
purposes. This right venerable and no less reverend old woman was grand protectress 
of our society, and chief treasuress. But upon a certain day, as the devil (who is never 
idle in such things as concern his good subjects) would have it, our good woman, 
going to sell a suit of clothes, and some other things, fell upon one who knew, among 
the rest, something that once belonged to himself. Presently he got a constable, who 
took her into custody. She soon squeaked, confessed all, and impeached our whole 
order; upon which we were soon secured, and guarded to Newgate.
	At length the sessions came; we were arraigned at the bar, and after a pretty 
long trial our poor old woman was condemned to follow a cart's tail from Newgate to 
Tyburn, with a fellow to brush her shoulders. My comrades were condemned to live 
seven years in another country. My innocency appeared, God-a-mercy horse-gold I 
mean and so I got clear for that bout.
	I resolved to leave London and go to Bristol. The first stage I went was to 
Reading, where it was my fortune to meet with a company of players, and amongst 
the rest one who had been an acquaintance of mine at Oxford. He embraced me very 
kindly, and so far prevailed upon his friends that they admitted me into the company, 
and gave me several parts to get by heart. I had got such a trick, that I could not 
forbear walking up and down the chamber with the same earnestness as if I had been 
upon the stage.
	It happened that the maid of the house was coming up with dinner just as I was 
upon a description of the hunting of wild beasts, and of a man being pulled down by a 
bear, as if it had been my own self; I began to cry out in a pitiful tone:
"Save thyself, and fly this grisly bear, 
Or else thy body he will surely tear: 
Fast in my flesh are fix'd his direful claws; 
I fall a prey to his rapacious jaws. 
O fly away; for this I plainly see, 
As soon as I am dead, he'll murder thee."
	The poor wench was so terrified with my cry, and action, that she verily 
believed I had really advised her to save herself from being devoured. The great haste 
in which she was in to be gone made her make but one step from the top to the bottom 
of the stairs: down she went, and the dishes with her. Away she got into the street, 
crying there was a bear in the house, killing and eating a man. I heard a noise, and, 
apprehending whence it came, went out to disabuse the girl; but notwithstanding all 
my haste, I found about a dozen men at the door, some with spits, some with halters, 
and others with swords, swearing and staring, and inquiring for the bear. I told them 
the whole story, and repeated the lines. They were mad and vexed at being made such 
fools of, and cursed the verses, and the poet too, to the pit of hell. But that little 
troubled me; that which concerned me most was, I was forced to lose my dinner.
	My companions hearing of this adventure made the town ring with it, and I 
had the honour of being the subject of several ballads. Not long after, another accident 
happened which confounded us all. The master of our company had run into debt with 
a tailor for a very considerable sum for clothes and other necessaries for our use, and 
he, perceiving there was no likelihood of getting his money, arrested him, and his 
other creditors coming in, he lay under so many locks and keys that there was no 
likelihood of his getting out. By this means our company dwindled, and everyone 
shifted for himself. The truth is, I might have got into another company, but I was 
quite tired with that way of life.
	My friend (who, I told you before, first introduced me into the above set of 
strollers, and with whom I had contracted a very intimate friendship) was resolved to 
accompany me to whatever part of the world I went. His name was Richard Brown. 
By his advice I took a resolution to revisit London, and on comparing our stock, found 
we could muster up two hundred pounds, by which we hoped to improve our fortune. 
Brown was a genteel, well-made fellow, had a tongue as smooth as oil, and a good 
address, and could cog a die or slip a card with anyone. We were both desperate as to 
our fortunes, and therefore resolved to make a bold push, either to gain more or be 
stripped; and if the latter happened, we thought of nothing but the last resort of 
gamesters, which was, either to hang ourselves, or get the county to furnish us with a 
proper officer.
	We had not been in London above a week before we lost all our money, and 
almost all our senses; but recalling some of the latter, we (by pawning part of our 
clothes) got each of us a brace of pistols, and took an airing towards Barnet. On the 
road we met a chariot and four horses, furnished with an elderly gentleman and his 
daughter, from whom we took about forty pounds in money, a brace of watches and a 
silver snuff-box, the last of which the young lady begged very hard for; but we were 
inexorable, and lucky for us that we were so, for when we got to our lodgings we 
found a diamond ring in the box, which we sold for ninety-three pounds. This being 
my first setting out as a highwayman, I was unwilling to be caught, so that to prevent 
being pursued I shot one of the wheel-horses, which vexed the old gentleman more 
than his money; for he lost all patience, calling us rogues, villains, highwaymen and 
murderers. "What harm," says old crusty, "has the horse done you? Can you get 
anything by killing him, or do ye think he has got any money hid about him?" My 
companion did not like the old chap's expressions; so with a great oath commanded 
him to come out of the chariot, that he might search him. "For," said he, "you old fox, 
I'll rummage you all over." We found nothing about him but a tobacco-box, a silver 
dram-bottle and a pocket-book; the last of which we returned, on his promising not to 
give such scurrilous language any more to gentlemen of our profession; and the same 
night we got safe to London.
	Flushed with our success, we often ventured out in the evening; but the worst 
was, whatever we got on the road, the dice swallowed. Our last exploit was near 
Richmond, where we attacked a gentleman and his man, well armed. We had no 
sooner bid them stand than the gentleman fired at us, but luckily missed us. The 
servant rode off as fast as his horse could go, whilst my comrade lodged a ball in the 
gentleman's arm, which made him yield. We robbed him of near three hundred 
pounds, wished him good-night, and rode off. Not far had we got before we found 
ourselves pursued, for the gentleman's servant had raised the county; but, however, 
after a pretty deal of difficulty, we again got safe home.
	This last adventure frightened both of us so much we did not venture at that 
sport any more; for by a kind turn of fortune my friend got, in one night, above nine 
hundred pounds. It was then my advice that we should buy each of us a good horse, 
and go into the country for some time. My companion agreed to it, and pitched upon 
Bath and Bristol to pay a visit to; and because we would set out with a good grace, we 
hired a servant to attend us, who proved an excellent one, for he was one of the most 
arch dogs I ever knew. He was by trade a saddler; he sung tolerably, and played upon 
the violin. In short, we could put him upon nothing but he would undertake it; so that 
we did not keep long upon the reserve of our servant, but let him into our designs, 
which were, to go a-fortune-hunting.
	At last we arrived at Bath, where we pushed into all company, and had not 
been there a fortnight before our dexterous servant had got acquainted with a young 
girl who waited on two sisters, who were guarded by their mother and watchful uncle; 
but, however, I made my addresses to one of them, wrote letters, and received 
answers, by help of my man, and found they were ten thousand pounds fortunes. My 
friend Brown cried me up in all places for a person of a great estate; but the mother 
and uncle were inexorable. However the young lady was not; for by means of a 
strolling clergyman, well daubed in the fist, we were married and fairly bedded in my 
own lodgings, nobody being privy to it but my spouse's sister, my landlady, my friend 
Brown, and my servant. My spouse's sister was a brisk lass, and, as I thought, wanted 
something. I persuaded Brown to address her, which he did, and the same parson 
joined them. However, this might have happened but poorly at last, had not the young 
ladies' father died, who was a Bristol merchant. He went over some time before to 
Jamaica to settle some affairs, but on his return was unfortunately (but fortunately for 
me and my brother adventurer) drowned; the news of which I received about a month 
after marriage. Hitherto all this had been secret, but on this news our marriages were 
publicly owned, and we demanded our spouses' fortunes. At first we were roughly 
treated; but the mother and uncle, both considering the indissoluble knot could not be 
untied, were reconciled, and in a little time we had their fortunes, and now both of us 
live happily.
	It was but reason we should make some amends to our man for his services, so 
we proposed a match between him and his sweetheart, the latter of whom was very 
glad; for he had been pretty busy with her, she being then with child, which she 
confessed to her mistresses. When we asked our faithful servant the question, and told 
him of her confession, says he: "I fancy the sin is worth the owning, the creature is a 
sound piece of mortality. 'Tis but supposing the first night we lie together that we 
have been married four or five months, and all is well; so that, gentlemen, I am ready 
to obey your commands." In short, they were married, and we and our spouses gave 
them nigh on a thousand pounds. They have lately set up an inn within fifteen miles of 
Bristol, have good business, and live comfortably.
	Thus far the wheel of fortune has gone round with me; what may hereafter 
happen I cannot foresee, but at present I'm resolved to live easy, and repent my former 
follies. Perhaps, gentle reader, you might have expected a tragical end had been my 
fate, but as yet I have got no further than matrimony and hanging; and that, you know, 
goes by destiny.


JOHN, RICHARD AND JOAN PERRY 
Mother and Sons, executed in 1661 on the false Statement of the First for the 
alleged Murder of Mr William Harrison, who appeared alive two Years 
later after strange Adventures.

ON the 16th of August, 1660, Mr William Harrison, aged seventy, steward to Lady 
Campden of Campden, in Gloucestershire, walked from Campden to Charringworth 
to receive her ladyship's rents. As he did not return at the usual time, his wife, about 
nine o'clock in the evening, sent her servant, John Perry, to meet him; but neither 
Harrison nor the servant returned that night. On the following morning Edward 
Harrison, son of the aforesaid William Harrison, went towards Charringworth, and 
meeting the servant Perry on the road, he learned that his father was not to be found 
there. They next went together to Ebrington, a village between Charringworth and 
Campden, where they were told by one Daniel that a Mr Harrison called at his house 
the previous evening, but stayed there only a few minutes. They then went to Paxford, 
about half-a-mile distant, where, hearing nothing of Mr Harrison, they returned to 
Campden. On their road thither they accidentally heard that a hat, band and comb had 
been recently picked up by a poor woman on the highway between Ebrington and 
Campden. They therefore sought for the woman, in whose possession these articles 
were said to be, and having found her, and identified the hat, band and comb to be the 
property of Harrison, they were conducted to the precise spot where they were picked 
up. Adjoining the road was a large furze field, which they searched, supposing that Mr 
Harrison might have been murdered there, as the hat, band and comb were much 
hacked, and the latter stained with blood. Their search was, however, in vain; and the 
news soon reaching Campden, so alarmed the inhabitants, that men, women and 
children commenced a general search for Mr Harrison, but with no success. Mrs 
Harrison's fear for her husband's safety now increased, and as her servant Perry, 
whom she had sent on the previous evening, had not duly returned, suspicion fell 
upon him as the murderer. On the next day Perry was apprehended, and examined 
before a Justice of the Peace concerning his master's absence, and his reason for 
staying from home all night — when he gave this account: that in consequence of his 
mistress sending him to meet his master between eight and nine o'clock in the 
evening, he went down Campden field towards Charringworth, where meeting one 
William Reed, of Campden, he apprised him of the object of his journey; and further 
told him that, as it was growing dark, he durst not venture on his journey on foot, but 
would return and saddle his young master's horse. He accordingly returned with Reed 
to Mr Harrison's gate, where they parted. He (Perry) remained there till, on one Pierce 
passing by, he joined him, walked a short distance into the fields, and returned with 
him also to Mr Harrison's gate, where they also parted. That he, John Perry, then went 
into his master's hen-roost, where he lay about an hour, but slept not. That when the 
clock struck twelve he rose and went towards Charringworth, till a great mist rising he 
lost his way, and so lay the rest of the night under a hedge. That at the break of day on 
Friday morning he went to Charringworth, where he inquired for his master of one 
Edward Plaisterer, who told him that he had paid him twenty-three pounds on the 
previous afternoon, but that he remained with him only for a short time. He then went 
to one William Curtis of the same town, who likewise told him that he had heard of 
Mr Harrison having been there the day previous, but being from home he did not see 
him. He then returned home, it being about five o'clock in the morning, when on the 
road he met his master's son, with whom he went to Ebrington and Paxford, as before 
stated.
	Reed, Pierce, Plaisterer and Curtis, in their examination, corroborated the 
whole of Perry's statement.
	On Perry being asked by the justice why he was afraid to go to Charringworth 
at nine o'clock, and so willing to go at twelve, he replied that at nine o'clock it was 
dark, but at twelve the moon shone. And on being further asked why, on returning 
home twice, after his mistress had sent him to meet Mr Harrison, and staying till 
twelve o'clock, he did not inquire at home whether his master had returned before he 
went a third time to seek him, he answered that he knew his master was not come 
home, because he saw a light in his chamber window, which was usual during Mr 
Harrison's absence from home. Notwithstanding this explanation, it was not thought 
prudent to discharge Perry till further inquiry was made after his master; and 
accordingly he remained in custody six days, during which time he was again 
examined at Campden, but nothing further was elicited.
	Various reports now obtained circulation, one of which was that Perry, on 
being again pressed to confess what he knew of the matter, said that a tinker had 
killed his master. He told others that a gentleman's servant of the neighbourhood had 
robbed and murdered him; and to others he said that he was murdered and hid in a 
certain bean-rick, where search was made for the body but in vain. At length he 
promised to disclose the whole affair if he were examined by the justice before whom 
he had deposed his former statement. On Friday the 24th of August, he was again 
examined, when, in reply to the question whether he would confess what had become 
of his master, he said that he was murdered, but not by him. On the justice telling him 
that if he knew him to be murdered it was most probable that he knew the murderer, 
he confessed that he did; and further, that his mother and brother had murdered Mr 
Harrison. The justice warned him of the serious nature of the charge, but he persisted 
in his assertion, which he justified by the following circumstances.
	The prisoner now deposed that his mother and brother had depended on him 
ever since he entered into his master's service, telling him that it was in his power to 
relieve them, by apprising them of the day on which Mr Harrison went to collect his 
rents, when they proposed to waylay him and rob him. That accordingly he acquainted 
his brother of the day, and walked with him a short distance on his leaving home to 
search for Mr Harrison in the evening. That they then parted; but meeting again near 
Campden church, he proposed that his brother should pursue his master through some 
adjoining gardens, while he walked in the fields. That he soon afterwards found his 
master on the ground in the middle of the garden, his brother leaning over the body, 
and his mother standing beside him. That on being asked whether his master was dead 
he answered No; and that after he came up to them Mr Harrison cried: "Ah, rogues! 
will you kill me?" He now told his brother he hoped he would kill his master, when he 
replied: "Peace! peace! you're a fool," and then strangled him. Which being done, he 
took a bag of money out of Mr Harrison's pocket and threw it into his mother's lap. 
Then he and his brother agreed to throw the body into a great sink by Wallington's 
Mill, behind the garden; but his mother and brother requesting him to watch at a 
distance, and listen if all were they undertook to dispose of the body accordingly.
	On being asked whether it was thrown there, he replied that he knew not; but 
that his mother and brother having promised to dispose of it, he left them, and went 
into the village of Campden. Here he met John Pierce, with whom he went into the 
fields, and returned to his master's gate; after which he went into the hen-roost, as 
before stated. Having brought with him his master's hat, band and comb, after cutting 
them in pieces, he threw them into the highroad, that it might be believed that his 
master was murdered there.
	Upon this confession and accusation, warrants were issued against Joan and 
Richard Perry, the mother and brother of the aforesaid John Perry; but all attempts to 
find the body proved ineffectual. On Saturday, 25th of August, the three prisoners 
were examined, when Joan and Richard, on being confronted with John, denied the 
charge in the most positive terms; as also an accusation made by John of their having 
broken open Mr Harrison's house, and robbed him of a hundred and forty pounds in 
the previous year. At the next assizes two indictments were accordingly found against 
the three. As the body had not been found, the judge refused to try them for the 
murder. They were, however, induced to plead guilty to the indictment for the 
burglary. John still persisted in the story that his mother and brother had murdered 
Harrison, and further, that they had attempted to poison him while in prison.
	At the following spring assizes they were again indicted for the murder, and 
severally pleaded not guilty, when John's confession being produced in evidence, he 
said that he was mad at the time when such confession was made. They were, 
however, found guilty, and were executed shortly afterwards on a hill near Campden, 
John Perry being hung in chains.
	About two years after the execution of these unfortunate persons Mr Harrison 
returned to Campden, in good health. As the case excited considerable interest, Mr 
Harrison explained the whole of the circumstances which had thus detained him, in 
the following letter to Sir Thomas Overbury, a magistrate of the county of Gloucester: 
—
FOR Sir THOMAS OVERBURY, Kt.
	HONOURED SIR, — In obedience to your commands, I give you this true 
account of my being carried away beyond the seas, my continuance there, and return 
home. One Thursday, in the afternoon, in the time of harvest, I went to 
Charringworth, to demand rents due to Lady Campden, at which time the tenants were 
busy in the field, and late before they came home, which occasioned my stay there till 
the close of the evening. I expected a considerable sum, but received only three and 
twenty pounds. In my return home, in the narrow passage amongst Ebrington furzes, 
there met me one horseman, and said, "Art thou there?" and I, fearing he would have 
rode over me, struck his horse on the nose. Whereupon he struck at me with his sword 
several blows, and ran it into my side, while I, with my little cane, made my defence 
as well as I could. At last another came behind me, ran me into the thigh, laid hold on 
the collar of my doublet, and drew me to a hedge near to the place, when another 
came up. They did not take my money, but mounted me behind one of them, drew my 
arms about his middle, and fastened my wrists together with something that had a 
spring lock to it, as I conceived; they then threw a great cloak over me, and carried me 
away. In the night they alighted at a hay-rick, which stood near a stone-pit, by a wall 
side, where they took away my money. About two hours before daybreak, as I heard 
one of them tell the other he thought it to be then, they tumbled me into the stone-pit. 
They stayed, as I thought, about an hour at the hay-rick; when they took horse again, 
one of them bid me come out of the pit. I answered, they had my money already, and 
asked what they would do with me. Whereupon he struck me again, drew me out, put 
a great quantity of money into my pockets, and mounted me again after the same 
manner; and on the Friday, about sunset, they brought me to a lone house upon a 
heath, by a thicket of bushes, where they took me down almost dead. When the 
woman of the house saw that I could neither stand nor speak, she asked them whether 
they had brought a dead man. They answered No; but a friend that was hurt, and they 
were carrying him to a surgeon. She answered, if they did not make haste, their friend 
would be dead before they could reach one. There they laid me on cushions, and 
suffered none to come into the room but a little girl. We stayed there all night, they 
giving me some broth. In the morning, very early, they mounted me, as before, and on 
Saturday night they brought me to a place where were two or three houses, in one of 
which I lay all night on cushions by their bedside. On Saturday morning they carried 
me from thence, and about three or four o'clock they brought me to a place by the 
seaside, called Deal, where they laid me down on the ground; and one of them staying 
by me, the other two walked a little off to meet a man, with whom they tackled, and in 
their discourse I heard them mention seven pounds; after which they went away 
together, and after half-an-hour returned. The man, whose name, as I afterwards 
heard, was Wrenshaw, said he feared I should die before he could get me on board. 
They then put me into a boat, and carried me on shipboard, where my wounds were 
dressed. I remained in the ship, as near as I can reckon, about six weeks; in which 
time I was indifferently recovered of my wounds and weakness. Then came the 
master of the ship and told me, and the rest who were in the same condition, that he 
discovered three Turkish ships. We all offered to fight in defence of the ship, and 
ourselves, but he commanded us to keep close, and said he would deal with them well 
enough. A little while after we were called up, and when we came on the deck we saw 
two Turkish ships close by us; into one of them we were put, and placed in a dark 
hole, where how long we continued before we were landed I know not. When we 
were landed they led us two days' journey, and put us into prison where we remained 
four days and a half. Eight men next came to view us, who seemed to be officers; they 
called us, and examined us of our trades, which everyone answered: one said that he 
was a surgeon, another that he was a weaver, and I said I had some skill in physic. We 
three were set by, and taken by three of those eight men who came to view us. It was 
my chance to be chosen by a grave physician of eighty-seven years of age, who lived 
near to Smyrna, had formerly been in England, and knew Crowland in Lincolnshire, 
which he preferred before all other places in England. I was there about a year and 
three-quarters, and then my master fell sick on a Thursday, and sent for me; and 
calling me as he used, by the name of Bell, told me he should die, and bid me shift for 
myself. He died on Saturday following, and I presently hastened to a port, almost a 
day's journey distant, when I addressed myself to two men who came out of a ship 
belonging to Hamburgh, which, as they said, was bound for Portugal within two or 
three days.
	I inquired of them for an English ship; they answered there was none. I 
entreated them to take me into their ship; but they durst not, for fear of being 
discovered by the searchers, which might occasion the forfeiture not only of their 
goods but also of their lives. At length they took me on board, and placed me below in 
the vessel, and hid me with boards and other things, so that I lay undiscovered, 
notwithstanding the strict search that was made in the vessel. On arriving at Lisbon in 
Portugal, as soon as the master had left the ship, and was gone into the city, they set 
me on shore moneyless, to shift for myself. I now met four gentlemen discoursing 
together; after a while one of them came to me and spoke to me in a foreign language. 
I told him I was an Englishman. He then spoke to me in English, and told me that he 
was an Englishman himself, and born near Wisbeach, in Lincolnshire. I then related to 
him how I had been carried away, and my present condition; upon which he took me 
along with him, and by his interest with the master of a ship bound for England, 
procured my passage, and commended me to the master of the ship, who landed me 
safe at Dover, from whence I proceeded to London, where being furnished with 
necessaries, I came into the country. Having arrived at Crowland, I was told of the 
unhappy fate of my servant Perry, and his mother and brother. What caused John so 
falsely to accuse them and himself, I know not. He has not only brought his blood 
upon his own head, but that also of his innocent mother and brother. For I never saw 
either of them that evening; nor do I know who they were that carried me away after 
that rude and barbarous manner.
	Thus, honoured sir, I have given you a true account of my great sufferings and 
happy deliverance. Your Worship's, in all dutiful respects,  
	William Harrison


COLONEL JAMES TURNER 
A Spendthrift London Merchant, against whom three Robberies from other 
Merchants were proved. Executed 21st of January, 1663

	THIS gentleman was born in the city of Worcester, in the year 1609, of very 
wealthy parents, who placed him with a goldsmith of reputation in London as soon as 
of years for a trade. With this man he served his apprentice- ship very faithfully, and 
had the character of being a young man well qualified for business. When his father 
thought proper to put him into trade for himself he gave him a stock of no less than 
three thousand pounds, to which he soon added two thousand pounds more by 
marriage. He had great success in business for some years, and was esteemed the 
wealthiest man in his neighbourhood, so that his word would have passed for almost 
any sum.
	Mr Turner had always a considerable inclination for pleasure and company, 
taking peculiar delight in associating himself with the gentlemen who were officers of 
the city Militia. Among these he was complimented with a captain's commission, then 
a major's, then a lieutenant-colonel's, and at last with the command of one of the 
regiments, in which he continued till the unhappy action that brought him to his end 
was discovered, to the surprise of all the world.
	The colonel's temper was very generous and noble, which, it is thought, in 
some measure brought on him that decay of his fortune which he afterwards laboured 
under. In his post, particularly, whenever he marched out with his regiment, he was 
very liberal in his entertainments, and commonly ran himself to four times the 
expense that was necessary. It was the same on every other occasion; no man was 
more free with his money, or more ambitious of living in splendour and reputation, 
than Colonel Turner.
	This disposition had with him the same effect as it commonly has with others 
who ruin themselves by their generosity. He had no notion of retrenching his expenses 
when he perceived his substance waste, but was resolved to support himself with the 
same pomp as usual, however he came by the money. It was easy for such a man to 
commit a great many little secret actions that were in themselves dishonourable, 
before he lost his character, on account of his great business. Several of these things 
discovered themselves after he was convicted, which even the persons who were 
wronged did not suspect before. One instance in particular will be well worth relating, 
and was as follows.
	He applied himself one day to a merchant, and bought of him as much train oil 
and rice as came to three hundred and sixty pounds, which he promised to pay for as 
soon as the goods were delivered. Accordingly the day after he went to the merchant's 
house, and gave him the full sum in money and notes; for which the merchant wrote a 
receipt while it all lay on the desk. Two of Turner's accomplices (for he made use of 
assistants) came just at this time, and pretended some urgent business with the 
merchant, and, in short, played their part so well that one of them got off with the 
greatest part of Turner's payment while the other kept the innocent man in discourse. 
Neither of them took any more notice of the colonel than if they had not known him, 
nor did the merchant imagine he had any concern in the matter till he was found guilty 
of another crime, of which take this short account.
	There was one Mr Francis Tryon, a great merchant, who lived in Lime Street, 
whom Colonel Turner knew to be very rich. In order to rob this man, one of the 
above-mentioned fellows conveyed himself into his cellar in the dusk of the evening, 
and as soon as Mr Tryon was abed and, as he thought, asleep, he let the colonel in at 
the door. They went up together to his bedchamber, bound him, gagged him, and used 
him in a very barbarous manner; and then, going into his warehouse, they took from 
thence a large quantity of diamonds, sapphires, rubies, etc., which Turner knew where 
to find. Then they took all the money in the house, which amounted to a very large 
sum; so that the whole booty was reputed to be of the value of five thousand nine 
hundred and forty-six pounds four shillings and threepence. They made off with all 
this quietly. Mr Tryon had a man and a maidservant, but they both lay abroad this 
night by permission, of which the colonel had before received information.
	Strict inquiry was made after the thieves, and all such jewels as were 
remarkable were particularly described. Turner thought himself secure in his 
character, which had so long screened him, but some of the things described were 
seen in his house, and the discoverers were resolved to examine further. Whereupon 
the colonel, his wife and three sons, John, William and Ely, were apprehended, and 
upon search almost all the jewels were found, There was now no room for evasion; 
the whole family were carried before Sir Thomas Allen, Knight and alderman, and all 
committed to Newgate.
	At the next sessions they were all indicted for the said robbery; but after a full 
examination of what evidence they had, and considering what the colonel himself said 
in his defence, it was thought proper by the Court to acquit the wife and sons, and to 
bring the colonel in guilty. Where upon the usual sentence of death was passed on 
him, and he was executed on the 21st of January, 1663, when he was drawn in a cart 
from Newgate to the end of Lime Street in Leadenhall Street, and there hanged on a 
gibbet erected for that purpose, being fifty-three years old.
	The colonel left a paper behind him full of expressions of piety and contrition, 
too long to be inserted here. We would only observe that though all who knew him 
wondered at the fact, yet everyone believed him guilty, because the proofs were so 
clear.
	There was a robbery in his lifetime which nobody could then find out, but after 
his death it was generally thought he was the manager. A letter was sent to a wealthy 
dealer at Chichester, signed with the name of a merchant his acquaintance in London, 
informing him of a profitable purchase in his way, and inviting him to town. The 
Chichester man had before received advices of this kind from the same friend, and 
found them of service, therefore scrupled not, but set out the next day with what 
money and notes he had in the house; but before he got half-way to London he was 
robbed of all by two men in disguise. He soon found his correspondent had not sent to 
him, and was astonished. Colonel Turner's death cleared all, he knowing both their 
circumstances.


MOSES DRAYNE 
Ostler, hanged at Brentwood in 1667 for the Murder (by a Chelmsford 
Innkeeper and his Family some Years before) of Thomas Kidderminster, a 
Guest.

	THOMAS KIDDERMINSTER was the only son of Walter Kidderminster of 
Tupsley, in the county of Hereford; but being wronged out of his paternal estate by 
the intrigues of his stepmother, he was compelled very early in life to enter into the 
service of the Bishop of Ely, who at length employed him as his steward till the 
commencement of the Civil War and the commitment of that prelate to the Tower for 
his unshaken loyalty.
	Mr Kidderminster was employed in the management of other gentlemen's 
estates in Cambridgeshire till, thinking it prudent to convert his property into money, 
and endeavour to settle upon or sell his estate which he claimed in Herefordshire, after 
sending his wife to London, who was then pregnant, and telling her he would return in 
about ten days, he departed from Cambridgeshire, through Essex, with a number of 
writings, taking with him about five or six hundred pounds in gold.
	Travelling in a by road for safety, Mr Kidderminster took a guide with him; 
but on reaching Chelmsford at night he was discharged. Mr Kidderminster then put up 
at the White Horse Inn, where it appears he had lain at other times, and was very well 
known; but there he was murdered on the same night, in April, 1654. The last place 
his wife heard of him was Cambridge. Then a report was spread that he was gone to 
Amsterdam, where she sent to inquire for him, but was assured he was not there. After 
some time she heard he was at Cork, in Ireland; thither she also sent, and made a most 
diligent and exact search for him, both in Cork and Munster. Again there was a report 
that he was in Barbadoes, and they sent to Barbadoes to make inquiries after him. She 
continued constantly inquiring after her husband, till her sister, one day, in 1662 or 
1663, reading the newspaper of the day, suddenly cried out: "Sister, here's news of 
your husband!" upon which she read in the news to this effect — viz. "That the bones 
of an unknown person, supposed to be robbed and murdered, were found buried in a 
backyard in Chelmsford. Whosoever can give notice of any person missing, let them 
give notice to Mr Talcott, coroner, in Feering, or to the constable of Chelmsford, or to 
Mr Roper, bookseller, over against St Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street"; and upon 
comparing the time of her husband's being missing with the time in the newspaper of 
the supposed murdered body's lying concealed, it appeared to be extremely probable; 
upon which she immediately went to Mr Roper's, and by his advice set off for 
Chelmsford, and for want of conveyance went on foot with a friend.
	They proceeded on their journey as far as Stratford, where, a little beyond the 
town, they lost their way, turning to the left hand of the road. At last they came to 
Romford; and by that time being very weary, went, into a house at the farther end of 
the town, the sign of the Black Bull, where they accidentally found one Mary 
Mattocks, who lived at Hornchurch.
	Mrs Kidderminster being now very weary, and not able to go on foot any 
farther, inquired whether any horse could be hired in that town. Mrs Mattocks being 
present, interposed and answered that there was no horse to be hired, nor any 
convenience of coach or wagon to be had upon that day. They asked Mrs Mattocks 
how far it was to Chelmsford; she answered, fifteen miles. Mrs Kidderminster asked 
her again whether she knew Chelmsford. She replied that she did very well, for she 
was born and bred there. Did she know the White Horse? She answered very well, and 
that one Turner, a very honest man, kept it; but that he who kept it formerly was one 
Sewell, who, if he had had his deserts, had been hanged long ago, for there was 
certainly a gentleman murdered in the house.
	Mrs Kidderminster was now induced to make further inquiry, and told 
Mattocks that her husband was missed much about that time. Mattocks informed her 
that the ostler who lived in Sewell's time at the White Horse now lived at Romford. 
With an intention to gather from him what circumstances she could, she sent for him, 
but he refused to come; for the messenger having heard part of the discourse 
communicated it to him, which made him unwilling to come.
	Mrs Kidderminster went directly to the White Horse Inn, Chelmsford, where, 
after some conversation with Mr Turner, then master of the house, he advised them to 
go to Mrs Sewell's house, at the Shears, in Colchester Lane. When her friend went out 
to Mrs Sewell, and inquired for the White Horse Inn, Mrs Sewell asked what business 
he had there; to which he answered that he was come to inquire about a gentleman 
who had been murdered there some years ago. To this Mrs Sewell replied: "Aye, this 
is Turner's doings; he has put us to great trouble about it already, but I will be avenged 
on him." They now returned to the White Horse, where Mr Turner gave his account 
concerning the discovery and disinterment of the corpse — viz. that he, Mr Turner, 
had pales between his neighbour's meadow and his orchard; a great wind having 
blown them down, he had resolved to make a mud wall; in digging which, they had 
found a skull with all the teeth in it but one, and a hole on the left side of the skull 
about the size of a crown. Upon digging on they had perceived that the corpse had 
been crammed in double. The coroner had sat upon the bones, and the jury had found 
a verdict of murder committed. A blow upon the side of the head was the cause of the 
person's death.
	Mr Turner, to vindicate the reputation of the house, had applied to the Justices 
of the Peace of the county. These had issued out warrants against Sewell, who 
formerly kept the inn, and his wife, who were taken before the justices; but upon their 
examination they had denied all knowledge of the matter. The magistrates, however, 
had bound them to appear at the next assizes. Sewell had died about a fortnight before 
the assizes, but it was suspected that he had been poisoned by his wife. He had shown 
visible signs of a troubled mind. He had often desired his wife to allow him to speak 
to some of the chief men of the town, for otherwise he could not die; which his wife 
would not permit.
	At the assizes Mrs Sewell had appeared , and nothing being positively proved 
against her, she had been continued under bail till the next assizes, at which time the 
Lord Chief Justice, Sir Orlando Bridgman, had gone the circuit, and finding that no 
clear account of the person murdered could be ascertained, nor who were the 
murderers, he had ordered that notice should be inserted in the newspapers, at Lent 
Assizes, by which means Mrs Kidderminster had the first intimation of it.
	Mrs Kidderminster, returning from Chelmsford, made inquiry at Romford for 
the ostler, Moses Drayne.
	She asked him to describe a man who left his horse behind him when he was 
ostler at the White Horse, in Chelmsford what clothes he wore for she had some 
suspicion it might be her husband. He answered that the gentleman was a tall, big, 
portly man, with his own hair, dark brown, not very long, curled up at the ends; that 
he wore a black satin cap, and that his clothes were of a dark grey; which she found 
agreed with her husband's figure. She then asked him what hat he wore. He replied, 
"A black one." "Nay," said she, "my husband's was a grey one." At which words he 
changed colour several times, and never looked up in her face afterwards, but told her 
that one Mary Kendall, who had been a servant at Chelmsford at the time of the 
gentleman's stay there, could inform her much better.
	The justice (Mildmay) now issued out a warrant for the apprehension of 
Moses Drayne, the ostler, who was immediately committed. After which Mary 
Kendall was traced to London, and was committed to Newgate. Here she was told by 
the prisoners that her running away was an argument of guilt, and that therefore she 
would be hanged; upon which she confessed all to Mrs Kidderminster, and told her 
she would not have continued so long in an obstinate denial, but that Sewell's 
daughters had threatened her that if she confessed, they would swear against her, and 
have her hanged first.
	Sewell's wife in the meantime died of the plague; but Mrs Kidderminster, with 
the special consent of the Lord Chief Justice Bridgman, caused Mary Kendall to be 
removed from Newgate to Brentwood the day before the assizes.
	On the arraignment of Drayne, Mary Kendall gave in evidence that she was a 
servant maid in the inn where the gentleman was murdered, and that she, having 
dressed herself in her best clothes, had leave of her master to go to Kilden, where her 
father lived; and upon her return home that night her mistress bid her fetch a pair of 
sheets, and lay them upon the bed in the room called the King's Arms. When she came 
into the room she found the gentleman standing with his back towards the fire, and 
with his hands behind him. He drank to her, and made her drink up her glass of beer, 
and bid her go and fetch him a napkin, to make him a cap. He asked her whether she 
was the man of the house's daughter, or his maid. She answered she was his servant. 
The master and mistress being in the room all this while, and having supped together 
with the gentleman, he, in the presence of the maid and the mistress, delivered his 
cloak bag to the master of the house, and told him there was in it near six hundred 
pounds and writings of considerable value. Then her mistress bade her go to bed, and 
lie with the younger children in the farther end of the house, that being not her usual 
lodging, where she was locked in that night, and her mistress unlocked the door in the 
morning. She said that between one and two of the clock in the morning she heard a 
great fall of something, and that it shook part of the house. When she came down in 
the morning she found her master and mistress, and the ostler, sitting very merrily at 
the fire, with a flagon of drink before them, none of them having been in bed that 
night, nor the two daughters, Betty and Priss, who were appointed to lie in the same 
room where the maid used to lie. She not seeing the gentleman stirring in the morning, 
after some time asked her mistress if the gentleman had gone. "Yes," answered she, 
"though you were so good a housewife that you could not get up;" and blamed her for 
lying in bed so long. She asked her mistress whether the gentleman left her anything. 
"Yes," said her mistress, "he left you a groat," and put her hand in her purse and gave 
it her. Then," said the maid, "I will go and make clean the chamber." "No," said the 
mistress, "my daughters and I have set that to rights already; do you what you are 
about, and then go to your flax wheel." The chamber door was kept locked for eight or 
nine weeks afterwards, and no person admitted to enter it but themselves. Once she 
asked her mistress why that room was locked, and not kept clean for guests as usual: 
the mistress answered they had no guests fit for that room, for it was kept for 
gentlemen.
	Some time afterwards, on a Sunday, her master gave her the key to fetch his 
cloak out of his chest in his chamber; there she saw the gentleman's suit of clothes, 
and his cloak bag, which she saw him deliver to them. About nine weeks afterwards 
her mistress sent her up into the room where the gentleman had been murdered to 
fetch something, it being the first time she had been in that room since it had been 
locked. She searched over the room, and looked upon the tester of the bed, and there 
she saw the gentleman's hat, his hanger, boots, and the satin cap which she took off 
the gentleman's head and hung upon his hat and laid it upon the table, when she made 
a cap of the napkin, and put it on the gentleman's head. She took the gentleman's hat, 
his hanger, boots and cap, and carried them down to her mistress and the ostler. She 
said to her mistress: "You said the gentleman was gone to London in a coach; did he 
go without clothes, or did you lend him some? For I saw his clothes in my master's 
chest, and these thing are his too." The ostler said: "You lie like a w — —; those 
things are mine." The maid answered: "You are a rogue; I am sure they were the 
gentleman's; I know not whose they are now." Her mistress hearing the maid and the 
ostler quarrelling, she fell upon the maid, and there arose violent words betwixt them, 
when her mistress broke her head in three several places, so that the blood ran about 
her ears. The maid talked the louder, and asked her mistress whether she intended to 
murder her, as she did the gentleman. Then her master hearing this disturbance came 
to them, and persuaded her to hold her tongue and be quiet. She further deposed that 
the ostler had from his master sixty pounds of the gentleman's money, for that some 
short time after the murder he lent sixty pounds to a woman who kept the Greyhound 
Inn in the same town; and that that must be the money, for the ostler was worth 
nothing of his own at the time of the murder; and that the ostler had the gentle man's 
clothes, which she had seen in her master's chest; and that the ostler sent them to one 
Clarke, a dyer in Modsam, to have them dyed into a liver colour. The dyer asked him 
why he would have the colour altered, since they were of a better colour before: the 
ostler answered that he would have them dyed because he did not like the colour; and 
that about a twelvemonth after he dyed the grey hat black. Then she deposed further, 
that her master raised himself to a good condition on a sudden; for before, he was so 
poor that his landlord would not trust him for a quarter's rent, but would make him 
pay every six weeks; and that he could not be trusted for malt, but was forced to pay 
for one barrel under another. That shortly after, they bought a ruined malt house and 
new built it, and usually laid out forty pound in a day to buy barley. There was seen, 
upon a sudden, a great change in the daughters' condition, both as to their clothes and 
otherwise; and if she bought but a hood for one of the daughters, there was a piece of 
gold changed; and they were observed to have gold in great plenty.
	There were two women, one of them a washerwoman of that town, and the 
other a Quaker, that lived next house to Mr Sewell, who both gave evidence at the 
trial. The washerwoman was going by the house very early, between one and two in 
the morning, to wash in the town, and the Quaker was sitting up for her husband, who 
was not then come home. They both of them made oath that about those hours they 
heard a noise in Mr Sewell's house, and a man's voice crying: "What! will you rob me 
of my money, and murder me too? If you take my money, spare my life." Then they 
heard something that fell very heavy, and a noise as it were of chairs and stools 
thrown about the room, and all the lights put out, and after that no further noise was 
heard.
	The next morning these women inquired at the inn what might be the occasion 
of the noise the night before, for they thought they heard somebody cry out "Murder!" 
But they were answered they must be mistaken, for there was no noise there, nor was 
any person in the house but their own family.
	William Denton, Mr Kidderminster's servant in the Isle of Ely, was produced 
as evidence to prove the horse and the gentleman's clothes and hat, which he did.
	Upon this evidence the jury found Moses Drayne, the ostler, guilty; and after 
sentence he was remanded to prison, where he was about to make a sincere 
confession, but his wife, coming in in the meantime, took hold of him, and bade him 
hold his tongue and confess no more, for if he died for it he should hang nobody else.
	Moses Drayne having confessed that Betty, the eldest daughter, had a share in 
the murder, and Mary Kendall having sworn at the trial that the two sisters were not in 
bed that night the murder was committed, moved the coroner to procure a warrant 
from a Justice of the Peace to apprehend the two sisters; which being done, they were 
bound over to appear at the next assizes. When the assizes came, both the daughters 
appeared, and a bill of indictment was preferred against them to the grand jury; 
against whom Mary Kendall gave the same evidence that she had done before at the 
trial of Moses Drayne, and also what he had confessed in the prison. But the grand 
jury, thinking the evidence not sufficient to find the bill, returned an ignoramus, and 
the two sisters were discharged by proclamation.


MARY FRITH OTHERWISE MOLL CUTPURSE 
A famous Master-Thief and an Ugly, who dressed like a Man, and died in 
1663.

	MARY FRITH, otherwise called Moll Cutpurse, from her original profession 
of cutting purses, was born in Barbican in Aldersgate Street, in the year 1589. Her 
father was a shoemaker; and though no remarkable thing happened at her nativity, 
such as the flattering soothsayers pretend in eclipses, and other the like motions 
above, or tides, and whales, and great fires, adjusted and timed to the genitures of 
crowned heads, yet, for a she-politician, she was not much inferior to Pope Joan; for 
in her time she was superior in the mystery of diving in purses and pockets, and was 
very well read and skilled too in the affairs of the placket among the great ones.
	Both the parents (as having no other child living) were very tender of this 
daughter, but especially the mother, according to the tenderness of that sex, which is 
naturally more indulgent than the male; most affectionate she was to her in her 
infancy, most careful of her in her youth, manifested especially in her education, 
which was the most strictly and diligently attended, by reason of her boisterous and 
masculine spirit, which then showed itself, and soon after became predominant. She 
was above all breeding and instruction. She was a very tomrig or hoyden, and 
delighted only in boys' play and pastime, not minding or companying with the girls. 
Many a bang and blow this hoyting procured her, but she was not so to be tamed, or 
taken off from her rude inclinations. She could not endure that sedentary life of 
sewing or stitching; a sampler was as grievous to her as a winding sheet; and on her 
needle, bodkin and thimble she could not think quietly, wishing them changed into 
sword and dagger for a bout at cudgels. Her headgear and handkerchief (or what the 
fashion of those times was for girls to be dressed in) were alike tedious to her, she 
wearing them as handsomely as a dog would a doublet; and so cleanly, that the sooty 
pot hooks were above the comparison. This perplexed her friends, who had only this 
proverb favourable to their hope, that "An unlucky girl may make a good woman"; 
but they lived not to the length of that expectation, dying in her minority, and leaving 
her to the swing and sway of her own unruly temper and disposition.
	She would fight with boys, and courageously beat them; run, jump, leap or 
hop with any of her contrary sex, or recreate herself with any other play whatsoever. 
She had an uncle, brother to her father, who was a minister, and of him she stood in 
some awe, but not so much as to restrain her in these courses; so that seeing he could 
not effectually remedy that inveterating evil in her manners, he trepanned her on 
board a merchant ship lying at Gravesend, and bound for New England, whither he 
designed to have sent her. But having learned to swim, she one night jumped 
overboard and swam to shore, and after that escape would never go near her uncle 
again. Furthermore, it is to be observed that Mercury was in conjunction with, or 
rather in the house of, Venus at the time of her nativity, the former of which planets is 
of a thievish, cheating, deceitful influence; and the other hath dominion over all 
whores, bawds and pimps, and, joined with Mercury, over all trepanners and hectors. 
She hath a more general influence than all the other six planets put together; for no 
place nor person is exempted from her, invading alike both sacred and profane — 
nunneries and monasteries, as well as the common places of prostitution — Cheapside 
and Cornhill, as well as Bloomsbury or Covent Garden. Under these benevolent and 
kind stars she grew up to some maturity. She was now a lusty and sturdy wench, and 
fit to put out to service, having not a competency of her own left her by her friends to 
maintain her without working; but as she was a great libertine, she lived too much in 
common to be enclosed in the limits of a private domestic life. A quarter staff was 
fitter for her than a distaff. She would go to the ale house when she had made shift to 
get a little stock, spend her penny, come into anyone's company, and club till she had 
none left; and then she was fit for any enterprise. Moreover, she had a natural 
abhorrence to tending of children, to whom she ever had an averseness in her mind, 
equal to the sterility and barrenness in her womb, never (to our best information) 
being made a mother.
	She generally went dressed in man's apparel. No doubt but Moll's converse 
with herself informed her of her defects, and that she was not made for the pleasure or 
delight of man; and therefore, since she could not be honoured with him, she would be 
honoured by him, in that garb and manner of raiment which he wore. This she took to 
from her first entrance into a competency of age, and to her dying day she would not 
leave it off.
	Though she was so ugly in any dress as never to be wooed nor solicited by any 
man, yet she never had the green sickness, that epidemical disease of maidens after 
they have once passed their puberty; she never ate lime, coals, oatmeal, tobacco pipes, 
cinders, or such like trash; no sighs, dejected looks, or melancholy clouded her 
vigorous spirits, or repressed her joviality; she was troubled with none of those 
longings which poor maidens are subject to. She had the power and strength to 
command her own pleasure of any person who had reasonable ability of body; and 
therefore she needed not to whine for it, as she was able to beat a fellow to 
compliance, without the unnecessary trouble of entreaties.
	Now Moll thinking what course of life she should betake herself to, she got 
acquainted with some fortune tellers of the town, from whom, learning some smatch 
and relish of that cheat, by their insignificant schemes, and calculating of figures, she 
got a tolerably good livelihood. But her income being not equivalent to her expenses, 
she entered herself into the Society of Divers, otherwise called file clyers, cutpurses or 
pickpockets; which people are a kind of land pirates, trading altogether in other men's 
bottoms for no other merchandise than bullion and ready coin, and they keep most of 
the great fairs and marts in the world. In this unlawful way she got a vast deal of 
money; but having been very often in Old Bridewell, the Compters and Newgate for 
her irregular practices, and burnt in the hand four times, she left off this petty sort of 
theft, and went on the highway, committing many great robberies, but all of them on 
the Roundheads, or rebels, that fomented the Civil War against King Charles I.; 
against which villains she had as great an antipathy as an unhappy man that, for 
counterfeiting a half crown in those rebellious times, was executed at Tyburn, where 
he said that he was adjudged to die but for counterfeiting a half crown; but those that 
usurped the whole Crown, and stole away its revenue, and had counterfeited its seal, 
were above justice, and escaped unpunished.
	A long time had Moll Cutpurse robbed on the road; but at last, robbing 
General Fairfax of two hundred and fifty jacobuses on Hounslow Heath, shooting him 
through the arm for opposing her, and killing two horses on which a couple of his 
servants rode, a close pursuit was made after her by some Parliamentarian officers 
quartering in the town of Hounslow, to whom Fairfax had told his misfortune. Her 
horse failed her at Turnham Green, where they apprehended her, and carried her to 
Newgate. After this she was condemned, but procured her pardon by giving her 
adversary two thousand pounds. Now Moll being frightened by this disaster, she left 
off going on the highway any more, and took a house, within two doors of the Globe 
tavern in Fleet Street, over against the Conduit, almost facing Shoe Lane and 
Salisbury Court, where she dispensed justice among the wrangling tankard bearers, by 
often exchanging their burden of water for a burden of beer, as far the lighter carriage, 
though not so portable.
	In her time tobacco being grown a great mode, she was mightily taken with the 
pastime of smoking, because of its singularity, and that no woman ever smoked before 
her, though a great many of her sex since have followed her example.
	Moll being quite scared from thieving herself, she turned fence that is to say, a 
buyer of stolen goods; by which occupation she got a great deal of money. In her 
house she set up a kind of brokery, or a distinct factory for jewels, rings and watches 
which had been pinched or stolen any manner of way, at never so great distance, from 
any person. It might properly enough be called the Insurance Office for such 
merchandise, for the losers were sure, upon composition, to recover their goods again, 
and the pirates were sure to have a good ransom, and she so much in the gross for 
brokage, without any more danger, the hue and cry being always directed to her for 
the discovery of the goods, not the takers.
	Once a gentleman who had lost his watch by the busy fingers of a pickpocket 
came very anxiously to Moll, inquiring if she could help him to it again. She 
demanded of him the marks and signs thereof, with the time when, and where, he had 
lost it, or by what crowd or other accident. He replied that, coming through Shoe 
Lane, there was a quarrel betwixt two men; one of which, as he afterwards heard, was 
a grazier, whom they had set in Smithfield, having seen him receive the sum of two 
hundred pounds or thereabouts in gold. There was one Bat Rud, as he was since 
informed, who, observing the man hold his hand in his pocket where his gold was, 
just in the middle of a lane whitherto they dogged him, overthrew a barrel trimming at 
an ale house door, while one behind the grazier pushed him over, who, withal, threw 
down Bat, who was ready for the fall. Betwixt these two presently arose a quarrel, the 
pickpocket demanding satisfaction, while his comrades interposing, after two or three 
blows in favour of the countryman, who had drawn his hand out of his pocket to 
defend himself, soon drew out his treasure; and while he was looking on at the scuffle, 
some of them had lent him a hand too, and fingered out his watch. Moll smiled at the 
adventure, and told him he should hear further of it within a day or two at the furthest. 
When the gentleman came again, she understood by his discourse that he would not 
lose it for twice its value, because it was given him by a particular friend; so she 
squeezed twenty guineas out of him before he could obtain his watch.
	Moll was always accounted by her neighbours to be an hermaphrodite, but at 
her death was found otherwise. She had not lived long in Fleet Street before she 
became acquainted with a new sort of thieves, called heavers, whose employment was 
stealing shop books from drapers and mercers, or other rich traders; which bringing to 
her, she, for some considerable profit for herself, got them a quantum meruit for 
restoring them again to the losers. While she thus reigned free from the danger of the 
common law, an apparitor, set on by an adversary of hers, cited her to appear in the 
Court of Arches, where was an accusation exhibited against her for wearing indecent 
and manly apparel. She was advised by her proctor to demur the jurisdiction of the 
Court, as for a crime, if such, not cognisable there. But he did it to spin out the cause 
and get her money; for, in the end, she was there sentenced to stand and do penance in 
a white sheet at St Paul's Cross during morning sermon on a Sunday. They might as 
soon have shamed a black dog as Moll with any kind of such punishment; for a 
halfpenny she would have travelled through all the market towns in England with her 
penitential habit, and been as proud of it as that citizen who rode to his friends in the 
country in his livery gown and hood. Besides, many of the spectators had little cause 
to sport themselves then at the sight; for some of her emissaries, without any regard to 
the sacredness of the place, spoiled a good many clothes, by cutting part of their 
cloaks and gowns, and sending them home as naked behind as Aesop's crow, when 
every bird took its own feather from her.
	However, this penance did not reclaim her, for she still went in men's apparel, 
very decently dressed; nor were the ornaments of her house less curious and pleasing 
in pictures than in the delight of looking glasses; so that she could see her sweet self 
all over in any part of her rooms. This gave occasion for folks to say that she used 
magical glasses, wherein she could show the querists, who resorted to her for 
information, those who, stole their goods; as likewise to others, curious to know the 
shapes and features of their husbands that should be, the very true and perfect idea of 
them; as is very credibly reported of your African sorcerers. We have a tradition of it 
in the story of Jane Shore's husband, who, by one of the like glasses, saw the unchaste 
embraces of his wife and Edward IV.
	One night late, Moll going home almost drunk from the Devil Tavern, she 
tumbled over a great black sow that was roosting in a dunghill near the kennel; but 
getting up again, in a sad dirty pickle, she drove her to her house, where, finding her 
full of pigs, she made her a drench to hasten her farrowing, and the next morning she 
brought her eleven curious pigs, which Moll and her companions made fat and ate; 
and then she turned the sow out of doors, which presently repaired to her old master, a 
bumpkin at Islington, who with wonder received her again. Having given her some 
grain, he turned her out of his gates, watching what course she would take, and 
intending to have satisfaction for his pigs wheresoever he should find her to have laid 
them. The sow, naturally mindful of her squeaking brood, went directly to Moll's 
door, and there kept a lamentable noise to be admitted. This was evidence enough for 
the fellow that there his sow had laid her belly; when knocking, and having entrance, 
he tells Moll a tale of a sow and her litter. She replied he was mad. He swore he knew 
his sow's meaning by her grunting, and that he would give her sauce to her pigs. 
"Goodman Coxcomb," quoth Moll, "come in, and see if this house looks like a hog 
sty"; when, going into all her rooms, and seeing how neat and clean they were kept, 
he was convinced that the litter was not laid there, and went home cursing his sow for 
misinforming him.
	To get money, Moll would not stick out to bawd for either men or women; 
insomuch that her house became a double temple for Priapus and Venus, frequented 
by votaries of both sorts. Those who were generous to her labour, their desires were 
favourably accommodated with expedition; whilst she lingered with others, laying 
before them the difficult but certain attainment of their wishes, which served as a spur 
to the dullness of their purses. For the Lady Pecunia and she kept the same pace, but 
still in the end she did the feat. Moll having a great antipathy against the Rump 
Parliament, she lit on a fellow very dexterous at imitating people's hands; with him 
she communicated her thoughts, and they concurred to forge and counterfeit their 
commissioners' and treasurers' hands to the respective receivers and collectors, to pay 
the sums of money they had in their hands, without delay, to such as he in his 
counterfeited orders appointed. So that, wheresoever he had intelligence of any great 
sum in the country, they were sure to forestall the market. This cheat lasted for half a 
year, till it was found out at Guildhall, and such a politic course taken to avoid 
cozenage that no warrants would pass among themselves. But when the government 
was seized and usurped by that arch traitor, Oliver Cromwell, they began this trade 
afresh, it being very easy to imitate his single sign manual, as that ambitious usurper 
would have it styled; by which means her man also drew good sums of money out of 
the Customs and Excise nay, out of the Exchequer itself, till Oliver was forced to use 
a private mark, to make his credit authentic among his own villains.
	After seventy four years of age, Moll being grown crazy in her body, and 
discontented in mind, she yielded to the next distemper that approached her, which 
was the dropsy; a disease which had such strange and terrible symptoms that she 
thought she was possessed, and that the devil had got within her doublet. Her belly, 
from a withered, dried, wrinkled piece of skin, was grown to the tightest, roundest 
globe of flesh that ever any beauteous young lady strutted with. However, there was 
no blood that was generative in her womb, but only that destructive of the grape, 
which by her excesses was now turned into water; so that the tympanied skin thereof 
sounded like a conduit door. If we anatomise her any further, we must say her legs 
represented a couple of mill posts, and her head was so wrapped with cloths that she 
looked like Mother Shipton.
	It may well be expected that, considering what a deal of money she got by her 
wicked practices, she might make a will; but yet, of five thousand pounds which she 
had once by her in gold, she had not above one hundred pounds left her latterly which 
she thought too little to give to the charitable uses of building hospitals and 
almshouses. The money that might have been designed that way, as it came from the 
devil, so it returned to the devil again, in the Rump's Exchequer and Treasury at 
Haberdashers and Goldsmiths Hall. Yet, to preserve something of her memory, and 
not leave it to the courtesy of an executor, she anticipated her funeral expenses; for it 
being the fashion of those times to give rings, to the undoing of the confectioners, 
who lived altogether by the dead and new born, she distributed some that she had by 
her among her chief companions and friends.
	These rings (like princes' jewels) were notable ones, and had their particular 
names likewise; as the Bartholomew, the Ludgate, the Exchange, and so forth; 
deriving their appellations from the places whence they were stolen. They needed no 
admonition of a death's head, nor the motto Memento mori, for they were the wages 
and monuments of their thieving masters and mistresses, who were interred at Tyburn; 
and she hoped her friends would wear them, both for her sake and theirs. In short, she 
made no will at all, because she had had it so long before to no better purpose; and 
that if she had had her desert, she should have had an executioner instead of an 
executor.
	Out of the one hundred pounds which she had by her, she disposed of thirty 
pounds to her three maids which she kept, and charged them to occupy it the best way 
they could; for that, and some of her arts in which they had had time to be expert, 
would be beyond the advantage of their spinning and reeling, and would be able to 
keep them in repair, and promote them to weavers, shoemakers and tailors. The rest of 
her personal estate, in money, movables and household goods, she bequeathed to her 
kinsman Frith, a master of a ship, dwelling at Reddriff, whom she advised not to make 
any ventures therewith, but stay at home and be drunk, rather than go to sea and be 
drowned with them.
	And now the time of her dissolution drawing near, she desired to be buried 
with her breech upwards, that she might be as preposterous in her death as she had 
been all along in her infamous life. When she was dead she was interred in St 
Bridget's churchyard, having a fair marble stone put over her grave; on which was cut 
the following epitaph, composed by the ingenious Mr Milton, but destroyed in the 
great conflagration of London:
"Here lies, under this same marble, 
Dust, for Time's last sieve to garble; 
Dust, to perplex a Sadducee, 
Whether it rise a He or She, 
Or two in one, a single pair, 
Nature's sport, and now her care. 
For how she'll clothe it at last day, 
Unless she sighs it all away; 
Or where she'll place it, none can tell: 
Some middle place 'twixt Heaven and Hell 
And well 'tis Purgatory's found, 
Else she must hide her under ground. 
These reliques do deserve the doom, 
Of that cheat Mahomet's fine tomb 
For no communion she had, 
Nor sorted with the good or bad; 
That when the world shall be calcin'd, 
And the mix'd mass of human kind 
Shall sep'rate by that melting fire, 
She'll stand alone, and none come nigh her. 
Reader, here she lies till then, 
When, truly, you'll see her again."


SAWNY DOUGLAS  
A Scottish Highwayman who laid England under toll, and took a Copy of 
"Chevy Chase" to Tyburn when he was hanged on 10th of September, 1664.

	SAWNY DOUGLAS, a Scotsman, was the son of a tanner, and born at 
Portpatrick in the shire of Galloway, where he lived till the unnatural Civil War broke 
out in 1641. Sawny at this time being very zealous on the side of the Kirk, and 
consequently against the King, entered himself into the service of the Parliament, was 
at the siege of Dundee, and boasted after that bloody action was over that he killed 
with his own hands no less than twenty-nine persons. Those who have read the 
histories of that time will remember that Dundee was taken by storm, and that the 
garrison was put to the sword; which gave Sawny an opportunity to discover his 
cruelty.
	After the restoration of King Charles II., when the Scots were reduced to 
obedience, Sawny found himself obliged to seek some other subsistence than the 
army. He had now been a soldier about twenty years, and though he had never been 
advanced higher than to carry a halberd, yet he was something loth to lay down his 
commission. However, there was no opposing necessity, and he was obliged to 
submit, as well as many of his betters, who were glad they could come off thus, after 
having been so deeply concerned in the rebellion.
	Coming into England, and being destitute of both money and bread, he was 
not long in resolving what course to take in order to supply himself. The highway, he 
thought, was as free for him as for anybody else, and he was both strong and 
desperate. But the question was, where should he get a horse and accoutrements? 
"What," said he again, "should hinder my taking the first that comes in my way, and 
seems fit for my purpose?" Pursuant to this last resolution he kept on the main road, 
with a good crab-tree stick in his hand, till he saw a gentleman's servant alone, well 
mounted, with pistols before him. He had some question ready to ask, and after that 
another, till the poor footman was engaged in a discourse with him, and rode along 
gently by his side. At last Sawny observes an opportunity, and gives him an effectual 
knock on the pate, which, followed with four or five more, left him insensible on the 
ground, while our young adventurer rode off with the horse till he thought himself out 
of the way of any inquiry.
	The first robbery he committed was in Maidenhead Thicket, in Berkshire, in 
those times a very noted haunt for highwaymen. The person he stopped was one Mr 
Thurston, at that time Mayor of Thornbury, in Gloucestershire. He got about eighteen 
pounds, and was so uncivil as to refuse the poor gentleman ten shillings to bear his 
charges home; which was all he required, and for which he begged very hard.
	Another time he robbed the Duchess of Albemarle of diamond rings to the 
value of two hundred pounds, besides a pearl necklace, rich bracelets and ear-rings. 
After this he came and took lodgings at the house of one Mr Knowles, an apothecary 
in Tuthil Street, Westminster, where he set up for a gentleman, appeared very fine, 
and made love to his landlord's daughter, who was reputed to be a two thousand 
pounds fortune. For some time he was very well received both by the young lady and 
her father; but when his money was gone, and they found him full of shifts, arts and 
evasions, they not only discarded him as a husband and son-in-law, but turned him 
fairly out of doors.
	Sawny now took to the road again, and committed more robberies than before, 
ranging all over the north of England, and being often so fortunate as to escape justice 
when it pursued him. He moreover contracted a familiarity with Du Vall, the most 
generous-spirited highwayman that ever lived, which friendship continued till Death 
parted them by his deputy Jack Ketch. Sawny's last attempt was on the Earl of 
Sandwich, who was afterwards admiral in the Dutch war, and unfortunately lost his 
life, together with his ship. This noble commander, having arms in the coach, resolved 
not to be insulted by a highwayman, and discharged a pistol into Sawny's horse, 
which immediately dropping down under him, the servants came up and secured our 
bonny North Briton, who was thereupon committed to Newgate, and in less than a 
month after ordered for Tyburn.
	While he was under sentence he behaved in a very profane and indecent 
manner, cursing the bellman for his bad English when he repeated the usual Memento 
the night before his execution. At St Sepulchre's the next day, when the appointed 
ceremony was performed, instead of composing his countenance, and looking as a 
man in his condition ought to do, he only told the spectators that it was hard a man 
could not be suffered to go to the gallows in peace; and that he had rather be hanged 
twice over without ceremony, than once after this superstitious manner. He read no 
Prayer Book, but carried the ballad of Chevy Chase in his hand all the way to Tyburn. 
When he came thither he took no notice of the ordinary, but bid the hangman be 
speedy, and not make a great deal of work about nothing, or at most about a mere 
trifle. He died 10th of September, 1664, aged fifty-three, and was buried in Tyburn 
Road.


JAMES BATSON 
A Rogue who became a pretty Soldier and saw much of Europe, finally 
dying by the Rope at home in 1666

	THE following is the life and adventures of an arch-villain born in the first 
year of the reign of King James I:
	I suppose, according to custom, the reader will expect some account of my 
genealogy, and as I was always a mighty admirer of fashions, I will follow the mode, 
and give some account of my parents and relations, beginning with my grandfather, 
who had the great fortune to marry a woman excellently skilled in vaulting and rope-
dancing, and would play her part with any man. She, though above fifty years of age, 
and troubled with the phthisis, died in the air. Her husband would not marry again — 
to avoid seeing other women fly as she had done — but kept a puppet-show in 
Moorfields, and it was reckoned the most curious that ever had been seen in the city. 
Besides, my grandfather was so little that the only difference between him and his 
puppets was, that they spoke through a trunk and he without one. He made such 
speeches before his shows that the audience would wish he had never done, for he had 
a tongue like a parrot. All the apple-women, hawkers and fish-women were so 
charmed with his wit among his puppets that they would run to hear him without 
leaving any guard upon their goods but their straw hats. Unfortunate man! being so 
like a cock-sparrow, he took to so many hens that, when they had devoured his 
money, clothes and puppets, they consumed his health, and left him like a naked baby 
in. a hospital.
	When he thought to have died soberly, he fell into a frenzy, to such a degree 
that one day he fancied he was a bull in a puppet-show, and was to encounter a stone 
cross that stood near the hospital gate; and after several essays he made at the same 
cross, crying: "Now I have you!" This said, he ran his head so furiously against the 
cross that he dropped down and said no more. A good hospital nurse, who was one of 
the family of the Innocents, seeing him die in that manner, cried: "O the precious 
soul! he died at the foot of the Cross, and directing his discourse to it."
	My father had two trades, or two strings to his bow, for he was a painter and a 
gamester, and a master much alike at both; for his paintings would hardly rise so high 
as a signpost, and his sleight-of-hand at play was of such an ancient date that it would 
hardly pass upon the mob. He had one misfortune, which he entailed on all his 
children, like original sin; and that was his being born a gentleman, which is as bad as 
a poet, few of whom escape eternal poverty, or are above perpetual want.
	My mother died, unluckily, of a longing for mushrooms when they were not to 
be had, being then with child by my father, as she said, and departed as quiet as a bird. 
She left two daughters, great devotees of Venus, though they were Christians, just at 
the age the doctors prescribe they are fit to eat; both very handsome and very young; 
and I was left very little, but much better skilled in sharping than my age seemed to 
promise. When the funeral ceremonies were over, and the tears dried up, which were 
not very many, my father fell again to his daubing, my sisters to stitching, and I 
returned to my little-frequented school, where my posteriors paid for the slowness of 
my feet and the lightness of my hands.
	I had such an excellent memory, that though my wicked idle temper was the 
same it has ever since continued, yet I soon learned to read, write and cast accounts 
well enough to have taken a better course than I have done. I put so many unlucky 
tricks upon my master, and so often set the boys together by the ears, that everybody 
called me the little Judas. It was hard for any book to escape me; and if once I cast my 
eye on a picture, it was surely my own, which cost me many a boxing bout every day, 
or else the complaints were carried home to my father and sisters. The eldest of them 
had it in charge to reprove and convert me; she would sometimes give me a soft cuff 
with her delicate white hand, at other times she would tell me I should be a disgrace to 
the family.
	All this nonsense, and her reproof, signified no more to me than the barking of 
a dog; it went in at one ear and out at the other; so that, in short, I played so many 
unlucky pranks, and was so full of roguery, that I was expelled the school in as 
solemn a manner as if it had been by beat of drum. My father, after currying my hide 
very well, carried me to a friend of his, who was barber to Count Gondemar, the 
Spanish Ambassador, then residing here, with whom he left me upon trial, in order to 
be bound apprentice. Having delivered his hopeful son he returned home, and my 
master ordered me into the kitchen to my mistress, who presently found me 
employment, giving me a basket full of children's blankets, clouts, slabberring-bibs, 
barrows, etc., and opening the yard door, furnished me with about an ounce of soap; 
then showing me the cistern, with a great trough under it — "Jemmy," says she, "mind 
your wits, there's a good boy; for this work belongs to the apprentices." I hung down 
my head, and tumbled all the filthy clouts from the basket into the trough and washed 
them as well as I could, and hung the linen to dry. I managed it very well for myself, 
since I was soon discarded from my office, which, had it continued longer, there had 
been an end of Jemmy in less than a fortnight.
	The next day I went over my task again, and what I wanted in washing of 
clouts was made up in running errands.
	The third day, my master having just given me a small note to receive, there 
came into the shop a bully ruffian with a pair of whiskers that covered his face, and 
would have been worth money to have made brushes on. He told my master he would 
have his whiskers turned up. It being then so early that the journeyman he kept was 
not come, he was going to turn them up himself, and bid me light a fire and heat the 
irons. I did as I was ordered; and just as my master had turned up one whisker there 
happened to be a quarrel in the street, and my master, being always a busy man, must 
needs step out to see what was the matter, leaving the stern bravo with one whisker 
hanging quite down, and the other turned up. The scuffle lasting long, and my master 
staying to see the end of it, the furious kill-crow never ceased swearing and cursing. 
He asked me in a harsh tone whether I understood my trade; and I, thinking it an 
undervaluing to myself to say I did not, boldly answered I did. "Why then, you son of 
a whore," says he, "turn up this whisker for me, or I shall go into the street as I am and 
kick your master." I was unwilling to be found in a lie, and, thinking it no hard matter 
to turn up a whisker, never showed the least concern, but took up one of the irons that 
was at the fire, which had been heating ever since the first alarm of the fray, and 
having nothing to try it on, but desiring to be thought expeditious, I took a comb, 
stuck it into his bristly bush, and clapped the iron to it. No sooner did they meet but 
there arose a smoke as if it had been out of a chimney, with a whizzing noise, and all 
the hair vanished. He cried out furiously: "Thou son of a thousand dogs and ten 
thousand whores, dost thou take me for Saint Laurence, that thou burnest me alive?" 
With that he let fly such a bang at me that, the comb dropping out of my hand, I could 
not avoid in the fright laying the hot iron close along his cheek, and cauterising him 
on one side of his face. This made him give such a shriek as shook the very house, 
and at the same time he drew his sword to send me to the other world; but I, 
remembering the proverb that "One pair of heels is worth two pairs of hands," got so 
nimbly into the street, and so swiftly scoured out of that part of the town, that, though 
I was a good runner, I was amazed when I found myself above a mile from home, 
with the iron in my hand and the spark's whisker sticking to it. As good luck would 
have it, I was near the person who was to pay the note my master gave me to receive 
for him. I carried it, and received the money; but thought fit to apply it to my own use, 
not daring to return home again.
	My money lasted me for about a month, when I began to think of returning to 
my father, but I understood he was gone into the country to receive some money 
owing to him. I rejoiced at the news, and went very boldly into the house as sole lord 
and master of it. My sisters received me very coldly, giving me many a sour look, and 
upbraiding me with the money my father was forced to pay for my pranks. We had a 
thousand squabbles every day, particularly about their giving me small instead of 
strong beer.
	These animosities ran so high that, perceiving they did not mend, I resolved to 
make them know me. Accordingly one day, they having brought me sour beer, and the 
meat being on the table, I threw the dish at my elder sister and the pot with the beer at 
the younger, overthrew the table, and marched out of doors on a ramble; but 
accidentally met a messenger from the country, who informed me of my father's death 
by a fever. At this news I quickly went back to my sisters, who were more compliable, 
finding by my father's will I was left executor without restraint of age. I sold the 
goods, got in what debts I could, and led a merry life whilst the money lasted, keeping 
all the rakes about the town company, who at last drained me of every farthing.
	They obliged me one night to go abroad with them; though much against my 
will, and one of them having the keys, like St Peter, opened the door of a house, 
whence they took several trunks, to ease the owner of lumber. A cur dog, who was 
upon guard, gave the alarm, and the people of the house came running into the street, 
which compelled my companions to lay down their burdens and act upon the 
defensive with their swords. For my part, I stood quaking for fear before the robbery, 
at the time of the robbery, and after the robbery; and always kept at a distance, 
repenting that I had not been acquainted with their way of living before I came out of 
my lodging, that I might have avoided that danger. So that, seeing my companions fly, 
and the wounded men return to their houses, I kept my post all in a cold sweat, lest I 
should be taken up as a party concerned; and when I should have gone away had not 
the power to stir one foot. At the noise the watch came in, who, finding three trunks in 
the street, besides two men dangerously wounded, and me not far off, came up to see 
who I was. By the disorder they found me in they concluded I was one of those who 
had done the mischief. They took care of me that night, and the next day I was 
ordered to a place where I had occasion to try all my friends and acquaintance, who 
all proved as I deserved. In about ten days I was called to my trial, and my excuses 
being very frivolous, and my answers contradictory, I was condemned to be hoisted 
up by the neck, and go to heaven in a string. However, just as I was singing the last 
stave, a reprieve came, and in about two months after I got a full pardon.
	Frightened at this last disaster, I was resolved to associate myself no more 
with anyone, but went about the streets selling wash balls, toothpicks and tooth 
powder. I played the merry-Andrew myself, cried up my rubbish, extolled the virtues 
of it, and sold very dear. For whoever has a mind to put off his trumpery, and make a 
good hand of it, must pretend his trash comes from Japan, Peru or Tartary, because all 
nations undervalue their own product and workmanship, though never so excellent, 
and set a great rate on foreign trifles.
	All my ware tending to make fine teeth and white hands, the ladies were my 
best customers, but especially the actresses. There was at that time one of the best 
companies of players that ever diverted England, and a man at the head of them famed 
for his excellency that way. By virtue of my scurvy ware I became acquainted with 
his imaginary queens and pretended princesses, one of whom, about eighteen years of 
age, and married to one of the actors, told me one day that she had taken a liking to 
me, because I was a confident, sharp, forward youth, and therefore if I would serve 
her, she would entertain me with all her heart; and that when the company went 
strolling I might beat the drum and stick up the bills. I fancied that was an easier sort 
of a life, so consented at first word, desiring only two days to sell my wares off, which 
she courteously granted; and to encourage me gave me a crown.
	Having sold off my trumpery, I waited on my mistress, who appointed me four 
several employments: the first was tiresome, the second uneasy, the third sluggish and 
the fourth dangerous. At home I was her valet de chambre, folding and laying up all 
her clothes. Abroad I was her porter, fetching and carrying her clothes to the 
playhouse. I was her gentleman usher in her attiring room, and her trusty secretary 
and ambassador in all places. My master quarrelled with her every night about me, 
because he supposed I was no eunuch, saw I had a tolerably good face, and thought 
me not so young but that I knew what was what; for which reason he was looking out 
for another servant, that he might turn me off. Such a multitude of young beaux 
resorted daily to my mistress's house that it looked like a fair. They all told me their 
secrets, and acquainted me with their sufferings. Some made me presents, others 
promised mountains, and others delivered me copies of verses, which being gathered 
in the morning on Parnassus, were buried at night in the necessary house. I played the 
part of a Prime Minister, and Secretary of State and War, receiving those memorials 
and the fees, promising every one my favour and interest. Some of them I dispatched 
with my mistress, and many more, considering she was so dilatory, I answered of my 
own head, after this manner: If the petitioner was poor or niggardly, rejected. If he 
was a young spark near coming to his estate, he shall be heard another time. If rich 
and generous, granted. Thus I kept them all in hand, absolutely dismissing none, but 
rather feeding them with hopes.
	When I happened to lose at play — for it is impossible a scoundrel should ever 
be wise — as I took out or laid up her clothes I filled my pocket with ribbons and 
garters, and giving them, in her name, as favours to the gallants, they requited me so 
plentifully that I could make what I had filched, and enough left to game all the week 
after.
	The devil, who they say never sleeps, so ordered it that, my master and 
mistress being gone a visiting, and I left at home, two of the servants belonging to the 
playhouse and the wardrobe keeper came to call me out to take a walk, it being a 
leisure day. I went away with them. We dropped in to a tavern, drank six bottles of the 
best, played at cards for the reckoning, and that falling upon me, I was so nettled that I 
challenged the wardrobe keeper to play with me at putt; and he, being no fool at that 
sport, soon stripped me of all I had. This provoked me so highly that I told him, if he 
would but stay, I would go fetch more money. He consented. I ran home with all 
speed, took out a rich laced petticoat my mistress had, and carried it to a pastrycook I 
was acquainted with, desiring him to lend me three jacobuses upon it, pretending they 
were for my mistress, who wanted so much to make up a sum to pay for a ring she 
had bought, assuring him of his money when my master returned home, with 
something for the favour. The pastry cook, finding the pawn sufficient, delivered me 
the money, with which I hurried back to play, and lost as I had done before. I got one 
jacobus back again off the winner, by way of wrangling with him as if he had not 
played fair, with which I turned out into the street, full of vexation that I had lost so 
beneficial a place. I went to an inn, where I supped and lay that night, but with little 
rest or satisfaction. As soon as ever I discovered the first dawn of day I got up, full of 
sorrow to think what a base return I had made my mistress for all her kindness; and, 
considering the danger I should be in when she missed her petticoat, I left London, 
directing my course towards Colchester.
	Travelling somewhat hastily, for fear of being followed, I overtook two of 
those sort of soldiers called decoy ducks, who serve to draw in others when there are 
levies. After some discourse, they told me they were going my way, being informed 
that at Colchester there was a captain raising men, and that none who listed under him 
would ever want. I travelled on with them very fairly, every one paying his club by 
the way. The next day we got to that town, and being kindly received by the captain, 
and listed, we lived in clover for a fortnight, making our landlords furnish us with 
dainties, and demanding impossibilities. At last we received orders to march, and 
having left the town, our captain moved like a snail, still leaving the quarters 
appointed us on one side, and taking the contrary way, because the towns paid him to 
be exempted. He continued this cheat three days; but on the fourth, as we were 
passing by a wood, all his men, about thirty in number, left him with only the colours, 
drum, sergeant and ensign, and five wenches, who went with the baggage; for he is 
not likely to keep up a company who contrives only how to make his advantage of 
them, without considering that it is very easy to find a captain, and no less difficult to 
get thirty soldiers.
	However, I liked my captain well enough, for he was civil to me. I stuck by 
him, and came to London with him, where he was so laughed at that he resolved to 
quit the kingdom, and, having a good estate, intended to go abroad a volunteer, and 
desired my company. He embarked for Barcelona, and in a little time got a company, 
which was ordered, with several others, to sail for Alicant. I being a good accountant, 
and writing a fair hand, stuck close all the while we were at sea to the steward of the 
ship, to help him deliver out the allowances to the sailors and land men. He, to keep 
up a good old custom, and avoid being blamed by others of his trade, gave the soldiers 
all the broken biscuits, and kept that which was whole; and so for the fish, they had 
what was rotten. As for the bacon, he stuck a knife into it, and if it stunk, the soldiers 
had it; if otherwise, he put it up carefully. However he took care to make much of the 
officers, which made them all keep council and see nothing; and whilst the poor 
soldiers fared hard, we lived well. At length we arrived at Alicant, where we were 
quartered, and had a mixture of good and bad; for as soon as they had shown us any 
favour they were over us with a Cap de Dieu! - which is that country's oath and out 
came two or three cases of pistols. My captain and I were at variance, because he had 
cheated me of my pay, and I had made my complaint to recover it. For this reason he 
bore me ill will, there being nothing so certain as that if a soldier does not put up with 
any wrong in point of interest, but pretends to complain, or to stand upon terms with 
his officers, all that he says, though never so true, will pass for a lie. He will never be 
advanced, but rather slighted and hated. My quarters were in a tavern, where I was 
one day drinking with a soldier, and happened to fall out about a lie given, and my 
sword unluckily running into his throat, he kicked up his heels, through his own fault, 
for he ran upon my point; so that he may thank his own hastiness. To prevent my 
captain's taking revenge, or giving him an opportunity of satisfying his malice, by 
taking upon himself to make an example of me, I went away to Barcelona, and took 
refuge in a monastery. My captain, as if I had murdered his father, stolen his goods, or 
taken away his mistress, sent after me to have me secured, and a little whippersnapper 
of his, who was the tale carrier of the company, followed his business so close that, in 
despite of the fathers, and in contempt of the Church, he had me taken out of the 
sanctuary and cast into the prison of the arsenal. They put me into irons, bolted my 
hands and feet, and so left me. I was prosecuted as a murderer, deserter and raiser of 
mutinies; and without any regard to the pain my mother endured when she brought me 
into the world, they put me into a fright with these terrible words: "You shall return to 
the place from whence you came, and from thence to the place of execution," etc.
	In short, as if it had been a thing of nothing, or but a matter of pastime, they 
gave sentence that I should be led in state along the streets, then mount upon a ladder, 
kick up my heels before all the people, and take a swing in the open air, as if I had 
another life in my snapsack. I was made acquainted with it by a public notary, who 
was so nice a Christian that he never asked any gratuity for the good news, nor any 
fees for the trial. It was impossible to avoid making some wry faces when I heard it; 
some sighs broke loose in spite of my manhood, and the salt tears trickled down my 
cheeks. The jailer bid me make peace with God, without the least supply from 
Bacchus to raise my spirits; and I, considering what I had to go through, gently 
squeezed my throat with my hand; and though it was done very tenderly, I did not like 
the test, but said to myself, "If the hand, which is soft flesh, hurts so much, what will 
it be when a hard hempen rope is there." I kneeled down, and cried to Heaven for 
mercy, solemnly protesting, if I regained my liberty, that I would do penance for my 
sins, and begin a new life; but these were like vows made in storms. The news was 
quickly spread, and several friends came to see me, others to condemn me. Some said 
it was a pity I should lose my life in the prime of my age; others that I looked like a 
rank knave; and some, that I was not come to that for my goodness. At last, in came a 
Franciscan friar, all in a sweat, and full of zeal, asking, "Where is the condemned 
person?" I answered: "Father, I am the man, though you don't know me." He said: 
"Dear child, it is now time for you to think of another world, since sentence is passed; 
and therefore you must employ this short time allowed you in confessing your sins, 
and asking forgiveness for your offences." I answered: "Reverend Father, in 
obedience to the commands of the Church, I confess but once a year, and that is in 
Lent. But if, according to human laws, I must atone with my life for the crime I've 
committed, your reverence being so learned must be truly sensible that there is no 
divine precept which says, 'Thou shalt not eat or drink '; and therefore, since it is not 
contrary to the law of God, I desire that you will give order that I have meat and 
drink, and then we will discourse of what is best for us both; for I am in a Christian 
country, and plead the privilege of sanctuary." The good father, much disturbed to 
hear me talk so wildly at a time when I should be serious, took a small crucifix out of 
his bosom and began to make a sermon to me on the text of the lost sheep and the 
repentance of the good thief; and this with such an audible voice that he might be 
heard all over the arsenal. I turned pale, my heart failed me, and my tongue was 
numbed when I heard the charity bells, which ring when criminals are executed. I 
cleared my apartment and, kneeling down before my ghostly father, disgorged a 
wonderful budget of sins, and cleared my storehouse of iniquity; and having received 
his blessing and absolution, found myself so changed, that it only troubled me to die 
because I thought myself so truly contrite that all the bells would ring out of 
themselves, the whole city would be in an uproar, and the poor people would lose 
their day's work to come and see me.
	In the height of this fright, which I would freely bestow on anyone that could 
be fond of it, the Marquis D'Este, then commanding officer, ordered me to be brought 
before him, I having got a petition presented to him. He, like a merciful man, being 
informed that I pleaded the privilege of sanctuary, ordered the execution to be 
respited, the sentence of death reversed, and me sent to the galleys for ten years. My 
master was so much my friend that he opposed it, alleging my constitution was too 
dainty to make a water thresher, and therefore it were better to send me out of this 
wicked world, that I might serve as an example to all the army; and that it would have 
been never the worse had it been done three or four years sooner. Not withstanding all 
this, I took a little courage, finding myself backed by some friends, and told the 
marquis it was malice, spite and hatred made my master so much my enemy, that he 
had detained my pay, upon which I threatened to com plain, and he vowed revenge, 
and now would have it by my death. The general said it was strange that two 
countrymen could not agree; that he would not trouble himself with my complaints, 
but ordered me to be immediately discharged without paying any fees. I threw myself 
at his feet for the kindness he had done me, to the disappointment of the mob, and the 
loss of the executioner. I presently departed the palace, and went to be blooded to 
prevent any ill consequence of the fright I had been in.
	When the bodily fear I had been put into was over, the danger I had escaped 
forgotten, and the blood I let out recruited in a tavern, I went out one day to take a 
walk upon the Mole, and understanding there was a new regiment to be raised, I 
inquired after the officers, and by accident met one of them, who asked me to list. I 
easily consented for the sake of a little ready money. My new master seemed to take a 
fancy to me, and ordered me to his own quarters, where it was not long before I got a 
new place; for the cook going away, I was asked if I understood anything that way, 
and I, always resolved to answer in the affirmative, declared I did understand cookery 
to the greatest perfection; so that I was both soldier and cook.
	After several voyages by sea to Rosas, and other places, we were ordered to 
succour Alsace, and for our winter residence had the woods of Bavaria. My master 
took up his residence in the house of one of the richest men in those parts, though he 
pretended to be very poor, because he had driven away all his cattle, and removed the 
best of his goods. This contrivance did not serve his turn. I got information from the 
servants. With this, in a very stately manner, I acquainted him that I was my master's 
steward, quartermaster and cook, and as such must inform him that he had a captain of 
horse in his house, who was a person of considerable quality, and therefore must take 
care to make very much of him and his servants; that my master was very much 
fatigued, and it was dinner time, and he must order all things that were necessary. He 
answered I need only tell him what provision I wanted for the kitchen, and he would 
order his servants to fetch it immediately. I told him we always kept three tables, the 
first for the gentlemen and pages, the second for the butler and under officers, and the 
third for the footmen, grooms, and other liveries; for all which tables he must furnish 
one ox, two calves, four sheep, twelve pullets, six capons, two dozen pigeons, six 
pounds of bacon for larding, four pounds of sugar, two of all sorts of spice, a hundred 
eggs, half a dozen dishes of fish, a pot of wine to every plate, and six hogsheads to 
stand by. He blessed himself, as if he had seen all the devils in hell, and answered: "If 
all that your worship speaks of be only for the servants' tables, the whole village will 
not be able to furnish the master's." I replied: "My master is such a worthy person that 
he had rather see the servants made much of than please himself; and therefore he and 
his friends never put their landlords to any more charge than a dish of imperial stuffed 
meat, with an egg in it." He asked me what that stuffed meat was made of, and I bid 
him order me a new laid egg, a squab pigeon, and two loads of coals, and to send for a 
cobbler with his nawl and ends, and a gravedigger with his spade, and then he should 
know what else was wanting, that he might provide it whilst we were at work. The 
landlord went and fetched what I demanded except the two loads of coals. I took the 
egg and the pigeon, which I gutted, and cutting it open enough with my knife (for I 
had all my tools about me) I clapped the egg into the belly of it; then said I to him: 
Sir, take notice this egg is in the pigeon, the pigeon is to be put into a partridge, the 
partridge into a pheasant, the pheasant into a pullet, the pullet into a turkey, the turkey 
into a kid, the kid into a sheep, the sheep into a calf, the calf into a cow; all these 
creatures are to be pulled, flead and larded, except the cow, which is to have her hide 
on; and as they are thrust one into another, like a nest of boxes, the cobbler is to sew 
every one of them with an end, that they may not slip out; and when they are all fast 
sewed into the cow's belly, the gravedigger is to throw up a deep trench, into which 
one load of coals is to be cast, and the cow laid on top of it; the other load upon her, 
the fuel set on fire to burn about four hours, more or less, when the meat being taken 
out, is incorporated, and becomes such a delicious dish that formerly the emperors 
used to dine upon it on their coronation day; for which reason, and because an egg is 
the foundation of all that curious mess, it was called the imperial egg stuffed meat."
	The landlord, who stood listening to me with his mouth open, and no more 
motion than a statue, gave such entire credit to all I said, because I spoke so seriously, 
and was very earnest to have the ingredients, that, squeezing me by the hand, he said, 
"Sir, I am very poor "; and I, under standing what he would be at, answered, "Fear 
nothing." Then leading him into the kitchen, we agreed the matter very well between 
us, and I told my master he was very poor indeed, and ruined by our troops, having 
had all his cattle stolen. My master ordered he should not be oppressed, and left the 
management of him to me.
	The other servants, observing that I had plenty of wine in the kitchen, and was 
supplied with choice bits, suspected the fraud, and informed my master, who upon 
inquiry found just the contrary to what I had told him. He sent for my landlord and 
discovered all my roguery. My master upon this paid me a visit in the kitchen and, 
taking up one of the nearest cudgels he found about it, dusted my jacket so furiously 
that he wanted a cook for a fortnight.
	During our stay here we were attacked by a parcel of French scoundrels. My 
master ordered me out with the rest, but I kept back, fearing a chance bullet might 
mistake me for somebody else. But when I heard the French were beaten, I ventured 
into the field with my drawn sword, hacking and hewing the dead carcasses in a 
furious manner. It happened, as a special instance of my valour, that as I came up to 
one of the enemies to give him half a dozen good gashes, thinking he was as dead as 
the rest, at the first stroke I let fall he gave such a dreadful groan that I was quite 
terrified, and thinking he made a motion to get up to be revenged on me, I had not the 
courage to stay so long to draw my sword out again, but faced about, and ran as fast 
as I could to the place our baggage was, looking back a thousand times for fear he 
should overtake me. I bought a good sword of one who had been in the pursuit, and 
some other booty, boasting all about the army that I had gained it in the fight. I met 
my master, who, being brought along desperately wounded, and past all hopes, said to 
me: "You scoundrel! why did you not do as I ordered you?" I answered: "Because, sir, 
I was afraid to be in your condition." He was carried into the town, where he soon 
ended his days, for want of being so discreet as I. He left me, rather out of his own 
innate goodness and generosity than for any good service I had done him, a horse and 
fifty ducats. God grant him fifty thousand ages of bliss for his kindness, and double 
that term to anyone who shall hereafter so far oblige me as to do the like.
	By this time you may suppose I was pretty remarkable, for I had got the name 
of the merry Englishman, and being out of place spent my money like a lord. My 
purse being exhausted, I got into the service of Count Picolomeni; and a little 
afterwards we were ordered to march towards Hainault, and in a few days encamped 
under the walls of Mons.
	A comical adventure befell me one day in this place. I happened to go abroad, 
after dining in the town, with my head so full that I took children for men and blue for 
black. Staggering along in this condition, I came up to a chandler's shop, which was 
all hung about with rows of tallow candles, and I, taking them for bunches of radishes, 
asked the owner why he pulled the leaves off. He not understanding what I meant, and 
perceiving the pickle I was in, made me no answer, but fell a laughing very heartily; 
but I, who had doubtless a drunken longing for radishes, put out my hand to one of the 
rows that hung upon a long stick, and laying hold of two candles pulled so hard that 
all the range came down. The shopkeeper, seeing his goods broken, took up a cudgel 
and exercised it so, you would have thought he had been beating off stock fish. 
Though drunk, I was so sensible of the pain that, drawing my sword, I charged him as 
my mortal enemy. He, seeing me void of fear and reason, fled into a room behind the 
shop, and shut the door after him. Finding that, though I made a hundred passes at the 
door, the smart of my bones did nothing abate, I vented my spleen against the candles 
and, laying about me, left the whole shop strewed with grease.
	It happened a gang of soldiers were passing by, and they, at the request of the 
neighbours, carried me out into the street by force, I still crying: "What! cudgel me for 
a radish or two which are not worth a farthing." A complaint was carried to my 
master, who ordered me to be sent to jail, and the next day, when I awoke, I found 
myself in irons.
	There I suffered for the radish fray, there I fasted though it was not Lent, and 
there was dieted, without any liberty of getting drunk. At length my mistress took pity 
on me, and. begged my master to forgive me, who, seeing me protected by such an 
angel, ordered me to be set free, on my paying for the damage done to the candles. I 
left the jail with a full resolution never more to disoblige my master. I lived so sedate 
and modest for a little time after this that it surprised my master, who continually 
heaped new favours upon me, and I, leaving off drinking for the present, grew 
amorous. To this purpose I made choice of a waiting maid, a country lass in dress, but 
a courtier in keeping her word. She was young in years, but old in cunning, carried all 
her fortune about her, and, being fatherless, for the more decency and security of her 
person served an aunt of hers, who kept a tavern, where I was acquainted. I set my 
heart on this virgin pullet, and one day, putting my hand upon her soft bubbies, she 
gave me such a kick that I defy the best Flanders mare to have outdone her. She 
withdrew into her chamber, and from that time fled from me as if I had been the devil. 
I was up to the ears in love, and knew not what to do. However, at last, I wrote a billet 
doux, and accompanied it with a present. The poor harmless creature, who had been 
several times upon trial before, and still pleaded, "Lord, I know not what you mean," 
bit at the bait, received the present, heard the message, and gave me leave, under the 
pretence of quenching my thirst, to pay her a visit, which I did, and from that moment 
she began to fleece me, and her aunt to pluck my feathers. Our love grew so hot that 
the customers who used the tavern took notice of it; therefore, to save her reputation, 
for she passed for a maid, I took lodgings for her, and by that means got her from her 
aunt. My lady was so nice that she could not eat snails, because they had horns; nor 
fish, because of the bones; nor rabbits, because they had tails. She swooned away at 
the sight of a mouse; but rejoiced to see a company of grenadiers. Before me she fed 
by ounces and in my absence by pounds. She hated to be confined, and loved liberty; 
and, under colour of melancholy, was never from the window or door. At first she 
used to receive abundance of visitors, pretending that all the men were her cousins; 
but I being informed they were carnal kindred put her into an enclosure, taking a room 
that had no window to the street, and when I went abroad left a spy upon her actions.
	Every now and then she would be lost, and rise again the third day, as 
drowned bodies do. Though she shed abundance of tears, and swore a thousand oaths 
to persuade me that my ill nature made her withdraw herself to her aunt's, and that she 
had never been out of her doors, nor seen by anybody, yet I did not forbear thrashing 
her so severely that she did not for a good while show any more of her tricks.
	I was confoundedly jealous of this creature, and not without a reason, for I had 
her not in keeping above four months, before she very civilly tipped me a distemper 
very common in Naples. Enraged at this, I beat her unmercifully, took away all her 
clothes but a few rags, and kicked her out of doors. I advised with a surgeon and a 
physician about my case, who both condemned me to be anointed like a witch, and to 
slabber like a natural. But I, hoping to find some way to avoid enduring the pains of 
hell in this world, went to every doctor of note. I told them of my distemper, and they 
all unanimously told me that if I designed to live I must forbear drinking (and they 
had as good have bid me cut my own throat), and that the wine I had so plentifully 
swallowed was to be distilled out of my body in water. Perceiving they all agreed in 
the same story, I resolved to get into the hospital, and take a gentle salivation.
	I was kindly received, those good people being willing to entertain one 
madman more in their godly house, and, treating me like a soul in purgatory, they 
scalded my entrails and stifled me for want of breath, keeping me always, like Dives, 
with my tongue hanging out of my mouth a quarter of a yard, still begging a drop of 
wine off some poor Lazarus, and preaching up the works of mercy; but they told me 
that patience was a virtue, and would carry me to heaven, and that I must suffer for 
my former excesses. At the end of two months I had been in the hospital I was 
dismissed perfectly cured, but my legs looked like trap sticks, my body like a shotten 
herring, and my voice like a eunuch. The first inquiry I made was for the next tavern, 
and there I ate everything I could come at, as if I had been a man in perfect health, 
making a jest of the doctor, and laughing at the surgeon, bestowing a thousand 
blessings on the good man that first found out the vine, and double the number on 
those who plant and prune it. After I had got a good refreshment, I inquired after my 
kind mistress and her aunt, both of whom had left the place just after I had entered the 
hospital. I was not at all sorry for it; but went to find out some of my old comrades, 
whom I found merrily carousing. At last a dispute arose among them, and swords 
were drawn. I was fool enough to concern myself, and one of the party against me 
gave me such a blow with his sword (but as it happened it was the flat part) that he 
made me void a flood of claret at my mouth. All the skip-kennel troop took to their 
heels, thinking I was killed, and I, believing myself not far from it, bawled out for a 
surgeon, who was called, and he feeling my pulse beat very unregular, and observing 
how I retched and sweated, never inquired into the cause of my distemper, but bid the 
landlord get a priest to prepare me for death. The good man, being unwilling I should 
die like a heathen in a Christian country, ran in all haste and brought one, who, being 
curious to see the wound, took off my hat, and found my head clear from blood, and 
without any other hurt but a bump raised by the stroke I had received. He asked those 
who had seen the fray whether I had any other wounds besides that; and being 
informed I had not says to the master of the house: "If this man was to make his 
confession every time he is troubled with this distemper he ought always to have a 
chaplain along with him. Sleep is the only thing will cure this disorder; therefore carry 
him to bed, and I will answer for his life." His orders were obeyed, and the next 
morning I found myself out of danger, and went to wait on my master, who received 
me with a frowning brow, and bid me be gone about my business; that he discarded 
me his service, and left me at liberty to go where I pleased. This was a terrible blow to 
me; but I was comforted the next morning by my generous master sending me a 
handsome present in gold, with a command from him to leave the place, which I did 
the next morning, resolving to go to France, and from thence to my native country. 
The carrier with whom I set out was a great gamester, and the second night invited me 
to his room, which was next the stable, and there by the light of a scurvy lamp I won 
all his money. Enraged at his ill fortune, he threw the cards in my face, and I in return 
wiped him across the face with my hat. He ran to a corner to lay hold of a rusty sword, 
and I discharged the lamp at him so furiously that he was oil all over, and I half dead 
with fear, being in the dark, and the door shut. However, I was fortunate to find the 
sally port, and fled to the watch, whither my greasy carrier followed me with his rusty 
tilter. A corporal met and disarmed him, after giving each of us half a dozen bangs, 
and then inquired into the affair, and endeavoured to reconcile us, but in vain, the 
carrier refusing to consent till I paid the damage done to his coat. I gave him half his 
money again, and the other part I spent on the corporal, watchmen, myself and the 
carrier, drowning the quarrel, and forgetting all wrongs.
	After travelling many a tedious mile I at last got to Calais, and from thence to 
London. Being come to the metropolis, I went directly to my father's house that had 
been, which upon inquiry I found in the hands of a stranger. I asked for my sisters, 
and was told they were removed into another world. I found they had both been 
married, and had left children; so that my hopes of getting anything by their deaths 
proved abortive. Destitute of friends, I knew not what to do, especially finding the 
gout come upon me. At last, by the advice of an acquaintance, I took a public house 
and, understanding several languages, have now very good custom from foreigners. I 
intend to leave off my foolish pranks; and as I have spent my juvenile years and 
money in keeping company, hope to find some fools as bad as myself, who delight in 
throwing away their estates and impairing their healths.
	This is all the account he gives of himself and all the information we can get 
further of him is that he kept an inn in Smithfield, and got a considerable fortune. But 
being eager to be rich at once, he, jointly with his ostler, committed a most barbarous 
and cruel murder; for a gentleman who had purchased an estate in the country was 
obliged to pay the money in London, and accordingly came to town for that purpose, 
putting up at Batson's inn. The ostler, in taking the gentleman's bags off, perceived 
they were very heavy, and acquainted his master with it, and they two soon agreed to 
murder the gentleman, and divide the booty, the first of which was barbarously 
executed by the ostler, who cut the guest's throat, and then they removed the body into 
a closet. But a dispute arose in dividing the money, which made the ostler leave his 
master with what he could get; and he getting drunk the same night discovered the 
inhuman deed, producing several pieces of gold as a confirmation. The neighbours at 
first thought it was all fiction, until the fellow often calling God to witness of the 
truth, and vowing revenge on his master (thinking by his discovery to save himself), a 
stander-by more penetrating than the rest sent for a constable and got him secured, 
who being carried, before a magistrate persisted in it, and desired the house of his 
master might be searched, which was accordingly done, and the body found. In a 
small time after they were both arraigned and convicted. The ostler died just after that 
but Batson was deservedly executed, dying penitent, and in the communion of the 
Church of Rome, the principles of which he had imbibed by going into foreign parts. 
And thus ended the life of this detestable villain about a year before the restoration of 
King Charles II.


THOMAS SAVAGE 
A Profligate Apprentice who murdered a Fellow-Servant, was executed 
twice, and finally buried 28th of October, 1668

  
Thomas Savage in the Bawdy-house

	THIS unhappy wretch was born of very honest parents in the parish of St 
Giles's in the Fields, and between fourteen and fifteen years of age bound apprentice 
to one Mr Collins, a vintner, at the Ship Tavern at Ratcliff Cross, with whom he led 
but a very loose and profligate sort of life for about two years.
	Breaking the Sabbath (by his own confession, he having never once heard a 
whole sermon during that time) was the first inlet to all his other vices, especially 
whoredom, drunkenness and theft, for he used commonly to pass away the Sabbaths 
at a bawdy-house in Ratcliff Highway with one Hannah Blay, a vile common 
strumpet, who was the cause of his ruin, and brought him to his shameful end.
	He was carried at first to drink there by an acquaintance, who afterwards went 
to sea; but having once found the way, he went after that alone, without his 
companion, and would often carry a bottle or two of wine to junket with her. This, 
however, not satisfying her wicked desires, she told him frequently that if he would 
enjoy her company he must bring good store of money with him. To this he always 
replied that he could bring none but his master's, and that he had never wronged him 
of twopence in his life. Nevertheless she still continued urging him to rob him 
privately, but he answered he could. not, because the maid was always at home with 
him. "Hang her, a jade!" said this limb of the devil; "knock her brains out, and I'll 
receive the money, and go anywhere with you beyond sea, to avoid the stroke of 
justice."
	She was often giving him this bad advice and preaching this infernal doctrine, 
and she repeated it in particular on the very day when he unhappily took her counsel 
and perpetrated the murder; for being at her house in the morning, she made him 
drunk with burnt brandy, and he wanting a groat to pay his reckoning, she again 
persuaded him to knock the maid's brains out, and bring her what money he could 
find.
	Hereupon he went home, between twelve and one o'clock, and seeing his 
master standing at the street door did not dare to go in that way, but climbed over a 
wall, and getting in at the back door went into the room where his fellow- servants 
were at dinner. "Oh, sirrah," said the maid to him, you have been now at the bawdy-
house; you will never leave it till you are utterly ruined thereby."
	These words provoked him highly, and he was so much enraged at her that 
from that moment the devil took firm possession of him, and he fully resolved, even 
while he was at dinner, to be her butcher. Accordingly, when his master with the rest 
of the family were gone to church, leaving only the maid and Tom Savage at home, he 
went into the bar and fetched a hammer, with which he began to make a great noise, 
as he sat by the fire, by knocking on the bellows. Hereupon says the maid to him: 
"Sure the boy is mad! Sirrah, what do you make this noise for?"
	To this he made no answer, but going to the kitchen- window began to knock 
and make the same noise there, of which the maid then taking no notice, he, to 
provoke her, got on the clean dresser, and walked up and down thereon several times 
with his dirty shoes. This piece of malice exasperating the maid, so that she scolded at 
him pretty heartily, he threw the hammer at her suddenly with such violence that, 
hitting her on the head, it felled her to the ground, and she shrieked out. He then went 
and took up the hammer, intending to repeat the blow, but laid it down again thrice, 
not being yet hardened enough in cruelty to strike her any more; but at last, taking it 
up the fourth time, the devil had then gained such an absolute mastery over him that 
he gave her several strokes with all the force he could, and quickly dispatched her out 
of the world.
	The inhuman wretch, having perpetrated this hellish piece of barbarity, 
immediately broke open a cupboard in his master's chamber, and taking out a bag, 
wherein was about sixty pounds, hid it under his coat, and went out at a back door 
directly away to Hannah Blay again. When he came there, and informed her what he 
had done, the cunning slut, who was hardened in wickedness, would fain have had the 
money from him; but he would part with no more than half-a-crown, which having 
given her, he went away without the least remorse for what he had done.
	But he had not gone very far, when, meeting with a stile, he sat down thereon 
to rest himself, and then began to reflect on the horrid deed he had perpetrated, and to 
cry out to himself, "Lord, what have I done!" wishing that he could have recalled the 
fatal blows, even at the price of ten thousand worlds, if so many had been in his 
power. After this he was in so much horror and dread of mind that he stirred not a step 
but he thought everyone he met came to apprehend him.
	That night he reached Greenwich, where he took up his lodging, telling the 
people of the house he was going to Gravesend; but being got to bed he could not 
sleep, through the terror of a guilty conscience, but got up again, and walked about the 
room for several hours. Next morning the mistress of the house, perceiving he had a 
large quantity of money in a bag not sealed up, began to examine him about it, 
doubting he came not by it honestly. Hereupon, to avoid her just suspicion, he told her 
he was carrying it down to Gravesend to his master, who was a wine-cooper, and 
lived on London Bridge; and that if she would not believe she might send to his 
mistress, and in the meantime he would leave the money in her hands.
	This was agreed upon, and accordingly he wrote a note himself to his 
pretended mistress, which was to be carried by some people who were then going to 
London, whilst he went his way, wandering towards Woolwich, where he was in the 
shipyard much about the time the hue and cry came to Greenwich of a murder 
committed at Ratcliff Cross by a youth upon a maid, who was his fellow-servant; and 
that he had also robbed his master of a bag of money. Upon this news the mistress of 
the house where he had lain presently concluded that it was the same youth who had 
lodged there, and that the bag he had left with her was that whereof he had robbed his 
master. Hereupon she immediately dispatched several men in search of him, who 
found him asleep in an ale-house, with his head upon a table and a pot of beer by him. 
Upon this, one of the men, calling him by his name, said: "Tom, did you not live at 
Ratcliff?" He answered Yes. "And did not you murder your fellow-servant?" He 
answered likewise in the affirmative. "And you took so much money from your 
master?" He acknowledged all. "Then," continued he, "you must go along with us." 
To which he replied: "Yes, with all my heart." Accordingly they went forthwith to 
Greenwich, to the house where he had lain the night before.
	By the time he got thither his master and some friends had arrived there 
likewise, who exaggerated to him the barbarity of the fact, wherewith he was not 
much affected at first, though a little after he burst out into tears. From thence he was 
carried back to Ratcliff, and had before a Justice of Peace, who committed him to 
Newgate.
	Being now in safe custody, he was visited by one Mr Baker, to whom, after 
some little acquaintance, he gave the foregoing account; and he found him at first but 
little sensible of the heinousness of the crime he had committed. But the next time, 
asking him whether he was sorry for the fact, he answered with tears in his eyes, 
wringing his hands, and striking his breast, "Yes, sir; for it cuts me to the heart to 
think that I should take away the life of an innocent creature; and that is not all, but 
for anything I know, I have sent her soul to hell. Oh I how can I think of appearing 
before God's tribunal, when she shall stand before me and say, 'Lord, this wretch took 
away my life, and gave me not the least time to consider of the state of my soul, that 
so I might have repented of my sins, and have turned to Thee; he gave me no warning 
at all, Lord.' Oh, then, what will become of me?"
	He was then visited by Mr Robert Franklyn, Mr Thomas Vincent, Mr Thomas 
Doolittle and Mr James Janeway, who asked him if he was the person that murdered 
the maid at Ratcliff. To which he answered Yes. Hereupon they endeavoured to set 
the sin home upon his conscience, telling him the danger he was in, not only of a 
temporal but of an eternal death, without true repentance, and a sincere and strong 
faith.
	The day he went down to the sessions his fellow-prisoners gave him 
something to drink, which very much disordered him; and Hannah Blay, whom he had 
accused, and who was taken into custody thereupon, was heard to say to him: "Others 
have made you drunk to-day, but I will make thee drunk to-morrow." He lamented 
this backsliding grievously, but said that it was not the quantity he had drunk, which 
was much less than he was able to drink at other times without being in the least 
disordered, but it was something they had infused into his liquor to intoxicate his 
senses; which made him ever afterwards very cautious and fearful of drinking in their 
company.
	After he had received sentence of death he was again visited by Mr Baker; and 
the Saturday before his execution he was again with him, when Savage said to him, 
taking him by the hand, "Oh, my dear friend, come hither." Then opening his coffin, 
"Look here," continued he, "this is the ship wherein I must launch out into the ocean 
of eternity. Is it not a terrible thing to see one's own coffin and burial clothes, when at 
the same time (as to my bodily health) I am every whit as well as you?"
	On the Sunday, expecting to be executed next day, he desired to be alone and 
spent it in prayer and other religious duties. Next morning the sheriff's men and cart 
came for him, but the Sheriff of Middlesex not having notice, it was deferred till 
Wednesday, when, invoking upon his clothes that he had put on to die in, he said: 
"What! have I got on my dying clothes? Dying clothes, did I say? They are my living 
clothes, the clothes out of which I shall go into eternal glory. They are the best clothes 
that ever I put on!"
	Being brought to the place of execution at Ratcliff Cross, he made a short 
speech, wherein he exhorted people, both old and young, to take warning by his 
untimely end how they offended against the laws of God and man. After which, 
having said a very pathetic prayer, and breathed forth such pious ejaculations as drew 
tears from the eyes of the beholders, he was turned off the cart, and struggled for a 
while, heaving up his body. Which a young man, his friend, perceiving, he struck him 
several blows upon his breast with all his strength, to put him out of his pain, till no 
motion could be perceived in him. Wherefore after he had hung a considerable time, 
and was to all appearance dead, the people moving away, the sheriff ordered him to be 
cut down, when, being received into the arms of some of his friends, he was conveyed 
into a house not far from the place of execution. There being laid upon a table, he 
began, to the astonishment of the beholders, to breathe, and rattle in the throat, so that 
it was evident life was whole in him. Hereupon he was carried from thence to a bed in 
the same house, where he breathed more strongly, and opened his eyes and mouth, 
though his teeth were set before, and he offered to speak, but could not recover the 
use of his tongue.
	However, his reviving being blazed abroad within an hour, the sheriff's 
officers came to the house where he was, and carrying him back to the place of 
execution, hung him up again till he was really dead. After which his body was 
carried by his mourning friends to Islington, and buried on 28th of October, 1668, 
being seventeen years of age.


THE REV. ROBERT HAWKINS 
The Subject of a foul Conspiracy on the Part of Henry Larrimore and Sir 
John Croke that failed at Aylesbury Assizes, 11th of March, 1669

	A FOUL conspiracy against the life of a clerk in holy orders was laid bare at 
the assizes at Aylesbury on 11th of March, 1669, when Robert Hawkins, clerk of 
Chilton, was indicted with breaking into the dwelling-house of Henry Larrimore and 
stealing his gold rings and other articles.
	Larrimore deposed that on Friday, 18th of September, 1668, between twelve 
and one o'clock at noon, he locked up his doors and went into a hemp-plat, about two 
furlongs from his house, with all his family, to pull hemp. Coming home an hour and 
a half before sunset he found his doors open, and ran upstairs to a loft over the 
chamber where he lay, and, looking through the chinks of the boards, there he saw the 
prisoner rifling a box, in which, among other goods, was a white holland apron and a 
purse, in which were two gold rings of the value of ten shillings each, two ten-shilling 
pieces of gold, and nineteen shillings in silver. The prisoner hearing some noise, the 
deponent saw him glance by the stair-foot door, and so run out of his house, down the 
yard, with a great bunch of keys; and the deponent saw the prisoner hide himself in a 
close where there were some beans and weeds. The next day he procured a warrant 
from Sir Richard Piggot to search for his rings and money, and with the constable of 
the place, and some others, he went to search the prisoner's house, who refusing to 
open his doors, the constable broke them open, and in a basket filled with paper, rags 
and other trumpery he found one of the rings, and a five-shilling piece of silver, which 
he positively swore were the same which he had seen the prisoner the day before take 
out of his purse.
	HAWKINS: Why did not Larrimore, when he saw his doors open, which he 
expected to have found locked, call some of his neighbours to assist in searching the 
house and securing me, or whoever the person it was that he found robbing him?
	To this Larrimore answered he did not then well consider what he did.
	HAWKINS: If he saw me commit the robbery in his house, why then did he 
search other houses for the goods he saw me steal?
	LARRIMORE: I had been robbed at several other times.
	HAWKINS: How came he not to charge me positively with the felony before 
Sir Richard Piggot, of whom he had the warrant, if he had been sure I robbed him?
	To this Larrimore made no direct answer.
	Henry Larrimore, the son, and Joan Beamsley gave evidence as to seeing 
Hawkins run from the house, where upon Lord Chief Baron Hales said: "Here is 
evidence enough to hang twenty men."
	HAWKINS: I doubt not but to clear myself, notwithstanding this evidence. 
Pray, Sir Richard Piggot, when Larrimore came for the warrant to search, did he not 
say he suspected several persons of robbing him of them, and that I was but one of the 
suspected persons?
	Sir Richard Piggot, being upon the bench, acknowledged this to be true.
	HAWKINS: And yet Larrimore swears he saw me steal them out of his house 
on the 18th of September, an hour and a half before sunset, which I desire the Court 
and the jury would take notice of.
	John Chilton was called, and said that Mr Hawkins brought him a pair of boots 
to put new legs to them, and that he told the prisoner he would lay them in his shop 
window, and he might take them as he came by, for he should be abroad; which 
accordingly the prisoner did, and paid him for doing them, at Sir John Croke's; but 
that when the prisoner came to demand his tithes, and sued for them, then this 
Larrimore, Mr Dodsworth Croke, Richard Maine the constable, and others, came to 
the deponent and plagued him night and day to charge the prisoner with felony for 
stealing the boots; and they would have forced him to fetch a warrant to search for 
them, and threatened, in case he would not, that Sir John Croke would indict him at 
the assizes, as accessory to the stealing his own goods; and Larrimore said he would 
make him swear that Mr Hawkins had stolen his boots, and subpoenaed him to the 
assizes for that purpose.
	LARRIMORE: My Lord, this fellow is hired by Mr Hawkins to swear this.
	CHILTON: I am not hired to swear by Mr Hawkins; but Thomas Croxton told 
me last Monday, if I would swear Mr Hawkins stole my boots, he would bear me out 
against Mr Hawkins as far as one hundred pounds would go; and if that would not do, 
as far as five hundred pounds would go; and if I doubted it, he would give me a bond 
to make good his promise.
	HAWKINS: My Lord, this is an easy way for the fanatics to pay their tithes. If 
they can but hang up the clergy, they may cease their pleas for liberty of conscience. I 
desire the Court and the jury will observe that this Chilton is one of Larrimore's 
witnesses, and yet he swears that Croxton and others used their utmost endeavours to 
persuade him to charge me with felony.
	Mr Hawkins added that Larrimore was a notorious Anabaptist, and an enemy 
to the Church of England and ministry in general, but particularly to himself, he 
having sued him for tithes, and indicted him for not coming to church or baptizing his 
children; that Larrimore's malice had sufficiently appeared before this, by dissuading 
those who owed him money from paying him, and persuading others, whom he owed 
money to, to arrest him; by dissuading those he had sued for tithes from agreeing with 
him, and telling them Sir John Croke would force him to run his country, etc. And if 
the jury doubted of any of these particulars, he was ready to prove them.
	Proceeding in his defence, he said it was very unlikely he should commit a 
robbery in his own parish in the daytime, where everybody that saw him must needs 
know him; and that if he had been conscious of his guilt he had twenty-four hours 
'time to have made his escape; and it was strange he could find no other place to 
conceal this ring and five-shilling piece but in a little basket that hung up upon a pin; 
and that if Larrimore had seen him rob him, it was strange he did not tell his 
neighbours of it, or take any care to secure him till the next day; nor did he declare it 
to Sir Richard Piggot, from whom, he fetched the warrant to search, as might appear 
by the contents of it.
	Hereupon my Lord Chief Baron ordered the constable to produce the warrant; 
and it being delivered to my Lord, he observed that it bore date before the robbery 
was committed. Turning to Larrimore he said: "Thou art very cunning, to be provided 
with a warrant a day before you were robbed. It seems you knew upon the 17th day 
that you should be robbed on the 18th, and that this person now at the bar should rob 
you. But, Mr Hawkins, if you were innocent of this robbery, why did you refuse to 
open your doors and let your house be searched?" HAWKINS: Most of those persons 
present were my inveterate enemies. As for Sir John Croke and Larrimore, they had 
often threatened to pull down my house, and hired people to make a forcible entry 
upon it; particularly they hired one Jaires to get down the chimney and open my doors 
when we were all abroad; they had also contracted with one Tyler for the same 
purpose. Besides, they had an execution against me which Larrimore's son had a few 
days before executed in part, and he was then present; and, my Lord, I offered at the 
same time that Mr Sanders, the other constable, who lived but next door, might search 
as narrowly as he pleased.
	These statements having been corroborated, the Lord Chief Baron said the 
business appeared very foul; and looking towards Sir John Croke asked if that were 
the Sir John Croke who was concerned in that business.
	HAWKINS: I doubt not to make appear to the world that Sir John is deeply 
concerned in this conspiracy. Mr Brown was called, and said that Sir John Croke and 
this Larrimore had threatened that if he came down to this assizes to testify what he 
had heard of this conspiracy they would ruin him and his family, and for that reason 
he dare not speak; but the Court promising him protection, he gave this evidence:
	Being entrusted by Sir John Lentall as keeper to Sir John Croke, who is a 
prisoner in the King's Bench, on Wednesday, the 16th of September last, as I was in 
bed at Sir John Croke's house in Chilton, I heard a great noise, and fearing they were 
contriving Sir John Croke's escape, I started out of bed in my shirt and stood at the 
dining-room door behind the hangings, and there I heard this Larrimore tell Sir John 
Croke that he had undone him by causing him to contend with the parson; for that he 
had entered him in most of the courts of England, and summoned him into the Crown 
Office and Chancery, and he could not maintain so many suits. Sir John replied: "Is 
that all? Come, brother Larrimore, be contented; we will have one trick more for 
Hawkins yet, which shall do his work." Larrimore answered: "You have put me upon 
too many tricks already — more than I can manage — and the parson is too hard for 
us still." Sir John replied: "If thou wilt but act, I will hatch enough to hang Hawkins. 
Cannot thou convey some gold or silver into his house, and have a warrant ready to 
search his house? — and then our work is done"; and, says he: "Do you but go to Sir 
John Piggot and inform him you have lost your money and goods, and desire his 
warrant to search for them; and take Dick Maine the constable, who is one of us, and 
will do what we desire him, and search the house, and when you find these things, 
charge him with flat felony, and force him before me, and I will send him to jail 
without bail, and we will hang him at the next assizes."
	On the Sunday morning I went to the ale-house, where they had kept Mr 
Hawkins all night, and saw them carrying him to jail. I said to Sir John, when I came 
home, "They have carried the poor parson to jail," and he answered, "Let him go, and 
the devil go with him, and more shall follow after. Have I not often told you," says he, 
"if my brother Larrimore and I laid our heads together, nobody could stand against 
us?" And I replied: "Yes, Sir John, I have often heard you say so, but never believed it 
till now."
	THE LORD CHIEF BARON: Is all this true, which you have related?
	BROWN: Yes, my Lord; and there sits Sir John Croke (pointing to him), who 
knows that every word I have said is true.
	Soon after Sir John Croke stole off the bench, without taking leave of the 
Chief Baron.
	LARRIMORE: My Lord, what I have sworn as to Mr Hawkins is true.
	THE LORD CHIEF BARON: Larrimore, thou art a very villain; nay, I think 
thou art a devil. Gentlemen, where is this Sir John Croke?
	It was answered he was gone.
	THE LORD CHIEF BARON: Gentlemen, I must acquaint you Sir John Croke 
sent me this morning two sugar loaves, to excuse his absence yesterday, but I sent 
them back again I did not then so well know what he meant by them as I do now. 
Surely Sir John does not think the King's justices will take bribes. Somebody may 
have used his name (here the Chief Baron showed Sir John's letter). Is this his hand?
	Some of the justices on the bench said they believed it might be; and it being 
compared with the mittimus, the hands appeared to be the same.
	His Lordship, summing up, said that it appeared upon the evidence, and from 
all the circumstances, to be a most foul and malicious conspiracy against the life of 
Mr Hawkins. Then the jury, without stirring from the bar, gave their verdict, that the 
prisoner was not guilty.
	Mr Hawkins moved that he might be discharged without paying his fees, for 
that he was very poor — this, and other troubles the prosecutors had brought upon 
him, having cost him a great deal of money. My Lord Chief Baron answered he could 
not help it; he could not give away other people's rights: if they would not remit their 
fees, he must pay them.
	As soon as the trial was over, Sir John Croke, Larrimore the prosecutor, and 
their accomplices in the conspiracy, fled privately out of town.


STEPHEN EATON, GEORGE ROADES AND SARAH 
SWIFT 
Executed 14th of July, 1669, for the Murder of the Rev. John Talbot; their 
Accomplice, Henry Prichard, being reprieved

	THIS gentleman (Talbot) had been chaplain to a regiment in Portugal in the 
reign of King Charles II., where he continued in the discharge of his office till the 
recalling of the said regiment, when, arriving in London, he preached three months at 
St Alphage in the Wall. Afterwards he was curate at a town called Laindon, in Essex, 
where a lawsuit commenced between him and some persons of the said parish, upon 
the account of which he came up to London at the unhappy time when a period was 
put to his life in the following manner: —
	Several profligate abandoned wretches, to the number of six men and one 
woman, took into their heads one day to waylay, rob and murder this poor man. 
Whether, hearing his business, they might think he had a pretty deal of money about 
him, or whether they acted at the instigations of some of Mr Talbot's enemies, is not 
certain; however it was, they dogged him from four o'clock in the afternoon 
whithersoever he went. The names of some of these miscreants were Stephen Eaton, a 
confectioner; George Roades, a broker; Henry Prichard, a tailor; and Sarah Swift.
	Mr Talbot had received information that his adversaries designed to arrest 
him, which made him a little circumspect while he was abroad; for everyone who took 
any notice of him he imagined to be an officer. This occasioned him the sooner to be 
alarmed when he saw himself followed by five or six people from place to place; so 
that, turn which way soever he would, he was certain of meeting one or more of them.
	After he had shifted about a long time to no purpose in order to avoid, as he 
thought, their clapping a writ on his back, he betook himself to Gray's Inn, whither, 
being still pursued, he had there a good opportunity to take particular and accurate 
notice of some or all of these evil-disposed persons. Here he took shelter a little while 
and wrote letters to some of his acquaintances and friends, requesting them to come 
and lend him their assistance in order to secure his person.
	The persons whom he sent to failing him, he got admittance into the chambers 
of one of the gentlemen of the place, where he stayed till he supposed all the danger 
was over; then, taking a little refreshment, he took the back way, through Old Street, 
and so over the fields to Shoreditch.
	Not long after he had got into the fields he perceived the same persons at his 
heels who had dogged him before. He was now more surprised than ever, it being 
eleven o'clock at night. The most probable method of escaping that he could see was 
by breaking through a reed hedge to a garden house; but before he could reach the 
place one or more of the villains seized him, and began to pick his pockets. They 
found about twenty shillings, and his knife, with which they attempted to kill him, by 
cutting his throat.
	Whether it was by chance, or these wretches pretended to have an 
extraordinary skill in butchering men, is uncertain; but they first cut out a piece of his 
throat, about the breadth of a crown-piece, without touching the windpipe, and then, 
in the dependent part of the orifice, they stabbed him with the knife so deep that the 
point almost reached his lungs. However, Providence so far overruled their cruelty 
that they did not cut the recurrent nerves, which would have stopped his speech, nor 
the jugular veins and arteries, which if they had done he had instantly bled to death 
without remedy, and then possibly no discovery had been made.
	There was a cut in the collar of his doublet, which seemed to show that they 
attempted this piece of butchery before they stripped him; but then the nature of the 
wound intimated, on the contrary, that they pulled off his coat and doublet before they 
accomplished their design.
	This bloody deed was perpetrated at Aniseed Clear on Friday night, the 2nd of 
July, 1669. While the wretches were committing their butchery the dogs barked and 
the beasts bellowed in an uncommon manner; so that several gardeners rose out of 
their beds to prepare for the market, supposing it had been daylight. Soon after it 
thundered and rained in a terrible manner, which drew several brick makers out of 
their lodgings to secure their bricks from the weather, and was also the occasion that 
the murderers did not get far from the place where their barbarity was acted before 
they were apprehended; so that heaven and earth seemed to unite in crying out against 
the inhuman deed, and detecting the wicked authors of it.
	Some of the brick makers who had been alarmed by the thunder and rain 
discovered Mr Talbot lying in his shirt and drawers, all bloody. These gave notice to 
their companions, who also came up. They then raised him, and cherished him with a 
dram which one of them had at hand; whereupon he immediately pointed which way 
the murderers went. The watch near Shoreditch were soon informed of what had 
happened, and some of them came, as well to take care of the wounded gentleman as 
to apprehend the authors of his misfortune. One of the number quickly discovered a 
man lying among the nettles, and called up his companions, supposing he also had 
been murdered; but when they came to a nearer examination they saw a bloody knife 
on one side of him and the minister's doublet on the other. Upon these circumstances, 
presuming he was guilty of the murder, they apprehended him. At first he feigned 
himself asleep, and then, suddenly starting up, he attempted to make his escape, but in 
vain. A pewter pot, with the mark newly scraped out, was found near him, and one of 
the watchmen broke his head with it, which made him a little more tractable. In the 
meantime Mr Talbot, by the great care of the officers of the night, was carried to the 
Star Inn, at Shoreditch church, where he was put to bed, and whither a surgeon was 
sent for to dress and take care of his wounds.
	This man who was apprehended was Eaton, the confectioner. He was carried 
before Mr Talbot, who instantly knew him, and by writing declared that he was the 
man who cut his throat; and that five more men and a woman were his associates. A 
second time, upon Mr Talbot's own request, Eaton was brought before him, when he 
continued his former accusation against him; whereupon he was carried before Justice 
Pitfield, and by him committed to Newgate. It was not long after Eaton, before the 
woman was found, who also pretended to be asleep. Mr Talbot swore as positively to 
her as he had done to the other, and inquired of the constable whether her name was 
not Sarah, for he had heard one of her comrades say to her, when in Holborn: "Shall 
we have a coach, Sarah?" The constable demanded her name, and she, not suspecting 
the reason, told him right, which confirmed the evidence of the dying gentleman. 
Shortly after a third, and then a fourth, was taken, who were also committed to 
Newgate, Mr Talbot knowing one of these also.
	The care of Mr Talbot's wounds was committed to one Mr Litchfield, an able 
surgeon, who diligently attended him; and that nothing be omitted which might 
conduce to his recovery, Dr Hodges, one of the physicians employed by the city 
during the dreadful visitation in 1665, was likewise called. To these, at the request of 
the minister of the Charter-house, Dr Ridgely was added. By their joint direction he 
was in a fair way to be cured, no ill symptoms appearing from Monday morning to the 
Sabbath Day following, either upon account of his wounds, or otherwise; for though 
he lay some time in the wet, yet through the experience of these gentlemen he was 
kept from a fever. Several other surgeons also freely offered their assistance.
	About noon on Sunday he was dressed. The wound looked well, and he 
seemed more cheerful than ordinary; but within two or three hours after, a violent fit 
of coughing seized him, which broke the jugular vein, and caused such an effusion of 
blood that he fainted, and his extreme parts were cold, before anyone could come to 
his assistance. The flux was once stopped, but upon coughing he bled again, so that 
his case was almost past hope.
	About one or two next morning he sent for Dr Atfield, minister of Shoreditch 
church; and though he had before said little more than Aye or No, and his physicians 
desired him not to strain those parts where his danger lay, but rather write his minds 
notwithstanding all this, he talked very familiarly to the doctor, telling him that he 
hoped to be saved by the merits of Jesus Christ only. Then the doctor pressed him to 
declare whether he were still fully satisfied as to the persons he swore against. To 
which he readily answered that he was certain he was not mistaken in what he had 
done. Being asked whether or no he could freely forgive them, he replied that he 
prayed for the welfare of their souls, but desired the law might be executed on their 
bodies. In a word, this reverend gentleman seemed very submissive under this severe 
dispensation, believing a Providence in everything that happens. The doctor prayed by 
him, and departed, and within two hours after he expired, having been very devout 
and composed to the last moment.
	Several attestations were made before the justice and at the trial of the 
prisoners concerning Mr Talbot's having been dogged and murdered by those who had 
either seen him the day before, or came up to him first, when he was left in the 
lamentable condition we have been describing. Mr Went, in particular, who was 
constable of the night when this murder was committed, gave a particular relation of 
taking the prisoners, and of what Mr Talbot said and wrote when he saw any one of 
them. The papers which the deceased wrote were likewise produced in court, and it 
was observable that he particularly exclaimed against the woman, whom he called 
bloody every time he mentioned her, affirming that she said to her companions 
several times, "Kill the dog, kill him."
	The facts and circumstances were so plain that the jury found all the four that 
had been taken guilty of the murder, not one of them being able to give a satisfactory 
account of themselves, or to prove where they were after six o'clock on the night the 
bloody deed was done. The names of these four were given at the beginning of this 
relation.
	Mr Cowper the coroner, and Mr Litchfield the surgeon, gave in their 
informations an exact account of Mr Talbot's wound, and both of them deposed that 
they verily thought it to be the occasion of his death. Mr Litchfield said the knife 
really penetrated his lungs.
	The night before Mr Talbot died he wrote to Mr Went, the constable, desiring 
him to go to the ordinary and inquire with him of Eaton whether any of Laindon's 
people employed or abetted him in the fact he had committed; if they did, to get their 
names of him. But Eaton persisted in denying not only that, but even the fact itself, 
telling them in the most solemn manner that to his knowledge he never in his life saw 
Mr Talbot till he was brought before him, after he was taken. Sarah Swift likewise 
being questioned concerning her guilt, and urged to confess what she knew, she 
answered that she would burn in hell before she would own anything of the matter. To 
such an uncommon degree had these wretches hardened themselves in their crimes.
	Mr Talbot wrote also several letters to his friends, with an exact account of the 
manner how he had been followed for seven hours together, and how he was at last set 
upon, and used in the barbarous manner herein related; but the substance of these 
letters being interspersed in the story itself it is needless to give them at large.
	On Wednesday, the 14th of July, 1669, Stephen Eaton, Gorge Roades and 
Sarah Swift were conveyed in a cart to Tyburn, where the two men confessed the 
murder; but the woman continued obstinate to the last. Henry Prichard was reprieved 
upon some favourable circumstances that were produced.


CLAUDE DU VALL 
A Frenchman who, coming to England, became by his Politeness and 
Gallantry on the Road the Romantic Darling of the Ladies. Executed 21st of 
January, 1670

	SOME have affirmed that this very celebrated highway- man was born in 
Smock Alley, without Bishopsgate; but this is without ground, for he really received 
his first breath at a place called Damfront in Normandy. His father was a miller, and 
his mother the daughter of a tailor. By these parents he was brought up strictly in the 
Roman Catholic religion, and his promising genius was cultivated with as much 
learning as qualified him for a footman.
	But though the father was so careful as to see that his son had some religion, 
we have good reason to think that he had none himself. He used to talk much more of 
good cheer than of the Church, and of great feasts than great faith; good wine was to 
him better than good works; and a sound courtesan was far more agreeable than a 
sound Christian. Being once so very sick there were great hopes of his dying a natural 
death, a ghostly father came to him with his Corpus Domini, and told him that, 
hearing of the extremity he was in, he had brought him his Saviour to comfort him 
before his departure. Old Du Vall, upon this, drew aside the curtain and beheld a 
goodly fat friar with the Host in his hand. "I know," said he, "that it is our Saviour, 
because He came to me in the same manner as He went to Jerusalem: C'est un asne 
que le porte" ("It is an ass that carries Him.")
	Neither father nor mother took any notice of young Claude after he was about 
thirteen years of age. Perhaps their circumstances might then oblige them to send him 
abroad to seek his fortune. His first stage was at Rouen, the capital city of Normandy, 
where he fortunately met with post-horses to be returned to Paris, upon one of which 
he got leave to ride, by promising to help dress them at night. At the same time falling 
in with some English gentlemen who were going to the same place, he got his 
expenses discharged by those generous travellers. They arrived at Paris in the usual 
time, and the gentle men took lodgings in the Faubourg St Germain, where the 
English generally quarter. Du Vall was willing to be as near as possible to his 
benefactors, and by their intercession he was admitted to run errands and do the 
meanest offices at the St Esprit in the Rue de Bourchiere, a house of general 
entertainment, something between a tavern and an ale-house, a cook's shop and a 
bawdy-house. In this condition he continued till the restoration of King Charles II. in 
1660 at which time, multitudes of all nations flocking into England, among them 
came Du Vall, in the capacity of a footman to a person of quality.
	The universal joy upon the return of the Royal family made the whole nation 
almost mad. Everyone ran into extravagances, and Du Vall, whose inclinations were 
as vicious as any man's, soon became an extraordinary proficient in gaming, whoring, 
drunkenness, and all manner of debauchery. The natural effect of these courses is 
want of money; this our adventurer experienced in a very little time; and as he could 
not think of labouring he took to the highway to support his irregularities. In this 
profession he was within a little while so famous as to have the honour of being 
named first in a proclamation for apprehending several notorious highwaymen. And 
here we have reason to com plain that our informations are too short for our assistance 
in writing the life of such a celebrated offender. However, such stories as have been 
delivered down to us we shall give our readers faithfully, and in the best manner we 
are able.
	He had one day received intelligence of a knight and his lady who were 
travelling with four hundred pounds in their coach. Upon this he takes four or five 
more along with him and overtakes them on the road. The gentry soon perceived they 
were likely to be beset when they beheld several horsemen riding backwards and 
forwards, and whispering to one another; whereupon the lady, who was a young 
sprightly creature, pulls out a flageolet, and begins to play very briskly. Du Vall takes 
the hint and plays excellently well upon a flageolet of his own, in answer to the lady, 
and in this posture rides up to the coach door. "Sir," says he to the knight "your lady 
plays excellently, and I make no doubt but she dances as well. Will you please to step 
out of the coach and let me have the honour to dance one courant with her on the 
heath?" "I dare not deny anything, sir," the knight readily replied, "to a gentleman of 
your quality and good behaviour. You seem a man of generosity, and your request is 
perfectly reasonable. Immediately the footman opens the door and the knight comes 
out; Du Vall leaps lightly off his horse and hands the lady down. It was surprising to 
see how gracefully he moved upon the grass; scarce a dancing-master in London but 
would have been proud to have shown such agility in a pair of pumps as Du Vall 
showed in a great pair of French riding-boots. As soon as the dance was over he waits 
on the lady back to the coach, without offering her the least affront; but just as the 
knight was stepping in — "Sir," says he, "you have forgot to pay the music." His 
worship replied that he never forgot such things; and instantly put his hand under the 
seat of the coach and pulled out a hundred pounds in a bag, which he delivered to Du 
Vall, who received it with a very good grace, and courteously answered: "Sir, you are 
liberal, and shall have no cause to repent your being so. This hundred given so 
generously is better than ten times the sum taken by force. Your noble behaviour has 
excused you the other three hundred which you have in the coach with you." After 
this he gave him the word, that he might pass undisturbed if he met any more of their 
crew, and then very civilly wished them a good journey.
	It happened another time, as Du Vall was upon his vocation of robbing on 
Blackheath, he meets with a coach richly fraught with ladies of quality, and with one 
child who had a silver sucking-bottle; he robs them rudely, takes away their money, 
watches, rings, and even the little child's sucking-bottle; nor would he, upon the 
child's tears, nor the ladies' earnest intercession, be wrought upon to restore it, until at 
last one of his companions forced him to deliver it.
	A little after the above-mentioned action another lucky turn in Du Vall's 
favour happened, as much as that to his advantage. In the course of his rambles he 
came into the Crown Inn, in Beaconsfield where he heard great singing, dancing, and 
playing upon the hautboy and violin. He instantly inquired into the reason of it, and 
found that there was a wake or fair kept there that day, at which were present most of 
the young men and maids for several miles about. This, he thought, was a promising 
place; and therefore he set up his horse for that evening, went into the kitchen, and 
called for a pint of wine. Here he met with an old rich farmer, who had just received a 
hundred pounds, and had tied it up in a bag, putting it into his coat pocket. Du Vall 
was very attentive to all that passed, and by this means he heard the farmer tell an 
acquaintance what money he had about him, which our sharper immediately put down 
for his own; more especially did he depend upon it when the countryman asked leave 
to go into the room where the music was, to see and hear the diversions. It was his 
next business to ask the same favour, which he as easily obtained, and very innocently 
to all appearance entered to see the country dancing, making an apology to the 
company when he came in, and telling them that he hoped it would be no offence, 
they replying as courteously that he might stay there and welcome.
	His business now was more to watch the old farmer's bag of money than to 
mind the diversions of the young people; and, after considering some time for a way 
to execute his designs in the most dexterous manner, he observed a chimney with a 
large funnel, which he thought would favour his project. Having contrived the whole 
affair, he went out and communicated it to the ostler, who, being a downright ostler, 
consented for a reward of two guineas to assist him. He was to dress up a great mastiff 
dog in a cowhide, which he had in the stable, placing the horns directly on his 
forehead, and then by the help of a ladder and a rope to let him down the chimney. All 
this he performed while the company were merry in the chamber. Du Vall being re 
turned from the yard, the dog howling as he descended the chimney, and pushing 
among them in this frightful manner, they were all put into a hurry and confusion. The 
music was silenced, the table overthrown, and the drink spilt; the people all the while 
screaming, and crowding downstairs as fast as they were able, everyone crowding to 
be foremost, as they supposed the devil would unavoidably take the hindmost. Their 
heels flew up, the women's coats flew over their heads, and the pipe and the fiddle 
were trod to pieces. While they were in this condition the supposed devil made his 
way over them all and got into the stable, where the ostler instantly uncased him; so 
that when the company came to examine the matter, as they could hear no more of 
him, they concluded he had vanished into the air.
	Now was the time for Du Vall to take care of the farmer's hundred pounds, 
which he very easily did by diving into his pocket. As soon as he had got the money 
he took horse, and spared neither whip nor spur until he came to London, where he 
thought himself safe. As soon as things were a little in order again at the inn there was 
a dismal outcry for the money. All the suspicious persons were searched, and the 
house was examined from top to bottom, to no purpose. What could they suppose 
after this but that the devil had taken it away? It passed in this manner, and was 
looked upon as a judgment inflicted by permission of Providence on the farmer for his 
covetousness; the farmer being, in reality, a miserable wretch, who made it his 
business to get money by all the methods he could, whether lawful or otherwise.
	One time Du Vall met with Esquire Roper, master of the buck-hounds to King 
Charles II., as he was hunting in Windsor Forest. As their rencounter happened in a 
thicket, Du Vall took advantage of the place, and commanded him to stand and 
deliver his money, or else he would shoot him. Mr Roper, to save his life, gave our 
adventurer a purse full of guineas, containing at least fifty, and Du Vall afterwards 
bound him neck and heels, fastened his horse by him, and rode away across the 
country.
	The hunting, to be sure, was over for that time, but it was a pretty while before 
the huntsman could find his master. When the squire was unbound, he made all the 
haste he could to Windsor, and as he entered the town was met by Sir Stephen Fox, 
who asked him whether or no he had had any sport. Mr Roper replied in a great 
passion: "Yes, Sir, I have had sport enough from a son of a whore, who made me pay 
damned dear for it. He bound me neck and heels, contrary to my desire, and then took 
fifty guineas from me, to pay him for his labour, which I had much rather he had 
omitted."
	But the proclamation which we spoke of at the beginning of this life, and the 
large reward that was promised for taking him, made Du Vall think it unsafe to stay 
any longer in England; whereupon he retired into France. At Paris he lived very 
highly, boasting prodigiously of the success of his arms and amours, and affirming 
proudly that he never encountered with any one person of either sex whom he did not 
overcome. He had not been long here before he relapsed into his old disease, want of 
money, which obliged him to have recourse to his wits again. He had an uncommon 
talent at contrivance, particularly at suiting his stratagems to the temper of the person 
they were designed to ensnare, as the following instance will prove.
	A learned Jesuit, who was confessor to the French King, was as much noted 
for his avarice as he was for his politics, by which latter he had rendered himself very 
eminent. His thirst for money was insatiable; and though he was exceeding rich, his 
desires seemed to increase with his wealth. It came immediately into Du Vall's head 
that the only way to squeeze a little money out of him was to amuse him with hopes 
of getting a great deal, which he did in the following manner.
	He put himself into a scholar's garb, to facilitate his admittance into the miser's 
company, and then waited very diligently for a proper time to make his address, 
which he met with in a few days. Seeing him alone in the piazza of the Faubourg, he 
went up to him very confidently and said: "May it please your reverence, I am a poor 
scholar who has been several years travelling over strange countries, to learn 
experience in the sciences, purely to serve my native country, to whose advantage I 
am determined to apply my knowledge, if I may be favoured with the patronage of a 
man so eminent as yourself." "And what may this knowledge of yours be?" replied the 
father, very much pleased. "If you will communicate anything to me that may be 
beneficial to France, I assure you no proper encouragement shall be wanting on my 
side." Du Vall, upon this, growing yet bolder, proceeded: "Sir, I have spent most of 
my time in the study of alchemy, or the transmutation of metals, and have profited so 
much at Rome and Venice, from great men learned in that science, that I can change 
several base metals into gold, by the help of a philosophical powder, which I can 
prepare very speedily."
	The father confessor appeared to brighten with joy at this relation. "Friend," 
says he, "such a thing as this will be serviceable indeed to the whole state, and 
peculiarly grateful to the King, who, as his affairs go at present, stands in some need 
of such a curious invention. But you must let me see some experiment of your skill 
before I credit what you say so far as to communicate it to his Majesty, who will 
sufficiently reward you if what you promise be demonstrated." Upon this, he 
conducted Du Vall home to his house, and furnished him with money to build a 
laboratory and purchase such other materials as he told him were requisite in order to 
proceed in this invaluable operation, charging him to keep the secret from every living 
soul until he thought proper, which Du Vall promised to perform.
	The utensils being fixed, and everything in readiness, the Jesuit came to 
behold the wonderful operation. Du Vall took several metals and minerals of the 
basest sort and put them into a crucible, his reverence viewing every one as he put 
them in. Our learned alchemist had prepared a hollow stick, into which he had 
conveyed several sprigs of pure gold, as blacklead is in a pencil. With this stick he 
stirred the preparation as it melted, which with its heat melted the gold in the stick at 
the same time; so that it sunk imperceptibly into the vessel. When the excessive fire 
had consumed in a great measure all the lead, tin, brass and powder which he had put 
in for a show, the gold remained pure to the quantity of an ounce and a half. This the 
Jesuit caused to be assayed, and finding it what it really was — all fine gold — he was 
immediately so devoted to Du Vall, and blinded with the prospect of future advantage, 
that he believed everything our impostor could say, still furnishing him with whatever 
he demanded, in hopes to be at last made master of this extraordinary secret, the 
whole fame as well as profit of which, he did not question, would redound to him, as 
Du Vall was but an obscure person.
	Thus were our alchemist and Jesuit, according to the old saying, as great as 
two pickpockets; which proverbial sentence, if we examine it a little closely, hits both 
their characters. Du Vall was a professed robber, and what is any Court favourite but a 
picker of the common people's pockets? So that it was only two sharpers 
endeavouring to outsharp one another. The confessor was as open as Du Vall could 
wish. He showed him all his treasure, and among it several rich jewels which he had 
received as presents from the King, hoping by these obligations to make him discover 
his art the sooner. In a word, he grew by degrees so importunate and urgent that Du 
Vall began to apprehend a too close inquiry if he denied the request any longer; and 
therefore he appointed a day when everything was to be communicated. In the 
meantime he took an opportunity to steal into the chamber where all the riches were 
deposited, and where his reverence generally slept after dinner, and finding him at that 
time very fast, with his mouth wide open, he gagged and bound him, then took his 
keys, and unhoarded as much of his wealth as he could conveniently carry out 
unsuspected; and so bade farewell to both him and France.
	Du Vall had several other ways of getting money besides these which I have 
mentioned, particularly by gaming, at which he was so expert that few men in his age 
were able to play with him. No man living could slip a card more dexterously than he, 
nor better understood all the advantages that could be taken of an adversary; yet, to 
appearance, no man played fairer. He would frequently carry off ten, twenty, thirty, or 
sometimes a hundred pounds at a sitting, and had the pleasure commonly to hear it all 
attributed to his good fortune so that few were dissuaded by their losses with him 
from playing with him a second, third or fourth time.
	He was moreover a mighty man for laying wagers, and no less successful in 
this particular than any of the former. He made it a great part of his study to learn all 
the intricate questions, deceitful propositions and paradoxical assertions that are made 
use of in conversation. Add to this the smattering he had attained in all the sciences, 
particularly the mathematics, by means of which he frequently won considerable sums 
on the situation of a place, the length of a stick, and a hundred such little things, 
which a man may practise without being liable to any suspicion, or casting any 
blemish upon his character as an honest man, or even a gentleman, which Du Vall 
affected to appear.
	But what he was most of all celebrated for, was his conquests among the 
ladies, which were almost incredible to those who had not been acquainted with 
intrigue. He was a handsome man, and had abundance of that sort of wit which is 
most apt to take with the fair sex. Every agreeable woman he saw he certainly died 
for, so that he was ten thousand times a martyr to love. "Those eyes of yours, madam, 
have undone me." "I am captivated with that pretty good-natured smile." "Oh, that I 
could by any means in the world recommend myself to your ladyship's notice!" "What 
a poor silly loving fool am I!" These, and a million of such expressions, full of flames, 
darts, racks, tortures, death, eyes, bubbies, waist, cheeks, etc., were much more 
familiar to him than his prayers, and he had the same fortune in the field of love as 
Marlborough had in that of war — viz. never to lay siege but he took the place.
	There is no certain account how long Du Vall followed his vicious courses in 
England before he was detected, after his coming from France, and fell into the hands 
of justice. All we know is, that he was taken drunk at the Hole-in-the-Wall in 
Chandois Street, committed to Newgate, arraigned, convicted, condemned, and (on 
Friday the 21st day of January, 1670) executed at Tyburn in the twenty-seventh year 
of his age.
	Abundance of ladies, and those not of the meanest degree, visited him in 
prison, and interceded for his pardon. Not a few accompanied him to the gallows, 
under their vizards, with swollen eyes and blubbered cheeks. After he had hanged a 
convenient time he was cut down, and, by persons well dressed, conveyed into a 
mourning coach. In this he was carried to the Tangier tavern at St Giles's, where he 
lay in state all night. The room was hung with black cloth, the hearse covered with 
'scutcheons, eight wax tapers were burning, and as many tall gentlemen attended with 
long cloaks. All was in profound silence, and the ceremony had lasted much longer 
had not one of the judges sent to interrupt the pageantry.
	As they were undressing him, in order to his lying-in-state, one of his friends 
put his hand into his pocket and found therein the following paper, which, as appears 
by the contents, he intended as a legacy to the ladies. It was written in a very fair 
hand: —
	"I should be very ungrateful to you, fair English ladies, should I not 
acknowledge the obligations you have laid me under. I could not have hoped that a 
person of my birth, nation, education and condition could have had charms enough to 
captivate you all; though the contrary has appeared, by your firm attachment to my 
interest, which you have not abandoned even in my last distress. You have visited me 
in prison, and even accompanied me to an ignominious death.
	"From the experience of your former loves, I am confident that many among 
you would be glad to receive me to your arms, even from the gallows.
	" How mightily and how generously have you rewarded my former services! 
Shall I ever forget the universal consternation that appeared upon your faces when I 
was taken; your chargeable visits to me in Newgate; your shrieks and swoonings 
when I was condemned, and your zealous inter- cession and importunity for my 
pardon! You could not have erected fairer pillars of honour and respect to me had I 
been a Hercules, able to get fifty of you with child in one night.
	"It has been the misfortune of several English gentlemen to die at this place, in 
the time of the late usurpation, upon the most honourable occasion that ever presented 
itself; yet none of these, as I could ever learn, received so many marks of your esteem 
as myself. How much the greater, therefore, is my obligation.
	" It does not, however, grieve me that your intercession for me proved 
ineffectual; for now I shall die with a healthful body, and, I hope, a prepared mind. 
My confessor has shown me the evil of my ways, and wrought in me a true 
repentance. Whereas, had you prevailed for my life, I must in gratitude have devoted 
it to your service, which would certainly have made it very short; for had you been 
sound, I should have died of a consumption; if otherwise, of a pox."
	He was buried with many flambeaux, amid a numerous train of mourners 
(most of them ladies), in Covent Garden. A white marble stone was laid over him, 
with his arms and the following epitaph engraven on it: —
"Here lies Du Vall, reader, if male thou art, 
Look to thy purse; if female, to thy heart. 
Much havoc hath he made of both; for all 
Men he made stand, and women he made fall.  
The second conqueror of the Norman race, 
Knights to his arms did yield, and ladies to his face. 
Old Tyburn's glory, England's bravest thief, 
Du Vall the ladies' joy! Du Vall the ladies' grief."


THOMAS WILMOT 
A Notorious Highwayman who hated and maltreated Women. Executed 30th 
of April, 1670

THOMAS WILMOT, the unfortunate subject of the few following pages, was the 
eldest son of John Wilmot, Esq., in the county of Suffolk. He was born at Ipswich, a 
noted seaport, and the capital town of all the county. When his father died he came 
immediately into the possession of an estate of six hundred pounds a year, entirely 
free from all encumbrances; which any reasonable person would think was sufficient 
to support a gentleman very handsomely.
	It was but a few years, however, before the whole was mortgaged, and soon 
after sold, to maintain him in his ex pensive way of living, which was only a course of 
intrigues and debauchery. Not a beautiful woman in the country round but he was in 
pursuit of, without any regard to her degree or circumstances; yet was he almost 
always unsuccessful in his amours, for he was very deficient in that fine manner of 
address which recommends a man to the regards of the fair sex, who are generally 
prevailed upon with splendid appearances.
	When our adventurer had very much reduced his estate by attempts upon the 
honour of women of character, he spent the last remains of it upon those who are 
always to be won with gold, and who also slighted him when they perceived he had 
no more of that shining metal.
	Tom had an education suitable to his degree. He could write several hands 
very finely, and speak the French, Dutch, Spanish and Italian tongues tolerably well. 
Nevertheless, when he found himself ruined by his extravagances, he could think of 
no other way to support himself but the highway, supposing it below a gentleman to 
follow any honest profession. In this vocation he was so intrepid and desperate as 
frequently to attack two or three passengers together, without any assistance, and his 
fortune, for a long time, was equal to his courage.
	One time, meeting a gentleman between Chelmsford and Colchester, and 
saluting him with the unwelcome words, "Stand and deliver," the person assaulted 
positively alleged that he had not any money about him. As it was contrary to Tom's 
interest, as well as to reason, for him to think a well-dressed man would travel on 
horseback without money, he proceeded to search his pockets, when he found the 
gentleman's asseveration true, or so nearly true that there was nothing worth taking. 
However, as his own coat was but indifferent, and the gentleman's very good, he 
made an exchange to keep his hands in exercise, and so took his leave. But Tom had 
this time better luck than he expected, for as he rode along he heard something jingle 
in his pockets, which made him examine them. It was no disagreeable surprise to find 
eighteen guineas and a crown-piece in an old steel tobacco-box. Another time, as he 
lay perdu in a thicket between Dorking in Surrey and Petworth in Sussex, he saw 
three gentlewomen riding along the road. He immediately rushed out upon them in a 
violent manner and demanded what they had. They gave him about eight pounds, 
which was their whole stock of money; but one of them had a large diamond ring on 
her finger, which Tom ordered her to deliver instantly. The poor woman could not 
easily get it off; upon which our inhuman villain pulled out a sharp knife and 
barbarously cut off finger and all, swearing at the same time that as he was now 
compelled to rob on the highway through his former extravagances, which had been 
occasioned by his fondness for their sex, he was resolved in all his actions to show a 
woman the least favour.
	Wilmot's principal places of haunt for a great many years were about the 
western roads, where at last there was scarce a stage-coach or wagon could travel in 
safety long together; but he became in time so very noted, and so much sought after, 
that he was obliged to fly into the north of England, where he fell into the same way 
of living. Here he also continued some time to rob by himself, till he fell in company 
with several others of the same profession. It was agreed among these, for their 
mutual safety, to form themselves into a society; and as Tom was a gentleman, 
besides his being the most experienced among them, it was unanimously agreed that 
he should be their captain. As soon as he was entered into his commission he called 
for pen, ink and paper, and drew up the following articles to be observed by their 
community; obliging them all to swear to them, and subscribe their names at the 
bottom of the paper: —
WE WHOSE NAMES ARE UNDERWRITTEN, HAVING BY MUTUAL 
AGREEMENT FORMED OURSELVES INTO A SOCIETY FOR THE SUPPORT 
OF EACH OTHER, WE DO ALL SOLEMNLY ENGAGE OURSELVES TO 
OBSERVE THESE PARTICULARS
I. To be obedient to our captain in all his commands, and faithful to our companions 
in all their designs and attempts.
II. To be always present at such meetings as the captain by his sole authority shall 
appoint, except we have his leave for the contrary.
III. To stand by one another in any danger to the last breath, and never to fly from an 
equal number of opposers.
IV. To help one another when taken and imprisoned, in sickness, and in any distress 
whatsoever.
V. Never to leave, if possibly we can help it, the body of any companion behind us, 
whether dead or only wounded.
VI. To confess nothing, if taken, to the damage of our accomplices, though punished 
even with death itself for our faithfulness.
	This our compact, when any one of us shall break, in any one article, may the 
greatest plagues fall on him in this world, and eternal damnation seize him hereafter.
The oath at the time of subscribing was in these words:
	"I, A.B., do swear, by the head and soul of our captain, to perform, to the 
utmost of my ability, everything agreed to in this writing. So help me honour."
	It is a pity that those who have furnished us with the preceding articles have 
not also obliged us with some of Wilmot's adventures in concert with his companions; 
but .as we meet with nothing of this nature in any account which we have seen, the 
reader must content himself with being told that the gang held together till the 
captain's exit, which was some years after the first institution. In such a series of time, 
there is no doubt but their robberies were very numerous. There are, however, two or 
three stories more of our hero himself, which are very well worth rehearsing.
	He one day met with the Lincoln stage-coach, in which was only the wife of 
Mr Blood, who stole the Crown of England out of the Tower in the reign of King 
Charles II. and conveyed it away under a parson's gown. Wilmot knew her very well, 
and so made bold to stop the horses and demand her money. Mrs Blood seemed to be 
much frightened, and begged of him to use her civilly, as she was a poor defenceless 
woman, and he appeared like a gentleman. "Madam," says Tom, "the falsehood of 
women has been the only cause of my misfortunes, the only thing that has reduced me 
to the wretched necessity of seeing a livelihood in this manner. The whole sex are 
alike. You are all false, perfidious and perjured, at least all of you that ever received 
any tenders of love. As you are a woman, madam, you must expect no favour from 
my hands, who am a professed enemy to the whole species. Therefore, dear Mrs 
Blood, be pleased to deliver your money this moment, or I'm afraid blood will come 
of it the next." The gentlewoman, finding he was in earnest, and that there was no way 
of coming off but by satisfying his demands, offered him half-a-crown, telling him 
she had no more about her. "You saucy b —ch," quoth Wilmot, "do you think I will 
be put off with half-a- crown, when nothing less than a whole one would satisfy your 
husband when he robbed the King? No, no, pray let us see what you have got." Upon 
this he searched her, and found about fifteen guineas in her pockets, besides a silver 
thimble, and several things of value.
	A little while after this he met with another adventure upon the road between 
Abingdon and Oxford. Mr Molloy, a famous counsel for thieves and pickpockets, was 
riding from one of these places to the other, it being the assize time. Wilmot knew 
him very well, and consulted with himself some time before he could resolve to 
meddle with a man so useful to his profession. At last he considered that Mr Molloy 
was an advocate only for the sake of a fee; and that, as he had got so much money by 
this means, it was just that he should refund a little to supply the necessities of one 
who might soon be a client. With this thought he rode up and commanded him to 
contribute. Mr Molloy thought to have escaped by telling him who he was, but 
Wilmot replied with, "Every man to his trade, sir. Another time, it is very possible, 
you may be the receiver, and then you must make the best market you can, as I intend 
to do at present." The poor counsellor saw there was no evading question, and he was 
very sensible how dangerous it would be to oppose a brace of pistols, vi et armis; so 
without any more words he surrendered three pounds odd money, and Tom, to prevent 
his doing any mischief, shot his horse, and then rode off on his own, quite across the 
country, until he thought himself pretty well out of danger.
	Another of his adventures was on Newmarket Heath, where he stopped a 
gentleman in his coach-and-six, notwithstanding he had several servants on horseback 
to attend him. The gentleman was obliged to order all his men to let him alone, for 
fear of his own life, which Tom threatened very hard, if one of them offered to stir. 
The booty he now met with was very large, though we have no certain account of the 
sum. It may be imagined that the gentleman was sufficiently irritated at being robbed 
in this manner. He cursed his servants that they could not see the highwayman 
coming, and cursed himself that he did not suffer them to fire at him afterwards; but 
all was now too late. The only method to be revenged on him was to pursue him with 
a hue and cry, of which Wilmot being aware, he got off by a byway to Chester.
	Here he consumed a considerable time, without doing anything worthy of 
notice, gaming and living high, till he had wasted all his ready cash. After this his 
clothes, his horse, and everything he had valuable were sold or lost, till he was 
reduced to extreme necessity, and obliged to leave the place and seek his fortune.
	As he wandered about the country in a miserable poor condition he saw, one 
evening, a house at a distance, to which he made. It was the seat of an ancient family 
in Shropshire. As he came near, his ears were saluted with music and merry songs, 
which gave him great hopes of meeting with good entertainment. In this confidence 
he went to the door and knocked, demanding if the master of the house was within. 
He was answered Yes by the master himself, who was within hearing, and desired to 
know his business. Wilmot readily told him that, being a stranger in those parts, and 
destitute of friends and money, he made bold to entreat that he would favour him with 
a lodging for one night. The gentleman answered him in a very civil manner, but said 
he feared he could not grant his request; for it was the anniversary of his birthday, and 
he had a great many friends within, most of whom must be obliged to stay all night. 
Tom continued to press his suit in very moving terms; upon which the good man told 
him that he had one room in his house that he could spare. "But," continued he, "if 
you venture to lie there, you may chance to repent it; for it is ten to one but you fall 
into some misfortune much greater than being all night in the fields. To tell you the 
truth, sir, it is haunted with a spirit ever since my grandfather's barber cut his throat in 
it, for the love of a coy chambermaid. The spirit appears at usual times with a razor in 
one hand, and a basin and light in the other, crying in a hoarse tone, 'Will you be 
shaved?' We have ventured to put several to bed there who knew nothing of the 
matter, but they have been all thrown violently out of their beds, and bruised in a 
strange manner for refusing to let him shave them."
	Tom Wilmot heard the gentleman's relation very attentively; but as he had 
more wit than to believe the reality of apparitions, which he looked upon to be only 
delusions — either the fancies of whimsical brains, or the invention of crafty men for 
some sinister purposes — he told the gentleman in very obliging language that, if he 
pleased, he would accept of the proffer, notwithstanding the dreadful report he had 
made. "For I know not," says he, "but by the learning I have attained I may be able to 
give rest to this poor distressed ghost, and confine him to the lower shades, from 
whence he shall never return to wander about the world any more."
	The gentleman, upon Tom's discovering such a willingness to run all hazards 
rather than want a lodging, invited him into the parlour, and desired him to sit down 
and make merry with the rest of the company, telling all that were present what the 
stranger had undertaken. They all wondered that he should venture upon such a 
dreadful thing, and looked upon him to be something more than a common man. 
Some dissuaded him from engaging in an affair so full of danger, telling him that they 
could not help thinking there was presumption in the very attempt. Others laughed in 
their sleeves to think what sport they should have in the morning when he related his 
night's adventure, not at all doubting but they should find him half-dead, with all his 
hair standing on end. Tom answered but little to either of them, yet what he did say 
was with such a solemn air that they all began to think him either a parson or a 
conjurer, who travelled in disguise.
	Supper being ended, the company adjourned into a large old-fashioned hall, 
and fell to cards and dice. As soon as Tom saw them set, and the stakes thrown down 
pretty briskly upon the table, a merry crotchet came into his head, which he thus 
executed.
	He retired into one side of the hall, and desired a servant to show him up into 
his appointed lodging, because he was very weary with hard travelling. The fellow 
gave him a candle, and such directions as were necessary, bidding him good-night at 
the stair-foot; for, though he was a lusty lubber, he was so terrified with what our hero 
had undertaken that he could not have ventured himself any farther for the world. 
Tom expected the goblin in vain at least for two hours, and then resolved to personate 
him, that such an ancient member of the family might not be wanting at a time of 
general joy. Thus concluding, he rubbed over his face with the white off the wall, and 
then tying a knot at one end, to place directly upon his head, he covered himself with 
a sheet. He had a razor in his pocket, and the pewter chamber-pot, he concluded, 
would serve by the glimmering of the candles for a basin. Thus accoutred he softly 
descended the stairs.
	By the noise they made, he perceived that the wine had pretty well got into the 
noddles of all the company, which made him proceed in his ghostly expedition with 
the more courage. They were so busy at gaming that he was almost upon them before 
he was seen; at last a servant who attended, looking up, started several yards 
backwards, and cried out, "The ghost! The ghost!" running out of the room in an 
instant. This alarmed the whole company, who turned round. Tom advanced with his 
chamber-pot and razor (which he had made all bloody by cutting his finger), and in a 
hoarse and dreadful tone repeated the words he had been taught: "Will you be 
shaved?" Immediately they all rose from their seats, without any regard to the money 
upon the table, and endeavoured to make the best of their way off the ground. It was 
now everyone for himself and God for us all, with a witness! They tumbled over each 
other, and happy was he who could get before his companion by treading on him. 
Tom pursued them, repeating the same terrible words, till he had cleared the hall of 
every soul of them. Some got into the cellars, others into the stables and outhouses; 
everyone keeping his castle till morning, so strongly had their fears enchanted them. 
When our ghost perceived all still, he went and lined his visionary pockets with the 
material money, and then departed to bed, and put out his candle.
	The next morning, as soon as he heard anybody stirring below, Tom came 
downstairs, and gave a woeful relation of what he had suffered in the night. "The 
ghost," says he, "came to me exactly in the manner you told me he used to appear, and 
upon my refusing to let him shave me he attempted to cut my throat; but, as 
Providence would have it, I so defended myself with my hands that he only cut one of 
my fingers." Then he showed them the finger which he had cut on purpose to make 
the razor bloody. "Afterwards," continued he, "he went downstairs, and in about five 
minutes returned, rattling something in his hands." "Pox on him!" says one of the 
company," then that was our money, which he stole off the table, I suppose." Upon 
this they fell into a dispute about a spirit taking money; some of them, who were well 
read in the history of apparitions, affirming that a ghost never meddled with anything, 
but often discovered hidden treasures for the advantage of others. To this Tom smartly 
replied: "It may be, gentlemen, that some of your forefathers owed him money for 
trimming, and he took this opportunity to come and collect his quarterage." At this 
they all smiled, and so the matter passed off without further inquiry.
	The collection which Wilmot made in his ghostly capacity set him up for a 
highwayman again. He bought a horse and a pair of pistols, and went on after his old 
manner, robbing everyone who came in his way.
	Tom again followed his trade so closely that he found himself in great danger, 
from the many descriptions of his person that were sent all over the kingdom, and the 
large rewards that were offered daily for apprehending him. He skulked about from 
place to place, but was in continual fear, till at last he concluded that it was no longer 
safe for him to continue in England. In this opinion he gathered together all his 
substance and took shipping for France, from whence he proceeded to Switzerland, as 
a country more likely to conceal him.
	Here he committed an action which, from the general account we have of it, 
appears to be the most bloody of his whole life. We are told that he broke into the 
house of an honest country gentleman and murdered him, his wife, three children, and 
a maidservant, carrying off everything that was valuable, and getting it privately 
conveyed out of the country before the tragedy was discovered. What makes this story 
appear yet more horrible is that he stayed in the same province long enough to see two 
innocent persons executed for this inhuman fact.
	Wilmot's reign, after he returned into England, was but very short. One of the 
first persons he attempted to rob was George Villiers, late Duke of Buckingham, a 
nobleman who made himself sufficiently famous by his extravagances in the last age. 
He succeeded in that bold adventure so far as to get off for the present with above two 
hundred guineas, but the action made so much noise, that it was not many days before 
he was taken, in the county of Northampton, where the robbery was committed. At the 
next assizes he was condemned, and on Saturday, the 30th of April, 1670, was 
hanged, being thirty-eight years of age.
	The following speech was taken in shorthand from his own mouth at the place 
of execution: —
	FRIENDS AND COUNTRYMEN, — I am come, by the appointment of the 
law, to suffer a shameful death for the crimes of which I stand convicted. The laws are 
just, and I acquiesce in the sentence passed upon me.
	As the vices of my youth were the immediate springs of all my irregular 
actions since, and the unhappy causes of my present misfortune, I shall address a few 
words to the young who are as yet under the care of parents or masters, and have 
never been trusted with the direction of their own actions.
	The time of your entrance into the world is the most important part of your 
lives. Look round you before you begin to give a loose to your inclinations, and take a 
view of virtue and vice in their proper colours. Your appetites are now very strong, 
and must be put under the restraint of reason, or they will certainly plunge you into 
destruction.
	Love, in particular, of the fair sex, is now very powerful, and if it be not 
properly directed, will carry you headlong into such circumstances as you will never 
disengage your self from. I speak this by experience. It was to gratify this inclination 
that I spent a good estate, and reduced myself to such a necessity as tempted me to the 
way of life for which I am going to suffer.
	It is not now a proper time to make a long discourse. The few moments I have 
to live must be spent in suitable exercises of devotion. A word or two from a dying 
man, it is to be hoped, will have more effect than a tedious harangue from one who 
may be suspected of pursuing the interest of this life. Pray earnestly for my departing 
soul, and remember to follow my advice, but not my example.


THOMAS BLOOD, GENERALLY CALLED COLONEL 
BLOOD 
Who stole the Crown from the Tower of London on 9th of May, 1671

	THIS desperate man was the son of a blacksmith in Ireland; but from other 
accounts his father appears to have been concerned in iron-works, and to have 
acquired an easy fortune in that kingdom. He was born about the year 1628, and came 
to England while a young man, and married, in Lancashire, the daughter of Mr 
Holcraft, a gentleman of good character in that county. He returned afterwards into 
Ireland, served as a lieutenant with the Parliament forces, and obtained an assignment 
of land for his pay; besides which, Henry Cromwell put him into the Commission of 
the Peace, though scarcely twenty-two years of age. These favours gave him such an 
inclination to the republican party as was not to be altered; and after the King's 
restoration some accidents contributed to increase his disaffection to the Government. 
Upon associating a little with the malcontents, he found his notions exactly justified, 
and that there was a design on foot for a general insurrection, which was to be begun 
by surprising the castle of Dublin, and seizing the person of the Duke of Ormond, then 
Lord Lieutenant. Into this scheme he entered without any hesitation; and though many 
of the persons involved in the dangerous undertaking were much his superiors in rank, 
yet he was very soon at the head of the affair, presided in all their councils, was the 
oracle in all their projects, and generally relied on in the execution of them. But, on 
the very eve of its execution the whole conspiracy, which had been long suspected, 
was discovered, His brother-in-law, one Lackie, a minister, was, with many others, 
apprehended, tried, convicted, and executed; but Blood made his escape, and kept out 
of reach, not withstanding the Duke of Ormond and the Earl of Orrery laboured to 
have him secured, and a proclamation was published by the former, with the promise 
of an ample reward for apprehending him.
	He found means to get over into Holland, where he was well received, and 
admitted into great intimacy with some of the most considerable persons in the 
republic, particularly Admiral de Ruyter. He went from thence to England with such 
recommendations to the Fifth-Monarchy Men, and other malcontents, that he was 
immediately admitted into all their councils, and had a large share in all the dark 
intrigues that were then carrying on for throwing the nation again into confusion. In 
this situation he gave another strong instance of his bold and enterprising genius; but 
finding the Government apprised of their designs, and foreseeing that the persons 
principally concerned could not escape being apprehended, he resolved to withdraw 
into Scotland, where he so wrought upon the discontents of the people that he 
contributed not a little to the breaking out of the insurrection there, and was present in 
the action of Pentland Hills, 27th of November, 1666, in which the insurgents were 
routed and about five hundred killed. He fled after this defeat back to England, and 
from thence to Ireland, where he landed within three miles of Carrickfergus; but Lord 
Dungannon pursued him so closely that he was obliged to retire into England. He had 
not been long in this kingdom before he performed a fresh exploit, which was as 
extraordinary, more successful, and made greater interest in the world than anything 
he had yet done. This was the rescue of his friend Captain Mason from a guard of 
soldiers who were conducting him to his trial at the assizes.
	Whether his next enterprise was entirely of his own contrivance is a point not 
to be decided; it was seizing the person of his old antagonist, the Duke of Ormond, in 
the streets of London; but whether with a view to murder, or carry him off till he had 
answered their expectation, is not perfectly clear. He actually put his design in 
execution on 6th of December, 1670, and was very near completing his purpose. 
However, the Duke was fortunately rescued out of his hands; but himself and his 
associates escaped, though closely pursued. An account of this transaction was 
immediately published by authority, together with a Royal Proclamation, offering a 
reward of one thousand pounds for apprehending any of the persons concerned. The 
miscarriage of this daring design, instead of daunting him, or creating the least 
intention of flying out of the kingdom, put him on another more strange and 
hazardous scheme to repair his broken fortunes. He proposed to those desperate 
persons who assisted him in his former attempt to seize and divide amongst them the 
Royal Insignia of Majesty kept in the Tower of London — viz. the crown, globe, 
sceptre and dove — and as they were blindly devoted to his service, they very readily 
accepted the proposal, and left it to him to contrive the means of putting it into 
execution. He devised a scheme of putting himself into the habit of a Doctor of 
Divinity, with a little band, a long false beard, a cap with ears, and all the formalities 
of garb belonging to that degree, except the gown, choosing rather to make use of a 
cloak, as most proper for his design. Thus habited, he, with a woman whom he called 
his wife, went to see the curiosities in the Tower; and while they were viewing the 
regalia the supposed Mrs Blood pretended to be taken suddenly ill, and desired Mr 
Edwards (the keeper of the regalia) to assist her with some refreshment. Mr Edwards 
not only complied with this request, but also invited her to repose herself on a bed, 
which she did, and after a pretended recovery took her leave, together with Blood, 
with many expressions of gratitude. A few days after, Blood returned and presented 
Mrs Edwards, the keeper's wife, with four pairs of white gloves, in return for her 
kindness. This brought on an acquaintance, which being soon improved into a strict 
intimacy, a marriage was proposed between a son of Edwards and a supposed 
daughter of Colonel Blood.
	The night before the 9th of May, 1671, the doctor told the old man that he had 
some friends at his house who wanted to see the regalia, but that they were to go out 
of town early in the morning, and therefore hoped he would gratify them with the 
sight, though they might come a little before the usual hour. [In this enterprise Blood 
had engaged three accomplices, named Desborough, Kelfy and Perrot.] Accordingly 
two of them came, accompanied by the doctor, about eight in the morning, and the 
third held their horses, that waited for them at the outer gate of the Tower ready 
saddled. They had no other apparatus but a wallet and a wooden mallet, which there 
was no great difficulty to secrete.
	Edwards received them with great civility, and immediately admitted them 
into his office; but as it is usual for the keeper of the regalia, when he shows them, to 
lock himself up in a kind of grate with open bars, the old man had no sooner opened 
the door of this place than the doctor and his companions were in at his heels, and 
without giving him time to ask questions, silenced him, by knocking him down with 
the wooden mallet. They then instantly made flat the bows of the crown to make it 
more portable, seized the sceptre and dove, put them together into the wallet, and 
were preparing to make their escape when, unfortunately for them, the old man's son, 
who had not been at home for ten years before, returned from sea at the very instant; 
and being told that his father was with some friends who would be very glad to see 
him at the Jewel Office, he hastened thither immediately, and met Blood and his 
companions as they were just coming out, who, instead of returning and securing him, 
as in good policy they should have done, hurried away with the crown and globe, but 
not having time to file the sceptre, they left it behind them. Old Edwards, who was not 
so much hurt as the villains had apprehended, by this time recovered his legs, and 
cried out murder, which being heard by his daughter, she ran out and gave an alarm; 
and Blood and Perrot, making great haste, were observed to jog each other's elbows as 
they went, which gave great reason for suspecting them. Blood and his accomplices 
were now advanced beyond the main-guard; but the alarm being given to the warder 
at the drawbridge, he put himself in a posture to stop their progress. Blood discharged 
a pistol at the warder, who, though unhurt, fell to the ground through fear; by which 
they got safe to the little ward-house gate, where one Still, who had been a soldier 
under Oliver Cromwell, stood sentinel. But though this man saw the warder, to all 
appearance, shot, he made no resistance against Blood and his associates, who now 
got over the drawbridge and through the outer gate upon the wharf.
	At this place they were overtaken by one Captain Beckman, who had pursued 
them from Edwards's house. Blood immediately discharged a pistol at Beckman's 
head; but he stooping down at the instant, the shot missed him, and he seized Blood, 
who had the crown under his cloak. Blood struggled a long while to preserve his 
prize; and when it was at length wrested from him he said: "It was a gallant attempt, 
how unsuccessful soever; for it was for a crown!" Before Blood was taken, Perrot had 
been seized by another person; and young Edwards, observing a man that was bloody 
in the scuffle, was about to run him through the body, but was prevented by Captain 
Beckman.
	Upon this disappointment Blood's spirits failed him; and while he remained a 
prisoner in the jail of the Tower he appeared not only silent and reserved, but dogged 
and sullen. He soon changed his temper, however, when, contrary to all reason, 
probability, and his own expectation, he was informed the King intended to see and 
examine him himself. This was brought about by the Duke of Buckingham, then the 
great favourite and Prime Minister, who infused into his Majesty (over whom he had 
for some time a great ascendancy) the curiosity of seeing so extraordinary a person, 
whose crime, great as it was, displayed extraordinary force of mind, and made it 
probable that, if so disposed, he might be capable of making great discoveries. He is 
allowed on all hands to have performed admirably on this occasion. He answered 
whatever his Majesty demanded of him clearly and without reserve; he did not 
pretend to capitulate or make terms, but seemed rather pleased to throw his life into 
the King's hands by an open and boundless confession. He took care, however, to 
prepossess his Majesty in his favour by various, and those very different, methods. At 
the same time that he laid himself open to the law he absolutely refused to impeach 
others. While he magnified the spirit and resolution of the party to which he adhered, 
and had always acted against monarchy, he insinuated his own and their veneration 
for the person of the King; and though he omitted nothing that might create a belief of 
his contemning death, yet he expressed infinite awe and respect for a monarch who 
had condescended to treat him with such unusual indulgence. It was foreseen by the 
Duke of Ormond, as soon as he knew the King designed to examine him, that Blood 
had no cause to fear; and indeed his story and behaviour made such an impression on 
the mind of his Sovereign that he was not only pardoned but set at liberty, and had a 
pension given him to subsist on. This conduct of his Majesty towards so high and so 
notorious an offender occasioned much speculation and many conjectures.
	His interest was for some time very great at Court, where he solicited the suits 
of many of the unfortunate people of his party with success. But as this gave great 
offence to some very worthy persons while it lasted, so, after the disgrace and 
dissolution of the ministry styled the Cabal, it began quickly to decline, and perhaps 
his pension also was ill paid; for he again joined the malcontents, and acted in favour 
of popular measures that were obnoxious to the Court.
	In this manner he passed between nine and ten years, sometimes about the 
Court, sometimes excluded from it, always uneasy and in some scheme or other of an 
untoward kind, till at last he was met with in his own way, and either circumvented by 
some of his own instruments, or drawn within the vortex of a sham plot, by some who 
were too cunning for this master in his profession. It seems there were certain people 
who had formed a design of fixing an imputation of a most scandalous nature upon 
the Duke of Buckingham, who was then at the head of a vigorous opposition against 
the Court, and who, notwithstanding he always courted and protected the fanatics, had 
not, in respect to his moral character, so fair a reputation as to render any charge of 
that kind incredible. But whether this was conducted by Colonel Blood, whether a 
counter-plot was set on foot to defeat it and entrap Blood, or whether some whisper 
thrown out to alarm the Duke, which he suspected came from Blood, led his Grace to 
secure himself by a contrivance of the same stamp, better concerted, and more 
effectually executed, is uncertain; but his Grace, who was formerly supposed a patron 
of the colonel, thought it requisite, for his own safety, to contribute to his ruin. The 
notion Blood induced the world to entertain of this affair may be discovered from the 
case which he caused to be printed of it; but it fell out that the Court of King's Bench 
viewed the affair in so different a light that he was convicted upon a criminal 
information for the conspiracy, and committed to the King's Bench prison; and, while 
in custody there, he was charged with an action of scandalum magnatum, at the suit of 
the Duke of Buckingham, in which the damages were laid at ten thousand pounds. 
Notwithstanding this, Colonel Blood found bail, and was discharged from his 
imprisonment. He then retired to his house in the Bowling Alley, in Westminster, in 
order to take such measures as were requisite to free himself from these difficulties; 
but finding fewer friends than he expected, and meeting with other and more grievous 
disappointments, he was so much affected thereby as to fall into a distemper, that 
speedily threatened his life. He was attended in his sickness by a clergyman, who 
found him sensible, but reserved, declaring he was not at all afraid of death. In a few 
days he fell into a lethargy, and on Wednesday, 24th of August, 1680, he departed this 
life. On the Friday following he was privately, but decently, interred in the new chapel 
in Tothill Fields. Yet such was the notion entertained by the generality of the world of 
this man's subtlety and restless spirit, that they could neither be persuaded he would 
be quiet in his grave, nor would they permit him to remain so; for a story being spread 
that this dying, and being buried, was only a new trick of Colonel Blood's, preparatory 
to some more extraordinary exploit than any he had been concerned in, it became in a 
few days so current, and so many circumstances were added to render it credible, that 
the coroner thought fit to interpose, ordered the body to be taken up again on the 
Thursday following, and appointed a jury to sit upon it. By the various depositions of 
persons attending him in his last illness they were convinced, and the coroner caused 
him to be once more interred, and left in quiet.


MARY CARLETON, THE GERMAN PRINCESS 
A Kentish Adventuress who travelled the Continent, acquired several 
Husbands, and was executed on 22nd of January, 1673, for returning from 
Transportation

  
The German princess and her Admirers

	THIS woman was so called from her pretending to be born at Cologne in 
Germany, and that her father was Henry van Wolway, a Doctor of the Civil Law, and 
Lord of Holmsteim. But this story was of a piece with her actions, for she was really 
the daughter of one Meders, a chorister at the cathedral of Canterbury, and, some say, 
only an indifferent trader of that city, in which she was born, the 11th of January, 
1642. We can say little of her education; only from her inclinations afterwards we 
may suppose she had as much learning as is commonly given to her sex. She took 
great delight in reading, especially of romances and books of knight-errantry — 
Parismus and Parismenus, Don Belianis of Greece, and Amadis de Gaul, were some 
of her favourite books; and she was so touched with the character of Oriana in the 
latter that she frequently conceited herself a princess, or a lady of high quality. 
Cassandra and Cleopatra were also read in their turns, and her memory was so 
tenacious that she could repeat a great part of their amours and adventures very 
readily.
	Her marriage was not agreeable to the high opinion she had entertained of her 
own merit; instead of a knight, or a squire at least, which she had promised herself, 
she took up with a journeyman shoemaker, whose name was Stedman, by whom she 
had two children, who both died in their infancy. This man being unable to maintain 
her extravagances, and support her in the splendour she always aimed at, she was 
continually discontented, till at last she resolved to leave him and seek her fortune. A 
woman of her spirit is never long in executing things of this nature; she made an 
elopement, and went to Dover, where she married another husband, who was a 
surgeon of that town.
	Information of this affair was soon taken, and she was apprehended and 
indicted at Maidstone for having two husbands, but by some masterly stroke, which 
she never wanted on a pressing occasion, she was quickly acquitted. This emboldened 
her to a third marriage, with one John Carleton, a Londoner, which was the occasion 
of her being first publicly known in town; for some of her old acquaintance giving 
Carleton's brother an account of her former weddings, she was again taken, committed 
to Newgate, and tried at the Old Bailey for polygamy. Here again the evidence against 
her was insufficient, so that she was a second time acquitted.
	It is requisite, before we proceed any further in our relation, to observe that 
between the two last marriages she embarked on board a merchant ship, which carried 
her to Holland, from whence she travelled by land to the place she had so often talked 
of, the city of Cologne, where, being now mistress of a considerable sum of money, 
she took a fine lodging at a house of entertainment, and lived in greater splendour 
than she had ever before done. As it is customary in England to go to Epsom or 
Tunbridge Wells in the summer season, so in Germany the quality usually frequent 
the Spa. Here our adventuress had the picking of a few feathers from an old 
gentleman who fell in love with her, and who had a good estate not many miles 
distant from Cologne, at Liege or Luget. By the assistance of the landlady she 
managed this affair with so much artifice that he presented her with several fine and 
valuable jewels, besides a gold chain with a very costly medal, which had been 
formerly given him for some remarkable good service under Count Tilley against the 
valiant King of Sweden, Gustavus Adolphus. The foolish old dotard urged his passion 
with all the vehemence of a young vigorous lover, pressing her to matrimony, and 
making her very large promises, till at last she gave her consent to espouse him in 
three days, and he left the preparation of things necessary to her care, giving her large 
sums of money for that purpose. Madam now perceived it was high time to be gone, 
and, in order to her setting off with the greater security, she acquainted her landlady 
with the design, who had before shared pretty largely in the spoils of the old captain. 
The hostess, to be sure, was willing to hearken to any proposal that would help her a 
little more to fleece the doting inamorato. The princess, however, was resolved this 
time to have all the booty to herself, and to accomplish this she persuaded her 
landlady to go into the town and get a place for her in some carriage that did not go to 
Cologne; because, she said, her lover should not know whither to follow her. The old 
trot saw that this precaution was very necessary, and therefore away goes she to 
provide for the safety of her guest, who was now sufficiently to reward her out of her 
dotard's favours. This was all our adventuress wanted, for as soon as she found herself 
left alone she broke open a chest, where she had observed her landlady to put all her 
treasure, and there she found not only what she had shared with her out of the old 
man's benevolence, but also an additional sum of money not inconsiderable. There is 
little reason to tell the reader that she took all that was worth taking, there being none 
of her character apt to spare what it is in their power to seize, though it be from a 
brother or sister of their own profession. Madam soon packed up her parcel, and 
having before privately made sure of a passage to Utrecht, she fled thither; from 
thence she went to Amsterdam, where she sold her gold chain, medal, and some of the 
jewels, then proceeded to Rotterdam, and then to the Brill, where she took shipping 
for England. She landed at Billingsgate one morning very early, about the latter end of 
March, in the year 1663, but found no house open till she came to the Exchange 
tavern, where she first obtained the title of "the German Princess," in the following 
manner.
	She was got into the aforesaid tavern, in company with some gentlemen, who, 
she perceived, were pretty full of money. These gentlemen addressing her in the 
manner usual on such occasions, she immediately feigned a cry, which she had always 
at command. The tears trickled down her cheeks, she sighed, she sobbed, and the 
cause being demanded, she told them that she little thought once of being reduced to 
such a wretched necessity as she was now in, of exposing her body to the pleasure of 
every bidder. Here she repeated the history of her extraction and education, telling 
them a great deal about her pretended father, the Lord Henry van Wolway, who, she 
said, was a sovereign Prince of the Empire, independent of any man but his sacred 
Imperial Majesty. "Certainly," continued she, "any gentleman may suppose what a 
mortification it must be to a woman born of such noble parents, and bred up in all the 
pomp of a Court, under the care of an indulgent father line missing out of mere pity, 
all the money they had about them, promising to meet her again with more. This they 
also accomplished, and ever afterwards called her the poor unfortunate German 
princess; which name she laid claim to in all companies.
	The Exchange tavern was kept by one Mr King, who was the same that kept it 
when our princess received her honorary title. As she was now come from foreign 
parts with a great deal of riches, he believed more than ever the truth of what she had 
before affirmed. Nor was madam backward in telling him that she had raised all her 
wealth by private contribution from some princes of the Empire who were acquainted 
with her circumstances, and to whom she had made herself known: adding, that not 
one of those who had given her anything dared to acquaint her father that they knew 
where she was, because they were all his neighbours, and vastly inferior to him in the 
number and strength of their forces. "For," said she, "my father is so inexorable that 
he would make war upon any prince whom he knew to extend his pity to me." John 
Carleton, whom we mentioned before as her third husband, was brother-in-law to Mr 
King. He made his addresses to the Princess van Wolway in the most dutiful and 
submissive manner that could be imagined, making use of his brother's interest to 
negotiate the affair between them, till with a great deal of seeming reluctance at 
marrying one of common blood, her highness consented to take him to her embraces. 
Now was Mr Carleton as great as his Majesty, in the arms of an imaginary princess; 
he formed to himself a thousand pleasures, which the vulgar herd could have no 
notion of; he threw himself at her feet in transport, and made use of all the rhetoric he 
could collect to thank her for the prodigious honour she had done him. But alas! how 
was he surprised when Mr King presented him with the following letter: —
	SIR, I am an entire stranger to your person, yet common justice and humanity 
oblige me to give you notice that the pretended princess, who has passed herself upon 
your brother, Mr John Carleton, is a cheat and an impostor. If I tell you, sir, that she 
has already married several men in our county of Kent, and afterwards made off with 
all the money she could get into her hands, I say no more than could be proved were 
she brought in the face of justice. That you may be certain I am not mistaken in the 
woman, please to observe that she has high breasts, a very graceful appearance, and 
speaks several languages fluently. Yours unknown, 
T. B.
	After Mrs Carleton (for so we may at present call her) had got rid of her 
husband, and of the prosecution for marrying him, she was entertained by the players, 
who were in hopes of gaining by a woman who had made such a considerable figure 
on the real theatre of the world. The house was very much resorted to upon her 
account, and she got a great deal of applause in her dramatical capacity, by the several 
characters she performed, which were generally jilt, coquette, or chambermaid, any 
one of which was agreeable to her artful intriguing genius; but what contributed most 
to her fame was a play, written purely upon her account, called The German Princess, 
from her name, and in which she performed a principal part, besides speaking the 
following epilogue: —
"I've passed one trial, but it is my fear 
I shall receive a rigid sentence here: 
You think me a bold cheat, put case 'twere so, 
Which of you are not? Now you'd swear I know. 
But do not, lest that you deserve to be 
Censur'd worse than you can censure me:, 
The world's a cheat, and we that move in it, 
In our degrees, do exercise our wit; 
And better 'tis to get a glorious name, 
However got, than live by common fame."
	The princess had too much mercury in her constitution to be long settled in 
any way of life whatsoever. The whole City of London was too little for her to act in. 
How was it possible then that she should be confined in the narrow limits of a theatre? 
She did not, however, leave the stage so soon but she had procured a considerable 
number of adorers, who, having either seen her person or heard of her fame, were 
desirous of a nearer acquaintance with her. As she was naturally given to company 
and gallantry, she was not very difficult of access; yet when you were in her presence, 
you were certain to meet with an air of indifference. There were two of her bullies 
who doted on her beyond all the rest, a couple of smart young fellows, who had 
abundance more in their pockets than they had in their heads. These, from a 
deficiency of wit in themselves, were very fond, in the large quantity, of that 
commodity which they discovered in our princess, and for that reason were frequently 
in her company. There is no doubt but they had other designs than just to converse 
with her, for they several times discovered an inclination to come a little nearer to her 
body. And madam was not so ignorant but she knew their meaning by their whining; 
she therefore gave them encouragement, till she had drained about three hundred 
pounds apiece out of them, and then, finding their stock pretty well exhausted, she 
turned them both off, telling them she wondered how they could have the impudence 
to pretend love to a princess.
	After this, an elderly gentleman fell into the same condition at seeing her as 
several had done before, though he was fifty years of age, and not ignorant of her 
former tricks. He was worth about four hundred pounds per annum, and immediately 
resolved to be at the charge of a constant maintenance, provided she would consent to 
live with him. To bring about which he made her several valuable presents of rings, 
jewels, etc. At last, after a long siege, he became master of the fort; yet in such a 
manner, that it seemed rather to be surrendered out of pure love and generosity than 
from any mercenary views, for she always protested against being corrupted, so far as 
to part with her honour, for the sake of filthy lucre, which is a common artifice of the 
sex. Our gentleman, though, as has been remarked, was sensible of what she was; yet 
by degrees he became so enamoured as to believe everything she said, and to look 
upon her as the most virtuous woman alive.
	Living now as man and wife, she seemed to redouble her endearments, and to 
give them all a greater air of sincerity, so that he was continually gratifying her with 
some costly present or another, which she always took care to receive with an 
appearance of being ashamed he should bear so many obligations on her, telling him 
continually that she was not worthy of so many favours. Thus did she vary her 
behaviour according to the circumstances and temper of the persons she had to deal 
with. At last our old lover came home one night very much in liquor, and gave her a 
jewel of five pounds value, and our princess thought this as proper a time as any she 
was like to meet with for her to make the most of his worship's passion. Accordingly, 
having got him to bed, and seen him fast asleep, which he soon was at this time, she 
proceeded to rifle him, finding his pocket-book, with a bill for one hundred pounds 
upon a goldsmith in the city, and the keys of his trunks and escritoires.
	She now proceeded to secure all that was worth her while; among other things 
she made herself mistress of twenty pieces of old gold, a gold watch, a gold seal, an 
old silver watch, and several pieces of plate, with other valuable movables, to the 
value in all of one hundred and fifty pounds. Now she thought it best for her to make 
off as fast as she could with her prize. So as soon as it was day she took coach and 
drove to the goldsmith, who mistrusted nothing, having seen her before with the 
gentleman, and instantly paid the ten pounds, upon which she delivered up the bill. 
Having thus overreached her old lover, madam took a convenient lodging, at which 
she passed for a virgin, with a fortune of one thousand pounds left her by an uncle; to 
this she added that her father was very rich, and able to give her as much more, but 
that disliking a man whom he had provided for her husband, she had left the country 
and retired to London, where she was in hopes none of her relations would find her. 
That this story might appear the more probable, she contrived letters from a friend, 
which were brought her continually, and in which she pretended she received an 
account of all that passed, with respect to her father and lover. These letters, being 
loosely laid about the chamber, were picked up by her landlady, who out of curiosity 
perused the contents, and by that means became more and more satisfied in her tenant.
	This landlady had a nephew of considerable substance, and it was now all her 
endeavour to make a match between him and her young gentlewoman, whom she 
soon brought to be pretty intimately acquainted together. The new lover presented her 
with a watch, as a token of his esteem for her person, but the poor innocent creature 
refused it with abundance of modesty. However, she was at last prevailed upon to 
accept this little favour, and the young man thought himself with one foot in Paradise 
already, that she was so condescending. Their amour after this went on to both their 
satisfactions, madam seeing a fair prospect of making a penny of her inamorato, and 
he not in the least doubting but he should obtain his wish, and one day or another 
enjoy that heaven of bliss which, as he frequently expressed it, was treasured in her 
arms.
	One day as they were conversing together, and entertaining each other with all 
the soft and tender endearments of young lovers, a porter knocks at the door, and, 
upon being admitted, delivers a letter to our lady, being introduced by the maid, who 
had received her instructions beforehand. Madam immediately opens and reads the 
letter; but scarce had she made an end before, altering her countenance, she shrieked 
out: "Oh, I am undone! I am undone!" All the company could scarce prevent her 
falling into a swoon, though the smelling bottle was at hand, and her young lover 
sitting by her who, to be sure, did not fail to use all the rhetoric he was master of, in 
order to comfort her, and learn the cause of her surprise. "Sir," quoth she at last, since 
you are already acquainted with most of my concerns, I shall not make a secret of this. 
Therefore, if you please, read this letter, and know the occasion of my affliction."
	The young gentleman received it at her hands, and read as follows: —
	DEAR MADAM, —I have several times taken my pen in hand, on purpose to 
write to you, and as often laid it aside again, for fear of giving you more trouble than 
you already labour under. However, as the affair so immediately concerns you, I 
cannot in justice hide what I tremble to disclose, but must in duty tell you the worst of 
news, whatever may be the consequence of my so doing. Know, then, that your 
affectionate and tender brother is dead. I am sensible how dear he was to you, and you 
to him; yet let me entreat you for your own sake to acquiesce in the will of Providence 
as much as possible, since our lives are all at His disposal Who gave us being. I could 
use another argument to comfort you, that with a sister less loving than you would be 
of more weight than that I have urged, but I know your soul is above all mercenary 
views. I cannot, however, forbear just to inform you that he has left you all he had; 
and you know further, that your father's estate of two hundred pounds per annum can 
now devolve upon nobody after his decease but yourself, who are now his only child.
	What I am next to acquaint you with may perhaps be almost as bad as the 
former particular. Your hated lover has been so importunate with your father, 
especially since your brother's decease, that the old gentleman resolves, if ever he 
should hear of you any more, to marry you to him, and he makes this the condition of 
your being received again into his favour, and having your former disobedience, as he 
calls it, forgiven. While your brother lived he was every day endeavouring to soften 
the heart of your father, and we were but last week in hopes he would have consented 
to let you follow your inclinations, if you would come home to him again; but now 
there is never an advocate in your cause who can work upon the old man's peevish 
temper, for he says, as you are now his sole heir, he ought to be more resolute in the 
disposal of you in marriage.
	While I am writing, I am surprised with an account that your father and lover 
are both preparing to come to London, where they say they can find you out. Whether 
or no this be only a device, I cannot tell, nor can I imagine where they could receive 
their information if it be true. However, to prevent the worst, consider whether or no 
you can cast off your old aversion, and submit to your father's commands; for if you 
cannot, it will be most advisable, in my opinion, to change your habitation. I have no 
more to say in the affair, being unwilling to direct you in such a very nice 
circumstance; the temper of your own mind will be the best instructor you can apply 
to, for your future happiness or misery, during life, depends on your choice. God grant 
that everything may turn for the better. From your friend, 
	S. E.
	Our young lover having read the letter, found that she had real cause to be 
afflicted. Pity for her, and, above all, a concern for his own interest, and the fear of 
losing his mistress to the country lover, through the authority of her father, put him 
upon persuading her to remove from her habitation and come to reside with him, 
having very handsome rooms, fit for the reception of a person of such high quality. 
Thither she went the next day with her maid, who knew her design, and had engaged 
to assist her therein to the utmost of her ability. When they were come into madam's 
bedchamber they resolved not to go to rest, that they might be ready to move off in 
the morning at the first opportunity. By turns they slept in their clothes on the bed, 
and towards morning, when all were fast but themselves, they went to work, broke 
open a trunk, took a bag with one hundred pounds in it, and several suits of apparel, 
and then slipped out, leaving our poor lover to look for his money and mistress 
together when he was stirring, both being by that time far enough out of his way.
	In a word, it would be impossible to relate half the tricks which she played, or 
mention half the lodgings in which she at times resided. Seldom did she miss carrying 
off a considerable booty wheresoever she came; at best she never failed of something, 
for all was fish that came to her net; where there was no plate, a pair of sheets, half-a-
dozen napkins or a pillow-bier — nay, even things of a less value than these — would 
serve her turn, rather than she would suffer her hands to be out of practice.
	One time she went to a mercer's in Cheapside with her pretended maid, where 
she agreed for as much silk as came to six pounds, and pulled out her purse to pay for 
it, but there was nothing therein but several particular pieces of gold, which she 
pretended to have a great value for. The mercer, to be sure, would not be so rude as to 
let a gentlewoman of figure part with what she had so much esteem for; so he ordered 
one of his men to go along with her to her lodgings, and receive the money there. A 
coach was ready, which she had brought along with her, and they all three went up 
into it. When they came to the Royal Exchange, madam ordered the coachman to set 
her down, pretending to the mercer that she wanted to buy some ribbons suitable to 
the silk; upon which he suffered the maid, without any scruple, to take the goods 
along with her, staying in the coach for their return. But he might have stayed long 
enough if he had attended till they came again, for they found means to get off into 
Threadneedle Street, and the young man having waited till he was quite weary made 
the best of his way home to rehearse his misfortune to his master.
	Something of a piece with this was a cheat she put upon a French master 
weaver in Spitalfields, from whom she bought to the value of forty pounds, taking 
him home with her to her lodging, and bidding him make a bill of parcels, for half the 
silk was for a kinswoman of hers in the next room. The Frenchman sat down very 
orderly to do as she bid him, whilst she took the silk into the next room for her niece 
to see it. Half-an-hour he waited pretty contentedly, drinking some wine which 
madam had left him. At last, beginning to be a little uneasy, he made bold to knock, 
when the people of the house came up, and upon his asking for the gentlewoman, told 
him she had been gone out some time, and was to come there no more. The poor man 
seeming surprised, they took him into the next room and showed him a pair of back 
stairs, which was the proper way to her apartment. Monsieur was at first in a passion 
with the people, till they convinced him that they knew nothing more of his 
gentlewoman than that she had taken their room for a month, which being expired, 
she had removed, they could not tell whither.
	The next landlord she had was a tailor, whom she employed to make up what 
she bilked the mercer and weaver of. The tailor imagined he had got an excellent job, 
as well as a topping woman for his lodger, so he fell to work immediately, and by the 
assistance of some journeymen, which he hired on this occasion, he got the clothes 
finished against a day which she appointed, when she pretended she was to receive a 
great number of visitors. Against the same time she gave her landlady twenty shillings 
to provide a supper, desiring her to send for what was needful, and she would pay the 
overplus next day. Accordingly an elegant entertainment was prepared, abundance of 
wine was drunk, and the poor tailor was as drunk as a beast. This was what our 
princess wanted, for the landlady going up to put her husband to bed, she and all her 
guests slipped out, one with a silver tankard, another with a salt, her maid with their 
clothes which were not on their backs; and, in a word, not one of them all went off 
empty-handed. Being got into the street, they put the maid and the booty into the 
coach, getting themselves into others, and driving by different ways to the place of 
their next residence, not one of them being discovered.
	Another time she had a mighty mind, it seems, to put herself into mourning, to 
which purpose she sent her woman to a shop in the New Exchange in the Strand, 
where she had bought some things the day before, to desire that the people would 
bring choice of hoods, knots, scarves, aprons, cuffs and other mourning accoutrements 
to her lodging instantly, for her father was dead, and she must be ready in so many 
days to appear at his funeral. The woman of the shop presently looked out the best she 
had of each of these commodities, and made the best of her way to madam's quarters. 
When she came there, the poor lady was sadly indisposed, so that she was not able to 
look over the things till after dinner; when, if madam milliner would please to come 
again, she did not doubt but they should deal. The good woman was very well 
satisfied, and refused to take her goods back again, but desired she might trouble her 
ladyship so far as to leave them there till she came again; which was very readily 
granted. At the time appointed comes our tradeswoman, and asks if the gentlewoman 
above-stairs was at home, but was told, to her great mortification, that she was gone 
out, they could not till whither, and that they believed she would never return again; 
for she had found means, before her departure, to convey away several of the most 
valuable parts of furniture in the room which she had hired. The next day confirmed 
their suspicions, and made both the landlord and milliner give her up for an impostor, 
and their goods for lost.
	Being habited, a la mode, all in sable, she took rooms in Fuller's Rents in 
Holborn, and sent for a young barrister of Gray's Inn. When Mr Justinian came, she 
told him she was heir to her deceased father, but that having an extravagant husband, 
with whom she did not live, she was willing to secure her estate in such a manner as 
that he might not enjoy the benefit of it, or have any command over it, for, if he had, 
she was certain of coming to want bread in a little time. Here she wept plentifully, to 
make her case have the greater effect, and engage the lawyer to stay with her till the 
plot she had laid could be executed. While the grave young man was putting his face 
into a proper position, and speaking to the affair in hand with all the learning of Coke, 
a woman came upstairs on a sudden, crying out: "O Lord, madam, we are all undone, 
for my master is below! He has been asking after you, and swears he will come up to 
your chamber. I am afraid the people of the house will not be able to hinder him, he 
appears so resolute." "O heavens!" says our counterfeit, "what shall I do?" "Why?" 
says the lawyer. "Why?" quoth she, "I mean for you, dear me; what excuse shall I 
make for your being here? I dare not tell him your quality and business; for that would 
endanger all. And, on the other side, he is extremely jealous. Therefore, good sir, step 
into that closet till I can send him away." The lawyer being surprised, and not 
knowing what to do on a sudden, complied with her request, and she locked him into 
the closet, drawing the curtains of the bed, and going to the door to receive her 
counterfeit husband, who by this time had demanded entrance.
	No sooner was our gentleman entered but he began to give his spouse the most 
opprobrious language he could invent. "O Mrs Devil," says he, "I understand you 
have a man in the room! A pretty companion for a poor innocent woman, truly! — 
one who is always complaining how hardly I use her. Where is the son of a whore? I 
shall sacrifice him this moment. Is this your modesty, madam? This your virtue? Let 
me see your gallant immediately, or, by the light, you shall be the first victim 
yourself." Upon this he made to the closet door, and forced it open in a great fury, as 
he had before been directed. Here he discovers our young lawyer, all pale and 
trembling, ready to sink through the floor at the sight of one from whom he could 
expect no mercy. Out flies the sword, and poor Littleton was upon his marrow-bones 
in a moment. just in this instant madam interposed, being resolved rather to die herself 
than see the blood of an innocent man spilt in her apartment, and upon her account. A 
companion also of our bully husband stepped up, and wrested the sword out of his 
hand by main strength, endeavouring to pacify him with all the reason and art he was 
master of. But still, that there might be no appearance of imposture, the more they 
strove the more enraged our injured poor cornuto appeared, for such he thought to 
make the lawyer believe he imagined himself. They could not, however, so effectually 
impose on our limb of the law as that he discerned nothing of the artifice. He began to 
see himself trepanned, and ventured to speak on his own behalf, and tell the whole 
truth of the story. But he might as well have said nothing; for the other insisted upon it 
that this was only pretence, and that he came there for other purposes. His honour was 
injured, and nothing would serve but blood, or other sufficient reparation. It was at 
last referred to the arbitration of the other man who came with the sham husband; and 
he proposed the sum of five hundred pounds to make up the matter. This was a large 
sum, and, indeed, more than the lawyer could well raise. However, he at last 
consented to pay down one hundred pounds rather than bring himself into fresh 
inconveniences which they obliged him immediately to send for, first looking over the 
note, to see that he did not send for a constable instead of the money. Upon the 
payment, they discharged him from his confinement.
	Not long after this our princess was apprehended for stealing a silver tankard 
in Covent Garden and, after examination, committed to Newgate. At the following 
sessions she was found guilty, and condemned, but was afterwards reprieved, and 
ordered for transportation. This sentence was executed, and she was sent to Jamaica, 
where she had not been above two years before she returned to England again, and set 
up for a rich heiress. By this means she got married to a very wealthy apothecary at 
Westminster, whom she robbed of above three hundred pounds and then left him. 
After this she took a lodging in a house where nobody lived but the landlady, a 
watchmaker, who was also a lodger, and herself and maid. When she thought her 
character here pretty well established, she one night invited the watchmaker and her 
landlady to go with her to see a play, pretending she had a present of some tickets. 
They consented, and only madam's maid, who was almost as good as herself, was left 
at home. She, according to agreement, in their absence broke open almost all the locks 
in the house, stole two hundred pounds in money, and about thirty watches; so that the 
prize, in all, amounted to about six hundred pounds, which she carried to a place 
before provided, in another part of the town. After the play was over, our princess 
invited her companions to drink with her at the Green Dragon tavern in Fleet Street, 
where she gave them the slip and went to her maid.
	We now proceed to the catastrophe of this prodigious woman, who, had she 
been virtuously inclined, was capable of being the phoenix of her age; for it was 
impossible for her not to be admired in everything she said and did. The manner of 
her last and fatal apprehension was as follows, we having taken the account from the 
papers of those times. One Mr Freeman, a brewer in Southwark, had been robbed of 
about two hundred pounds, whereupon he went to Mr Lowman, keeper of the 
Marshalsea, and desired him to search all suspicious places, in order to discover the 
thieves. One Lancaster was the person most suspected, and while they were searching 
a house near New Spring Gardens for him they spied a gentlewoman, as she seemed 
to be, walking in the two-pairs-of-stairs room in a night-gown. Mr Lowman 
immediately enters the room, spies three letters on the table, and begins to examine 
them. Madam seems offended with him, and their dispute caused him to look on her 
so steadfastly that he knew her, called her by her name, and carried away both her and 
her letters.
	This was in December 1672, and she was kept close prisoner till the 16th of 
January following, when she was brought by writ of habeas corpus to the Old Bailey, 
and asked whether or no she was the woman who usually went by the name of Mary 
Carleton, to which she answered that she was the same. The Court then demanded the 
reason of her returning so soon from the transportation she had been sentenced to. 
Here she made a great many trifling evasions to gain time, by which means she gave 
the bench two or three days' trouble. At last, when she found nothing else would do, 
she pleaded her belly; but a jury of matrons being called, they brought her in not quick 
with child. So that on the last day of the sessions she received sentence of death, in the 
usual form, with a great deal of intrepidity.
	After condemnation she had abundance of visitants, some out of curiosity, 
others to converse with her, learn her sentiments of futurity, and give her such 
instructions as were needful. Among the latter was a gentleman to whom she gave a 
great many regular responses; in which she discovered herself to be a Roman 
Catholic, professed her sorrow for her past life, and wished she had her days to live 
over again. She also blamed the women who were her jury for their verdict, saying 
she believed they could not be sure of what they testified, and that they might have 
given her a little more time.
	On the 22nd of January, which was the day of her execution, she appeared 
rather more gay and brisk than ever before. When her irons were taken off (for she 
was shackled) she pinned the picture of her husband Carleton on her sleeve, and in 
that manner carried it with her to Tyburn. Seeing the gentleman who had conversed 
with her, she said to him in French, "Mon ami, le bon Dieu vous benisse" — "My 
friend, God bless you." At hearing St Sepulchre's bell toll, she made use of several 
ejaculations. One Mr Crouch, a friend of hers, rode with her in the cart, to whom she 
gave at the gallows two Popish books, called The Key of Paradise and The Manual of 
Daily Devotion. At the place of execution she told the people that she had been a very 
vain woman, and expected to be made a precedent for sin; that though the world had 
condemned her, she had much to say for herself; that she prayed God to forgive her, 
as she did her enemies; and a little more to the same effect. After which she was 
turned off, in the thirty-eighth year of her age, and in the same month she was born in.
	Her body was put into a coffin and decently buried in St. Martin's churchyard, 
on which occasion a merry wag wrote this distich:
"The German princess here, against her will, 
Lies underneath, and yet oh, strange! lies still."


ANDREW RUTHERFORD OF TOWNHEAD 
Executed for the Murder of James Douglass, Brother to Sir William 
Douglass of Cavers, on 25th of November, 1674

	ANDREW RUTHERFORD was accused of having conceived deadly malice 
against James Douglass; that having dined together in a farmer's house on the 9th of 
July preceding, in company with several gentlemen, he, urged by this malevolent 
passion, on their way home from dinner, within half-a-mile of the town of Jedburgh, 
did murder Douglass, by giving him a mortal wound with a small sword through the 
arm, and through the body under the right pap, of which wounds he died within four 
hours; that he immediately fled to England, and would have embarked at South 
Shields, for Holland, had he not been apprehended. The prisoner pleaded self-defence.
	Robert Scott of Horslehill deposed that, about ten at night on the 9th of July, 
he, with Charles Ker of Abbotrule, William Ker of Newtown, and their servants, the 
prisoner, and the deceased, after dining at Swanside, called in the evening at the house 
of John Ker at Berchope, in their way to Jedburgh. Douglass was riding a little way 
before him, and Rutherford, who was at a distance behind, galloped up beyond him to 
Douglass. They rode a little way together, then alighted and drew their swords. On 
galloping up, he saw them pushing at each other, and called to them to desist; but 
before he could alight they were in each other's arms. He asked if there was any hurt 
done; to which Rutherford answered, none that he knew of; but at the same time 
Douglass held out his right hand, and said that he had got blood. He demanded their 
swords, which they immediately delivered to him. Instantly thereafter Douglass sunk 
down, and Rutherford fled. A surgeon was sent for from Jedburgh, they being but a 
quarter of a mile from the town. By his order Douglass was put on a horse — a man 
sitting behind, and one walking on each side. When they arrived at Jedburgh, 
Douglass was laid on a bed, but he died within two hours after receiving the wounds. 
Both in the field and when laid in bed he exclaimed: "Fie! fie! that I should be 
affronted by such a base man!" The witness did not hear him say he was wounded 
before he drew; as little did he hear him urge anything before his death in vindication 
of the prisoner.
	The jury returned their verdict on the 12th of November, unanimously finding 
the prisoner guilty; and on the 16th the Court passed sentence of death upon him, 
ordaining him to be beheaded on the 25th, at the Cross of Edinburgh.


GEORGE CLERK AND JOHN RAMSAY 
Executed 1st of March, 1675, for poisoning John Anderson, an Edinburgh 
Merchant; Kennedy, the Chemist's Apprentice who supplied them, being 
banished

	JOHN RAMSAY, servant to the deceased John Anderson, and George Clerk, 
late servant to Mr John Clerk of Penicuik, were prosecuted for the murder of John 
Anderson, merchant in Edinburgh, at the instance of Mr John Clerk of Penicuik, and 
James Clerk, merchant in Edinburgh, nephews to the deceased, and of Sir John Nisbet 
of Dirleton, his Majesty's advocate.
	The indictment set forth that the prisoners lived in the house with the 
deceased, and waited on him at the time of his death, and for some months preceding. 
The deceased was an unmarried person, and had nobody living in the house with him 
but the prisoners, who perfidiously abused the trust reposed in them. When their 
master was counting his money, having the room door shut upon him, they were in 
use to rap at the door, and when he opened it they slipped in and stole part of his 
money. The season was very sickly; a flux in particular raged with such violence that 
many died of it daily, and it was deemed so contagious that those who were not 
infected were afraid to approach the sick, from the danger of infection. The prisoners 
conspired to bring this disease upon their master. They consulted one Kennedy, 
apprentice to Thomas Henryson, apothecary in Edinburgh, in the month of October or 
November preceding, and got from him some purgative powders and drugs, which 
they administered to the deceased in his drink and otherwise. The first purging 
powder wrought slowly. They then got a white powder, which operated to their 
wishes; so that the deceased had recourse to Hugh Brown, apothecary, his ordinary 
medical adviser. The prisoners took advantage of the sickness they had brought on 
him, by combining to steal his money and jewels, which he kept in an iron chest. That 
they might steal with the greater security, they also applied to Kennedy for 
intoxicating or somniferous draughts, obtained from him a medicine which he called 
syrup of poppy, and gave it to their master when he was bad, and keeping the house, 
without his knowledge or that of Brown his apothecary. It was mixed in his drink, and 
he fell into a deep sleep. They took out his keys, opened his chest, carried off a large 
gold chain, gold bracelets, a gold ring with a blue stone, two pieces of gold, twelve of 
silver, and five purse pennies, silver buttons, brooches, and various other articles. 
They then got from Kennedy several drugs, which he called powder of jalap and 
crystal of tartar, which they gave to their master. Clerk told Kennedy that, their master 
being ill, they had stolen several pieces of coin from him, and that there were three 
bags of money in his chest; that they were resolved to take some of it, and would give 
Kennedy a part. They gave the jalap and the tartar to their master, to counteract the 
effect of Brown's prescriptions.
	On the Wednesday preceding their master's death, which happened on 
Monday, the 15th of November, 1674, Anderson's friends visited him, and he told 
them he was greatly better. On this the prisoners, fearing his recovery, and that he 
should discover their practices, came to a positive resolution to murder him, 
communicated it to Kennedy, and sought poison from him to effect their purpose. But 
Kennedy would not give poison, saying the body would swell, and so they would be 
discovered; but he would give a powder which would do the business slowly, and 
which he would engage would kill their master in a month. They got a powder 
accordingly, which Kennedy called powder of jalap, but which either in quality, 
quantity, or frequency of being administered, was truly poison. On the five days 
immediately preceding his death the prisoners and their associate Kennedy held 
frequent consultations in the shop of Kennedy's master, in the house of the deceased, 
and in the King's Park. They gave Kennedy part of what they had already stolen, and 
promised him an equal share of their future plunder. On Saturday night the deceased 
was so well that his apothecary said he would not visit him next day. On Sunday he 
was not thought near death, but rose, dressed himself, and supped in his usual style. 
On Sunday night the prisoners mixed some drugs in conserve of roses that had been 
prescribed for him by his own apothecary. These were so poisonous that he died on 
Monday morning at ten o'clock. At five o'clock their master called for the bed-pan, 
which they gave him; they then ran to the iron chest, filled their hands with jewels, 
goods, and money belonging to their dying master, and did not look near him till 
about eight o'clock, when they found him speechless, the whites of his eyes turned up, 
and the bed swimming around him. They then called in the neighbours to see him die.
	Both the prisoners emitted confessions corresponding in general to the charge 
in the indictment. They added that, before they conceived the idea of giving their 
master drugs to bereave him of life, they had frequently been in use to infuse powders 
in his drink, which made him outrageously drunk, that they might make sport of him 
in his drunkenness — a dreadful lesson to beware of the first steps in vice. Had they 
not infused powders to make their master drunk, in order to gratify a barbarous and 
disrespectful mirth, the idea of taking away his life by similar means would not have 
occurred to them.
	They were convicted, and sentenced on the 8th of February to be hanged at the 
Cross of Edinburgh on the 1st of March, and their movable goods to be forfeited. The 
trial of Kennedy, the apothecary's apprentice, for furnishing the medicines, was 
brought on upon the 22nd of February, 1676, and after various adjournments, and a 
tedious confinement of eighteen months, he, on his own petition, on the 30th of July, 
1677, was banished for life.


PHILIP, EARL OF PEMBROKE AND MONTGOMERY 
Tried for the Murder of Nathaniel Cony by his Brother Peers in 1678 and 
found guilty of Manslaughter later

	AN indictment for murder against a peer, which necessitated his being tried by 
his brother peers, occurred in 1678, accused being Philip, Earl of Pembroke and 
Montgomery, and the dead man Nathaniel Cony, gentleman.
	The Lords came from their House above, in their usual order, to the court 
erected for them in Westminster Hall; and the Lord High Steward's commission being 
read, as also the certiorari to the commissioners, before whom the indictment was 
found, and the return thereof, the Constable of the Tower was commanded to return 
his precept, and bring his prisoner to the bar. The Constable of the Tower being a 
peer, Sir John Robinson, his lieutenant, brought the Earl of Pembroke to the bar; after 
which the Lord High Steward made a speech to the prisoner, wherein he acquainted 
him that he stood charged with no less a crime than murder by the grand jury of the 
county of Middlesex, who were all men of quality; but that this was no more than an 
accusation, upon which their Lordships should not prejudge him, the examination of 
the grand jury having been but partial. That his lordship was now to be tried in full 
Parliament, and not by a select number of Lords. That the being made a spectacle to 
such august assembly, and having his faults and weaknesses exposed, must be very 
mortifying; and it behoved his lordship to recollect himself, and use his utmost 
caution in his defence, but advised him not to let the disgrace of standing as a felon at 
the bar too much deject him, or the terrors of justice amaze him; for whatever might 
lawfully be hoped for, his lordship might expect from the peers; and if he were 
dismayed, when he considered how inexorable the rule of law was in the case of 
blood (which their Lordships indeed could not depart from), yet it might be a support 
to him to consider that nothing but plain and positive proof, and such as deserved to 
be called evidence, would be received against him. That their Lordships thought 
themselves bound in honour to be counsel for him in matters of law; and that, though 
there were counsel to plead against him, no skill or arguments could pervert their 
Lordships' justice. He should not fall by the charms of eloquence, or be depressed by 
anything but the burden of his crime, and even as to that all candid allowances would 
be made.
	Then the prisoner was arraigned, and held up his hand. Mr Richard Savage 
deposed that, being in company with my Lord Pembroke at Mr Long's in the 
Haymarket on 4th of February, 1678, and Mr Cony making a great noise at the bar, 
my lord looked out at the door of the room where they were, and seeing Mr Cony, 
invited him and his friend Mr Goring into the room, and after some time falling into 
discourse, Mr Goring used some impertinent language to my lord, and told his 
lordship he was as good or a better gentleman than he; upon which my lord threw a 
glass of wine in Goring's face, and stepped back and drew his sword; and Goring 
being about to draw his, the deponent took it from him and broke it, and persuaded 
my lord to put up his sword again; but to prevent more words, the deponent shoved 
Mr Goring out of the room, and while the deponent was thrusting him out he heard a 
bustle be hind him, and, leaving the drawer to keep Mr Goring out, he turned, and saw 
my Lord Pembroke strike Mr Cony, who immediately fell down, and then my lord 
gave him a kick; and then, finding Mr Cony did not stir, my lord and the deponent 
took him off the ground and laid him on the chairs, and covered him up warm.
	THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL: Did my lord kick him but once?
	SAVAGE: My lord kicked him but once that I saw, and that was on the body, 
and not with a very great force. We chafed his temples, and he opened his eyes, but 
did not speak; when I asked him if he knew me he shook his head as if he did, and 
then closed his eyes again.
	THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL: What condition was he in before that 
accident?
	SAVAGE: He was very drunk, and, I think, proposed some thing about play to 
my lord; but how my lord came to strike him I cannot tell, for I was putting Goring 
out of the room.
	Similar evidence and evidence as to the dead man's internal injuries having 
been given, the Lord High Steward asked: Will your lordship say anything for 
yourself?
	EARL OF PEMBROKE: I have nothing more to say, my Lord.
	Mr Solicitor having summed up the evidence for the King, the Lords went to 
their House above, and after two hours' debate returned, and having taken their places, 
the Lord High Steward, beginning with the puisne baron (my Lord Butler), demanded 
of their Lordships severally in their order if Philip, Earl of Pembroke and 
Montgomery, were guilty of the felony and murder whereof he stood indicted, or not 
guilty. And my Lord High Steward having numbered them, declared that six of their 
Lordships had found the prisoner guilty of murder, eighteen had found him not guilty, 
and forty had found him guilty of manslaughter. Then the prisoner was commanded to 
be brought to the bar again, and the Lord High Steward acquainted him that the 
judgment of the Lords was, that he was guilty of manslaughter; and demanded what 
he could say why judgment should not pass upon him to die, according to law.
	The Earl of Pembroke answered that he claimed the privilege of the statute.
	The Lord High Steward told him he must have it; for as by the Act clergy was 
allowed to a commoner by reading and burning in the hand, a peer convicted of such 
felony was to be delivered without either; but his lordship would do well to take 
notice that no man could have the benefit of that statute but once.


THE REV. ROBERT FOULKES 
Executed 31st of January, 1679, for the Murder of his newly-born Babe

	THIS unhappy gentleman was a divine of the Church of England, and had 
been very much esteemed for his learning and abilities. Few men were more capable 
of shining in a church, or had a greater share of that sacred eloquence so requisite in a 
preacher. He was minister of Stanton-Lacy, in the county of Salop, where he was 
exceedingly followed and admired till his crimes came to be known, and where he 
might have been beloved till death in a natural way had taken him hence, and then 
universally lamented, if his heart had been as well furnished with grace as his head 
was with knowledge and his tongue with expressions.
	A young gentlewoman of a considerable fortune, who had been left an infant 
by her parents, was committed to his care by her executors, as to a man who, they 
trusted, would not only deal justly by her, but also instruct her betimes in the 
principles of religion, and her several duties as a Christian. But, alas! how weak is 
human nature, and how soon are we tempted aside from the ways of piety! Mr 
Foulkes, instead of answering the purpose of the young woman's friends, was soon 
smitten with her charms, and took an opportunity of discovering a criminal passion 
for her, though he had at that time a virtuous wife and two children living. The young 
lady too easily consented to gratify his lust, and they continued their conversation 
together till she became pregnant.
	All the means he could think of to procure abortion were now tried, and they 
all proved ineffectual; so that they must be both exposed to scandal, unless she could 
be removed to some convenient place, remote from the eyes of the world, and from 
the jealousies of Mrs Foulkes, where she might be delivered of her burden, which was 
not yet perceived. A plausible excuse for his going up to London was soon formed, 
and for his taking Miss along with him, who at that time was under twenty years of 
age. When they arrived in town they took a lodging in York Buildings in the Strand, 
where she lay in, and where (shocking to think of! ) the child was privately murdered, 
to prevent the infamy that might follow.
	But divine vengeance would not suffer this horrible deed to remain long 
concealed, for before Mr Foulkes went out of town the girl was examined upon the 
suspicion of some women, when she confessed the whole, and charged Mr Foulkes 
with the murder, who was thereupon apprehended and committed to Newgate; in a 
short time after which he was condemned at the sessions house in the Old Bailey, 
upon the evidence of the young woman. On the 31st of January, 1679, he was 
executed at Tyburn.


CAPTAIN RICHARD DUDLEY 
[Note: The two versions of this man's life given in different editions are so 
dissimilar that they may be two different men. Both are given here]

VERSION A
	RICHARD DUDLEY was a gentleman descended of a very good family in 
Northamptonshire, but his father being ruined for exerting his loyalty in the time of 
the unhappy rebellion, when a cursed republican party most villainously murdered 
King Charles I. before his own palace, he had little or no estate left him; yet, for his 
father's sake, King Charles II., after his restoration, gave him a captain's commission 
in a regiment of foot; in which post he behaved himself very sincere; for being at 
Tangier, and one day the regiment ordered to be drawn out in battalia, Captain Dudley 
perceiving one of the men belonging to his company to stand a little out of his rank, 
he presently commanded a sergeant to knock him down. Accordingly the command 
was obeyed, but not to his liking; for calling the sergeant to him again, and taking the 
halberd out of his hand, quoth he: "When I command you to knock down a man, 
knock him down thus." So with the right end of the halberd he cleft his skull in two; 
of which he immediately died. When Tangier was demolished, and all our forces were 
then recalled from thence, Dick Dudley came into England at the same time; but 
living here at a very extravagant rate, he could support himself in no manner of way 
but by taking on the road what he thought was a fair prize. The highway he quickly 
made his exchange, and would venture very boldly for what he got; but one time, 
being apprehended in London for robbing the Duke of Monmouth near Harrow-on-
the-Hill, he was committed to the Poultry Compter, whither a man need not sail, for 
this prison is a ship of itself, where the master-side is the upper deck, and they in the 
common-side lie under hutches, and help to ballast it. Intricate cases are the tacklings, 
executions the anchors, capiases the cables, Chancery bills the huge sails, a long term 
the mainmast, law the helm, a judge the pilot, a barrister the purser, an attorney the 
boatswain, his clerk the swabber, bonds the waves, outlawries sudden gusts, the 
verdicts of juries rough winds, and extents the rocks that split all in pieces. Or, if it be 
not a ship, yet this and a ship, differ not much in the building, for the one is a moving 
misery, the other standing. The first is seated on a spring, the second on piles. Either 
this place is the emblem of a bawdy-house or a bawdy-house of it, for nothing is to be 
seen in any room but scurvy beds and bare walls; nevertheless it is a sort of a 
university of poor scholars, in which three arts are chiefly studied — viz. to pray, to 
curse and to write letters. But Dudley, breaking out of this mansion of sorrow and 
tribulation, not long after obtaining his liberty met with John Wilmot, Earl of 
Rochester, coming from his seat at Woodstock, and setting on his lordship and his 
retinue, which was his chaplain, a couple of footmen and a groom, he took from him 
above one hundred guineas and a gold watch. The chaplain then beginning to 
catechise Dudley for his unlawful actions, quoth he: "I don't think I commit any sin in 
robbing a person of quality, because I keep generally pretty close to the text, 'Feed the 
hungry and send the rich empty away '"; which was true in the main, for whenever he 
had got any considerable booty from great people, he would very generously extend 
his charity to such as he really knew to be poor. After this exploit, Dick Dudley 
meeting Captain Richardson, the keeper of Newgate, on the road betwixt London and 
Tunbridge, in whose clutches he had been three or four times, he commanded him to 
stand and deliver; but Richardson refusing to deliver, withal threatening what he 
would do if ever he came into his custody again, quoth he: "I expect no favour from 
the hands of a jailer, who comes of the race of those angels that fell with Lucifer from 
Heaven, whither you'll never return again. Of all your bunches of keys, not one hath 
wards to open that door; for a jailer's soul stands not upon those two pillars that 
support Heaven, Justice and Mercy; it rather sits upon those two footstools of Hell, 
Wrong and Cruelty. So make no more words about your purse, for have it I will, or 
else your life." Hereupon Captain Richardson was obliged to grant his request, and 
betwixt Dudley and the waters drinking at Tunbridge, went home as well purged and 
cleansed as a man could desire. This daring robber had committed several most 
notorious robberies on the road with that famous highwayman on whom King Charles 
II. was pleased to confer the name of Swiftnicks, from his robbing a gentleman near 
Barnet about five in the morning, being come then from Bosom's Inn in London, and 
taking from him five hundred and sixty guineas. He rode straight to York, and 
appeared there on the bowling-green about six in the evening of the same day; and 
being apprehended and tried for the aforesaid robbery, before Judge Twisden, being 
acquitted of it, and the judge mistrusting something of the matter, after strictly 
examining him, Mr Nicks, otherwise called Swiftnicks, owned the fact when he was 
out of danger, and was made a captain in the Lord Moncastle's regiment in Ireland, 
where he married a great fortune, and afterwards lived very honest. But at last, this 
country being too hot for Dick Dudley, upon the account of robbing General Monk, 
who had ordered a strict search to be made after him, he was forced to fly into France; 
from whence, travelling to Rome, he was in very great necessity indeed. Not long 
after his arrival into this kingdom again, meeting with a Justice of the Peace on the 
road betwixt Midhurst and Horsham, in the county of Sussex, "Stand and deliver" was 
the language which he spoke to his worship, who, making a very stout resistance, shot 
Dudley's horse under him; but at the same time, being wounded in his arm, he was 
obliged to surrender at discretion. Then the resolute highwayman, searching his 
pockets, out of which he took twenty-eight guineas, a gold watch and silver tobacco-
box, next securing the magistrate's horse, quoth he: "Since your worship has 
previously broke the peace, in committing a most horrid and barbarous murder on my 
prancer, which, with my assistance, was able to get his living in any ground in 
England, I must make bold to take your horse by way of reprisal; however, I'll not be 
so uncivil as to let a man of your character go home afoot, for, for once, and not use it, 
I'll make one Justice of the Peace carry another." So, stepping into a field where an ass 
was grazing, he brought him into the road, and putting the justice on his back, as he 
was tying his legs under the beast's belly, quoth he: "I know I offend against the rules 
of heraldry, in putting metal upon metal, but as there's no general rule without an 
exception, I doubt not but all the heralds will excuse this solecism committed in their 
art, which I look upon to be as great a bite and cheat as astrology." Thus taking his 
leave of the justice, his worship rode a very solemn pace, till the grave creature 
brought him safe into Petworth, where his worship had as many people staring at him 
as if he had been riding through the town in triumph.
	At last, Dick Dudley attempting to rob the Duke of Lauderdale, when riding 
over Hounslow Heath, he was conquered in his enterprise, and committed to 
Newgate; and when he came to his trial at justice hall in the Old Bailey, above eighty 
indictments being preferred against him for robberies committed only in the county of 
Middlesex, he pleaded guilty. Then, receiving sentence of death, he was (though great 
intercession was made for his life to King Charles) executed at Tyburn, on 
Wednesday, the 22nd of February, 1681, aged forty-six years.
VERSION B
        Captain Dudley was born at Swepston in Leicestershire. His father once 
possessed a considerable estate, but through extravagance he lost the whole except 
sixty pounds per annum. In these reduced circumstances he went to London, intending 
to live in obscurity, corresponding to the state of his finances.
	Richard his son had a promising genius, and received a liberal education at St 
Paul's school. But a natural vicious disposition baffled all restraints. When only nine 
years old he showed his covetous disposition, by robbing his sister of thirty shillings, 
and flying off with that sum. In a few days, however, he was found, brought home, 
and sent to school. But his vicious disposition strengthened by indulgence. Impatient 
at the confinement of a school, he next robbed his father of a considerable sum of 
money, and absconded. But his father discovered his retreat, and found him a little 
way from town in the company of two lewd women.
	Despairing of his settling at home, his father sent him on board a man of war, 
in which he sailed up the Straits, and behaved gallantly in several actions. Upon his 
arrival in England, he left the ship, on pretence that a younger officer had been 
preferred before him, upon the death of one of the lieutenants. In a short time he 
joined a band of thieves, assisted them in robbing the country house of Admiral 
Carter, and escaped detection.
	The next remarkable robbery in which he was engaged, was that of breaking 
into the house of a lady of Blackheath, and carrying off a large quantity of plate.
	He and his associates were also successful in selling the plate to a refiner; but 
in a short time he was apprehended for this robbery, and committed to Newgate 
prison. While there, he sent for the refiner, and severely reproached him in the 
following manner: 'It is,' said he, 'a hard thing to find an honest man and a fair dealer: 
for, you cursed rogue, among the plate you bought, there was a cup with a cover; 
which you told us was but silver gilt, and bought it at the same price with the rest; but 
it plainly appeared, by the advertisement in the gazette, that it was a gold cup and 
cover; but I see you are a rogue, and that there is no trusting anybody.' Dudley was 
tried, convicted for this robbery, and sentenced to death; but his youth and the interest 
of his friends, procured him a royal pardon.
	For two years he conducted himself to the satisfaction of his father, so that he 
purchased for him a commission in the army. In that situation he also acquitted 
himself honourably, and married a young lady of a respectable family, with whom he 
received an estate of an hundred and forty pounds a year. This, with his commission, 
enabled them to live in a genteel manner. Delighting, however, in company, and 
having become security for one of his companions of a debt, and that person being 
arrested for it, one of the bailiffs was killed in the scuffle, and Dudley was suspected 
as having been the murderer.
	Having by frequent crimes vanquished every virtuous feeling, and being more 
inclined to live upon the ruins of his country than the fruits of industry, he abandoned 
his own house, and joined a band of robbers. Dudley soon became so expert, that 
there was scarcely any robbery committed, but he acted a principal part. Pleased with 
this easy way of obtaining money, and supporting an extravagant expense, he also 
prevailed upon Will his brother to join him in his employment. It happened, however, 
that Will had not been long in his new occupation, when the Captain was apprehended 
for robbing a gentleman of a watch, a sword, a whip, and nine shillings. But 
fortunately for him the evidence was defective, and he escaped death a second time.
	Now, hardened in vice, he immediately returned to his old trade. He robbed on 
the highway, broke into houses, picked pockets, or performed any act of violence or 
cunning by which he could procure money. For a length of time he went on with 
impunity, but was at last apprehended for robbing Sir John Friend's house. Upon trial 
the evidence was decisive, and he received sentence of death. His friends again 
interposed, and through their influence his sentence was changed for that of 
banishment. Accordingly, he and several other convicts were put on board a ship 
bound for Barbados. But they had scarcely reached the Isle of Wight, when he excited 
his companions to a conspiracy, and having concerted their measures while the ship's 
company were under the hatches, they went off with the long boat.
	No sooner had he reached the shore than he abandoned his companions, and 
travelled through woods and by-paths. Being in a very mean dress, he begged when 
he had no opportunity to steal. Arriving however at Hounslow Heath, he met with a 
farmer, robbed him, seized his horse, and having mounted, set forward in quest of 
new spoils. This was a fortunate day, for Dudley had not proceeded far on the heath 
when a gentleman well dressed, and better mounted than the farmer, made his 
appearance. He was commanded to halt and surrender. Dudley led him aside in a 
secret thicket, exchanged clothes and horse, rifled his pockets, then addressed him, 
saying, "That he ought never to accuse him of robbing him, for, according to the old 
proverb, exchange was no robbery;" so bidding him good day, he rode off for London. 
Arrived there he went in search of his old associates, who were glad to see their 
friend; who in consequence of his fortunate adventures and high reputation among 
them, received the title of Captain, and all agreed to be subject to his commands. 
Thus, at the head of such an experienced and desperate band, no part of the country 
was secure from his rapine, nor any house sufficiently strong to keep him out. The 
natural consequences were, that he soon became known and dreaded all over the 
country.
	To avoid being taken, and to prevent all enquiries, he paid a visit to the north 
of England, and being one day in search of plunder, he robbed a Dutch Colonel of his 
horse, arms, and fine laced coat. Thus equipped, he committed several robberies. He 
at length, however, laid aside his colonel's habit, only using his horse, who soon 
became dexterous at his new employment. But one day meeting a gentleman near 
Epsom, he resisted the Captain's demands, and discharged his pistol at Dudley. In the 
combat, however, he was victorious, wounded the gentleman in the leg, and having 
stripped him of his money, conveyed him to the next village, that he might receive 
medical assistance, and then rode off in search of new adventures. The Captain and 
his men were very successful in this quarter. No stage, nor coach, nor passenger, of 
which they had intelligence, could escape their depredations, and scarcely a day 
passed without some notorious robbery being committed.
	Captain Dudley and his men went on in a continued course of success, 
acquiring much wealth, which was as soon dissipated in riot and extravagance, as 
their extravagance was equal to their gains.
	One day, however, having attacked and robbed the Southampton coach, they 
were keenly pursued, and several of them taken, but Dudley escaped. Deprived of the 
chief of his own forces, he now joined himself to some house-breakers, and with them 
continued to commit many robberies; in particular, with three others, he entered the 
house of an old woman in Spitalfields, gagged her, bound her to a chair, and rifled the 
house of a considerable sum of money, which the good woman had been long in 
scraping together. Hearing the money clink that was going to be taken from her, she 
struggled in her chair, fell down upon her face, and was stifled to death, while the 
Captain and his companions went off with impunity. But when the old woman came 
to be interred, a grandchild of hers, who had been one of the robbers, when about to 
be fitted with a pair of gloves, changed his countenance, was strongly agitated, and 
began to tremble. He was suspected, charged with the murder, confessed the crime, 
and, informing upon the rest, two of them were taken, tried and condemned, and all 
three hung in chains.
	But though Dudley's name was published as accessory to the murder, yet he 
long escaped detection. At length, however, he was apprehended, and charged with 
several robberies, of which he, by dexterous management, evaded the deserved 
punishment. He was also called to stand trial for the murder of the old woman; but the 
principal evidence, upon whose testimony the other three were chiefly condemned, 
being absent, he escaped suffering for that crime. The dexterous manner in which he 
managed that trial, the witnesses that he had suborned, and the manner in which he 
maintained his innocence before the jury were often the cause of his boast and 
amusement.
	The profligate Dudley was no sooner relieved from prison than he hastened to 
join his own companions in vice. Exulting to see their Captain again at their head, 
they redoubled their activity, and committed all manner of depredations. Among other 
adventures, they robbed a nobleman on Hounslow Heath of fifteen hundred pounds, 
after a severe engagement with his servants, three of whom were wounded, and two 
had their horses shot under them.
	Having at length with his companions committed so many robberies upon the 
highway, a proclamation was issued against them, offering a reward to those who 
should bring them, either dead or alive. This occasioned their detection in the 
following manner: Having committed a robbery, and being closely pursued to 
Westminster ferry, the wherrymen refused to carry any more that night. Two of them 
then rode off, and the other four gave their horses to a waterman to lead to the next 
inn. The hones being foaming with sweat, he began to suspect that they were robbers 
who had been keenly pursued. He communicated his suspicions to the constable, who 
secured the horses, and went in search of the men.
	He was not long in seizing one of them. He confessed, and the constable 
hastening to the inn, secured the rest, and having placed a strong guard upon them, 
rode to Lambeth and securing the other two, led them before a justice of the peace, 
who committed them to Newgate.
	At the next sessions Captain Dudley, his brother, and three other accomplices, 
were tried, and condemned to suffer death. After sentence, Captain Dudley was 
brought to Newgate, where he conducted himself agreeably to his sad situation. He 
was conveyed from Newgate with six other prisoners. He appeared cheerful, but his 
brother lay all the time sick in the cart. The ceremonies of religion being performed, 
they were launched into another world, to answer for the numerous crimes of their 
guilty lives.
	The bodies of the Captain and his brother were put into separate coffins, to be 
conveyed to a disconsolate father; at the sight he was so overwhelmed, that he sunk 
upon the dead bodies and expired. Thus the father and the two sons were buried in one 
grave.


CAPTAIN VRATZ, JOHN STERN AND GEORGE 
BOROSKY 
Foreigners who murdered Thomas Thynn, Esq., in Pall Mall, on behalf, it 
was alleged, of Count Coningsmark. Executed 10th of March, 1682

	CHRISTOPHER VRATZ, the youngest son of a very good gentleman, and 
born in Pomerania, a country adjoining Poland, having but a very small patrimony left 
him, he was incited, through the slenderness of his fortune, to betake himself to the 
highway; and, being a man of great courage and undaunted spirit, he ventured on such 
attempts by himself which would not be undertaken by half-a-dozen men; for once 
John Sobieski, King of Poland, who, with the Duke of Lorraine, raised the siege of 
Vienna, going disguised out of the Christian camp, in company only with three 
officers, to observe the motion of the Turks, he intercepted his coming back, and 
robbed him and his attendants of as many diamonds, which he sold to a Jew at Vienna 
for above eight thousand ducatoons, besides taking from them a considerable quantity 
of gold. He had also committed some robberies in Hungary; but, having somewhat of 
a more generous soul than always to get his bread by that diminutive way of living, he 
was, contrary to all others of that profession, not extravagant whilst he maintained 
himself by those scaring words, "Stand and deliver;" therefore having saved a good 
purse by him, he bought a captain's commission in a regiment in the Emperor of 
Germany's service.
	Whilst he was in this post he became acquainted with Charles John, Count 
Coningsmark, and came over with him into England; where the said Count, being 
balked in his amours with a certain Lady Ogleby Thomas Thynn, Esq., his ill success 
therein he so highly resented that nothing could pacify his resentment but the death of 
his rival. Captain Vratz being made privy to his disgust procured two other assassins 
— namely, John Stern, a lieutenant, and George Borosky alias Boratzi — who, about 
a quarter after eight at night, on Sunday, the 12th of February, 1681, meeting Esquire 
Thynn riding in his coach up to St James's Street, from the Countess of 
Northumberland's, Borosky, a Polander, shot him with a blunderbuss, which mortified 
him after such a barbarous manner that Mr Hobbs, an eminent chirurgeon, found in 
his body four bullets, which had torn his guts, wounded his liver and stomach and 
gall, broke one of his ribs, and wounded the great bone below, of which wounds he 
died.
	These murderers being taken the next day, and carried before justice 
Bridgman, he committed them to Newgate; from whence being brought to the Old 
Bailey on Tuesday, the 28th of February following, they were tried before the Lord 
Chief Justice Pemberton, before a jury half English and half foreigners (all three 
prisoners being foreign).
	The jury, after retiring half-an-hour, brought in the three principals guilty, but 
acquitted the Count of the charge of procuring the others to commit the murder. He 
was ordered, however, to enter into a recognizance with three sureties, to appear the 
next sessions, and answer any appeal that might be brought by Mr Thynn's relations. 
The other three being brought to the bar again, and asked what they had to say why 
sentence of death should not be passed upon them, Vratz insisted he had not had a fair 
trial, and Stern said it was for Captain Vratz's sake he was concerned in the fact. And 
as to Borosky, he did not pretend to make any apology for the murder, considering 
himself to be under an obligation of obeying his superiors without reserve.
	Whereupon sentence of death was pronounced upon the principals by the 
recorder, the judges having left the bench. Dr Gilbert Burnet writes thus of Captain 
Vratz: It is certain that never man died with more resolution and less signs of fear, or 
the least disorder. His carriage in the cart, both as he was led along and at the place of 
execution, was astonishing; he was not only undaunted, but looked cheerful, and 
smiled often. When the rope was put about his neck he did not change colour nor 
tremble; his legs were firm under him. He looked often about on those who stood in 
balconies and windows, and seemed to fix his eyes on some persons. Three or four 
times he smiled . He would not cover his face as the rest did, but continued in that 
state, often looking up to heaven, with a cheerfulness in his countenance, and a little 
motion of his hands. I asked him if he had anything to say to the people. He said 
"No." After he had whispered a short word to a gentleman, he was willing the rope 
should be tied to the gibbet. He called for the German minister; but the crowd was 
such that it was not possible for him to come near. So he desired me to pray with him 
in French; but I told him I could not venture to pray in that language, but, since he 
understood English, I would pray in English. I observed he had some touches in his 
mind when I offered up that petition that for the sake of the blood of Christ the 
innocent blood shed in that place might be forgiven and that the cry of the one for 
mercy might prevail over the cry of the other for justice.
	At these words he looked up to heaven with the greatest sense that I had at any 
time observed in him. After I prayed he said nothing but that he was now going to be 
happy with God; so I left him. He continued in his undaunted manner, looking up 
often to heaven, and sometimes round about him, to the spectators. After he and his 
two fellow-sufferers had stood about a quarter of an hour under the gibbet they were 
asked when they would give the signal for their being turned off. He answered that 
they were ready, and that the cart might be driven away when it pleased the sheriff to 
order it. So, a little while after, it was driven away. And thus they all ended their lives.
	As for Lieutenant Stern, the illegitimate son of a baron of Sweden, afterwards 
made a count, and Borosky the Polander, they were very penitent from first to last, 
being with Captain Vratz, aged thirty-eight, executed in the Pall Mall on Friday, the 
10th of March, 1682; but Borosky was afterwards hung up in chains, a little beyond 
Mile End, by the command of King Charles II.
	Mr Echard gives us the following account of Lady Ogle, — "Josceline, late 
Earl of Northumberland, of the family of Percy, dying in the year 1670, left no issue 
but the Lady Elizabeth, his daughter and sole heir (at the time of his death about four 
years of age), who, possessing a great fortune, was in her minority married to Henry, 
Earl of Ogle, son and heir to the Duke of Newcastle, who, dying soon after, left her a 
virgin widow; after which many people of the first quality made their addresses to her, 
and among the rest Count Coningsmark, whose pretensions, it is said, were 
countenanced by the King. But the young lady, by her grandmother's contrivance, was 
married privately, the summer before the accident happened, to Mr Thynn, a 
gentleman of ten-thousand-pounds-a-year estate, who had been a member of several 
Parliaments and made some figure both within the House and out of it. But whether 
the lady herself did not approve of the match, or was put upon it by others, she 
privately went over to Holland in Michaelmas Term, 1681, before Mr Thynn had ever 
cohabited with her."


WILLIAM NEVISON 
A Highwayman who, dying Of the Plague as was thought, reappeared as his 
own Ghost, and was finally executed at York in 1684

	WILLIAM NEVISON was born at Pomfret in Yorkshire, about the year 1639, 
of well-reputed, honest, and reasonably estated parents, who bred him up at school, 
where he made some progress as to his learning, and in the spring of his youth 
promised a better harvest than the summer of his life produced; for, to say truth, he 
was very forward and hopeful until he arrived at thirteen or fourteen years of age, 
when he began to be the ringleader of all his young companions to rudeness and 
debauchery. So early as this he also took to thieving, and stole a silver spoon from his 
father; for which being severely punished at school, the punishment was the subject of 
the next night's meditation, which issued into a resolution of revenge on his master, 
whatever fate he met with in the execution thereof. To which end, having hit on a 
project for his purpose, and lying in his father's chamber, he gets softly up before such 
time as the day appeared, and hearing that his father slept he put his hand into his 
pocket, where he found the key of his closet, which unperceived he drew hence, and 
down he creeps to the said closet, where he supplies himself with what cash he could 
readily find, which amounted to about ten pounds, and with this, knowing that his said 
master had a horse he had particular delight for, that then grazed behind his house, he 
gets a bridle and saddle from his father's stable, and an hour before morning arrays 
and mounts the said horse onwards for London, at which he arrives within four days; 
when, the evening coming upon him, he cuts the throat of the horse, within a mile or 
two of the town, for fear it should prove a means of his discovery if he should have 
carried it to an inn. When he came to London he changed his garb and name, and 
being a lusty well-looking lad put himself into the service of a brewer, where for two 
or three years he lived, not at all changed in mind, though opportunity was not, during 
that time, ripe to put his ill intentions into practice, though he watched all seasons to 
advance himself, by having several times attempted to rob his master, which at last he 
thus effected. Taking the advantage one night of the clerk's drunkenness, who was his 
master's cashier, he got up by stealth after him into the counting-house, where, the 
said clerk falling asleep, he rifled the same of all such cash as he could conveniently 
come at, which amounted to near two hundred pounds, and fled to Holland, where, 
running away with a burgher's daughter, who had robbed her father of a great deal of 
money and jewels, he was apprehended, had the booty taken from him, and clapped in 
jail; and had he not broken out, he had certainly made his exit beyond sea. Having 
thus made his escape, he got, after divers difficulties, into Flanders, and listed himself 
amongst the English volunteers, who were under the command of the Duke of York, 
who about the same time was made Lieutenant-General of the Spanish forces, under 
Don John of Austria, that were then designed to raise the siege of Dunkirk, which was 
besieged by the English and French armies, and behaved himself very well while he 
was in a military employment; but not greatly liking it, and having got some money 
whilst he was in the service, he came over to England, and bought himself a horse and 
arms, and resolved for the road, and perhaps a pleasant life, at the hazard of his neck, 
rather than toil out a long remainder of unhappy days in want and poverty, which he 
was always averse to. Being thus supplied, every day one booty or other enriched his 
stores, which he would never admit a sharer in, choosing to manage his designs alone, 
rather than trust his life into the hands of others, who by favour or misfortune might 
be drawn in to accuse him.
	One day Nevison, who went otherwise by the name of Johnson, travelling on 
the road, and scouring about in search of prize, met two countrymen, who, coming up 
towards him, informed him that it was very dangerous travelling forwards, for that the 
way was set, and they had been robbed by three highwaymen, about half-a-mile off; 
and if he had any charge of money about him it were his safest course to turn back. 
Nevison asking them what they had lost, they told him forty pounds; whereupon he 
replied: "Turn back with me, and show me the way they took, and, my life to a 
farthing, I'll make them return you your money again." They rode along with him till 
they had sight of the highwaymen; when Nevison, ordering the countrymen to stay 
behind him at some distance, rode up and spoke to the foremost of them, saying: "Sir, 
by your garb, and the colour of your horse, you should be one of those I look after, 
and, if so, my business is to tell you that you borrowed of two friends of mine forty 
pounds, which they desired me to demand of you, and which before we part you must 
restore." "How!" quoth the highway- man. "Forty pounds! Damn you, sir, is the 
fellow mad?" "So mad," replied Nevison, "as that your life shall answer me if you do 
not give me better satisfaction." With that he draws his pistol and suddenly claps it to 
his breast, and finding then that Nevison had also his rein, and that he could not get 
his sword or pistols, he yielded, telling him his life was at his mercy. "No," says 
Nevison, "it is not that I seek for, but the money you robbed these two men of, who 
are riding up to me, which you must refund." The thief was forced to consent, and 
ready to deliver such part thereof as he had, saying his companions had the rest; so 
that Nevison having made him dismount, and taking away his pistols, which he gave 
to the countrymen, ordered them to secure him, and hold his own horse, whilst he 
took the thief's and pursued the other two, who he soon overtook; for they, thinking 
him their companion, stopped as soon as they saw him; so that he came up to them in 
the midst of a common. "How now, Jack," says one of them, "what made you engage 
with yon fellow?" "No, gentle- men," replies Nevison; "you are mistaken in your man. 
Thomas, by the token of your horse and arms, he hath sent me to you for the ransom 
of his life, which comes to no less than the prize of the day, which if you presently 
surrender you may go about your business; if not, I must have a little dispute with you 
at sword and pistol." At which one of them let fly at him, but missing his aim received 
Nevison's bullet into his right shoulder; and being thereby disabled, and Nevison 
about to discharge at the other, he called for quarter, and came to a parley, which, in 
short, was made up, with Nevison's promise to send their friend, and their delivering 
him all the ready money they had, which amounted to one hundred and fifty pounds, 
and silver. With this, Nevison rides back to the two countrymen, and releases their 
prisoner, giving them their whole forty pounds, with a caution for the future to look 
better after it, and not, like cowards, as they were, to surrender the same on such easy 
terms again.
	In all his pranks he was very favourable to the female sex, who generally gave 
him the character of a civil obliging robber; he was charitable also to the poor, 
relieving them out of the spoils which he took from them that could better spare it; 
and being a true Royalist, he never attempted anything against that party. One time 
Nevison, meeting with an old sequestrator on the road, stopped the coach and 
demanded some of that money which he had thievishly extorted from poor widows 
and orphans, and ought to be returned. At which words the old man, in a fit of terror, 
and especially so when a pistol was clapped to his breast, began to expostulate for his 
life; offering whatsoever he had about him for his ransom, which he readily delivered, 
to the value of sixty broad-pieces of gold. But this not serving the turn, Nevison told 
him that he must come thence, and go with him about some other affairs he had to 
concert with him, and beg leave of three young gentlewomen who were also 
passengers in the coach with him that they would spare one of the coach-horses for an 
hour or two, which should certainly be returned that night for the next day's journey. 
So Nevison left them, and took his prize with him on the postilion, which he loosed 
from his coach, and carried him from them in a great fright, thinking he was now near 
his end. The gentlewomen pursued their journey. About two hours after they were got 
to their inn, in comes the old sequestrator on the postilion's horse before mentioned, 
and gave a lamentable relation of how he had been used; and forced to sign a bill 
under his hand of five hundred pounds for his redemption, payable by a scrivener in 
London on sight, which he doubted not but would be received before he could prevent 
the same; and indeed he did not doubt amiss, for Nevison made the best of his way all 
night, and the next day by noon received the money, to the no small vexation of him 
that owned it.
	About the year 1661, having one day met a considerable prize, to the value of 
four hundred and fifty pounds, from a rich country grazier, with this he was resolved 
to settle down quietly and go back to Pomfret, where he was most joyfully received 
by his father, who, never hearing of him in his absence of seven or eight years, 
thought he had been really dead. He lived very honestly with his father till he died, 
and then returned to his old courses again, committing such robberies as rendered his 
name the terror of the road; insomuch that no carrier or drover who passed the same 
but was either forced to compound for their safety by a constant rent, which he 
usually received from them at such and such houses, where he appointed them to 
leave it, or they were sure to be rifled for the failure thereof.
	Committing some robberies in Leicestershire, he was there taken, and 
committed to Leicester Jail, where he was so narrowly watched, and strongly ironed, 
that he could scarce stir; yet by a cunning stratagem he procured his enlargement 
before the assizes came. For one day, feigning himself extremely ill, he sent for two 
or three trusty friends, one of whom was a physician, who gave out that he was sick of 
a pestilential fever; and that unless he had the benefit of some open air, in some 
chamber, he would certainly infect the whole jail, and die of the said distemper. 
Hereupon the jailer takes off his fetters and removes him into another room, to lie by 
himself. In the meantime a nurse was provided him, and his physician came twice or 
thrice a day to visit him, who gave out there was no hopes of his life, and that his 
distemper was extremely contagious. On which report, the jailer's wife would not let 
her husband, nor any of the servants, go nearer than the door; which gave Nevison's 
confederates a full liberty to practise their intent, which they did thus. A painter was 
one day brought in, who made all over his breast blue spots, resembling those that are 
the forerunners of death in the disease commonly called the plague; as likewise 
several marks on his hands, face and body, which are usually on such that so die. All 
which being done, the physician prepared a dose whereby his spirits were confined for 
the space of an hour or two, and then immediately gave out that he was dead. 
Hereupon his friends demand his body, bringing a coffin to carry him away in. The 
jailer, as customary, orders a jury — the nurse having formally laid him out — to 
examine the cause of his death, who, fearing the contagion he was said to die of, 
stayed not long to consider thereon; but having viewed him, seeing the spots and 
marks of death about him, his eyes set, and his jaws close muffled, they brought in 
their verdict that he died of the plague; and thereupon he was put in the coffin and 
carried off.
	Being thus discharged, he falls to his trade again, and meeting several of his 
old tenants the carriers, who used to pay him his rents as aforesaid, told them they 
must advance the same, for that his last imprisonment had cost him a great sum of 
money, which he expected to be reimbursed among them. They being strangely 
surprised at sight of Mr Nevison, after the reports of his death, brooked about that his 
ghost walked, and took upon him the employment it was wont when living, which 
was the more confirmed by the jailer at Leicester, who had brought in his verdict of 
the jury on oath, who had examined the body and had found it dead, as above 
mentioned; whereby he had been discharged by the Court, as to the warrant of his 
commitment. But afterwards, when the same came to be known, and the cheat 
detected, the said jailer was ordered to fetch him in, at his peril. Whereupon great 
search was made for him in all places, and a reward of twenty pounds set upon his 
head for any person who should apprehend him.
	Nevison, after this, was determined to visit London. and the company he 
happened to fall in with upon the road was a crew of canting beggars, pilgrims of the 
earth, the offspring of Cain, vagabonds and wanderers over the whole world, fit 
companions for such as made a trade of idleness and roguery, and these were at this 
time fit companions for him, who, seeing the merry life they led, resolved to make 
one of their company. Whereupon, after he had a little more ingratiated himself 
amongst them, and taken two or three cups more of rum booze, he imparted his 
inventions to one of the chief of them, telling him he was an apprentice who had a 
cursed master, whose cruelties had caused him to run away from him; and that 
whatever fortune might betide him, yet should not the most necessitous conditions he 
could be plunged into ever make him to return to him again. And therefore, if he 
might be admitted into their society, he should faithfully observe and perform what 
rules and orders were imposed upon him. The chief beggar very much applauded him 
for his resolution, telling him that to be a beggar was to be a brave man, since it was 
then in fashion. "Do not we," said he, "come into the world like arrant beggars, 
without a rag upon us? And do not we all go out of the world like beggars, without a 
rag upon us? And do not we all go out of the world like beggars, without anything, 
saving only an old sheet over us? Shall we then be ashamed to walk up and down in 
the world like beggars, with old blankets pinned about us? No, no; that would be a 
shame to us indeed. Have we not the whole kingdom to walk, at our pleasure? Are we 
afraid of the approach of quarter day? Do we walk in fear of bailiffs, sergeants and 
catchpoles? Whoever knew an arrant beggar arrested for debt? Is not our meat dressed 
in every man's kitchen? Does not every man's cellar afford us beers? And the best 
men's purses keep a penny for us to spend?" Having these words, as he thought, fully 
fixed him in love with begging, he then acquainted the company with Nevison's 
desires, who were all of them very joyful thereat, being as glad to add one to their 
society as a Turk is to gain a proselyte to Mahomet. The first question they asked him 
was, if he had any loure in his bung. He stared at them, not knowing what they meant; 
till at last one told him it was money in his purse. He told them he had but eighteen 
pence, which he freely gave them. This, by a general vote, was condemned to be spent 
on booze for his initiation. Then they commanded him to kneel down, which being 
done, one of the chief of them took a gage of booze, which is a quart of drink, and 
poured the same on his head, saying: "I do by virtue of this sovereign liquor install 
thee in the roage, and make thee a free denizen of our ragged regiment. So that 
henceforth it shall be lawful for thee to cant, and to carry a doxy or mot along with 
thee, only observing these rules: First, that thou art not to wander up and down all 
countries, but to keep to that quarter that is allotted to thee. And, secondly, thou art to 
give way to any of us that have borne all the offices of the wallet before; and upon 
holding up a finger, to avoid any town or country village where thou seest we are 
foraging for victuals for our army that march along with us. Observing these two 
rules, we take thee into our protection, and adopt thee a brother of our numerous 
society."
	Having ended his oration, Nevison rose up, and was congratulated by all the 
company's hanging about him like so many dogs about a bear, and leaping and 
shouting like so many madmen, making such a confused noise with their gabbling that 
the melody of a dozen of oyster-wives, the scolding at ten conduits, and the gossiping 
of fifteen bake-houses were not comparable unto it. At length he that installed him 
cried out for silence, bidding the French and English pox to light on their throats for 
making such a yelping. Then fixing their eyes upon Nevison, he read a lecture to him 
out of the devil's horn-book, as followeth.
	"Now," saith he, "that thou art entered into our fraternity, thou must not 
scruple to act any villainies which thou shalt be able to perform, whether it be to nip a 
bung, bite the Peter Cloy, the lurries crash, either a bleating cheat, cackling cheat, 
grunting cheat, quacking cheat, Tib-oth-buttery, Margery Prater, or to cloy a mish 
from the crack man's — that is, to cut a purse, steal a cloak-bag or portmanteau, 
convey all manner of things, whether a chicken, sucking-pig, duck, goose, hen, or 
steal a shirt from the hedge; for he that will be a quier cove, a professed rogue, must 
observe this rule, set down by an ancient pat Rico in these words:
'Wilt thou a-begging go. o per se-o, o per se-o. 
Then must thou God forsake, 
And to the devil thee be take. 
o per se-o, etc.'
"And because thou art yet but a novice in begging, and understandest not the 
mysteries of the canting language, to principle thee the better thou shalt have a doxy 
to be thy companion, by whom thou mayst receive fit instructions for thy purpose." 
And thereupon he singled him out a girl of about fourteen years of age, which tickled 
his fancy very much, that he had gotten a young wanton to dally withal. But this was 
not all; he must presently be married to her, after the fashion of their pat Rico, who 
amongst beggars is their priest; which was done after this manner.
	They got a hen, and having cut off the head of it, laid the dead body on the 
ground, placing him on the one side, and his doxy on the other; this being done, the 
pat Rico, standing by, with a loud voice bid them live together till death did them part. 
Then one of the company went into the yard and fetched a dry cow-turd, which was 
broken over his doxy's head, in imitation of a bride-cake; and so, shaking hands and 
kissing each other, the ceremony of the wedding was over, and for joy of the marriage 
they were all as drunk as beggars; but then to hear the gabbling noise they made 
would have made anyone burst himself with laughing. Some were jabbering in the 
canting language, others in their own; some did nothing but weep, and profess love to 
their mots; others swore swords and daggers to cut the throats of their doxies if they 
found them tripping; one would drink a health to the bride till he slavered again; some 
were for singing bawdy songs, others were devising oaths for justices of peace, head-
boroughs and constables. At last, night approaching, and all their money being spent, 
they betook themselves to a barn not far off, where they couched a hogshead in the 
dark man's, and went to sleep.
	Nevison, having met with this odd piece of diversion in his journey, slipped 
out of the barn, when all were asleep, took horse and posted directly away. But 
coming to London, and finding his name too much noised about to induce him to stay 
there, he returned into the country, and fell to his own pranks again. Several who had 
been robbed by him happened to meet him, and could not help thinking but his ghost 
walked, considering the report of his pestilential death in Lincoln Jail. In short, his 
crimes became so notorious that a reward was offered to anyone who would 
apprehend him. This made many waylay him, especially two brothers named Fletcher, 
one of whom Nevison shooting dead, he got off; from whence going into a little 
village about thirteen miles from York, he was taken by Captain Hardcastle and sent 
to York Jail, where in a week's time he was tried, condemned, and executed, aged 
forty-five.


JOHN COTTINGTON ALIAS MUL-SACK 
Chimney-Sweep, Pickpocket and Highwayman, who brought off some big 
Coups. Executed in April, 1655

  
Mul-sack Robing a Waggoner

	THE father of John Cottington, or Mul-Sack, as he was oftener called, was a 
haberdasher of small wares in Cheapside, and one time reputed to be pretty wealthy; 
but having a large extensive family, and being himself very fond of what is commonly 
called good company, he so far wasted his substance as to die very poor — even so 
poor as to be buried by the parish. This was an unhappy thing for his children, who 
were no less than nineteen in number, fifteen of which were daughters, and John was 
the youngest of them all of either sex, which exposed him perhaps to more 
misfortunes than those who had some reason to govern themselves by, at the time 
when they became orphans.
	At about eight years of age he was put out apprentice to a trade no less 
honourable than chimney-sweeping. He was bound for a great many years, as he was 
so young at the time of going to his master; but he took care not to make his servitude 
longer than ordinary, for instead of adding six or seven years, he cut off two from the 
usual term, and ran away in the fifth year of his apprenticeship, apprehending that as 
he was got into his teens he was as good a man as his master, and being confident that 
he had learned enough of his trade for him to live upon.
	He had not been long gone from his master before he perceived business 
coming on him even as fast as he could wish, and he made all the advantage possible 
of his good fortune — not in the usual sneaking manner, by hoarding up all he got, but 
by behaving himself like a gentleman, swearing at everyone that offended him, and 
assuming to himself almost as much state as the old chimney-sweeper below, who we 
may be certain is haughty, because to say anyone is as proud as Lucifer is become a 
proverb. Nor was it only in Cottington's carriage that you might observe the effects of 
his good fortune, for he lived in the best manner possible; no liquor but sack, forsooth, 
would go down with him, and that too must always be mulled, to make it the more 
pleasant. It was from this that he got his name of Mul-Sack, by which he was 
commonly called, and by which we shall choose to distinguish him in the following 
account of his exploits.
	One evening Mul-Sack was drinking at the Devil Tavern in Fleet Street when 
he observed what he thought was a beautiful woman; and being naturally pretty 
amorous, and at that time in particular warm with his favourite liquor, he made his 
addresses to her. Madam appeared to be none of the coyest, for she received him very 
freely, only nothing but matrimony would go down with her, which did not 
thoroughly please him. "Yet why," thought he at last, "should I be against it? I can 
keep myself and a wife very well, and I never saw a woman whom I could like better 
than this; therefore, hang it! I'll e'en take her, for better for worse." Upon this he 
immediately gave her his hand, and there were no more words to the bargain, but 
away they tramped to the Fleet together; where divinity linked their hands, 
pronounced them man and wife, and prayed heartily for their welfare; in particular, 
that they might be successful in their honest and lawful endeavours for the procreation 
of children, which, as the holy office of the Church informs us, is the principal end of 
matrimony.
	But how was our jolly bridegroom deceived at night when he found himself 
espoused to an hermaphrodite, and that the lady he had married was no other than a 
person well known by the name of Aniseed Robin? The redundancy of nature was 
soon discovered, and the bride confessed her fault, or, if you please, his fault, with 
abundance of seeming contrition, while poor Mul-Sack had nothing more to do in bed 
than to go to sleep as usual.
	This disappointment in matrimony had a great effect upon our gentleman's 
manners; for whereas he was never before known to be guilty of any worse crime than 
spending his money, sitting up late, and keeping jovial company, he now ran into all 
sorts of extravagances. In particular, he got acquainted with five noted amazons in 
Drury Lane, who were called the women shavers, and whose actions were then much 
talked of about town, till, being apprehended for a riot, and one or two of them 
severely punished, the rest fled to Barbados. Mul-Sack was once present when these 
furies got a poor woman among them whom one of them suspected of having been 
great with her husband. As a punishment for this they stripped her as naked as she was 
born, beat her with rods in a terrible manner, and then shaved off all the hair about her 
whole body. After that they soused her in a tub of soapsuds over head and ears, and in 
fine almost killed her, in spite of all her tears, cries and protestations of innocence.
	After the law — the greatest enemy that people of this character have in the 
world — had deprived Mul-Sack of these worthy companions, he resolved to pursue 
his amours elsewhere, and to that purpose appeared, when out of his business, in a 
very smart and genteel manner; being withal a graceful person, and having a very 
extraordinary flow of words for a man of his calling. With these accomplishments he 
found means to insinuate himself into the good liking of a merchant's wife in Mark 
Lane, who had before this none of the best of characters. This lady had originally been 
very handsome, but by a long course of amours her beauty was a little the worse for 
wearing when Mul-Sack became acquainted with her. However, what she wanted in 
person she made up in purse; for our smut made a shift to squeeze out of her about 
one hundred and twenty pounds before she fell sick and died, which happened not a 
great while afterwards.
	Mul-Sack had lately been so plentifully supplied with money, that when his 
kind benefactress departed this life, and changed this vain world, as we ought in 
Christian charity to believe, for a better, he could not think of applying himself to 
business anew, and relapsing again to his sooty occupation.
	Mul-Sack now turned pickpocket — a calling that generally serves for an 
introduction to the gentlemen who make the heroes of this history. As a trial of his 
dexterity, the first thing he did was to take a very valuable gold watch, set with 
diamonds, from a lady of chief quality in those times of usurpation. One Mr Jacob, a 
man very much followed by the Precisians, preached at that time a weekly lecture at 
Ludgate church, and the gentlewoman we are speaking of was one of his admirers and 
constant attendants. Mul-Sack had taken notice for some time how the pretty bauble 
hung dangling at her side by a gold chain. One of the companions he had engaged on 
this occasion found means to take out the pin of one of the coach wheels, so that the 
wheel fell, and the coach caused an obstruction just under the gate. The end of this 
was to make a crowd, and oblige madam to alight before she came to the church door; 
all which was effected, and Mul-Sack stood ready, dressed in what was then the 
height of the mode, to offer the lady his arm into the church. He presented himself 
very impudently, the favour was kindly accepted, and by the way he found means to 
cut the gold chain in two, and secure the watch as they passed through the crowd. The 
loss was not perceived till Mr Jacob concluded, when the devout gentlewoman was 
going to see how long the spiritual meal had lasted. But, alas! all the consolation she 
had received vanished after her darling watch.
	We are informed that, before Mul-Sack left off this trade, he was once so 
impudent as to attempt the pocket of Cromwell himself, and the danger he then ran of 
being detected was the occasion of his leaving this secret sort of knavery and taking to 
the highway, in company with one Tom Cheney.
	These two fellows had the courage and confidence to set upon Colonel 
Hewson, a great man in those times, and one who had been advanced from a cobbler 
to the dignity he then enjoyed merely because his conscience was according to the 
measure of that time; that is very large, or if you please very small, which 
expressions, the witty author of Hudibras tells us, signify the same thing. The 
colonel's regiment was then marching to Hounslow, and he not so far before it but 
some of the troopers saw the action of our bravoes. Nobody can doubt but they were 
soon pursued; yet by the help of a good horse Mul-Sack got clear off; but Cheney's 
beast failing him he was obliged to stand in his own defence, which he did very 
stoutly, till he was overpowered by numbers, desperately wounded, taken prisoner, 
and carried to Newgate. Sessions began at the Old Bailey within a few days after, and 
Cheney, being brought to the bar, begged to have his trial put off on account of his 
wounds. But the favour could not be obtained; for they caused a chair to be brought 
for him to sit in, obliged him to plead, and passed sentence of death upon him. What 
he had urged as a motive for putting off his trial was made the means to hasten his 
execution; for though it was two o'clock in the afternoon when he was condemned, he 
was carried in a cart that very day to Tyburn, and there executed, lest he should have 
evaded the sentence of the law, by dying in Newgate.
	The next companion Mul-Sack entered into articles with was one Mr Horne, a 
very bold man, and a pewterer by trade, though he had been formerly a captain in 
Colonel Downe's regiment of foot. Their engagement was to act in concert, 
offensively and defensively, like generous highwaymen. But neither did this 
partnership subsist long; for the first considerable action they ventured on was fatal to 
the poor captain, he being taken in the pursuit, while Mul-Sack had still the good 
fortune to escape. The captain's fate was the same as Cheney's, saving that he 
continued in good health till the hour of his execution, when he behaved with so much 
bravery and gallantry that his death drew tears from a great part of the spectators, 
particularly from that sex who know the value of a brave man so well as always to be 
grieved when such a one dies, especially at Tyburn.
	His companions having such ill success, Mul-Sack was resolved to try his 
fortune alone, and he several times practised his calling upon committee-men, 
sequestrators, Members of Parliament, etc., who were then almost the only men in the 
nation worth robbing, they having plundered everybody else, and gotten the wealth of 
England into their own hands. In all these adventures he was as fortunate as he could 
wish, which prompted him forwards to attempt still greater things. Being informed 
that four thousand pounds were coming from London to pay the regiments quartered 
at Oxford and Gloucester, he resolved to venture his life for so considerable a sum, 
though two or three men well armed were appointed for a convoy. Just at the close of 
day, when the wagon was past Wheatley, and at the foot of a hill, he started from an 
ambuscade, presented his pistol, and bid the carrier stand. He would have certainly 
now gone to pot if the guard had not thought it impossible he should attempt such an 
action without company, but the apprehension of more behind the hedge made these 
sturdy fellows ride for their lives, and leave our adventurer to secure the booty; which 
he spent with as much mirth as he had obtained it with danger.
	There were also two or three passengers in this wagon who were frightened 
terribly; but Mul-Sack generously told them he had no design upon what they had. 
"This," says he, "that I have taken, is as much mine as theirs who own it; being all 
extorted from the public by the rapacious members of our Commonwealth, to enrich 
themselves, maintain their janizaries, and keep honest people in subjection; the most 
effectual way to do which is to keep them very poor."
	It is said that Mul-Sack got more money than any highwayman of his time, 
though no man was less suspected than he by his acquaintance in town. When out of 
his calling he appeared like a merchant, talked always about business, and was seen 
on 'Change very often, these being the methods he used to conceal his trade; for 
nothing betrays a man so soon as endeavouring to hide himself.
	One time, having notice that the Receiver-General at Reading was to send up 
six thousand pounds to London by an ammunition wagon, he immediately contrived 
to save that trouble, and bring it up to town himself on his own horse. An accomplice 
was necessary in this undertaking, and he soon found one, by whose assistance he 
scaled the receiver's house the night before the money was to be carted. The window 
they got in at was next to the garden, where they left the ladder standing, and came off 
at the present very well, having bound all the family, to prevent any alarm whereby 
they might be discovered.
	But an affair of this kind, as might very well be expected, made a great noise, 
and Mul-Sack was apprehended in town by some who had seen him in Reading the 
evening the fact was committed. Upon this he was sent down to Reading, and tried at 
the next assizes for Berkshire before Judge Jermyn, who did all he could to hang him. 
Nevertheless, by his cunning, he found means either to baffle the evidence or to 
corrupt the jury by his money, so far that he was acquitted, the proofs against him 
being only circumstantial.
	Not long after this narrow escape our offender, growing in wickedness, added 
murder to his former crimes. The person on whom it was committed was one John 
Bridges, with whose wife he had before contracted a familiarity. On this account he 
fled beyond the sea, and got himself introduced at the Court of King Charles II., who 
was then in exile.
	He got so much intelligence here, that he ventured home again, upon a 
presumption of obtaining his pardon from Oliver Cromwell, as a reward for what he 
could discover of affairs amongst the King's friends. Accordingly, he applied himself 
to the usurper, confessed his crime, and made very large promises, upon the 
performance of which Cromwell assured him of his life. But whether he could not be 
as good as his word, or whether the Protector thought such an abandoned wretch 
utterly unfit to live, so it was that he was apprehended, condemned, and executed in 
Smithfield Rounds, in April, 1655, being forty-five years of age.


EDWARD AND JOAN BRACEY 
Who robbed on the Highway together, the Woman being executed in 1685 
and the Man being killed by a Gunshot Wound

	THESE two criminals flourished from the year 1680 to 1684, during which 
time they committed a great number of robberies and frauds. Their natural inclinations 
to such a manner of living first brought them together, and kept up the union between 
them till they were separated by justice, though we cannot learn that they were ever 
married, Joan only assuming the name of her companion, as is common in such cases, 
the better to colour their living together, and impose on the world.
	Edward Bracey had been a highwayman before he fell into company with his 
pretended wife, who was the daughter of a wealthy farmer in Northamptonshire, 
named John Phillips. The beginning of their acquaintance was Bracey's making love 
to her in hopes of getting a large sum of money out of the old man for a marriage 
portion, and then leaving both wife and father-in-law. But he was very agreeably 
deceived; for Joan was as good as he. She suffered herself to be first debauched by 
him, and then consented to rob her father, and go along with him on the pad; all which 
she accordingly accomplished. They now passed for husband and wife wheresoever 
they went, frequently robbed together on the highway, and as often united in picking 
of pockets and shoplifting at all the country fairs and markets round about.
	It was next to impossible that they should continue this course of life long 
together without coming into trouble. One or the other of them was often in danger of 
the gallows, but they had both the good fortune to escape till they had got a large 
quantity of money. The dread of justice more than a desire to live honestly now 
prevailed upon them to quit their vocation and take to some creditable business, in 
which they might spend the remainder of their days in quiet, and live comfortably 
upon what they had acquired by their industry. In order to do this they took an inn in 
the suburbs of Bristol, where they met with success, having a large trade in particular 
for wine, which was occasioned by the beauty of our landlady. It is no uncommon 
thing for a husband to get money by his having a handsome wife, especially if they 
have both art enough to manage an intrigue, which was the present case. All the gay 
young fellows of the place came to drink with Madam Bracey, purely for the sake of 
having an opportunity to discover their love. She gave them all encouragement so 
long as they could spend a great deal of money, and then took care not only to turn 
them out of doors, but to expose them sufficiently.
	It may not be amiss to give an instance of this her manner of using her suitors. 
One Mr Day, an eminent citizen of Bristol, was among the number of her humble 
servants. He made her a great many fine proposals, and she received them all with 
abundance of complaisance, consenting at last that he should make use of the first 
opportunity that offered to take a night's lodging with her. In a little time Mr Day was 
informed that his landlord, Bracey, was to be abroad on such a night, and that nothing 
could happen more favourably to his wishes. He went at the time appointed with all 
the ardour of a lover, and was received by a maidservant, who told him her mistress 
had gone to bed, and waited impatiently for him; but desiring him however to pull off 
his clothes, and leave them in another room, where he might be concealed, and have 
time to dress himself again, in case any surprise should happen. The innocent Mr Day 
thanked her for the contrivance, and hugged himself in the thought of the mistress's 
sincere affection, because the maid was so careful for his safety.
	Mrs Abigail led him to the room appointed, put out the candle on account of 
mere modesty, and stayed at the door while Mr Day undressed himself; which he did 
in two minutes. Now the best of the comedy was to be played: our tractable maid 
conducted the gallant to a door, which she told him opened into her mistress's 
chamber, bid him enter softly, and immediately turned the key upon him. Here Mr 
Day wandered about to find the bed, and pronounced the name of Mrs Bracey as loud 
as he dared, that she might give him directions; but no Mrs Bracey answered. He was 
sufficiently amazed at the oddness of the scene, but was yet more surprised when he 
tumbled down a pair of stairs against the back door of the house. The contrivance was 
now plain; he saw that mistress and maid were agreed not only to balk his passion, but 
to strip him of his clothes also. It was in vain to call and make protestations; he 
received no other answer than that the back door was only bolted, and he might open 
if he pleased, and go about his business.
	This door opened into a narrow dirty lane, down which the common sewer 
ran; and there was no going out at it unless you got into a coach, or upon a horse, 
directly off the steps, which was the only use made of it, and that not often, especially 
in the winter-time, as it was at present. Mr Day knew all these inconveniences; but the 
terrible pinching cold, and the shame of being discovered if he stayed till broad 
daylight, made him go out, wade through the mud, and make the best of his way 
home, where he was heartily laughed at by those friends to whom he told the story; 
which were only such as he could not conceal it from, and even upon these he laid the 
severest injunctions imaginable never to divulge a word of it. They kept the secret 
from everybody else, but diverted themselves privately with poor Mr Day all his life 
afterwards.
	Everyone whom our honest innkeepers imposed on were not, however, so easy 
as Mr Day; so that in less than a twelvemonth's time their house became so 
scandalous that they were obliged to leave it, and then they had nothing to do but to 
take to their old courses again, being by this time pretty well got over the 
apprehensions they were under of a halter. At their first setting out again they played 
such a trick as was hardly ever matched, which was the woman's contrivance as well 
as Bracey's. We shall relate this also, in as few words as we can conveniently.
	A young gentleman who had spent his fortune had used their house all the 
time they had been at Bristol, and got a pretty deal into their debt. They knew he was 
heir to an estate of about a hundred pounds a year, which was kept from him only by 
the life of an old distempered uncle, and they had a mighty itching to get this 
reversion into their hands. In order to this, Joan threatened him grievously with a 
prison for what he owed them, till she perceived he was heartily frightened, and 
would do anything to keep his liberty. She knew besides that he was viciously 
inclined, and only wanted a little introduction to be made anything of that they could 
wish. Upon this she told him what she and her husband were going upon, and 
prevailed with him to join them. In a day or two after she informed him that a rich 
tradesman was coming to Bristol with a large quantity of money, and that he must 
accompany her husband to-morrow to take it from him. Accordingly Bracey and the 
young man set out, stopped a person on the road, and took from him above a hundred 
pounds, with which they returned home together. The man that was robbed had been 
sent out with the money in his pocket for that very purpose.
	As soon as the fact was over, and they had got their dupe safe, madam told 
him plainly that he must make over the reversion of his estate to them, or her husband 
should immediately swear the robbery upon him, and get him hanged for it. The terror 
he was under, and the promise of liberty upon complying, made him do all they 
desired. After which they still kept him in their house till they had sold it again, 
obliging him to assure the purchaser that he had received a valuable consideration of 
Mr Bracey; which was readily enough believed, because everybody knew the young 
gentleman's extravagances. They got fourteen hundred pounds by this bargain, with 
which they immediately made off, leaving the unfortunate spark to lament his folly. 
The name of this young man was Rumbald.
	Joan after this usually dressed herself in men's apparel, and she and her fellow-
adventurer committed a great many robberies together on the highway. At last, 
however, fortune put an end to their progress in iniquity; for as they were robbing a 
person of quality's coach together in Nottinghamshire, madam was apprehended, and 
carried to Nottingham Jail. At the next assizes she was condemned by the name of 
Joan Bracey, and in April, 1685, she was executed, aged twenty-nine years.
	Her pretended husband got off at the time she was taken, and concealed 
himself for some time after by skulking about the country. One day, being at a public 
inn, he was seen by somebody whom he had robbed, who immediately got assistance, 
and came to take him, being at the stair-foot with armed men before Bracey knew 
anything of the matter. It happened that in the room where he was, one of the drawers 
had left his cap and apron, which Bracey in a moment snatched up and put on, 
running downstairs ready to break his neck, and crying out as he ran, "Coming, 
gentlemen, coming," as if he were waiting upon company above. This stratagem 
preserved his life a little longer, for the gentleman who came to secure him, not 
apprehending anything, let him pass as a drawer, though he had taken so much notice 
of his face before; so that he got his horse out of the stable and rode off while they 
were searching the house for him. Two or three of his companions, who were with 
him in the inn, and knew nothing of the occasion of his running down so, were 
apprehended and brought to justice.
	This escape, however, did him but little service; for about three or four days 
after, stopping at a little house to drink, and leaving his white mare, on which he 
usually robbed, at the door, another gentleman who had suffered by him came by, 
alarmed the neighbourhood upon his knowledge of the beast, and beset the house 
before he had the least notice. As soon as he heard a noise of men at the door he ran 
out, and attempted to mount; but two or three pieces were instantly discharged at him, 
one of them killing his mare, and another taking off several of his fingers. He then 
endeavoured to leap over some pales, and get off by the back side of the house, when 
another discharge was made at him from a fowling-piece, which lodged several great 
goose-shot in his guts, and wounded him so that he dropped down on the place and 
died in three days afterwards.


JONATHAN SIMPSON 
A Highwayman who was witty with a Halter round his Neck and, being 
reprieved, found that Newgate would not have him. Executed 8th of 
September, 1686

	JONATHAN SIMPSON was the son of a very wealthy inhabitant of 
Launceston, in Cornwall, and his father put him apprentice to a linen-draper in Bristol 
when he was about fourteen years of age. When he had served out his time, which he 
did with reputation, the same indulgent father gave him fifteen hundred pounds to set 
up with in the city, where he was free, and where he soon fell into great business and 
got money apace.
	In less than a year after he had kept shop he married a merchant's daughter of 
the same place, who brought him a fortune of two thousand pounds. This was a great 
addition to his wealth; but the union proved unhappy, because the young lady was 
before engaged in affection to a gentleman of less fortune in the neighbourhood, 
whom her father hindered her from having, and with whom she continued a 
familiarity that soon displeased her husband.
	Such a crisis as this must be a great trial for any man; but there can be no 
excuse sufficient to defend a person that invades the property of another. Almost any 
man in such a case would have run into extravagances; but none but a man who was 
viciously inclined would have turned highwayman, as Simpson now did. He had 
above five thousand pounds of his own, but his expenses were of a piece with the rest 
of his actions; for at the end of eighteen months he had not a penny left of all this 
large sum, or of all the money he had during that time taken on the road.
	While his money lasted he played with the law; for though he was once or 
twice discovered, he made up the matter, and prevented a prosecution.
	No sooner had Simpson wasted all his substance but he was apprehended and 
condemned at the Old Bailey for a robbery on the highway, and he must certainly 
have swung for it if some of his rich relations had not procured him a reprieve from 
above. It came when he was at Tyburn, with the halter about his neck, and just ready 
to be turned off in company with several others. As he was riding back to Newgate 
behind one of the sheriff's officers, the officer asked him if he thought anything of a 
reprieve when he came to the gallows. "No more," said Simpson, "than I thought of 
my dying day." A very pretty expression at that time.
	When he was brought to the prison door, the turnkey refused to receive him, 
telling the officer that, as he was sent to be executed, they were discharged of him, 
and would not have anything to do with him again, unless there was a fresh warrant 
for his commitment; whereupon Simpson made this reflection: "What an unhappy 
cast-off dog am I, that both Tyburn and Newgate should in one day refuse to entertain 
me! Well, I'll mend my manners for the future, and try whether I can't merit a 
reception at them both the next time I am brought hither." He was as good as his 
word; for it was believed he committed above forty robberies in the county of 
Middlesex within six weeks after his discharge.
	He was a very good skater, and made a practice of robbing people on the ice 
between Fulham and Kingston Bridge, in the great frost of 1689, which held thirteen 
weeks. He used to kick up their heels and then search their pockets.
	One time a gentleman whom he stopped gave him a fine silk purse full of 
counters, which he took for gold, and so did not examine them till he came to his inn 
at night. When he found himself outwitted he made no words of it, but kept the brass 
booty in his pocket, looking out frequently for his benefactor, whom he knew to be 
often on the road. At the end of about four months he met his worship again, on 
Bagshot Heath, when, riding up to the coach — "Sir, ' says he, "I believe you made a 
mistake the last time I had the happiness to see you, in giving me these pieces; I have 
been troubled ever since for fear you should have wanted them at cards, and am glad 
of this opportunity to return them. Only for my care I require you to come this 
moment out of your coach and give me your breeches, that I may search them at 
leisure, and not trust any more to your generosity, lest you should mistake again." The 
gentleman was obliged to comply by a pistol, and Simpson found at night that the 
freight of his breeches was a gold watch, a gold snuff-box, and a purse containing 
ninety-eight guineas and five jacobuses.
	Another time he robbed the Lord Delamere on Dunmoor Heath of three 
hundred and fifty guineas, persuading his lordship first to send away all his attendants, 
on a sham pretence of two highwaymen that were just before who had robbed him of 
forty pounds. This action made his lordship swear never to do a good-natured deed 
again to a stranger. The robberies he committed on drovers, pedlars, market-people, 
etc., were almost innumerable. He stopped in one day nineteen of those people 
between London and Barnet, and took from them above two hundred pounds. He even 
ventured to attack the Duke of Berwick, natural son to King James II., and take from 
him his watch, rings and money, amounting in all to a great value.
	This great malefactor was at last apprehended near Acton, by means of two 
captains of the Foot Guards, whom he attempted to rob both together. There was an 
obstinate fight between them, and Simpson behaved himself with so much bravery 
that in all probability he would not have been taken if one of the officers had not shot 
his horse under him, though he was before that wounded in both his arms and one of 
his legs. Nay, even when he was dismounted he defended himself till other passengers 
came up and secured him, which his adversaries were scarce able to do, they being 
also both very much hurt. When he was sent to Newgate he now found the keeper so 
much his friend as to receive him; neither did Tyburn this time refuse to bear his 
burden. He was hanged on Wednesday, the 8th of September, 1686, aged thirty-two 
years.


WILLIAM CADY 
A Highwayman who shot a Woman before the Eyes of her Husband for the 
Wedding-Ring she had swallowed. Executed in 1687

	THIS unhappy gentleman was born at Thetford, in the county of Norfolk. His 
father was an eminent surgeon in that place, and very careful of his son's education. 
After a course of grammar learning, Will was sent to the University of Cambridge, 
where he was servitor to the father of the present Right Honourable the Lord Viscount 
Townshend, at that time a student in Trinity College. He profited so well as in time to 
be made Bachelor of Arts, and continued at his studies till the death of his father. The 
decease of a parent to a young gentleman, as Cady was, is often the crisis of fortune 
and the time that fixes his future fate. When a man becomes his own master, we learn 
in what he places his happiness, and what has before given a prevailing turn to his 
thoughts then influences his actions. Will, immediately upon the news, withdrew from 
the Muses and went up to London, where he professed physic; for his father made so 
good use of what he had in his lifetime, that he left nothing behind him. The first 
patient he had was his own uncle, who was dangerously ill of an imposthume; and the 
manner how he cured him is very well worth relating in this place.
	When he came into his uncle's chamber, the first thing he did was to examine 
the state of the old gentleman's stomach. To this purpose he hunted the room all over, 
moved every dish, plate and basin he could see, all under a pretence of finding out 
what they gave him to eat, though in reality to find a proper occasion for the 
experiment he afterwards tried. At last he spied an old saddle under the bed. Upon 
which he seemed to start, crying out: "Uncle, your case is very desperate." "Not so 
bad, I hope," says the uncle, "as to make me past recovery." "Heaven knows that!" 
cried Cady; "but a surfeit is a terrible thing, and I perceive you have got a violent 
one." "A surfeit!" replied the old gentleman. "You mistake, nephew; it is an 
imposthume that I am afflicted with." "The devil it is!" quoth Cady. "Why, I could 
have sworn it was a surfeit; for I perceive you have eaten a whole horse, and left us 
only the saddle!" At this he held up the saddle in his hands, and the old gentleman fell 
into such a fit of laughing that instantly his imposthume broke; so that he became a 
well man again in less than a fortnight.
	Cady's uncle gave him fifty guineas for performing so speedy and unexpected 
a cure; all which he spent in less than a month. It was not long after that he bid adieu 
to Galen and Hippocrates, and betook himself to the highway for a livelihood. The 
first exploit which he performed was on Hounslow Heath, where, meeting with 
Monsieur Chevalier, Captain of Grenadiers in the first regiment of Foot Guards — 
afterwards killed in the West in the engagement against the Duke of Monmouth — 
and another gentleman, he rode boldly up to them and inquired the way to Staines, 
telling them he was a stranger in the country. They courteously told him they were 
going thither themselves, and that they should be very glad of his company, if he 
pleased to keep pace with them. Will thanked them for their civility and accepted of 
their proffer, riding and talking by the side of them for about a mile. At last seeing the 
coast clear, he without ceremony shot one of the good-natured guides through the 
head; then turning upon Chevalier, he told him if he did not deliver his money he 
should suffer the same fate with his companion. Chevalier said he was a captain of the 
Guards, and therefore he must fight if he got anything from him. "If you are a soldier, 
sir," quoth Cady, "you ought to obey the word of command, other wise you know the 
sentence: I have nothing to do but to tie you neck and heels." "You are an 
unconscionable son of a b —-h," says Monsieur, "to demand money of me, who never 
owed you any." "Sir," replied Cady, "there's not a man travels the road but what owes 
me money, if he has any about him. Therefore, as you are one of my debtors, if you 
do not pay me instantly, your blood shall satisfy my demands. The noble captain 
exchanged a shot or two with our highwayman, but had the misfortune at last to have 
his horse killed; upon which, seeing it was in vain to make any more resistance, he 
surrendered his gold watch, a diamond ring, and a purse of twenty-six guineas. Will, 
having collected all he could, tied the Frenchman neck and heels, nailed the hind 
lappets of his coat to a tree, and then rode off with his booty.
	The next person he robbed was on Bagshot Heath. It was Lord Viscount 
Dundee, who was killed at the fight of Killiecrankie in Scotland, after the revolution. 
His honour was on horseback, attended only by a couple of footmen. Cady rode up to 
them full speed, inquiring if they did not see a single man ride that way harder than 
ordinary. Being told Yes, he presently added: "He has robbed me of twenty pounds, 
which I was going to pay my landlord, and I am utterly ruined." The man who had 
rode by was a confederate of Cady's, who had parted from him for that very purpose. 
My lord was touched with compassion at Will's complaint, and immediately ordered 
his footmen to pursue the villain. The servants rode away full stretch, and Cady after 
them some distance, till he thought they were far enough; then he turned back on his 
lordship, and robbed him of a gold watch, a gold snuff-box and sixty guineas in 
money. To make all safe, he shot the Viscount's horse, and then rode after the 
footmen, whom he found a mile off, with his comrade between them, prisoner. The 
fellows were surprised when Will bid them let the man go and seemed to laugh at 
them for what they had done, till at last they absolutely refused to part with their 
prize. Cady, upon that, swore they should, and a warm engagement ensued, 
continuing till one of the footmen was killed and the other was obliged to fly, who 
found his lord dismounted and robbed.
	Dundee complained at Court of this abuse, and a reward of one hundred 
pounds was promised in the London Gazette to anyone who should apprehend Cady 
or his comrade, who were both very particularly described. Our adventurer now 
thought it safest to get out of the reach of justice; and to that end made the best of his 
way to Douay, in Flanders, where was an English seminary. As he was a scholar, he 
was easily admitted, upon the superior's examination, into the fraternity of 
Benedictine Friars, among whom he behaved with a great deal of seeming devotion 
and piety; so that he shortly attained a very extraordinary character. The natural result 
of this was his having a great number of penitents continually resorting to him to 
make a confession of their sins. Cady's piety, however, at last began to sit very uneasy 
upon him, and he was afraid his hypocrisy would in time be found out, for he looked 
upon himself as incapable of keeping the vows of poverty and chastity which he had 
made. This made him resolve to return to England again at all hazards, choosing to 
enjoy a merry though but a short life, rather than drag out many years under the 
strictness of ecclesiastical discipline. But there was money wanting before this could 
be done, and now his invention was racked for some method of raising a sufficient 
quantity.
	He feigned himself indisposed, and kept his chamber several days, during 
which time he received visits from abundance of people, and, among others, from all 
of the fair sex who usually made him their confessor. He had singled out in his mind a 
couple of young gentlewomen who commonly came together, and were both very rich 
and very handsome. A brace of pistols he had also found means to procure. At last the 
ladies came, and when they had made their confession, he desired them to hear his. In 
short, he told them he was in great want of money, and if they did not instantly supply 
him, they should never depart alive. At the same time he held the pistols to their 
breasts, and commanded them not to make the least noise. The poor gentlewomen 
were almost out of their wits with fear, and trembled like aspen leaves while Cady 
made inquiry into their pockets, and found them lined with about fifty pistoles. To this 
he compelled them to make an offering of two diamond rings, which were on their 
fingers, and then laying them both on the bed, he gave them, after one another, a taste 
of his manhood, and robbed them of their virginity into the bargain. Next he gagged 
and tied them neck and heels, and then went out, pretending to the father of the 
convent that he would only take the air in the fields a little. But he went much farther 
afield than they expected; for he never returned again, but changed his canonical 
habit, and returned to England.
	Even before he arrived at London he fell again into his old courses, though he 
had been two years out of his native country; for as he rode over Blackheath he met 
with one Sandal, a great hop merchant, and his wife, whom he commanded to "Stand 
and deliver." Sandal stood up smartly in his own defence, and fired two pistols 
without success; after which he was obliged to lie at the mercy of the enemy, who 
presently dismounted them both, and killed their horse (for they had but one), and 
then fell to rifling their pockets. He found about twenty-eight pounds upon the 
husband, but the wife had no more than half-a-crown. "Is this your way of travelling?" 
says Cady. "What! carry but half-a- crown in your pocket, when you are to meet a 
gentleman collector on the highway! I assure you, madam, I shall be even with you; 
therefore off with that ring on your finger." Mrs Sandal begged him to spare her 
wedding-ring, because she would not lose it for double the value, as she had kept and 
worn it above twenty years. "You whining bitch!" quoth Will. "Marriage may be d — 
—d and you too. What, because you are a whore by licence, I must be more 
favourable to you than another woman I'll warrant! Give me the ring in a moment 
without any more cant, or I shall make bold to cut off your finger with it for dispatch, 
as I have served several of your sex before."
	The good woman, finding all entreaties were in vain, pulled off her ring; but 
instead of giving it to Cady, instantly clapped it into her mouth and swallowed it, in 
hopes, by that means, of preserving what she so superstitiously prized. Cady fell to 
swearing and stamping like a madman, telling her that all her tricks were in vain; for 
he would that moment send her to the devil without her wedding-ring. Accordingly he 
shot her through the head, ripped her open, and took the ring out of her body in the 
presence of her husband, whom he had before bound, and who was in capable of 
uttering a word at the sight of such an unheard-of piece of barbarity. "Your wife's a 
bite, Sir," says the butcherly villain, "but I think I have bit the biter." And remounting 
his horse, he rode away with as little concern as if he had done no crime, leaving the 
sorrowful widower bound by his wife's body till some passengers came by and loosed 
him, and then carried the mangled corpse to the next inn.
	The same night Cady came straight to London, but was afraid that even that 
great city was not large enough to conceal him from the inquiry which such a horrid 
action would naturally occasion. He did not stay therefore above an hour before he 
took horse for Scotland, where he arrived and stayed about a month, without any 
notice being taken of him. After this he came into England again, and as he was 
making towards London, between Ferry Bridge and Doncaster in Yorkshire, he 
overtook Dr Moreton, a prebendary of Durham. It would not be more strange to see a 
horse refuse oats than to hear that such a gentleman as Cady would let a plump, sleek 
clergyman pass unmolested, when he was in his power. "Stand and deliver" was the 
precept, with the addition of "D — n you are a dead man if you hesitate." The 
clergyman had never been used to such language before, and began to give him good 
advice, counselling him very gravely to refrain from such ill courses, and telling him 
the hazard he ran, both with respect to his soul and his body. But all his preaching was 
in vain; for Cady looked upon him with all the moroseness he could collect in his 
countenance, and told him that his doctrine had no effect, and the pretence of religion 
was framed only to preserve what he had before got in the same way. Adding, that if 
he did not speedily deliver what he had, he should send him out of the world. "But 
that," quoth he with a sneer, "is nothing to a man of your cloth; for doubtless all the 
clergymen are prepared for death at any time, and certain of eternal happiness."
	While Cady was uttering these words, a stone-horse in an adjacent field, 
smelling his mare, leaped over the hedge, and came snorting and neighing to her like a 
mad creature. Will was so busy with Mr Doctor that he took no notice of the stallion 
till his mare was covered and he dismounted. The poor parson was glad of an 
opportunity to save his bacon; so as soon as he saw Cady on the ground he rode off as 
fast as he could. "The devil take all whoring," cried Will, "if horses must practise it 
too! However, Mr Mettle, I shall go nigh to spoil your sport before the game be over." 
He was as good as his word, for instantly pulling out a pistol he shot the horse, and 
then remounted his mare and rode after divinity.
	In three quarters of a. mile he overtook poor Moreton, and accosted him with 
"You unreasonable unmannerly dog! what do you mean to leave a man in the midst of 
his journey, without giving him anything to pay his charges?" The doctor had taken 
care, as he rode off, to hide his money in a hedge, so that when Cady searched him he 
found never a farthing. He could not, however, think that a man of his figure would 
travel on horseback without any money in his breeches; so that he swore the reverend 
priest should never go home alive if he did not inform him what he had done with his 
mammon. The doctor standing to it that he had none, our bloody wretch instantly shot 
him through the heart, which to him was no more than making a good meal when he 
was hungry.
	After this he took a journey into Norfolk with an intent to see his friends and 
relations at Thetford, but meeting a coach within two or three miles of that town, with 
three gentlemen and a gentlewoman in it, could not forbear riding up to it and making 
the usual compliment. The gentlemen were resolved to dispute a point with him, and 
stood bravely upon their guard, one of them firing off a blunderbuss without doing 
him any other damage than just grazing across his left arm, and tearing his coat, 
waistcoat and shirt. This put him into a violent passion, so that after he had taken 
about one hundred and thirty pounds from them all, he swore that the loss of his 
money should not entitle him that had shot him to any quarter. He was always as good 
as his word in these cases — the poor gentleman was left dead in the coach; and then, 
cutting the reins and traces off the horses, he rode off, without going to Thetford to 
see his acquaintance.
	Now he steers his course towards London as fast as he can; and coming over 
Finchley Common attacks a lady, who was riding there for the air, attended by a 
single footman. He fell upon her in a very rude manner, pulling a diamond ring from 
her finger and a gold watch from her side; taking a purse with eighty guineas in it out 
of her pocket, and giving her a great deal of ill language. The honest footman, though 
the lady had commanded him not to meddle, could not forbear showing his 
resentment at Cady's unmanly behaviour. He returned his foul words with others of 
the same kind, calling him villain, rascal, thief, and other names of the same import, 
which were suitable to his character. Will Cady, without speaking a word, answered 
the poor fellow by sending a brace of balls through his head; then he cut the girths of 
the lady's saddle, and was going to make off, but the time which Providence had fixed 
for a period to his wicked actions was now come. Two gentlemen, who had seen the 
transaction at a distance, intercepted him, just as he put spurs to his horse, with pistols 
in their hands. Cady was very desperate when he saw his own danger. He fired as fast 
as he was able, and they as nimbly returned the same compliment, till a lucky ball 
lodged in his horse, and made him fall under him. After this he resolutely maintained 
his ground on foot for a considerable time, even till he had discharged all his pistols 
and entirely wearied himself. He was then apprehended and carried before a Justice of 
the Peace at Highgate, who committed him under a strong guard to Newgate, where 
he continued till the next sessions without any signs of remorse for the blood he had 
so plentifully shed within four years before.
	When his trial came on at the Old Bailey he behaved agreeably to his character 
before that venerable court. The Lord Mayor and Recorder, he said, were a couple of 
old almswomen, and the jurymen were treated in the same manner. The matter of fact 
which he was indicted for was proved so plainly against him that he received sentence 
of death, and was put into the condemned hold; but even this place of horror and 
darkness had no effect upon his mind, for he continued to swear, curse, sing, roar, and 
get drunk, as he had always done before. What hardened him the more, was the 
dependence he had on some friends at Court, who had given him room to hope for a 
reprieve from King James II. who then reigned; but the many murders he had 
committed put a stop to the mercy which he might otherwise have obtained. His day 
of execution being come, and the cart stopping as usual under St Sepulchre's church 
wall, whilst the bellman rang his bell and repeated his exhortatory lines, instead of 
being affected with the admonition, he fell to swearing at the sheriff's officers, asking 
them why they detained him there to hear an old puppy chatter nonsense. At Tyburn 
he was just the same, being turned off without either conversing with the ordinary, 
praying by himself, or making any speech to the people. His exit was in 1687 when he 
was just twenty-five years of age.


PHILIP STANSFIELD, SON OF SIR JAMES 
STANSFIELD 
Executed 15th of February, 1688, for the Murder of his Father and for High 
Treason

	SIR JAMES STANSFIELD held the rank of colonel in the Parliamentary 
army. After Cromwell's victory at Dunbar he went to Scotland and established a 
woollen manufactory at Newmilns (now Amisfield) in the neighbourhood of 
Haddington, under the patronage of the Protectorate. At the Restoration, Parliament 
granted certain annuities and privileges to Colonel Stansfield, on whom Charles II. 
conferred the honour of knighthood. His prospects were, however, soon blasted, for in 
1687 he was found murdered, as was supposed, by his eldest son, Philip, whom he 
had disinherited for his debauchery. This unfortunate man was brought up for trial, 
6th of February, 1688, the indictment stating that, although his father had given him a 
liberal education, he had taken ill courses, and been detained prisoner in the 
Marshalsea, in Southwark, and in the public prisons of Antwerp, Orleans, and other 
places, from whence his said father had released him; and that notwithstanding, he fell 
to his debauched and villainous courses again. Whereupon, his father signifying his 
intentions to disinherit him and settle his estate upon John Stansfield, his second son, 
the said Philip Stansfield did declare he would cut his father's throat, and did attempt 
to assassinate his father by pursuing him in the highway, etc., and firing pistols upon 
him; which the said Sir James, his father, had declared to several persons of honour in 
his lifetime.
	The court at Edinburgh, the 7th of February, 1688, met, and the assize, 
consisting of fifteen merchants and trades-men, being sworn without any challenge or 
exception to any of them, his Majesty's advocate produced his witnesses.
	After evidence as to prisoner having drunk confusion to the King, and made 
others drink likewise, Agnes Bruce further deposed that she had often heard the 
prisoner vow and swear he would kill any person that offended him. That he 
conversed much with Janet Johnston, George Thomson and his wife (charged with 
being concerned in this murder), and used after supper at his father's to go to these 
persons. That she had frequently heard the prisoner curse his father, and express his 
hatred and abhorrence of him, and say he had hated his father these seven years; and 
this in his mother's presence. That the Friday before Sir James's death, Janet Johnston 
was a considerable time with the prisoner in his chamber. That she thought Sir James 
not so merry as usual the night before his death. That on the Saturday night when Sir 
James came home he went to his lady's chamber, where he did not stay a quarter of an 
hour; and that his lady fell a-quarrelling with him for going to another house before he 
came there. That the next morning, when Sir James was missed, the deponent went 
into his chamber to make a fire, and found the bed in better order than usual, and the 
candle at the bed's foot which used to be at the head. That the deponent desiring the 
body might be brought up to the chamber, the prisoner answered it should not enter 
there, for he had died more like a beast than a man; and that it was brought to a cellar 
within the close, where was very little light. That she heard the prisoner cry and 
lament when his father's body was found, but saw no tears. That he would have forced 
his father's chamber door open, but the key being found he entered, and took the gold 
and money out of his pocket, and then searched the cabinet; that within an hour after 
his father was brought from the water he got the buckles off his shoes and put them on 
his own. That a short time before Sir James died, his lady having fallen into a swoon, 
and afterwards telling the prisoner he was likely in a short time to lose his mother, he 
answered in the deponent's hearing that his father should be dead first. That two 
nights after Sir James's death the lady told this deponent that she heard the prisoner 
had vowed his brother's death, and little less as to his father, upon his hearing Sir 
James was about to settle his estate upon his brother; and that the lady renewed the 
same expression to this deponent at Edinburgh, and added, what if they should put her 
bairn in prison.
	James Murehead, surgeon, deposed that upon the prisoner's assisting to lift the 
body, after it had been sewed up, and clean linen put on, it darted out blood through 
the linen, from the left side of the neck, which the prisoner touched; but that when the 
deponent and the other surgeon put on the linen, and stirred and moved the head and 
neck before, he saw no blood at all. (Sir Patrick Hume, in the prisoner's defence, said 
that this was a superstitious observation, founded neither upon law nor reason.) His 
Majesty's advocate desired that James Thomson, son to George Thomson, and Anna, 
daughter to Janet Johnston, spouse to the said James Thomson, might be examined as 
witnesses against the prisoner; but the prisoner's counsel opposed it, for that they were 
but children, the boy being about thirteen, and the girl about ten years of age. 
Whereupon the Court refused to admit them, but the jury desired that they be 
permitted to declare what they knew, viz. —
	The said James Thomson declared that Janet Johnston came to George 
Thomson's (his father's) house between nine and ten o'clock that night Sir James was 
killed, and the prisoner came thither soon after. His mother ordered him to go to bed, 
which was in the same room, and beat him because he did not go presently. Anna 
Mark, the said Janet's daughter, came for her to give her child suck, but Janet stayed a 
considerable time after, and whispered with the said George Thomson, and he heard 
the prisoner complain that his father would not give him money, and prayed the devil 
might take his father, and God d —n his own soul if he should not make an end of his 
father, and then all would be his, and he would be kind to them. Philip Stansfield and 
Janet Johnston went away about eleven o'clock, and soon after his father and mother 
came to bed. But his father and mother rose afterwards in the night and went out of 
the house, and stayed away an hour and a half or two hours. His mother came in first, 
and he pretended to be asleep when they returned, and he heard his father say the deed 
was done; that the prisoner guarded the door with a drawn sword and a bended pistol; 
that he never thought a man would have died so soon; that they carried him out to the 
water-side and tied a stone about his neck, and leaving him there, they came back to 
the little kiln, and considered if they should cast him in the water with the stone about 
his neck or not, and whether they should cast him in far, or near the side; and that at 
length they returned and took away the stone from about his neck, and threw him in 
the water. His father said he was afraid, for all that, that the murder would come out. 
And his mother said, "Hout, fool, there is no fear of that; it will be thought he has 
drowned himself." When Sir James was found in the morning his mother said to his 
father: "Rise quickly, for if you be found in your bed, they will say that you have had 
a hand in the murder." The coat and waistcoat Sir James had on in the water being 
sent to their house, his mother said she was frightened at it, and desired his father to 
send it away. His mother said she was afraid to stay in the house in the evening, and 
therefore went out with his father, if he went out, ever since Sir James died, which she 
did not use to do before.
	Anna Mark, daughter of Janet Johnston, declared that on the Saturday night 
Sir James was killed the prisoner came to her mother's house and sent for George 
Thomson and his wife, and then sent her to see if Sir James was come home. Upon 
her bringing word that Sir James was come the prisoner ran down to Newmilns. 
About eleven o'clock the same night her father sent her to find her mother, and she 
found her with the prisoner at George Thomson's house, but her mother did not come 
home till two in the morning. Whereupon her father said: "B — —, w — —, where 
have you been so long?" She answered, "Wherever I have been, the deed is done," and 
then went to bed. Her mother, ever after that, was afraid to be alone.
	The jury found the prisoner guilty of all the facts laid in the indictment — viz. 
of treason, cursing his father, and being accessory to his murder.
	The assize finding him guilty, the Lords of Justiciary ordered him to be 
hanged on the 15th of February, at the Cross of Edinburgh, and his tongue to be cut 
out for cursing his father, and his right hand to be cut off for the parricide, and his 
head to be put upon the East Port of Haddington, as nearest to the place of murder, 
and his body to be hung up in chains betwixt Leith and Edinburgh, and his lands and 
goods to be confiscated for the treason.
	All this was rigorously put into execution. Some thought," says Lord 
Fontainhall, a contemporary judge, "if not a miraculous, yet an extraordinary return of 
the imprecations was the accident of the slipping of the knots on the cross, whereby 
his feet and knees were on the scaffold, which necessitated them to strangle him, 
bearing therein a near resemblance to his father's death; and a new application having 
been made that they might be allowed to bury him, Duke Hamilton was for it, but the 
Chancellor would not consent, because he had mocked his religion. So his body was 
hung up, and some days after being stolen down, it was found lying in a ditch among 
some water, as his father's was; and by order was hung up again, and then a second 
time was taken down."


JOHN CHISLIE OF DALRY 
Hanged 3rd of April, 1689, for the Murder of the Right Hon. Sir George 
Lockhart, of Cornwath, Lord President of the Court of Sessions, after being 
tortured under a Special Act

	JOHN CHISLIE of Dalry was brought before the Lord Provost on the 1st of 
April, 1689, to be examined concerning the murder of Sir George Lockhart, 
committed on the day preceding. Sir John Lockhart of Castlehill, brother, and 
Cromwell Lockhart of Lee, nephew, of the deceased, appeared in court; and in their 
own name, and in that of the children of the deceased, gave an Act of the meeting of 
Estates of Parliament, passed that day, of the following purport: — That the Estates 
having considered the supplication of the friends of the deceased Sir George Lockhart, 
for granting warrant to the magistrates of Edinburgh to torture John Chislie of Dalry, 
perpetrator of the murder, and William Calderwood, writer in Edinburgh, an 
accomplice; therefore, in respect of the notoriety of the murder, and of the 
extraordinary circumstances attending it, the Estates appoint and authorise the 
Provost, and two of the bailies of Edinburgh, and likewise the Earl of Errol, Lord 
High Constable, and his deputies, not only to judge of the murder, but to proceed to 
torture Chislie, to discover if he had any accomplices in the crime. [Note: By the Act 
and declaration which the Estates of Parliament passed, just ten days after this trial, 
declaring King James to have forfaulted the crown, by illegal assumption and exercise 
of power, they declared, "That the use of torture, without evidence, and in ordinary 
crimes, is contrary to law."-Act of Estates, 11th of April, 1684.] The Estates at the 
same time declare that this extraordinary case shall be no precedent to warrant torture 
in time coming, nor argument to ratify it as to the time past.
	The prisoner was then put to the torture, and declared that he was not advised 
to the assassination of Sir George Lockhart by any person whatever. That when at 
London he told James Stewart, advocate, that if he got no satisfaction from the 
President, he would assassinate him; and told the same to a person there of the name 
of Callender, and to Mr William Chislie, his uncle. He confessed that he charged his 
pistol on Sunday morning, and went to the new kirk, and having seen the President 
coming from the church, he went to the close where the President lodged, followed 
him, and when just behind his back shot him. That he was satisfied when he heard of 
the President's being dead; and on hearing it he said he was not used to doing things 
by halves. He also confessed that when at London he walked up and down Pall Mall 
with a pistol beneath his coat, lying in wait for the President.
	The prisoner judicially confessed the crime libelled, and declared that he 
committed the murder because he thought the deceased had given an unjust sentence 
against him. Being asked if it was not a sentence pronounced in favour of his wife and 
children for their aliment, he declared he would not answer to that point, nor give any 
account thereof. Among other witnesses, Mr William Chislie, Writer to the Signet, 
deposed that he had not seen the prisoner since April, 1688, who then expressed his 
resentment against Sir George Lockhart, threatening to assassinate him for having 
decreed an aliment of seventeen hundred merks [about L.93 sterling] yearly to the 
prisoner's wife and ten children. The witness told the President of it, but he despised 
the threat. The jury all in one voice, by the mouth of Sir John Foulis of Ravelston, 
their chancellor (i.e. foreman), found, by the prisoner's judicial confession, that he 
was guilty of the murder of Sir George Lockhart, etc.; and by the deposition of 
witnesses, that he was guilty of "murder, out of forethought felony."
	The verdict was subscribed by the whole jury. The Lord Provost and bailies of 
Edinburgh sentenced the prisoner as follows:-
	"That he be carried on a hurdle from the Tolbooth of Edinburgh to the Market 
Cross on Wednesday, the 3rd of April, inst.; and there, between the hours of two and 
four of the afternoon, to have his right hand cut off alive, and then to be hanged upon 
a gibbet, with the pistol about his neck with which he committed the murder. His body 
to be hung in chains between Leith and Edinburgh; his right hand fixed on the West 
Port; and his movable goods to be confiscated."


WILLIAM BEW 
Who practised the Art of Flattery on the Highway. Executed 17th of April, 
1689

	WE have little more to say of this fellow than that he was the brother of 
Captain Bew, the notorious highwayman who was killed some years ago at 
Knightsbridge by one Figg and some thief-takers, and that he was himself as great an 
offender in that way as his said brother for most of his time; only his reign was shorter 
than that of some others, he being apprehended at Brainford before he had pursued the 
course many years, brought from thence to Newgate, and at the next execution tucked 
up at Tyburn. This fatal day to him was Wednesday, the 17th of April, in the year 
1689.
	The following story, which Bew himself used to tell, is of an adventure of 
Bew with a young lady, whom he overtook on the road, with her footman behind her. 
He made bold to keep them company a pretty way, talking all along of the lady's 
extraordinary beauty, and carrying his compliments to her to an unreasonable height. 
Madam was not at all displeased with what he said, for she looked upon herself to be 
every bit as handsome as he made her. However, she seemed to contradict all he told 
her, and professed with a mighty formal air that she had none of the perfections he 
mentioned, and was therefore highly obliged to him for his good opinion of a woman 
who deserved it so little. They went on in this manner, Bew still protesting that she 
was the most agreeable lady he ever saw, and she declaring that he was the most 
complaisant gentleman she ever met with. This was the discourse till they came to a 
convenient place, when Bew took an opportunity to knock the footman off his horse; 
and then addressing himself to the lady, "Madam," says he, "I have been a great while 
disputing with you about the beauty of your person; but you insist so strongly on my 
being mistaken, that I cannot in good manners contradict you any longer. However, I 
am not satisfied yet that you have nothing handsome about you, and therefore I must 
beg leave to examine your pocket, and see what charms are contained there." Having 
delivered his speech he made no more ceremony, but thrust his hand into her pocket 
and pulled out a purse with fifty guineas in it. "These are the charms I mean," says he; 
and away he rode, leaving her to meditate a little upon the nature of flattery, which 
commonly picks the pocket of the person it is most busy about.


PATRICK O'BRYAN 
Hanged once for Highway Robbery, but lived to rob and murder the Man for 
whom he had been executed. Finally hanged 30th of April, 1689

	THE parents of Patrick O'Bryan were very poor; they lived at Loughrea, a 
market-town in the county of Galway and province of Connaught in Ireland. Patrick 
came over into England in the reign of King Charles II., and listed himself into his 
Majesty's Coldstream Regiment of Guards, so called from their being first raised at a 
place in Scotland which bears that name. But the small allowance of a private sentinel 
was far too little for him. The first thing he did was to run into debt at all the public-
houses and shops that would trust him; and when his credit would maintain him no 
longer, he had recourse to borrowing of all he knew, being pretty well furnished with 
the common defence of his countrymen — a front that would brazen out anything, and 
even laugh at the persons whom he had imposed on to their very faces. By such means 
as these he subsisted for some time.
	At last, when he found fraud would no longer support him, he went out upon 
the footpad. Dr Clewer, the parson of Croydon, was one of those whom he stopped. 
This man had in his youth been tried at the Old Bailey, and burnt in the hand, for 
stealing a silver cup. Patrick knew him very well, and greeted him upon their lucky 
meeting; telling him that he could not refuse lending a little assistance to one of his 
old profession. The doctor assured him that he had not made a word if he had had any 
money about him, but he had not so much as a single farthing. "Then," says Patrick, "I 
must have your gown, sir." "If you can win it," quoth the doctor, "so you shall; but let 
me have the chance of a game at cards." To this O'Bryan consented, and the reverend 
gentleman pulled out a pack of the devil's books; with which they fairly played at all-
fours, to decide who should have the black robe. Patrick had the fortune to win, and 
the other went home very contentedly, as he had lost his divinity in such an equitable 
manner.
	There was in Patrick's time a famous posture master in Pall Mall; his name 
was Clark. Our adventurer met him one day on Primrose Hill, and saluted him with 
"Stand and deliver." But he was mightily disappointed, for the nimble harlequin 
jumped over his head, and instead of reviving his heart with a few guineas, made it 
sink into his breeches for fear, he imagining the devil was come to be merry with him 
before his time, for no human creature, he thought, could do the like. This belief was a 
little mortification to him at first; but he soon saw the truth of the story in the public 
prints, where Mr Clark's friends took care to put it, and then our Teague's qualm of 
conscience was changed into a vow of revenge if ever he met with his tumblership 
again; which, however, he never did.
	O'Bryan at last entirely deserted from his regiment, and got a horse, on which 
he robbed on the highway a long time. One day in particular he met Nell Gwyn in her 
coach on the road to Winchester, and addressed himself to her in the following 
manner:- "Madam, I am a gentleman, and, as you may see, a very able one. I have 
done a great many signal services to the fair sex, and have in return been all my life 
long maintained by them. Now, as I know you are a charitable w — —e, and have a 
great value for men of my abilities, I make bold to ask you for a little money, though I 
never have had the honour of serving you in particular. However, if an opportunity 
should ever fall in my way, you may depend upon it I will exert myself to the 
uttermost, for I scorn to be ungrateful." Nell seemed very well pleased with what he 
had said, and made him a present of ten guineas. However, whether she wished for the 
opportunity he spoke of, or no, cannot be determined, because she did not explain 
herself; but if a person may guess from her general character, she never was afraid of 
a man in her life.
	When Patrick robbed on the highway he perverted several young men to the 
same bad course of life. One Claudius Wilt in particular was hanged at Worcester for 
a robbery committed in his company, though it was the first he was ever concerned in. 
Several others came to the same end through his seducements; and he himself was at 
last executed at Gloucester for a fact committed within two miles of that city. When 
he had hung the usual time, his body was cut down and delivered to his acquaintance, 
that they might bury him as they pleased. But being carried home to one of their 
houses, somebody imagined they perceived life in him; whereupon an able surgeon 
was privately procured to bleed him, who by that and other means which he used 
brought him again to his senses. The thing was kept an entire secret from the world, 
and it was hoped by his friends that he would spend the remainder of his forfeited life, 
which he had so surprisingly retrieved, to a much better purpose than he had 
employed the former part of it. These friends offered to contribute in any manner he 
should desire towards his living privately and honestly. He promised them very fairly, 
and for some time kept within due bounds, while the sense of what he had escaped 
remained fresh in his mind; but the time was not long before, in spite of all the 
admonitions and assistance he received, he returned again to his villainies like a dog 
to his vomit, leaving his kind benefactors, stealing a fresh horse, and taking once more 
to the highway, where he grew as audacious as ever. It was not above a year after his 
former execution before he met with the gentleman again who had convicted him 
before, and attacked him in the same manner. The poor gentleman was not so much 
surprised at being stopped on the road as he was at seeing the person who did it, being 
certain it was the very man whom he had seen executed. This consternation was so 
great that he could not help discovering it, by saying: "How comes this to pass? I 
thought you had been hanged a twelvemonth ago." "So I was," says Patrick," and 
therefore you ought to imagine that what you see now is only my ghost. However, lest 
you should be so uncivil as to hang my ghost too, I think it my best way to secure 
you." Upon this he discharged a pistol through the gentleman's head; and, not content 
with that, dismounting from his horse, he drew out a sharp hanger from his side and 
cut the dead carcass into several pieces. This piece of barbarity was followed by 
another, which was rather more horrible yet. Patrick, with four more as bad as 
himself, having intelligence that Lancelot Wilmot, Esq., of Wiltshire, had a great deal 
of money and plate in his house which stood in a lonely place about a mile and a half 
from Trowbridge, they beset it one night and got in. When they were entered they tied 
and gagged the three servants, and then proceeded to the old gentleman's room, where 
he was in bed with his lady. They served both these in the same manner, and then 
went into the daughter's chamber. This young lady they severally forced one after 
another to their brutal pleasure, and when they had done, most inhumanly stabbed her, 
because she endeavoured to get from their arms. They next acted the same tragedy on 
the father and mother, which, they told them, was because they did not breed up their 
daughter to better manners. Then they rifled the house of everything valuable which 
they could find in it that was fit to be carried off, to the value in all of two thousand 
five hundred pounds, After which they set the building on fire, and left it to consume, 
with the unhappy servants who were in it.  Patrick continued above two years after 
this before he was apprehended, and possibly might never have been suspected of this 
fact if one of his bloody accomplices had not been hanged for another crime at 
Bedford. This wretch at the gallows confessed all the particulars, and discovered the 
persons concerned with him; a little while after which, O'Bryan was seized at his 
lodging in Little Suffolk Street, near the Haymarket, and committed to Newgate; from 
whence before the next assizes he was conveyed to Salisbury, where he owned the 
fact himself, and all the other particulars of his wicked actions that have been here 
related. He was now a second time executed, and great care was taken to do it 
effectually. There was not, indeed, much danger of his recovering any more, because 
his body was immediately hung in chains near the place where the barbarous deed 
was perpetrated. He was in the thirty-first year of his age at the time of his execution, 
which was on Tuesday, the 30th of April, in the year 1689.


THOMAS RUMBOLD 
Who, if all the Stories about him be true, was a very notable Cheat. 
Executed in 1689

	THIS Thomas Rumbold was descended from honest and creditable parents at 
Ipswich, in Suffolk. In his youth he was put apprentice to a bricklayer, but evil 
inclinations having an ascendant over his mind, he went from his master before he had 
well served two-thirds of his time.
	This elopement obliged him to pursue some irregularities to support himself. 
He absconded from his father's house, and having a desire to see London, he came up 
to town, where, getting into the company of a notorious gang of robbers, he went on 
the highway, and frequently took a purse. This course he continued some time, in 
conjunction with confederates; but having a mind to make prizes by himself, he 
ventured by himself, committing several depredations on his countrymen, the 
following whereof have come to our hands.
	One time, being informed that the Most Reverend Dr William Sancroft, 
Archbishop of Canterbury in the reign of King James II., was to make a journey from 
Lambeth Palace to the city of Canterbury, he was determined to waylay him; and 
accordingly, getting sight of him between Rochester and Sittingbourne, in Kent, he 
gets into a field, and spreading a large tablecloth on the grass, on which he had placed 
several handfuls of gold, he then takes a box and dice out of his pocket, and falls a-
playing at hazard by himself. His Grace riding by that place, and espying a man 
shaking his elbows by himself, sent one of his footmen to know the meaning of it. The 
man was no sooner come up to Rumbold, who was still laying very eagerly, swearing 
and staring like a fury at his losses, but he returns to the reverend prelate, and telling 
him what he had seen, his Grace stepped out of his coach to him, and seeing none but 
him, asked him who he was to play with? "Damn it," said Rumbold, "there's five 
hundred pounds gone. Pray, sir, be silent." His Grace going to speak again: "Aye," 
said Rumbold, "there's a hundred pounds more lost." "Prithee," said the Archbishop, 
"who art thou to play with?" Rumbold replied, With — —-." "And how will you send 
the money to him?" "By," said Rumbold, "his ambassadors; and therefore, looking 
upon your Grace to be one of them extraordinary, I shall beg the favour of you to 
carry it him." Accordingly, giving his Grace about six hundred pounds in gold and 
silver, he put it into the seat of his coach, and away he rode to Sittingbourne to bait. 
Rumbold rode thither also to bait in another inn; and riding some short while before 
his Grace, as soon as he had sight of him again, he planted himself in another field in 
the same playing posture as he had before; which his Grace seeing, when riding by, 
went again to see this strange gamester, whom he then took to be really a madman. 
No sooner was his Grace approaching Rumbold, who then had little or no money 
upon his cloth, than he cried out: "Six hundred pounds." "What!" said the Archbishop, 
"lost again?" "No," replied Rumbold; "I won, by gad! I'll play this hand out, and then 
leave off. So, eight hundred pounds more, sir, won, I'll leave off while I'm well." 
"And whom have you won off?" said his Grace. "Off the same person," replied 
Rumbold, "that I left the six hundred pounds with you for before you went to dinner." 
"And how," said his Grace, "will you get your winnings?" Says Rumbold, "Off his 
ambassador too." So, riding up with sword and pistol in hand to his Grace's coach, he 
took fourteen hundred pounds out of the seat thereof above his own money, which he 
had entrusted in his hands to give to —, and rode off.
	One day, at Colebrook, being informed that a couple of travellers lay at a 
certain inn in the abovesaid town he rose early the next morning to waylay them in 
their journey to Reading, so went before them to surprise them at Maidenhead 
Thicket; but the travellers being cunning, they had given out in public the wrong road 
they were to go, for instead of riding to Reading, they went to Windsor, so that 
Rumbold, missing his prey, rode back again very melancholy, when meeting with the 
Earl of Oxford, who was attended only with one groom and a footman, he clapped his 
hair into his mouth to disguise himself for his intended design, and attacked his 
lordship with the terrifying words "Stand and deliver," withal swearing that if he 
made any resistance he was a dead man. The expostulations the Earl used to save 
what he had were as much in vain as to pretend to wash a blackamoor white; however 
he swore too that, since he must lose what he had, Rumbold should search his pockets 
himself, for he would not be at that trouble.
	Upon this, our adventurer, commanding his lordship's servants to keep at 
above a hundred-foot distance upon pain of death, took the pains of searching the 
Earl, when, finding nothing but boxes and dice in the pockets of his coat and 
waistcoat, he began to rend the skies with many first-rate oaths, swearing also that he 
believed he was the groom-porter, or else some gaming sharper going to bite the poor 
country people at their fairs and markets, till searching his breeches, he found within a 
good gold watch and six guineas. He changed his angry countenance into smiling 
features, and giving his lordship eighteen-pence, bade him be of good cheer, go up to 
his regiment then at London as fast as he could, and do his duty as he ought, and when 
he next met with him he would give him better encouragement.
	Rumbold having a long time observed a goldsmith in Lombard Street to be 
very intent in counting several bags of money was resolved to have a share out of 
some of them; but having tried several essays, still came off disappointed. He had 
several rings about him which he had got by robbing, one of which had a very fine 
diamond set in it. Money being wanting, and so many disappointments crossing his 
desires, he went to the goldsmith's to sell him the ring, in company with a servant he 
kept. On entering the shop he pulled the ring off his finger and asked him what it was 
worth. The goldsmith, looking on him, and then on the ring, hoped to make the ring 
his own for a small matter; and seeing our adventurer (who had disguised himself in a 
plain country dress), believed that he had little skill in diamonds, and that this came 
accidentally into his possession, and that he might purchase it very easily. Wherefore 
being doubtful what to answer as to the price, he told the countryman that the worth of 
it was uncertain, for he could not directly tell whether it was a right or a counterfeit 
one. As for that, said our pretended countryman, "I believe it is a right one, and dare 
warrant it; and indeed I intend to sell it, and therefore would know what you intend to 
give me for it." "Truly," replied the goldsmith," it may be worth ten pounds." "Yes, 
and more money," said the countryman.
	"Not much more," answered the goldsmith; "for look you here," said he, "here 
is a ring which I will warrant is much better than yours, and I will also warrant it to be 
a good diamond, and I will sell it you for twenty pounds." This the goldsmith said, 
supposing that the countryman, who came to sell, had no skill, inclination or money to 
buy. But our pretended countryman, believing that the goldsmith only said this 
thinking to draw him on to part with his own ring the more easily, and by that means 
cheat him, resolved, if he could, to be too wise for the goldsmith; wherefore, taking 
both the rings into his hands, through a pretence of comparing them together, he thus 
said: "I am sure mine is a right diamond." "And so is mine," replied the goldsmith. 
"And," said the countryman, "shall I have it for twenty pounds? Yes," replied the 
goldsmith. "But," said he, "I suppose you came to sell and not to buy; and since you 
shall see I will be a good customer, I will give you fifteen pounds for yours." "Nay," 
replied the countryman, "since I have the choice to buy or sell, I will never refuse a 
good pennyworth, as I think this is; therefore Master Goldsmith, I will keep my own, 
and give you money for yours." "Where is it?" said the goldsmith hastily. And 
endeavouring then to seize on his ring —" Hold a blow there," said Rumbold; "here's 
your money, but the ring I will keep." The goldsmith, seeing himself thus caught, 
fluttered and bounced like a madman, and Rumbold, pulling out a little purse, tolled 
down twenty pieces of gold, and said: "Here, shopkeeper, here's your money, but I 
hope you will allow the eighteen-pence apiece in exchange for my gold." "Tell me not 
of exchange, but give me my ring," said the goldsmith. "It is mine," said the 
countryman, "for I have bought it, and paid for it, and have witness of my bargain." 
All this would not serve the goldsmith's turn, but he cursed and swore that Rumbold, 
the pretended countryman, came to cheat him, and the ring he would have; and at the 
noise several people came about the shop, but he was so perplexed he could not tell 
his tale. At length a constable came, and although the goldsmith knew not to what 
purpose, yet before a justice he would go. Rumbold seemed content, and therefore 
before a justice they went together. When they came there, the goldsmith, who was 
the plaintiff, began his tale, and said that the countryman had taken a diamond ring 
from him worth one hundred pounds, and would give him but twenty pounds for it. 
"Have a care," replied Rumbold, "for if you charge me with taking a ring from you, I 
suppose that is stealing, and if you say so, I shall vex you more than I have yet done"; 
and then he told the justice the whole story as here related, which was then a very 
plain case, and for the proof of the matter our pretended country gentleman's man was 
a witness. The goldsmith, hearing this, alleged that he believed the country gentleman 
and his man were both impostors and cheats. To this our adventurer replied, as before, 
that he had better have a care he did not make his case worse, and bring an old house 
over his head by slandering him thus; for it was well known that he was a gentleman 
of three hundred pounds per annum, and lived at a place not above twenty miles from 
London, and that he, being desirous to sell a ring, came to his shop for that purpose; 
and he would have cheated him, but it proved that he only made a rod for his own 
breech, and what he intended for him had fallen upon himself. Thus did our 
adventurer make good his case; and the justice, seeing there was no injustice done, 
dismissed him, and ordered that his neighbour the goldsmith should have the twenty 
pieces of gold for twenty pounds, though they were worth more in exchange, and this 
was all the satisfaction he had.
	Rumbold had a mighty itching after the goldsmiths' money in Lombard Street; 
he could not pass through that street and hear those tradesmen telling their sums but 
his hands longed to be feeling them. He had a boy who constantly attended him, who, 
every time his master had a mind to make some advantage to himself, went into a 
gold- smith's shop, took up a handful of money, and then, letting it all fall down on 
the counter, ran out. One time the boy performed this trick the servants in the shop ran 
after him and taxed him with stealing some of the money. Rumbold, who always 
vindicated his youngster, bade them take care what they said, and positively affirmed 
that his boy had not taken a farthing, and must be so plain with them as to tell them 
that the goldsmith should pay for it. Hereupon they fell to hot words, and the 
goldsmith, calling our adventurer a shirking fellow, said he would have both him and 
the boy sent to Newgate for robbing him, and that in conclusion he must and should 
pay for it. At first our adventurer desired to know with what sum they pretended to 
charge the boy; they said they knew not, but that he had taken money from a heap 
they were telling, and which was a hundred pounds. Rumbold, hearing them say thus, 
told them that he would stay the telling of it, and then they might judge who had the 
abuse. They were content with it, and accordingly went to telling. Half-an-hour had 
dispatched that matter, and then they found all their money was right to a farthing. 
The goldsmith, seeing this, asked our adventurer's pardon for the affront they had 
done him, saying it was a mistake. Rumbold answered to this that he must pay for his 
prating; and that being a person of quality, he would not put up with the affront, and 
that he must expect to hear further from him. The goldsmith, seeing our adventurer 
hot, was as choleric as he, and so they parted for that time. Rumbold the next day got 
the goldsmith to be arrested in an action of defamation, and the serjeant who arrested 
him, being well fed by our adventurer, told the goldsmith that he had better by far 
compound the matter, for the gentleman he had injured was a person of quality, and 
would not put it up, but make him pay soundly for it if he proceeded any further. The 
goldsmith, being desirous of quiet, hearkened to his counsel, and agreed to give ten 
pounds; but that would not be taken, so twenty pounds was given to our adventurer, 
and the business was made up for the present.
	Rumbold having got some of the goldsmith's money was determined to have 
more, or venture hard for it; wherefore having again given instructions to his boy what 
to do, he made several journeys to the goldsmith's, walking by his door to watch an 
opportunity. At length he found one; for seeing the servants tell a considerable 
quantity of gold, he gave the sign to his boy, who presently went in and, clapping his 
hand on the heap, took up and brought away a full handful, and coming to his master 
gave it him. Neither did the boy make so much haste out of the shop but that he could 
hear a stranger, who was in the shop receiving of money, say to the apprentice: "Why, 
do not you stop the boy?" "No," said the apprentice, "I do not mean to; I know him 
well enough. My master paid sauce lately for stopping of him." And so they continued 
telling of their money.
	Rumbold being intimately acquainted with a jeweller in Foster Lane, whom he 
had often helped to the sale of rings and jewels, which made his credit good with him, 
went one time into his workroom, and chancing to spy a very rich jewel he told him 
that he could help him to the sale thereof, my lady such-an-one having spoken to him 
about such a thing. The jeweller, glad of the opportunity, delivered it to our 
adventurer at such a price to sell for him. But Rumbold only carried it to another 
workman to have another made like it with counterfeit stones. Before he went, he 
asked if the lady disliked it whether he might leave it with his wife or servant. "Aye, 
aye," says he, "either will be sufficient." Rumbold was forced to watch a whole day to 
see when he went out, and being gone, presently went to the shop and inquired of his 
wife for her husband. She answered him that he was but just gone. "Well, madam," 
said he, "you can do my business as well as he; it is only to deliver these stones into 
your custody"; and so he went his way. Not long after, Rumbold met the jeweller in 
the street with displeasing looks. "Sir," said he, "I thought a friend would not have 
served me so." But our adventurer denied it stiffly; whereupon he was very angry, and 
told him he would prosecute him. Rumbold seemed not to value his threats, and so left 
him. Rumbold was not gone many paces before he met with a friend who complained 
to him that he had lost a very valuable locket of his wife's, it being stolen from her. 
Rumbold was glad to hear of such a circumstance that had fallen out so favourably to 
his present purpose; he asked him to give him a description of it, which he did 
punctually. "Now," said Rumbold, "what will you give me if I tell you where it is?" 
"Anything in reason." "Then go to such a shop in Foster Lane" (the same shop where 
he had cheated the man of his ring) "and there ask peremptorily for it, for I was there 
at such a time and saw it — nay, he would have had me help him to a customer for it; 
meantime I'll stay at the Star Tavern for you" Away he went and demanded his locket. 
The jeweller denied he had any such thing (as well he might). Upon this, Rumbold 
advised him to have a warrant for him, and to fetch him before a Justice of the Peace; 
and that he and the person who was with him would swear it. The goldsmith was 
instantly seized on by a constable, and as soon as he saw who they were that would 
swear against him, desired the gentleman to drink a glass of wine, and then ordered 
him satisfaction. But Rumbold had so ordered the business that it would not be taken 
unless he would give all three general releases. The goldsmith, knowing the danger 
that might ensue to life and estate if he persisted, consented to the proposal.
	Rumbold walking one time in the fields with an attendant or two, who should 
be constantly bare before him if in company with any person of quality, but otherwise 
kind- fellow-well-met, he was got as far as Hackney before he knew he was, for his 
thoughts were busied in forming designs, and his wit was contriving how to put them 
into execution. Casting his eye on one side of him, he saw the prettiest- built and well-
situated house that ever his eyes beheld. He had immediately a covetous desire to be 
master thereof. He was then, as fortune would have it, in a very handsome dress. He 
walked but a little way farther before he found out a plot to accomplish his desires. 
And thus it was. He returned and knocked at the gate, and demanded of the servant 
whether his master was within. He understood he was, and thereupon desired to speak 
with him. The gentleman came out to him himself, and desired him to walk in.
	After Rumbold had made a general apology, he told him his business, which 
was only to request the favour of him that he might have the privilege to bring a 
workman to survey his house and to take his dimensions thereof, because he was so 
well pleased with the building that he earnestly desired to have another built exactly 
after that pattern. The gentleman could do no less than grant him so much civility. 
Coming home, he went to a carpenter, telling him he was about to buy a house at 
Hackney, and that he would have him go along with him, to give him (in private) the 
estimate. Accordingly they went, and found the gentleman at home, who entertained 
our adventurer kindly as a stranger. In the meantime the carpenter took an exact 
account of the buts and bounds of the house on paper, which was as much as he 
desired at that time. Paying the carpenter well, he dismissed him, and by that paper 
had a lease drawn with a very great fine (mentioned to have been paid) at a small rent. 
Witnesses he did not want to his deed, and shortly after he demanded possession. The 
gentleman, thinking our adventurer out of his wits, only laughed at him. Rumbold 
commenced a suit of law against him, and produced his creatures to swear to his 
sealing and delivery of the lease, and the carpenter's evidence, with many other 
probable circumstances to corroborate his cause; whereupon he had a verdict. The 
gentleman, by this time understanding who our adventurer was, thought it safer to 
compound with him and lose something rather than all.
	Another time, Rumbold, coming early one morning to an inn in the country, 
called for a flagon of beer, and desired a private room — "For," said he, "I have 
company coming to me, and we have business together." The tapster accordingly 
showed him a room, and brought him a flagon of beer, and with it a silver cup worth 
three pounds. Rumbold drank off his beer and called for another flagon, and at the 
same time desired the landlord to bear him company. The landlord, seeing him alone, 
sat and talked with him about State affairs till they were both weary and the landlord 
was ready to leave him. "Well," said our adventurer," I see my company will not 
come, and therefore I will not stay any longer." Neither did he; but having drank up 
his beer, he called to pay. "Fourpence," said the tapster. "There it is," answered our 
adventurer, laying it down, and so he went out of the room. The tapster stayed behind 
to bring away the flagon and silver cup, yet though he found the flagon, the cup was 
not to be found; wherefore, running hastily out of the room, he cried: "Stop the man!" 
Rumbold was not in such haste but that he quickly stopped of himself; he was not 
quite gone out of the doors, and therefore soon returned to the bar; where, when he 
was come —" Well," said he, what is the matter? What would you have?" "The cup," 
answered the tapster, "that I brought to you." "I left it in the room," replied Rumbold. 
"I cannot find it," answered the tapster; and at this noise the landlord appeared, who, 
hearing what was the matter, said: "I am sure the cup was there but just now, for I 
drank out of it." "Aye, and it is there for me," replied our adventurer. "Look then 
further," said the landlord. The tapster did so, but neither high nor low could he find 
the cup. "Well, then," said the landlord, "if it be gone you must pay for it, 
countryman, for you must either have it or know of its going, and therefore you must 
pay for it." "Not I, indeed," replied our adventurer; "you see I have none of it. I have 
not been out of your house, nor nobody has been with me, how then can I have it? 
You may search me." The landord immediately caused him to be searched, but there 
was no cup to be found. However, the landlord was resolved not to lose his cup so, 
and therefore he sent for a constable, and charged him with our adventurer, and 
threatened him with the justice. All this would not do, and Rumbold told him that 
threatened folks live long, and if he would go before a justice, he was ready to bear 
him company to him. The landlord was more and more perplexed at this, and seeing 
he could not have his cup, nor nothing confessed, before the justice they went. When 
they came, the landlord told the story as truly as it was, and our pretended countryman 
made the same answer there as he had done before to the landlord. The justice was 
perplexed, not knowing how to do justice. Here was a cup lost, and Rumbold did not 
deny but he had it; but gone it was, and although Rumbold was pursued, yet he did 
not fly; he had nobody with him, and therefore it could not be conveyed away by 
confederacy; and for his own part he had been and was again searched, but no such 
thing found about him, and he in all respects pleaded innocence. This though 
considered, and weighed in the balance of justice, he could not think that our 
adventurer had it, and therefore to commit him would be injustice. He considered all 
he could, and was inclined to favour the countryman, who was altogether a stranger, 
and he believed innocent, especially when he considered what kind of person the 
landlord was, of whose life and conversation he had both heard and known enough to 
cause him to believe that it might be possible that all this might be a trick of the 
landlord's to cheat our adventurer; and therefore he gave his judgment that he did not 
believe by the evidence that was given that the countryman had the cup, and that he 
would not commit him unless the landlord would lay and swear point-blank felony to 
his charge, and of that he desired the landlord to beware. The landlord, seeing how the 
affair was likely to go, said no more, but he left it to Mr Justice, who, being of the 
opinion above-mentioned, discharged Rumbold, and advised the landlord to let him 
hear no more of such matters, and if he could not secure his plate, and know what 
company he had delivered it to, then to keep it up. The landlord thanked the justice for 
his advice, and so departed, our pretended countryman going about his business, and 
he returning home, being heartily vexed at his loss and the carriage of the whole 
affair, which was neither for his profit nor credit; but he was forced to sit down with 
the loss, being extremely uneasy at thinking which way he had lost the cup. He threw 
away some money upon a cunning man to know what was become of it, but all he 
could tell him was that he would hear of it again; and so he did shortly after, though it 
was to his further cost, and to little purpose.
	He had some occasion to go to the market-town during the time of the assizes, 
and there seeing the prisoners brought to their trials, among others he espied 
Rumbold, whom he had charged with the silver cup. He inquired what was his crime, 
and was told it was for picking of a pocket. "Nay, then," said the landlord, "probably I 
may hear of my cup again." And therefore, when the trial was over and the prisoners 
carried back to the jail, he went and inquired for our adventurer, to whose presence he 
was soon brought. "O Lord, master! how do you do? Who thought to have seen you 
here? I believe you have not met with so good friends in this country as you did at our 
town of our justice; but let that pass. Come, let us drink together." Hereupon a jug of 
ale was called for and some tobacco which they very lovingly drank off, and smoked 
together; which done, said the landlord to our adventurer: "I would gladly be resolved 
in one point, which I question not but you can do." "I suppose you mean," said 
Rumbold, "about the old business of the silver cup you lost?" "Yes," said the 
landlord;" and the losing of it does not so much vex me as the manner how it was lost, 
and therefore," continued he, "if you would do me the kindness to give me the 
satisfaction how you came by it, I do protest I will acquit you although you are 
directly guilty." "No, that will not do," replied Rumbold; "there is somewhat else in 
the case." "Well, then," said the landlord, "if you will tell me, I will give you ten 
shillings to drink." "Ready money does very well in a prison," said our adventurer, 
"and will prevail much; but how shall I be assured that you will not prosecute me if I 
should chance to be concerned?" "For that ," replied the landlord, "I can give you no 
other warrant than my oath, which I will inviolably keep." "Well, then," said 
Rumbold, "down with the merry grigs; let me handle the money, and I'll be very true 
to you, and as for your charging me with it I fear you not." The landlord, being big 
with expectation to know how this clean conveyance was wrought, soon laid down the 
ten shillings, and then our countryman thus proceeded: "I must confess that I know 
which way your cup went, but when you charged me with it I had it not, neither was it 
out of the room, and I must tell you this, that if you had sought narrowly you might 
have found it, but it was not there long after. We who live by our wits must act by 
policy more than downright strength, and this cannot be done without confederates, 
and I had such in the management of this affair, for I left the cup fastened with soft 
wax under the middle of the board of the table where I drank; which place of the 
table, by reason it was covered with a cloth, as you may remember it was, it could not 
well be seen, and therefore you and your servants missed it. You know that very 
willingly I went with you to the justice; and whilst we were gone, those friends and 
confederates of mine, whom I had appointed, and who knew the room and everything 
else, went into the house, and into the same room, where they found the silver cup, 
and without the least suspicion went fairly off with it; and at a place appointed we 
met, and there acquainted one another with our adventures; and what purchases we 
had made we equally shared them between us." The landlord, at hearing this 
discourse, was extremely surprised, although fully satisfied. "But yet," said he, "I 
would be resolved one question, which is this: How if we had found it where you had 
put it whilst you were there?" "Why, truly," said Rumbold, "then you would have 
charged me with nothing, and I would have put it off with a jest; and if that would not 
have done, the most you could have done would have been only to have kicked and 
beaten me, and those things we of our quality must venture. You know the old 
proverbs, ' Nothing venture, nothing have '; and 'Faint heart never won fair lady.' And 
we have this other proverb to help us: 'Fortune favours the bold,' as it commonly does 
those of our quality, and she did me, I thank her, in that attempt." Rumbold thus 
descanted upon his actions, and the landlord, finding no likelihood of getting his cup, 
or anything else, from our adventurer, returned home.
	We shall give our readers now the last adventure of Rumbold which he 
performed upon this mortal stage. It is this: Our adventurer, in company with two or 
three more cheats going together, saw a countryman who had a purse of money in his 
hand; they had observed him draw it to pay for some gingerbread he had bought on 
the road, wherefore they closed with him and endeavoured to nip his bung — pick his 
pocket — but could not, for he, knowing he was in a dangerous place, and among as 
dangerous company, put his purse of money into his breeches, which being close at 
the knees secured it from falling out, and besides he was very sly in having anybody 
come too near him. Our practitioners in the art of thieving, seeing this would not do, 
set their wits to working further, and having all their tools ready about them, and 
taking a convenient time and place, one of them goes before and drops a letter. 
Another of our adventurers, who had joined himself to the countryman, seeing it lie 
fairly for the purpose, says to him: "Look you, what is here!" But although the 
countryman did stoop to take it up, yet our adventurer was too nimble for him in that, 
and having it in hand, said: "Here is somewhat else besides a letter." "I cry half," said 
the countryman. "Well," said Rumbold, "you stooped indeed as well as I, but I have it; 
however I'll be fair with you. Let us see what it is, and whether it is worth the 
dividing." And thereupon he breaks open the letter and there sees a fair chain or 
necklace of gold. "Good fortune," says Rumbold, "if this be right gold." "How shall 
we know that?" replied the countryman. "Let us see what the letter says." Which 
being short, and to the purpose, spoke thus:
BROTHER JOHN,-I have here sent you back this necklace of gold you have sent me, 
not for any dislike I have to it, but my wife is covetous and would have a bigger; this 
comes not to above seven pounds, and she would have one of ten pounds; therefore 
pray get it changed for one of that price, and send it by the bearer to your loving 
brother, 
	JACOB THORNTON.
	"Nay, then, we have good luck," said the cheating dog, our adventurer; "but I 
hope," continued he to the countryman, "you will not expect a full share, for you 
know I found it, and besides, if we should divide it, I know not how to break it in 
pieces, but I doubt it would spoil it, therefore I had rather have my share in money." 
"Well," said the countryman, "I'll give you your share in money, provided I may have 
a full share." "That you shall," said Rumbold, "and therefore I must have of you three 
pounds ten shillings, the price in all being as you see seven pounds." "Aye," said the 
countryman (thinking to be too cunning for our adventurer)," it may be worth seven 
pounds in money in all, fashion and all, but we must not value that, but only the gold; 
therefore I think three pounds in money is better than half the chain, and so much I'll 
give you if you'll let me have it ." "Well, I'm contented," said Rumbold, "but then you 
shall give me a pint of wine over and above." To this the countryman also agreed, and 
to a tavern they went, where Rumbold received the three pounds, and the countryman 
the chain, who believed he had met with good fortune. They drank off their wine and 
were going away, but Rumbold, having not yet done with him, intending to get the 
rest of the money from him, offered him his pint of wine, which the countryman 
accepted of; but before they had drank it off, in comes another of the same tribe, who 
asked whether such a man, naming one, were there. "No," said the bar- keeper. 
Rumbold — the countryman sitting near the other cheat all the while — asked of the 
inquirer: "Did not you inquire for such a man?" "Yes," said the inquirer. "Why," said 
Rumbold, "I can tell you this news of him, that it will not be long before he comes 
hither, for I met him as I came in, and he appointed me to come in here and stay with 
him." "Well then, it is best for me to stay," said the inquirer; "but," continued he, "it 
would be more proper for us to take a larger room, for we cannot stir ourselves in 
this." "Agreed," said Rumbold. So the reckoning was paid, and they agreed to take a 
larger room, leaving word at the bar that if any inquiry should be made for them, there 
they should find them. Accordingly they went into another room, and the countryman, 
having done his business, gave signs of going away. "No," said Rumbold, "I beg you 
would stay and keep us company; it shall not cost you anything." "Well then," said the 
countryman, "I am content to stay a little." Being now in the room they called for a 
quart of wine, and drank it off. "What shall we do to spend time?" said the last cheat, 
"for I am weary of staying for this man. Are you sure you are not mistaken?" "No," 
said the other. One of them upon this pretended to walk a turn round the room and, 
coming to the window, behind a cushion finds a pack of cards, which indeed he 
himself had laid there. "Look you here," said he to the countryman and the other, "I 
have found some tools; now we may go to work and spend our time, if you will play." 
"Not I," said the countryman, "I'll not play." "Then I will," said Rumbold; "but not for 
money." "Why then," said the other, "for sixpence to be spent, and the game shall be 
putt." They being agreed, and the countryman being made overseer of the game, fell 
to playing, and the countryman's first acquaintance had the better of it, winning 
twelve games to the other's four. "Come," said he, "what shall we do with all this 
drink? We will play twopence wet and fourpence dry." To this the other agreed, and 
so they played; and at this low gaming Rumbold had, in short, won off his confederate 
ten shillings in money. The loser seemed to be angry, and therefore proposed to play 
for all money, hoping to make himself whole again. "Nay," said the other, "I shall not 
refuse your proposition, because I have won your money." And therefore to it they 
went, and Rumbold had still the same luck, and won ten shillings more. Then the 
other would play for twelve-pence a game. "No," said Rumbold, "I am not willing to 
exceed sixpence a game; I will not alter what I have begun, lest I change my fortune, 
unless this honest countryman will go my halves." "I have no mind to gaming," 
replied the countryman. "You need not play," said the other; "I'll do that, and you see 
my fortune is good. Venture a crown with me; you know we have both had fortune, 
which I hope will continue propitious to us still." "Well content," said the 
countryman, and so they proceeded. Still Rumbold had good fortune, and he and the 
countryman won ten shillings apiece more off the other, which made them merry, and 
the other was extremely enraged; he therefore told them he would either win the horse 
or lose the saddle, and venture all now; and drawing out about thirty shillings, "Come, 
take it all, win it and wear it," and so they played. But they had now drawn the 
countryman in sufficiently, and he was flush, but it lasted not long thus before he was 
taken down a buttonhole lower, for the fortune changed, and what he had won was 
lost, and forty shillings more. He was now angry, but to no purpose, for he did not 
discover their foul play; and he, in hopes of his good fortune, ventured and lost the 
other forty shillings. And then he said he would go halves no longer, for he thought he 
would be merry and wise, and if he could not make a winning, he would be sure to 
make a secure bargain; which he reckoned he should do, because although he had lost 
four pounds in money, and given Rumbold three pounds for his share of the chain, 
that yet he should make seven pounds off the chain, and so be no loser. They seeing 
he would not play, left off, and he that had won the money was content to give a 
collation, which was called for; but Rumbold, pretending much anger at his loss, was 
resolved to venture more, and to playing again he went, and in a short time he 
recovered a great deal of his losses. This vexed the countryman that he had not joined 
with him, and in the end, seeing his good fortune continue, and that he won, he again 
went halves, but it was not long that they thrived. The countryman was obliged to 
draw his purse, and in the end lost all his money, which was near twenty pounds. He 
did not think his condition to be so bad as it was, because he believed he had a chain 
worth seven pounds in his pocket, and therefore he reckoned he had not lost all. By 
this time several other confederates (having been abroad, employed on the same 
account, cozening and cheating of others) came into the tavern, which was the place 
appointed for their rendezvous then they acquainted one another of their several gains 
and prizes, and afterwards fell to drinking, which they did very plentifully, and the 
countryman for anger called up the landlord to make one of the company. He soon 
understood what kind of guests he had in his house, and how they had cheated the 
poor countryman, and therefore he was resolved to serve them in the same sort. 
Accordingly he put forward the affair of drinking; and some, being hungered, called 
for victuals. He told them he would get them what they pleased, and they being 
determined to take up their quarters there for that night, a supper was bespoke for all 
the company, such as the master of the house in his discretion should think fit. He told 
them they should have it, and accordingly went down to provide supper. He soon 
returned and helped them off with their liquor till supper-time: by this time they were 
all perfectly drunk. He then commanded up supper, and they fell to with a shoulder of 
mutton and two capons. After supper, and having consumed more liquor, they went to 
bed, and it was time, for it was past midnight. They all slept better than the 
countryman, who could hardly sleep a wink for thinking on his misfortunes, and 
having such good fortune in the morning it should prove so bad before night. But 
morning being come, he and they all arose, and the countryman's money being all 
spent he knew it was to no purpose for him to stay there; wherefore he resolved to go 
to a goldsmith in the city and sell or pawn his chain, that he might have some money 
to carry him home. Being come to the goldsmith's he produced the chain, which 
though at first sight he took to be gold, yet upon trial he found it otherwise, and that it 
was but brass gilt. He told the countryman the same, who at this heavy news was like 
to break his heart. The goldsmith, seeing the countryman in such a melancholy taking, 
inquired of him how he came by it. He soon acquainted him with the manner, and 
every circumstance. The goldsmith, as soon as he understood the cheat, advised him 
to go to a justice and get a warrant for him that had thus cheated him; and the 
countryman telling him he had no money nor friend, being a stranger, he himself went 
with him to the justice, who soon understood the matter, and granted his warrant. The 
goldsmith procured a constable to go with him to the tavern, or night-house, where 
Rumbold was apprehended; but he found means some way or other to make his 
escape out of the house, as did the rest by main force. Rumbold was not, as men of his 
profession generally are, very lavish with his money, for he had got above six hundred 
pounds, which he put into a friend's hands, with a resolution to improve it to the best 
advantage, without venturing his neck any more by robbing; but his banker (which 
makes good the old proverb, "To deceive the deceiver is no deceit ") running off with 
his cash, he was forced to take to the old trade of padding again, till he was like to 
have been taken at a lodging in Golden Lane, at the end of Red Cross Street, by 
Barbican, but by a very narrow escape getting free of his pursuers, he still followed 
his wicked course of life, till he was at last apprehended and sent to Newgate. Being 
afterwards brought to his trial at the sessions-house in the Old Bailey, he was 
condemned, and whilst under sentence of death was particularly visited by one Mr 
Downs, formerly a factor at Virginia and Maryland in America. Whilst Rumbold was 
in the condemned hold he began to have serious meditations of his former ill-spent 
life; and through the great pains Mr Downs took with him in his melancholy moments 
he entertained good thoughts about preparing himself for his latter end, earnestly 
requiring him that he would vouchsafe the favour of seeing him ride up Holborn to 
make his last exit at Tyburn. Accordingly Mr Downs granted his request, by not only 
standing in an ale-house to see him go by, but also charitably calling out to him, 
saying, "Dear friend Rumbold, I wish you a good journey," which he took so kindly at 
his hands that he went with a great deal of joy to the gallows, saying that now he 
plainly saw, to his great consolation, that his old acquaintance would not forget him to 
the last. So he ended his wicked life, aged about forty-six years, in 1689.


WILLIAM DAVIS, THE GOLDEN FARMER 
Who was Farmer and Highwayman for Forty-two Years without his 
Neighbours suspecting. Executed 20th of December, 1689

	THE Golden Farmer was so called from his occupation and from paying 
people, if it was any considerable sum, always in gold; but his real name was William 
Davis, born at Wrexham, in Denbighshire, in North Wales, from whence he removed, 
in his younger years, to Salisbury, in Gloucestershire, where he married the daughter 
of a wealthy innkeeper, by whom he had eighteen children, and followed the farmer's 
business to the day of his death, to shroud his robbing on the highway, which irregular 
practice he had followed for forty-two years without any suspicion among his 
neighbours. He generally robbed alone, and one day, meeting three or four stage-
coaches going to Salisbury, he stopped one of them which was full of gentlewomen, 
one of whom was a Quaker. All of them satisfied the Golden Farmer's desire 
excepting this precisian, with whom he had a long argument to no purpose, for upon 
her solemn vow and affirmation she told him she had no money, nor anything 
valuable about her; whereupon, fearing he should lose the booty of the other coaches, 
he told her he would go and see what they had to afford him, and he would wait on 
her again. So having robbed the other three coaches he returned, according to his 
word, and the Quaker persisting still in her old tone of having nothing for him it put 
the Golden Farmer into a rage, and taking hold of her shoulder, shaking her as a 
mastiff does a bull, he cried: "You canting bitch! if you dally with me at this rate, 
you'll certainly provoke my spirit to be damnably rude with you. You see these good 
women here were so tender-hearted as to be charitable to me, and you, you whining 
whore, are so covetous as to lose your life for the sake of mammon. Come, come, you 
hollow-hearted bitch, unpin your purse-string quickly, or else I shall send you out of 
the land of the living." Now the poor Quaker, being frightened out of her wits at the 
bullying expressions of the wicked one, gave him a purse of guineas, a gold watch and 
a diamond ring, and they parted then as good friends as if they had never fallen out at 
all.
	Another time this desperado, meeting with the Duchess of Albemarle in her 
coach, riding over Salisbury Plain, was put to his trumps before he could assault her 
Grace, by reason he had a long engagement with a postilion, a coachman and two 
footmen before he could proceed in his robbery; but having wounded them all, by the 
discharging of several pistols, he then approached to his prey, whom he found more 
refractory than his female Quaker had been, which made him very saucy, and more 
eager for fear of any passengers coming by in the meanwhile; but still her Grace 
would not part with anything. Whereupon by main violence he pulled three diamond 
rings off her fingers, and snatched a rich gold watch from her side, crying to her at the 
same time, because he saw her face painted: "You bitch incarnate, you had rather read 
over your face in the glass every moment, and blot out pale to put in red, than give an 
honest man, as I am, a small matter to support him on his lawful occasions on the 
road," and then rode away as fast as he could, without searching her Grace for any 
money, because he perceived another person of quality's coach making towards them, 
with a good retinue of servants belonging to it.
	Not long after this exploit, the Golden Farmer meeting with Sir Thomas Day, a 
Justice of Peace living at Bristol, on the road betwixt Gloucester and Worcester, they 
fell into discourse together, and riding along he told Sir Thomas, whom he knew, 
though the other did not know him, how he was like to have been robbed but a little 
before by a couple of highwaymen; but as good luck would have it, his horse having 
better heels than theirs, he got clear of them, or else, if they had robbed him of his 
money, which was about forty pounds, they would certainly have undone him for 
ever. "Truly," quoth Sir Thomas Day," that would have been very hard; but 
nevertheless, as you would have been robbed between sun and sun, the county, upon 
your suing it, would have been obliged to have made your loss good again." But not 
long after this chatting together, coming to a convenient place, the Golden Farmer, 
shooting Sir Thomas's man's horse under him, and obliging him to retire some 
distance from it, that he might not make use of the pistols that were in his holsters, 
presented a pistol to Sir Thomas's breast, and demanded his money of him. Quoth Sir 
Thomas: "I thought, sir, that you had been an honest man." The Golden Farmer 
replied: "You see your Worship's mistaken, and had you had any guts in your brains 
you might have perceived by my face that my countenance was the very picture of 
mere necessity; therefore deliver presently, for I am in haste." Then, Sir Thomas Day 
giving the Golden Farmer what money he had, which was about sixty pounds in gold 
and silver, he humbly thanked his Worship, and told him, that what he had parted with 
was not lost, because he was robbed betwixt sun and sun, therefore the county, as he 
told him, must pay it again.
	One Mr Hart, a young gentleman of Enfield, who had a good estate, but was 
not overburdened with wit, and therefore could sooner change a piece of gold than a 
piece of sense, riding one day over Finchley Common, where the Golden Farmer had 
been hunting about four or five hours for a prey, he rides up to him and, giving the 
gentleman a slap with the flat of his drawn hanger over his shoulders, quoth he: "A 
plague on you! How slow you are, to make a man wait on you all this morning. Come, 
deliver what you have, and be poxed to you, and go to hell for orders!" The 
gentleman, who was wont to find a more agreeable entertainment betwixt his mistress 
and his snuff-box, being surprised at the rustical sort of greeting, began to make 
several sorts of excuses, and say he had no money about him; but his antagonist, not 
believing him, made bold to search his pockets himself, and finding in them above a 
hundred guineas, besides a gold watch, he gave him two or three slaps over the 
shoulder again with his hanger; and at the same time bade him not give his mind to 
lying any more, when an honest gentleman desired a small boon of him.
	Another time this notorious robber had paid his landlord above forty pounds 
for rent, who going home with it, the goodly tenant, disguising himself, met the grave 
old gentleman, and bidding him stand, quoth he: "Come, Mr Gravity from head to 
foot, but from neither head nor foot to the heart, deliver what you have in a trice." The 
old man, fetching a deep sigh, to the hazard of losing several buttons of his waistcoat, 
said that he had not above two shillings about him; therefore he thought he was more 
of a gentleman than to take a small matter from a poor man. Quoth the Golden 
Farmer: "I have not the faith to believe you; for you seem by your mien and habit to 
be a man of better circumstance than you pretend; therefore open your budget or else I 
shall fall foul about your house. "Dear sir," replied his landlord, "you cannot be so 
barbarous to an old man. What! Have you no religion, pity or com- passion in you? 
Have you no conscience? Have you no respect for your own body and soul, which 
must be certainly in a miserable condition, if you follow unlawful courses?" "Damn 
you!" said the tenant to him, "don't talk of age and barbarity to me; for I show neither 
pity nor compassion to any. Damn you, don't talk of conscience to me! I have no more 
of that dull commodity than you have; nor do I allow my soul and body to be 
governed by religion, but interest; therefore, deliver what you have, before this pistol 
makes you repent your obstinacy." So, delivering his money to the Golden Farmer, he 
received it without giving the landlord any receipt for it, as his landlord had him. Not 
long after committing this robbery, overtaking an old grazier at Putney Heath, in a 
very ordinary attire, but yet very rich, he takes half-a-score guineas out of his pocket, 
and giving them to the old man he said there were three or four persons behind them 
who looked very suspicious, therefore he desired the favour of him to put that gold 
into his pocket; for in case they were highwaymen, his indifferent apparel would 
make them believe he had no such charge about him. The old grazier, looking upon 
his intentions to be honest, quoth: "I have fifty guineas tied up in the fore-lappet of 
my shirt, and I'll put it to that for security." So riding along, both of them check by 
jowl, for above half-a- mile, and the coast being clear, the Golden Farmer said to the 
old man: "I believe there's nobody will take the pains of robbing you or me to-day; 
therefore, I think I had as good take the trouble of robbing you myself; so instead of 
delivering your purse, pray give me the lappet of your shirt." The old grazier was 
horridly startled at these words, and began to beseech him not to be so cruel in 
robbing a poor old man. "Prithee," quoth the Golden Farmer, "don't tell me of cruelty; 
for who can be more cruel than men of your age, whose pride it is to teach their 
servants their duties with as much cruelty as some people teach their dogs to fetch and 
carry?" So being obliged to cut off the lappet of the old man's shirt himself, for he 
would not, he rode away to seek out another booty.
	Another time this bold robber, lying at an inn in Uxbridge, happened into 
company with one Squire Broughton, a barrister of the Middle Temple, which he 
understanding, pretended to him that he was going up to London to advise with a 
lawyer about some business; wherefore, he should be much obliged to him if he could 
recommend him to a good one. Counsellor Broughton, thinking he might be a good 
client, bespoke him for himself. Then, the Golden Farmer telling his business was 
about several of his neighbours' cattle breaking into his grounds and doing a great deal 
of mischief, the barrister told him that was very actionable, as being damage feasant. 
"Damage feasant," said the Golden Farmer; "what's that, pray, sir?" He told him that 
it was an action brought against persons when their cattle broke through hedges, or 
other fences, into other people's grounds, and did them damage. Next morning, as 
they both were riding toward London, says the Golden Farmer to the barrister: "If I 
may be so bold as to ask you, sir, what is that you call 'trover' and 'conversion'?" He 
told him it signified in our common law an action which a man has against another 
that, having found any of his goods, refuses to deliver them upon demand, and 
perhaps converts them to his own use also. The Golden Farmer being now at a place 
convenient for his purpose — "Very well, sir," says he, "and so, if I should find any 
money about you, and convert it to my use, why then that is only actionable, I find." 
"That's a robbery," said the barrister, "which requires no less satisfaction than a man's 
life." "A robbery!" replied the Golden Farmer. "Why then, I must e'en commit one for 
once and not use it; therefore deliver your money, or else behold this pistol shall 
prevent you from ever reading Coke upon Littleton any more." The barrister, 
strangely surprised at his client's rough behaviour, asked him if he thought there was 
neither heaven nor hell, that he could be guilty of such wicked actions. Quoth the 
Golden Farmer: "Why, you son of a whore, thy impudence is very great, to talk of 
heaven or hell to me, when you think there's no way to heaven but through 
Westminster Hall. Come, come, down with your rhino this minute; for I have other 
guess customers to mind, than to wait on you all day." The barrister was very loath to 
part with his money, still insisting on the injustice of the action, saying it was against 
law and conscience to rob any man. However the Golden Farmer, heeding not his 
pleading, swore he was not to be guided by law and conscience any more than any of 
his profession, whose law is always furnished with a commission to arraign their 
consciences; but upon judgment given they usually had the knack of setting it at large. 
So putting a pistol to the barrister's breast, he quickly delivered his money, amounting 
to about thirty guineas, and eleven broad-pieces of gold, besides some silver, and a 
gold watch.
	Thus the Golden Farmer, having run a long course in wickedness, was at last 
discovered in Salisbury Court; but as he was running along, a butcher, endeavouring 
to stop him, was shot dead by him with a pistol; being apprehended nevertheless, he 
was committed to Newgate, and shortly after executed, at the end of Salisbury Court, 
in Fleet Street, on Friday the 20th of December, 1689; and afterwards was hanged in 
chains, in the sixty-fourth year of his age, on Bagshot Heath.


JACK BIRD 
A Highwayman who boxed an Earl's Chaplain for Twenty Guineas. 
Executed 12th of March, 1690

	THIS notorious malefactor was born at Stainford in Lincolnshire, of very 
honest parents, by whom, after he had been at school to learn reading, writing and ac- 
counts, he was put apprentice to a baker at Godmanchester, near Huntington. He had 
not served three years before he ran away from his master, came to Lincoln, and 
enlisted in the foot-guards. While he was in the army he was at the Siege of 
Maestricht, under the command of the Duke of Monmouth, who was General of the 
English Forces in the Low Countries.
	Here he was reduced to such necessities as are common to men who engage 
themselves to kill one another for a groat or fivepence a day. This occasioned him to 
run away from his colours, and fly to Amsterdam, where he stole a piece of silk off a 
stall; for which fact he was apprehended and dragged before a magistrate. The effect 
of this was a commitment to the rasp-house, where he was put to hard labour, such as 
rasping logwood, and other drudgeries, for a twelvemonth.
	As Jack had never been used to work, he fainted under the sentence, though to 
little purpose; for his taskmasters, imputing it to a stubborn laziness, inflicted a 
severer punishment upon him, the manner of which was as follows. He was chained 
down to the bottom of a dry cistern by one foot; immediately upon which, several 
cocks were set a-running into it, and he was obliged to pump for his life. The cistern 
was much deeper than he was high; so that if the water had prevailed he must 
inevitably have been drowned, without relief or pity. Jack was very sensible of his 
danger, which occasioned him to labour with all his might for an hour, which was as 
long as the sentence was to continue. Having overcome this difficulty, he plied his 
business very well the remaining part of the year, when being released he returned 
into England, with a resolution to try his fortune on the highway. Near St 
Edmundsbury he stole a horse, and he had before provided half-a-dozen good pistols 
and a sword. Success attended him in his three or four first robberies, but an unlucky 
adventure soon brought about a turn in his affairs.
	In the road between Gravesend and Chatham he met with one Mr Joseph 
Pinnis, a pilot of Dover, who had lost both his hands in an engagement. He had been 
at London to receive ten or twelve pounds for carrying a Dutch ship up the river. 
When Bird accosted him with the salutation common to gentlemen of his profession, 
"You see, sir," quoth Pinnis, "that I have never a hand; so that I am not able to take 
my money out of my pocket myself. Be so kind, therefore, as to take the trouble of 
searching me." Jack soon consented to this very reasonable request; but while he was 
very busy in examining the contents of the pilot's purse the boisterous old tar suddenly 
clapped his arms about his neck, and spurring his own horse pulled our adventurer 
from his; then falling directly upon him, and being a very strong man, he kept him 
under, and mauled him with his stirrups, which were plated. In the midst of the scuffle 
some passengers came by, and inquired the occasion of it. Mr Pinnis replied with 
telling them the particulars and desiring them to supply his place, and give the villain 
a little more of the same, adding that he was almost out of breath with what he had 
done already. When the company understood what was the reason of the pilot's 
labouring so hard upon the bones of our ruffian they apprehended him, and carried 
him before a justice, who committed him to Maidstone jail, where he continued till 
the assizes, and then was condemned to be hanged.
	This time Jack had the good fortune to receive mercy, and afterwards to obtain 
his liberty. The remembrance of his being so heartily thumped by a man without 
hands stuck so much in his stomach that he had almost a mind to grow honest; and 
indeed he continued pretty orderly till he was again reduced to necessitous 
circumstances for want of employment. He had no trade that he was master of, nor 
learning enough to secure him a maintenance in a genteel way; so that when he found 
himself in the utmost straits, he could see no other method of supporting himself than 
what he had formerly followed. The first that he met with, after he had resolved to set 
out in pursuit of new enterprises, was a Welsh drover, about a mile beyond Acton. 
The fellow, being almost as stout as Mr Pinnis, would not obey the usual precept, but 
began to lay about him with a good quarter-staff, which he had in his hands. Jack, 
when he saw Taffy's courage, leaped nimbly out of the way of his staff, and told him 
that he had been taken once by a son of a whore without hands; "and for that trick," 
says he, "I shall not venture my carcass within reach of one that has hands, for fear of 
something worse." While he was speaking he pulled out a pistol, and instantly shot 
him through the head. Rifling his pockets, and finding but eighteen-pence, he said 
ironically: "This is a prize worth killing a man for at any time." He then rode away 
about his business, as little concerned as if he had done no mischief at all.
	Being again encouraged by a series of successful adventures, and having 
remounted himself on a very good horse, he was resolved to venture on higher 
exploits. An opportunity for putting this resolution into practice soon fell in his way, 
by his meeting the mad Earl of P —, and his chaplain, who was little better than 
himself, in a coach, with no more attendants than the coachman and one footman. 
"Stand and deliver!" was the word. His lordship told him that he did not trouble 
himself about losing the small matter he had about him. "But then," says he, "I hope 
you will fight for it." Jack, upon this, pulled out a brace of pistols, and let off a volley 
of imprecations. "Don't put yourself into a passion, friend," says his honour, "but lay 
down your pistols, and I will box you fairly for all the money I have, against nothing." 
"That's an honourable challenge, my Lord," quoth Jack, "provided none of your 
servants be near us." The Earl immediately ordered them to keep at a distance.
	The chaplain, like Withrington in the old ballad of Chevy Chase, could not 
bear to see an earl fight on foot while he stood looking on; so he desired the honour of 
espousing the cause of his lordship. To which both parties readily agreeing, off went 
the divinity in a minute, and to blows and bloody noses they came.
	Though Jack had once the ill-fortune to be stumped out of his liberty by a 
sturdy old sailor, he was nevertheless too hard for his Reverence in less than a quarter 
of an hour. He beat him in such a manner that he could not see, and had but just breath 
enough to cry: "I'll fight no more." About two minutes after this victory (which he 
took for a breathing time) Jack told his lordship that now, if he pleased, he would take 
a turn with him. "By no means," quoth the Earl, "for if you beat my chaplain, you will 
beat me, he and I having tried our manhood before." So giving our hero twenty 
guineas, his honour rode off in a whole skin.
	While Jack resided in town he married a young woman who had been servant 
to a dyer near Exeter Exchange, in the Strand. But though Bird was married, he did 
not confine himself to any one woman; for we are told that he was continually. in 
company with whores and bawds. One night in particular, having a woman with him, 
he knocked down a man, between Dutchy Lane and the Great Savoy Gate in the 
Strand, and, having robbed him, made off safely; but the woman was apprehended, 
and sent to Newgate. Jack went to her, in hopes to make up the affair with the 
prosecutor, and was thereupon taken, on suspicion, and confined with her.
	At his trial he confessed the fact, and took it wholly upon himself; so that the 
woman was acquitted, and he condemned to suffer death; which sentence was 
inflicted on him at Tyburn, on Wednesday, the 12th of March, 1690, he being forty-
two years of age. After execution his body was conveyed to Surgeons' Hall, and there 
anatomised. He spoke but very little at the gallows; what he did say consisted chiefly 
of invectives against lewd women, and advice to young men not to be seduced by 
their conversation from the rules of virtue and morality.


OLD MOBB 
A Highwayman who took to cheating the Citizens of London. Executed 30th 
of May, 1690

	THIS man was born at Ramsey, in Hampshire, which continued to be the place 
of his habitation, when he resided anywhere under his right name, till the day of his 
apprehending; and he had a wife and five children, besides grandchildren, living there 
at the time of his shameful death.
	We have no particular account of his education and private life, from whence 
we may conclude there was nothing remarkable in either. His adventures on the road 
we shall relate in the order which we have received them, which is the only method 
we can follow. Riding one time between Honiton and Exeter, he met with Sir 
Bartholomew Shower, whom he immediately called to account for the money he had 
about him. Sir Bartholomew gave him all he had without any words, which proved to 
be but a very little. Old Mobb looked upon his prize, and finding it infinitely short of 
his expectations readily told him that there was not enough to answer his present 
demands, which were very large, and very pressing. "And therefore, sir," says he, "as 
you are my banker in general, you must instantly draw a bill upon somebody at Exeter 
for one hundred and fifty pounds, and remain in the next field, as security for the 
payment, till I have received it." The Knight would fain have made some evasion, and 
protested that there was nobody in Exeter who would pay such a sum at a moment's 
warning; but Old Mobb so terrified him with holding a pistol to his breast that his 
worship at last consented, and drew upon a rich goldsmith.
	As soon as Old Mobb had got the note, he made Sir Bartholomew dismount, 
and walk far enough from the road to be out of everybody's hearing, then bound him 
hand and foot and left him under a hedge, while he rode to Exeter, and received the 
money, which was paid without any scruple, the goldsmith knowing the handwriting 
perfectly well. When he returned, he found the poor Knight where he left him. "Sir," 
says he, "I am come with a Habeas Corpus to remove you out of your present 
captivity "; which he accordingly did by untying him and sending him about his 
business. But Sir Bartholomew was obliged to walk home, which was fully three 
miles, for our adventurer had cut the girths and bridle of his horse, and turned him 
stray, ever since he went to Exeter with the note.
	Mr John Gadbury, the astrologer, was another who fell into the hands of Old 
Mobb, who, notwithstanding his familiarity with the stars, was not wise enough to 
foresee his own misfortune, which has been a common case with men of his 
profession. This rencounter was on the road between Winchester and London. Poor 
Gadbury trembled, and turned as white as a clout, when Old Mobb told him what he 
wanted, professing that he had no more money about him than just enough to bear his 
expenses to London; but our highwayman was not at all moved with compassion at 
what he said. "Are not you a lying son of a whore," quoth he, "to pretend you want 
money when you hold twelve large houses of the planets by lease parole, which you 
let out again to the Stationers' Company at so much per annum? You must not sham 
poverty upon me, sir, who know as good things as yourself, and who have a pistol that 
may prove as fatal as Sirius in the dog days, if you stand trifling with me." Mr 
Gadbury was at this time, indeed, more apprehensive of Old Mobb's pistol than of any 
star in the firmament; for he was sensible the influence of it, if discharged, would be 
much more violent and sudden; so that he looked like one out of his senses. He was 
now even afraid to deliver his money, lest he should suffer for telling a lie. However, 
as he saw there was no remedy, he pulled out a bag, in which was about nine pounds 
in gold and silver, which he gave with a few grumbling expressions. Old Mobb told 
him he should take no exception at what he said, for it was but just that the loser 
should have leave to speak, so, setting spurs to his horse, he left the star-gazer to curse 
the disastrous constellations.
	One day Old Mobb overtook the stage-coach going for Bath, with only one 
gentlewoman in it. When he had commanded the coachman to stop, and was come to 
the door to raise contribution after his usual manner, the passenger made a great many 
excuses, and wept very plentifully, in order to move him to pity; she told him she was 
a poor widow, who had lately lost her husband, and therefore she hoped he would 
have some compassion on her. "And is your losing your husband then," says he, "an 
argument that I must lose my booty? I know your sex too well, madam, to suffer 
myself to be prevailed on by a woman's tears. Those crocodile drops are always at 
your command; and no doubt but that dear cuckold of yours, whom you have lately 
buried, has frequently been persuaded out of his reason by their interposition in your 
domestic debates. Weeping is so customary to you, that everybody would be 
disappointed if a woman was to bury her husband and not weep for him; but you 
would be more disappointed if nobody was to take notice of your crying; for 
according to the old proverb, the end of a husband is a widow's tears; and the end of 
those tears is another husband."
	The poor gentlewoman upon this ran out into an extravagant detail of her 
deceased husband's virtues, solemnly protesting that she would never be married 
again to the best man that wore a head, for she should not expect a blessing to attend 
her afterwards; with a thousand other things of the same kind. Old Mobb at last 
interrupted her, and told her he would repeat a pleasant story in verse which he had 
learned by heart, so, first looking round him to see that the coast was clear on every 
side, he began as follows: —
"A widow prude had often swore  
No bracelet should approach her more;  
Had often proved that second marriage  
Was ten times worse than maid's miscarriage,  
And always told them of their sin,  
When widows would be wives agen:  
Women who'd thus themselves abuse,  
Should die, she thought, like honest Jews  
Let her alone to throw the stones;  
If 'twere but law, she'd make no bones.
Thus long she led a life demure;  
But not with character secure:  
For people said (what won't folks say?)  
That she with Edward went astray:  
(This Edward was her servant-man)  
The rumour through the parish ran,  
She heard, she wept, she called up Ned,  
Wiped her eyes dry, sighed, sobbed, and said:
'Alas! what sland'rous times are these!  
What shall we come to by degrees!  
This wicked world! I quite abhor it!  
The Lord give me a better for it!  
On me this scandal do they fix?  
On me? who, God knows, hate such tricks!  
Have mercy, Heaven, upon mankind,  
And grant us all a better mind! 
My husband — Ah that dearest man!  
Forget his love I never can;  
He took such care of my good name,  
And put all sland'rous tongues to shame. — 
But, ah! he's dead —' Here grief amain,  
Came bubbling up, and stopped the strain.
Ned was no fool; he saw his cue,  
And how to use good fortune knew:  
Old Opportunity at hand,  
He seized the lock, and bid him stand;  
Urged of what use a husband was  
To vindicate a woman's cause,  
Exclaimed against the sland'rous age;  
And swore he could his soul engage  
That madam was so free from fault  
She ne'er so much as sinned in thought;  
Vowing he'd lose each drop of blood  
To make that just assertion good.
This logic, which well pleased the dame,  
At the same time eludes her shame:  
A husband, for a husband's sake,  
Was what she'd ne'er consent to take.  
Yet, as the age was so censorious,  
And Ned's proposals were so glorious,  
She thought 'twas best to take upon her,  
A second guardian of her honour."
	"This," says Old Mobb, "is an exact picture of woman-kind, and as such I 
committed it to memory; you are very much obliged to me for the recital, which has 
taken me up more time than I usually spend in taking a purse; let us now pass from 
the dead to the living, for it is these that I live by. I am in a pretty good humour, and 
so will not deal rudely by you. Be so kind, therefore, as to search yourself, and use me 
as honestly as you are able; you know I can examine afterwards, if I am not satisfied 
with what you give me." The gentlewoman found he was resolute, and so thought it 
the best way to keep him in temper, which she did by pulling out forty guineas in a 
silk purse, and presented them to him. It is fifty to one but Old Mobb got more by 
repeating the verses above than the poor poet that wrote them ever made of his copy. 
Such is the fate of the sons of Apollo.
	Scarce was Old Mobb parted from this gentlewoman before he saw the 
appearance of another prize at some distance. Who should it be but the famous 
Lincoln's Inn Fields mountebank, Cornelius a Tilburgh, who was going to set up a 
stage at Wells. Our adventurer knew him very well, as indeed did almost everyone at 
that time, which occasioned his demanding his money in a little rougher language 
than usual. The poor quacksalver was willing to preserve what he had; and to that end 
used a great many fruitless expostulations, pretending that he had expended all the 
money he had brought out with him, and was himself in necessity. But Old Mobb 
soon gave him to understand that he would not be put off with fine words; and that he 
had more wit than to believe a mountebank, whose profession is lying. "You get your 
money," says he, "as easily as I do, and it is only fulfilling an old proverb if you give 
me all you have: 'Lightly come, lightly go.' Next market-day, doctor, will make up all, 
if you have any luck. It will excite people to buy your packets if, as an instance of 
your great desire to serve them, you tell them what you suffered upon your journey, 
which nevertheless could not hinder your coming to exercise your bowels of 
compassion among them, and to restore such as are in a languishing condition."
	The empiric could scarce forbear laughing to hear Old Mobb hold forth so 
excellently well, and lay open the craft of his occupation with so much dexterity. He 
was, notwithstanding, very unwilling to part with his money, and began to read a 
lecture of morality to our desperado, upon the unlawfulness of his actions, telling him 
that what he did might frequently be the ruin of poor families, and oblige them 
afterwards to follow irregular courses, in order to make up what they had lost. "And 
then," says he, "you are answerable for the sins of such people." "This is the devil 
correcting sin with a witness," quoth Old Mobb. "Can I ruin more people than you, 
dear Mr Theophrastus Bombastus? You are a scrupulous, conscientious son of a 
whore, indeed, to tell me of ruining people. I only take their money away from them; 
but you frequently take away their lives: and what makes it the worse you do it safely, 
under a pretence of restoring them to health; whereas I should be hanged for killing a 
man, or even robbing him, if I were taken. You have put out more eyes than the 
smallpox, made more deaf than the cataracts of Nile; in a word, destroyed more than 
the pestilence. It is in vain to trifle with me, doctor, unless you have a remedy against 
the force of gunpowder and lead. If you have any such excellent specific, make use of 
it instantly, or else deliver your money." Our itinerant quack still continuing his 
delays, Old Mobb made bold to take a portmanteau from his horse, and put it upon his 
own, riding off with it, till he came to a convenient place for opening it. Upon 
examining the inside, he found five and twenty pounds in money and a large golden 
medal, which King Charles II. had given him for poisoning himself in his Majesty's 
presence; besides all his instruments and implements of quackery.
	Another time Old Mobb met with the Duchess of Portsmouth, on the road 
between Newmarket and London, attended with a very small retinue. He made bold to 
stop the coach, and ask her Grace for what she had about her; but madam, who had 
been long used to command a monarch, did not understand the meaning of being 
spoken to in this manner by a common man. Whereupon she briskly demanded if he 
knew who she was. "Yes, madam," replied Old Mobb, "I know you to be the greatest 
whore in the kingdom; and that you are maintained at the public charge. I know that 
all the courtiers depend on your smiles, and that even the K — himself is your slave. 
But what of all that? A gentleman collector is a greater man upon the road, and much 
more absolute than his Majesty is at Court. You may now say, madam, that a single 
highwayman has exercised his authority where Charles II. of England has often 
begged a favour, and thought himself happy to obtain it at the expense of his treasure, 
as well as his breath." Her Grace continued to look upon him with a superior lofty air, 
and told him he was a very insolent fellow; that she would give him nothing, and that 
he should severely suffer for this affront. Adding that he might touch her if he durst.
	"Madam," says Old Mobb, "that haughty French spirit will do you no good 
here. I am an English freebooter; and insist upon it as my native privilege to seize all 
foreign commodities. Your money indeed is English, and the prodigious sums that 
have been lavished on you will be a lasting proof of English folly; nevertheless, all 
you have is confiscated to me by being bestowed on such a worthless b —-h. I am 
king here, madam, and I have a whore to keep on the public contributions as well as 
King Charles. It is for this that I collect of all that pass, and you shall have no favour 
from me." As soon as he had spoken he fell on board her in a very boisterous manner, 
so that her Grace cry out for quarter, telling him she would deliver all she had. She 
was as good as her word; for she surrendered two hundred pounds in money, which 
was in the seat of the coach, besides a very rich necklace, which her royal cully had 
lately given her, a gold watch and two diamond rings. Not long after the committing 
of this robbery, Old Mobb met with Sir George Jeffreys, at that time Lord Chief 
Justice of the King's Bench, as he was going to his country seat. My Lord Chief 
Justice upon the road was no more than another man; for Old Mobb disabled two 
servants that attended him, by shooting one through the arm, and the other through the 
thigh, and then stopped the coach, and demanded his Lordship's money. Jeffreys had 
before this made himself sufficiently famous, by his Western Assizes, and other very 
severe proceedings, so that he imagined his name carried terror enough in it to 
intimidate any man; but he was mistaken in Old Mobb, who had courage to speak his 
mind without any respect to persons, and when his Lordship told him his name only 
said he was glad he could be revenged on him in any manner for putting him in bodily 
fear at Hertford Assizes a few months before. "According to law, my Lord," says he, 
"I might charge a constable with you, and bind you over to the Quarterly Sessions, for 
threatening to take away my life. However, if you please, as I don't love to be spiteful, 
I will make up the matter with you for what money you have in the coach, which, I 
think, is as easy as you can desire, and easier than you deserve." Jeffreys expostulated 
with him upon the great hazard he ran, both of soul and body, by following such 
wicked courses, telling him that he must expect justice to follow his crimes if he 
believed there was any such thing as a Providence that governed the world. "I don't 
doubt," says Old Mobb, "but that when justice has overtaken us both, I shall stand at 
least as good a chance as your Lordship; who have already written your name in 
indelible characters of blood, by putting to death so many hundred innocent men, for 
only standing up in defence of our common liberties, that you might secure the favour 
of your Prince. It is enough for you to preach morality upon the Bench, where nobody 
dares to contradict you; but your lessons can have no effect upon me at this time; for I 
know you too well not to see that they are only calculated to preserve money." This 
speech of Old Mobb was followed with fifty oaths and imprecations against the poor 
Judge, which threatened him with nothing but immediate death if he did not deliver 
his money. Jeffreys saw his authority would now stand him in no stead; so he gave 
what money he had, which amounted to about fifty-six guineas.
	We took notice at the beginning of this life of Old Mobb that he sometimes 
was engaged with the Golden Farmer; the reader may therefore justly expect an 
account of some of their actions in concert; two stories, the most remarkable and 
diverting that we have seen concerning them, now follow. Having both of them a 
pretty deal of ready cash, and being willing to retire a little while from the highway, 
where they had lately made a great noise, and were now very much sought after, they 
came to London, in order to make use of their wits, of which they had both as great 
shares as they had of strength and courage. Here their first work was to observe the 
humours and manners of the citizens, which neither of them was well acquainted with 
before, that they might know the better how to proceed, and impose upon them in 
their own way.
	Everyone knows that London is all hurry and noise; every man there is a man 
of business, and those who make good appearances never want credit. All people 
there live by mutual dependence upon one another, and he who has dealt for two or 
three hundred pounds, and made good his payments, may afterwards be trusted for 
five. Our adventurers soon perceived all this, and what advantages many designing 
men made of the general confidence that people reposed in each other. They saw that 
nobody could teach them how to cheat a citizen so well as a citizen himself, and 
thereupon they concluded that the best way they could take was, to both turn 
tradesmen.
	Each of them now takes a large handsome house, hires two or three servants, 
and sets up for a great dealer. The Golden Farmer's habitation was in Thames Street, 
where he passed for a corn chandler, which occupation he had the most knowledge in 
of any. Old Mobb took up his residence somewhere near the Tower, and called 
himself a Holland trader, he having been abroad when a boy, and knowing pretty well 
what commodities were exported to that country, of the language of which he had also 
a small smattering. They went for near relations, of the name of Bryan, and said they 
were North Country men.
	They now employ all their time in inquiring after goods in their several ways, 
buying whatever comes to their hands, and either paying ready money themselves, or 
drawing upon each other for one, two or three days; at which time payment was 
always punctually made. This constant tide of money was kept up by their continually 
selling privately what they bought (sometimes, perhaps, not a little to loss) to such 
persons as are glad to make use of their cash in this manner; and always wink at 
things which they can't comprehend, while they find their interest in it. As they dealt 
in very different ways, the chapmen of the one had no knowledge of those of the 
other; so that though every one of them had been sent at one time or another, by his 
respective customer, to receive money off his kinsman, none of them had any notion 
that the correspondence was mutual, and consequently no suspicion of a fraud at the 
bottom.
	Thus they continued till they both found their characters thoroughly 
established. Perhaps in this time they may each of them have lost a hundred or two 
pounds, but they very well knew that this loss would get them as many thousands. 
When they saw that all who dealt with them were ready to send in what goods they 
required, and not in the least care about their money, they thought their project ripe 
for execution. Accordingly a day was appointed for that purpose.
	They now ordered all their customers to bring them in goods on such a day, as 
much, at least, in quantity, as they had ever before received at one time of the 
respective sorts, confining them all to particular hours for the delivery of what they 
brought, that they might not interfere with one another, and so suspect that some 
unfair design was on foot. At the same time they informed those who usually bought 
everything off their hands that they should have such-and-such quantities of so many 
sorts to dispose of, naming the next day to that when they were to receive them; that 
they would sell them cheap, because they were obliged to make up a large sum of 
ready money; that therefore they desired them to be punctual, and bring only cash for 
what they designed to buy. The whole scheme succeeded as well as they could wish: 
on one side there was no suspicion; and on the other, if there was any, it was not the 
interest of the parties to discover what they thought, because every one of them 
promised himself some advantage.
	The goods were all delivered according to order, at the day and hour 
appointed, and notes were mutually drawn by the kinsman in Thames Street upon him 
by the Tower, and by the kinsman by the Tower upon him in Thames Street, for the 
several sums, to be paid at three days after date. Never were men better satisfied than 
these poor dupes, not one of them doubting but he should have all his money the 
moment he went for it, as usual. They went home and slept soundly that night, and the 
two nights succeeding. Next day came the buyers, and entirely cleared both houses, 
paying down ready money for all they carried off. These too were as well pleased as 
the rest, and with much better reason. They imagined indeed that their chapmen were 
going to break, but what was that to them? No matter how the poor men were to live 
for the future, so long as they could have good bargains at present.
	There was now time enough before the day of payment for our two merchants 
to take care of themselves, and the money they had raised, which they did very 
effectually. When they came to computation they found that by this one bold stroke 
they had got clear into their pockets about sixteen hundred and thirty pounds — a 
pretty considerable sum for three months, which was the longest time they were in 
trade. When the creditors came to receive their money they were surprised at both 
places to see the doors fast, and the windows shut, till they were informed by the 
neighbours that the birds were flown the day before, and that all their furniture was 
either carried off in the night, or seized for rent. How the men now looked upon one 
another! Every one began to suspect that the rest who were attending came about the 
same business as himself, and indeed, when they came to examine the matter, they 
found themselves not mistaken. Those who were earliest in Thames Street, and had 
heard the melancholy news, went forthwith to the Tower to complain that Mr Cousin 
was gone; and those at the Tower set out for Thames Street. Now was the whole plot 
unravelled, when they saw both were departed quietly, and had learned of each other 
how they had been mutually imposed upon by the pretended relations, when they told 
their several cases.
	One such trick as this is enough for a man's whole life, and as much as he can 
safely play in the same kingdom. Our two Bryans now, therefore, resumed their old 
names and habits, taking to the highway again for some time, till fresh danger of 
being apprehended put them once more to their shifts. There was not less art in what 
they now did than in what we have just related, only they acted in a lower sphere, not 
daring to aspire so high as to be merchants, after they had brought so much scandal 
upon the name. Men whose thoughts are all turned upon money have no regard to the 
manner in which they get what they desire — nor need they, provided they come off 
with impunity; for all people honour the rich, without inquiring how they came to be 
so.
	There were two wealthy brothers of the name of Seals, Philip and Charles, 
both jewellers. Philip lived in London, and Charles resided at Bristol. The Golden 
Farmer and Old Mobb knew every circumstance of the family from which these men 
were descended, and were moreover particularly instructed in the private history of 
our brothers. This made our desperadoes fix on them for their next prize, now they 
were again reduced to extremity. The brothers were sickly, consumptive men, which 
inclined these arch-villains to undertake and perform what will be as diverting in the 
relation as it was unparalleled in itself, and worthy of the men who acted in it. Having 
contrived and ordered the whole affair, the first step they took towards executing it 
was writing, and copying, the following letter, making only the alteration of the place 
and name, as they saw necessary: —
March 26,1686. 
DEAR BROTHER, — This comes to bring you the sorrowful news that you have lost 
the best of brothers, and I the kindest of husbands, at a time when we were in hopes of 
his growing better, as the spring advanced, and continuing with us at least one 
summer longer. He died this morning, about eleven of the clock, after he had kept his 
bed only three days. I send so hastily to you, that you may be here before we prepare 
for the funeral, which was the desire of my dear husband, who informed me that he 
had made you joint-executor with me. The will is in my hands, and I shall defer 
opening it till you arrive here. I am too full of grief to add any more; the messenger, 
who is a very honest man, and a neighbour of mine, shall inform you of such 
particulars as are needful from, your sorrowful sister, 
— SEALS. 
P.S.-I employed a friend to write for me, which I desire you to excuse; for I was not 
able to do it myself, nor indeed to dictate any more.
	These letters being sealed and properly directed, our two adventurers dressed 
themselves according to the characters they were to bear, and parted from each other; 
one of them riding towards London, and the other towards Bristol, having so ordered 
it beforehand that they might both come to the end of their journey at the same time. 
They arrived, they delivered their credentials, and were kindly received. It is not to 
our purpose to declare how many tears were shed upon opening the letters, and how 
many eulogies each of the living brothers bestowed upon him whom he supposed to 
be dead. Much less shall we pretend to describe the secret joy which they both 
concealed under a sorrowful countenance; but which naturally arose in their breasts 
when they understood that an addition would now accrue to their fortunes by the 
death of a brother. It is true they both loved one another; but of all love, self-love is 
the strongest.
	The evening at each place was spent in talking over several particulars of the 
family, subjects that at such a time as this always come in the way. Our messengers 
were both very expert, and each brother was convinced that the man whom his sister 
had sent had been long conversant in the family, by the exact account which he gave 
of things. They moreover added of their own heads a great deal of stuff concerning 
the manner of the respected Mr Seals' death, and what he said in his last moments, 
which at this time was doubtless very moving. In a word, the best bed in both houses 
was made ready for our two sharpers, who were to depart the next morning, and tell 
the sisters-in-law that their brothers would come two days after, which was as soon as 
their mourning could be made, and other things prepared for the journey.
	It may be proper to observe that Old Mobb went to Bristol, and the Golden 
Farmer to London. The first of these found means in the evening to secure jewels to 
the value of two hundred pounds, which was all the booty he had any opportunity to 
make. But the Golden Farmer, having well observed the position of Mr Philip Seals' 
shop, arose in the night, came silently downstairs, and took to a much greater value; 
among other things a diamond necklace — which was just made for a lady of the first 
quality, but not to be delivered till some days after — three very large diamond rings, 
and five small ones. In the morning both our adventurers set out, one from Bristol, 
and the other from London. They met at a place before appointed, and congratulated 
one another upon their success.
	But we must leave them together, and return to the brothers, who were both 
getting ready for their journey. Such was the hurry and confusion which our 
messengers had put the two families in, that nobody in either of them took any notice 
of the shops, so that nothing of the robberies was discovered in time enough to 
prevent the masters setting out, and let them see that they were imposed on. The shops 
were well furnished out, and what was carried off took up but little room; wherefore it 
was not surprising that such a thing should be overlooked, at a time when no business 
was thought of but the preparations for travelling, and appearing decently at the 
funeral.
	The merriest part of the whole story was our two brothers setting out the same 
morning, and coming the same evening to Newbury, where they took up their lodging 
also at the same inn. He from London came in first, and being fatigued went to bed 
before the other arrived. The Bristol man, about two hours after, passed through his 
brother's room, and a companion with him, whom he had engaged to attend him, and 
reposed themselves where but a thin partition was between the two chambers. Philip, 
the Londoner, was asleep when his brother went by him, but the discourse between 
Charles and his friend surprised him; he could not tell what they talked off; but was 
certain one of the tongues was his brother's, whom he was going to see buried. By and 
by Charles had occasion to go to the necessary house; upon which he rises, and 
attempts to go through Philip's chamber again, who by the moonlight was still more 
convinced that he had not been deceived in the voice. Upon this he screamed out, and 
Charles was now as much surprised as his brother; so that he ran back to bed half dead 
with fear. In a word, they both continued sweating, and frightening themselves, till 
morning, when they arose and dressed themselves in their mourning apparel. Below 
stairs for some time they shunned one another, till they were taken notice of by the 
people of the house, who with some difficulty brought them together, after they had 
heard both their stories. They now saw themselves imposed on, but could not imagine 
the reason of it, till, after spending two days together at the inn, they both returned, 
and found themselves robbed. Now was the plot unravelled.
	Old Mobb was at last apprehended in Tuthill Street, Westminster, committed 
to Newgate, and tried at the Old Bailey, on thirty-six indictments, of thirty-two of 
which he was found guilty.
	On Friday, the 30th of May, 1690, he was executed at Tyburn, without making 
any speech or confession, but continuing to act with his usual intrepidity.


TOM KELSEY 
An audacious young Thief who robbed the Tent of King William in Flanders 
and stabbed a Newgate Turnkey. Executed 13th of June, 1690

	THOMAS KELSEY was born in Leather Lane, in the parish of St Andrew, 
Holborn; but his mother being a Welsh woman, and she having an estate of about 
forty pounds per annum, left her by an uncle at Wrexham, in Denbighshire, the whole 
family — which consisted only of the two old people, and this their son — went down 
thither to live upon it.
	Tom was from his infancy a stubborn, untoward brat, and this temper 
increased as he grew up; so that at fourteen years of age he was prevailed on by one 
Jones, who has since been a victualler in London, to leave his father and come up to 
town, in order to seek his fortune. Having neither of them any money, they were 
obliged to beg their way along in the best English they were masters of. Going one 
day to a gentleman's house with their complaint, he took a liking to the boys, and 
received them both into his house: Kelsey in the quality of a horsekeeper and Jones as 
a falconer. It may be supposed they were both awkward enough in their callings, but 
Tom's place was the least difficult, so that he kept it the longest, the gentleman being 
soon weary of his falconer, and glad to send him about his business again.
	It was not a great while after, before Tom Kelsey was detected in some little 
pilfering tricks, and turned out of doors after his companion, whom he could not find 
when he came to London. His being out of place till he could subsist no longer, and 
his natural inclination to dishonesty, soon brought him forward in the course of life 
for which he was afterwards so infamous. He fell into company with thieves, and was 
as bold and as dexterous in a little time as the best of them, if not even beyond them 
all.
	Going one day by the house of Mr Norton, a silversmith in Burleigh Street, 
near Exeter 'Change, a couple of his companions came by him like strangers, and one 
of them snatched off his hat, and flung it into the goldsmith's chamber window, which 
stood open, running away as fast as they could. Tom, who had a look innocent enough 
to deceive anybody, made a sad complaint to Mr Norton, who stood at his door and 
saw all that passed. It happened that at that time there was nobody at home but 
himself, of which Tom had got intelligence before. "Poor lad!" says Mr Norton, "you 
shall not lose your hat; go upstairs and fetch it yourself, for I cannot leave the shop." 
This was just what Tom wanted; he went up and took his hat, and with it a dozen of 
silver spoons that lay in his way, coming down in a minute, and making a very 
submissive bow to Mr Norton for his civility, who let him go without suspicion. This 
prize was divided between him and his two associates, as is common in such-like 
cases.
	Tom was not, however, so successful in his villainies but that he was 
condemned to be hanged before he was sixteen years of age. The fact was breaking 
open the house of one Mr Johnson, a grocer in the Strand, and stealing from thence 
two silver tankards, a silver cup, six silver spoons, a silver porringer, and forty pounds 
in money. But he got off this time on account of his youth, and the interest his father 
made at court; for, hearing of his son's condemnation, the old gentleman came directly 
up to town, and arrived before the day appointed for his execution, procuring a full 
pardon by the mediation of some powerful friends.
	To prevent his following the same courses again, and exposing himself afresh 
to the sentence of the law, the old gentleman put his son apprentice to a weaver, but 
before he had served half-a-year of his time he ran away from his master, and took to 
his old courses again. It was his pride to make all whom he conversed with as bad as 
himself, an instance of which appeared in what he did by one David Hughes, a cousin 
of his by the mother's side. This youth, going to Kingston Assizes along with Tom a 
few days after he came to town, was prevailed upon by him to pick a pocket in the 
court; in which action being apprehended, he was immediately tried, and condemned 
to be hanged upon a gibbet within sight of the Bench, as a terror to others. This week 
was fatal enough to young Hughes; for he came to London on the Monday, on 
Tuesday and Wednesday spent and lost ten pounds, which was all the money he had, 
along with whores and sharpers, on Thursday in the evening picked a pocket, was 
condemned on Friday morning, and hanged on Saturday. This was the end of one of 
Kelsey's hopeful pupils, who had the impudence to boast of it.
	Another of the actions of this extravagant was his robbing the Earl of 
Feversham's lodgings. This nobleman was General of the Forces in the reign of King 
James II., and consequently had a sentinel always at his door. Tom dressed himself in 
a foot-soldier's habit one evening, and went up to the fellow who was then on duty, 
asking him a great many questions, and offering at last to stand a drink, if he knew 
where to get a couple of pots of good beer. The soldier told him there was very good a 
little beyond Catherine Street, but he durst not leave his post so long as to fetch it. 
"Can't I take your place, brother soldier?" quoth Tom. "I am sure if somebody be at 
the post there can be no danger." The soldier thanked him, took the sixpence, and 
went his way; meanwhile Tom's associates got into the house, and were rifling it as 
fast as they could. They had not quite done when the soldier came back; whereupon 
Tom gave him twopence more, and desired him to get a little tobacco also. While the 
poor fellow was gone for this the villains came out, and Tom went with them, 
carrying off not only above two hundred pounds worth of plate, but even the soldier's 
musket. The next day the sentinel was called to account, and committed to prison. At 
the ensuing court martial he was ordered to run the gauntlet for losing his piece, and 
then was sent to Newgate, and loaded with irons, on suspicion of being privy to the 
robbery, where, after nine months' confinement, he miserably perished. Kelsey, after 
this, broke open the house of the Lady Grace Pierpont, at Thistleworth, and stole from 
thence a great many valuable things. But soon after one of his companions impeached 
him for this fact; whereupon, being informed that the officers were in search after 
him, he fled to the camp of King William in Flanders. Here he got a considerable 
booty out of his Majesty's tent, and from other general officers, with which he got to 
Amsterdam, and sold it to a Jew; whom he also robbed afterwards, and sold what he 
had gotten to another Jew at Rotterdam, from whence he re-embarked for England.
	He had not been long returned to his native country before he was detected in 
breaking open the house of a linen-draper in Cheapside, which put a final end to his 
liberty, though not to his villainy, for, being sent to Newgate, and having no hopes of 
ever getting out any more, unless to go to Tyburn, he grew desperate, and resolved to 
do all the mischief he could there. Mr Goodman, one of the turnkeys of that jail, being 
one day drinking in the common-side cellar, Kelsey privately stabbed him in the belly 
with a knife, of which wound he instantly died. For this murder he received sentence 
of death at the next session in the Old Bailey, and a gibbet being erected in Newgate 
Street, near the prison, he was thereon executed, on Friday, the 13th of June, 1690, 
being then no more than twenty years of age. As a terror to the other prisoners who 
were then in confinement, his body was suffered to hang on the gibbet the space of 
three hours.


SIR JOHN JOHNSTON 
Executed at Tyburn, 23rd of December, 1690 , for assisting to steal an 
Heiress

	SIR JOHN JOHNSTON was born at Kirkcaldy, in Fifeshire. His father had 
had a good estate, but had diminished it by extravagant living, so Sir John went young 
into the army to improve his fortune. He went over to Ireland, where he thought to 
better his circumstances by marriage; and getting into the acquaintance of a Mr 
Magrath, in the county of Clare, he, by his urbane conversation, so gained his good 
opinion, that he frequently invited him to dinner. Mr Magrath having a daughter, with 
ten thousand pounds as her portion, Sir John took every opportunity to insinuate 
himself into her company, and so far gained upon her affections as to obtain her 
consent to elope with him; but the father, having some hints given him of their private 
courtship, kept a very watchful eye over their actions, and at last, being confirmed in 
his suspicions, forbade Sir John his house, and kept his daughter close.
	Miss Magrath being uneasy under her confinement, and deprived of the 
company of Sir John, whom she loved to distraction, made a kinswoman her 
confidante, and entrusted her with a letter to Sir John, to let him know how uneasy her 
life was, and that if he would come to such a place, at a stated time, she would 
endeavour to make her escape, and meet him. But the lady, thinking she should gain 
most by obliging her uncle, delivered the letter to him, instead of Sir John. Mr 
Magrath, having read it, sealed it up again, and sent it to Sir John, who received it 
with a great deal of satisfaction, and immediately wrote an answer, and returned it by 
the same messenger. But, repairing to the place of rendezvous, instead of meeting the 
lady, he fell into an ambuscade of fellows with sticks and clubs, who beat him so 
unmercifully that he promised to relinquish his pursuit.
	Having been in London some time, and spent his money, he was obliged to 
apply to some of his countrymen for support; and Captain James Campbell, brother of 
the Earl of Argyll, having a design to steal an heiress, one Miss Mary Wharton, he and 
Mr Montgomery were assistants in the affair. Miss Wharton was the daughter of 
Philip Wharton, Esq., and at the age of thirteen, by his death, inherited fifteen hundred 
pounds per annum, besides a personal property to the amount of one thousand pounds. 
This young lady resided with her mother in Great Queen Street, and Captain James 
Campbell, brother of the Earl of Argyll, wishing to possess so rich a prize, determined 
to marry her perforce, and for that purpose prevailed upon Sir John Johnston and 
Archibald Montgomery to assist him in conveying Miss Wharton from her home, 
which being done, and a reward of a hundred pounds offered for the apprehension of 
Captain Campbell, and fifty pounds a-piece for him and Mr Montgomery. Sir John, 
being betrayed by his landlord, was apprehended and indicted for it, the 11th of 
December, 1690.
	The evidence was, in substance, that Miss Mary Wharton, being an heiress of 
considerable fortune, and under the care of her guardian (Mr Bierly), was decoyed out 
on the 10th of November, and being met with by Sir John Johnston, Captain Campbell 
and Mr Montgomery, in Queen Street, was forced into a coach with six horses 
(appointed to wait there by Captain Campbell) and carried to the coachman's house, 
and there married to Captain Campbell, against the consent of herself, or knowledge 
of her guardian. The jury having found the prisoner guilty, he received sentence of 
death.
	The enterprise succeeded but too well to Johnston's cost. Campbell, who was 
the real culprit, escaped punishment, and married Margaret Leslie, daughter of David 
Lord Newark, after Parliament had dissolved his first marriage; but every effort to 
save Johnston proved ineffectual. Miss Wharton afterwards married Colonel Bierly, 
who commanded a regiment of horse in the service of William III.
	At the place of execution, Sir John addressed the spectators in a long speech, 
in which he not only endeavoured to make it appear he was blameless in the 
transaction for which he suffered, but that he had been greatly wronged by printed 
papers, in which he was charged with a rape at Chester, and a similar crime at Utrecht, 
in Holland. He was executed at Tyburn, the 23rd of December, 1690.


JACK WITHRINGTON 
One of five Brothers, all of whom were hanged. He earned Fame for his 
Courage, challenged the Captain of his Regiment; turned Gamester, Thief 
and Highwayman. Executed 1st of April, 1691

	THIS fellow was the youngest of five brothers, who were all born at 
Blandford, in Dorsetshire. The other four were all hanged in the country, but Jack had 
the good fortune to be reserved for Tyburn, and by that means to have his name 
transmitted to posterity. He was bound to a tanner in Shaftesbury, a town in his native 
county, with whom he served about three years. Then he entered into the Earl of 
Oxford's Regiment of Horse, in which, when Monmouth's rebellion was suppressed in 
the West of England, he came up to London, where he soon met with opportunities of 
discovering his valour to the world. These occasions were two quarrels in which he 
was engaged: the first with a man famous for fighting, against whom he behaved with 
so much bravery and skill that it won him a vast reputation; the second with a person 
of great estate, but a noted coward, when he showed himself a gentleman by his 
adherence to the point of honour and good breeding. By these duels he won 
abundance of applause, so as thereby to contract a familiarity with all the greatest 
fighting men of the time, especially those in his own regiment. Withrington however 
carried his manhood so far as to get himself turned out of the regiment within a year 
after, for challenging his captain. He then became a perfect bully and gamester; and, 
being fortunate, in a little time by these means saw himself master of a considerable 
sum of money. Notwithstanding all this good luck at first, he found himself afterwards 
subject to the fate of gamesters — viz. to be frequently without money in spite of his 
large winnings. This brought him at last to consider the uncertainty of Fortune and 
endeavour to make himself master of her, by supplying with fraud what he might want 
in plain open skill. But this also did not continue long; for everyone began to be aware 
of him as a common sharper, and none who knew him would venture to play with 
him.
	In the common scale of knavery the next step above a sharper is a downright 
thief. Withrington made bold to ascend this degree, and was resolved to take the most 
honourable station thereon, that of a highwayman. He had money enough to buy him 
a good horse and accoutrements, so that the resolution and the real attempt were not 
long asunder. His first adventure was with a farmer, from whom he took forty pounds, 
giving him in return only an impudent harangue, occasioned by the countryman's 
reproaching him with the robbery.
	The next that fell in Withrington's way was Mr Edward Clark, gentleman 
usher to the Duchess of Mazarin. They met in Devonshire, on the road between 
Chudleigh and Ashburton. Mr Clark made some resistance, so that in the scuffle 
Withrington's mask fell off and discovered his face, which Mr Clark knowing, he 
called him by his name, and said he hoped he would not rob an old acquaintance. 
"Indeed I shall, sir," quoth Withrington, "for you get your money much easier than I 
do, who am forced to venture my life for a maintenance; you have so much a year for 
eating, drinking and entertaining your lady with scandal and nonsense. What I shall 
take from you will do you little harm; it is only putting a higher price upon half-a-
score reputations, which you know how to do as well as any coxcomb in England. 
Ladies never let such faithful servants go unrewarded, nor will yours suffer your loss 
to fall on yourself." He got about eight guineas out of this gentleman's pocket, and for 
old acquaintance sake bade him "Good-b'w'ye" very heartily.
	Withrington's robberies in less than a year and a half were talked of almost all 
over the kingdom. But alas! he met with a diversion, common to mankind, that draws 
even the most stupid into the rank of polite persons. The poor man was in love; and 
with whom but a rich widow inn-keeper in Bristol! Farewell to the highway: 
Withrington has another scent to pursue. No more robberies to be thought of from a 
man who was himself robbed of his heart! He employed an old bawd in the affair, 
who was intimately acquainted with our hostess, and by this flesh-broker's mediation 
things had like to have come to an issue, and Jack to have been master of the Swan 
Inn. In short, there was nothing prevented it but the accidental coming of a certain 
gentleman, who knew our highwayman, and informed his mistress what he was. The 
effects of this discovery were Jack's being kicked out of doors by the ostler and 
chamberlain, and the commitment of madam the negotiatress to Bridewell, in order to 
mill Dolly.
	After his return to the highway he and one of his companions met with Mr 
Thompson, a noted tailor, in a part of Hertfordshire that was convenient for robbing. 
They took from him about thirty pounds in silver, and then, dismounting him, they 
ordered him to stay where he was till they brought him more company. As soon as 
they were gone from him he remounted his horse and attempted to ride off as fast as 
he could; but our highwaymen perceiving what he was at, and having the best horses, 
they fetched him back, and mistrusting he had more money, by his being in so much 
haste, they searched him afresh, he protesting all the while that he had not so much as 
a farthing left if it were to save his soul. In a literal sense he might be right; but they 
made a shift to find forty guineas, which they thought better than farthings. 
Withrington upon this exclaimed that it was a sad thing that one Christian could not 
believe another! They then shot his horse, to put a stop to his speed, and so rode away 
and left him.
	The last robbery Withrington committed was alone. He stopped a nobleman on 
Hounslow Heath attended by two footmen. There was a short dispute, but Withrington 
having the best of it, he took a portmanteau in which were two hundred and eighty 
guineas, sixty pounds in silver, and a parcel of fine linen. A hue and cry was soon 
issued out after him, and he was apprehended by means of it at Malmesbury, in 
Wiltshire, from whence he was removed to London, where he was condemned for this 
fact.
	The sentence of death seemed to have no effect on his temper, for he was as 
gay and humorous under that circumstance as ever he had been before. When he was 
riding up Holborn Hill he ordered the cart to stop, and calling up the Sheriff's deputy, 
"Sir," said he, "I owe a small matter at the Three Cups, a little farther on, for which I 
am afraid of being arrested as I go by the door; therefore I shall be much obliged to 
you if you will be pleased to carry me down Shoe Lane and bring me up Drury Lane 
again into the road by which I am to travel this devilish long journey." The deputy 
informed him that if such a mischance should happen he should come to no damage. 
"For," says he, "I'll be bail for you myself, rather than you shall go back to prison 
again." "Thank you heartily, sir," quoth Jack; "I protest I could not have thought that I 
had a friend in the world who would have stood by me so in such a time of need." 
After this he rode very contentedly to the place of execution, where he was tucked up 
with as little ceremony as usual. This fatal day was Wednesday, the 1st of April, in the 
year 1691.


JACOB HALSEY 
The Quaker Highwayman, who after being fooled by a "Spirit" led a Life of 
Crime, and was executed at Maidstone in April, 1691

	JACOB HALSEY was born in Bedford, the chief town in Bedfordshire, of 
very wealthy parents, who were Quakers, and accordingly bred him up in that 
persuasion from his infancy.
	When he was arrived at man's estate he pretended to be wonderfully gifted, 
and the spirit abounded so powerfully in him that he frequently held forth in the 
meetings of the Friends twice or thrice a week. Nay, he either pretended to be, or was, 
so very enthusiastically given, that he affirmed, with all the gravity imaginable, that 
he nightly dreamed dreams and saw visions, and had sundry comfortable and 
enlightening revelations.
	Hereupon one of his neighbours, an arch unlucky weed, resolved to put 
Halsey's faith, or rather folly, to the test whether he really believed what he pretended 
to affirm and preach to others; which brought poor Jacob into a very ugly scrape, as 
we shall see in the sequel; for this neighbour, getting upon the house one night when it 
was very late, called out twice or thrice, with a loud voice, to Halsey: Jacob, where art 
thou?" Halsey, at last hearing the voice, starts out of his bed naked, and, running to 
the window whence the voice seemed to come, cries out: "Here am I! Oh, what is thy 
will?" Quoth the wag in the same voice, who could hardly forbear laughing: "Arise 
presently, Jacob, my beloved, my chosen one, and go to the church, or rather steeple-
house, and break all the windows."
	Immediately Halsey hurries on his clothes, gets a long pole, runs to the church, 
and demolishes all the windows, lead and all; zeal being never so well pleased as 
when it is set a-tearing and doing mischief. But poor Yea-and-Nay suffered severely 
in the flesh for this zealous fit; for, being taken in the fact, he was committed to 
Bedford jail, and before the matter was made up it cost him above four hundred 
pounds, between the charges of the Spiritual Court and at common law. He was above 
three months under confinement, during which time, being a facetious sort of a fellow 
— what we call a "wet Quaker" — he would drink and keep company, 
notwithstanding his persuasion, with the felons in Bedford Jail, asking them several 
questions, and being very inquisitive in examining into the art and mystery of 
thieving. There was one rogue more acute than the rest, with whom he would daily 
converse, and one time, as the were drinking together, he acquainted him with the 
several lays which the thieves went upon, and amongst the rest informed him of a set 
of rascals who wore cloaks and hats cocked up on one side, with a plume of feathers 
on the other, whence their fraternity received the name of "Plumers."
	The exercise of these gentry by daytime was to stroll about the streets and 
create quarrels upon nothing, only to draw a crowd together, that they might twitch a 
cloak, or pick a pocket, among the confused multitude. But in the night they had 
recourse to a different method of practice. Some of them had the industry to insinuate 
themselves into gentlemen's company and, enticing them to play, pick their pockets of 
their money by new-invented cheats. These had the policy to keep so fair a 
correspondence with the constables and justices' clerks that they very seldom under- 
went any disgrace or punishment, unless they encountered some very powerful 
adversary, whose purse was not only better lined than theirs, but who had interest 
enough to make even the justices' commission shake if they offered to protect or 
screen them, as those trading justices always do who go snacks with their clerks.
	In short, after this thief had acquainted Halsey with the chief secrets of his 
calling and profession, he took the liberty of asking him if none of them apprehended 
hanging. "Scarce any of us," answered he, "ever suffer such a thing to enter into our 
thoughts; so far from it that we frequently are present at the execution of our 
comrades, without the least fear or terror; for nothing dazzles our eyes or is capable of 
moving our hearts like the insatiate thirst of invaluable gold."
	As soon as he was set at liberty, Halsey, being sensible how he had been 
imposed upon in the affair of the voice which commanded him to break the church 
windows, was very much ashamed of his ridiculous folly, and would willingly have 
had it forgotten; but the people flouted him, and jeered him continually, throughout 
the town of Bedford. Nay, what was worst of all, he could never appear in the streets 
or go about his business without having a whole tribe of boys and girls hollowing and 
hooting after him. This exasperated him so much at last, that, being weary of his life, 
he was resolved to quit the country, and be revenged of all the churchmen that fell 
into his clutches, though it were at the hazard of his own neck. He resolved then upon 
following the road; and, in order thereunto, metamorphosed his cropped hair into a 
peruke, his formal hat to one pinched and cocked, his diminutive cravat to a ranting 
neck-cloth, and his precise coat, without plaits, to one more fashionable, designing to 
hide his knavery as much as he possibly could by such an alteration. But nevertheless, 
even under this disguise, he would always rob in the language of the lambs.
	Accordingly, one day, meeting with an old wicked usurer of Bedford, between 
Barnet and St Albans, he rode on with him very peaceably for three or four miles; 
when, coming to a convenient place for his intended purpose, "Look thee, friend," 
says he, "I am not like one of those profane ones, who spoil men in the terrifying 
words of 'Stand and deliver.' No, I say again, I am not one of that wicked stamp, but 
an Israelite that spoils an Egyptian with all the good humour, peace and quietness in 
the world; so open thy purse-strings straight, and lend what thou hast, without any 
grumbling."
	The old usurer, not liking this mild way of parting with his mammon any more 
than that of being more roughly handled, refused Jacob his money, and made great 
resistance; whereupon Halsey shot his horse, and after taking from him about sixty 
pounds, resolving to punish him yet further, for moving his righteous spirit to wrath, 
made him cast his arms about a large elm-tree, and bound them fast together with a 
strong cord. This done, he left him to stretch out his neck like the cock of a conduit, 
whose head, not being fixed to the body, may be set higher or lower at pleasure, and 
look out to see when some good person would come by and deliver him.
	Another time, Jacob, overtaking a country curate between Abingdon and 
Oxford, accosts him in this manner: "Friend, imagining thee to be some Philistine 
going to spoil an honest Israelite for tithes, I must make bold to spoil thee first; 
wherefore, thou wicked one, deliver thy mammon to the righteous, that he may 
convert it to a better use than to exhaust it in gluttony and pride, otherwise I shall send 
thee to the bottomless pit before thy time is come by the course of nature." The parson 
made several hums upon the matter, but finding the resolute Quaker would not be said 
nay, gave him a bag containing thirty-two pounds, after which they parted.
	Jacob was at last apprehended in attempting to rob the Earl of Westmoreland, 
not far from his seat near Wateringbury, in Kent, and being committed to Maidstone 
jail, was condemned at the assizes held there in April, 1691, and executed a few days 
afterwards.


WILL MACQUEER 
Who stole the Lord Chancellor's Mace and delighted in robbing Army 
Officers on the Highway. Executed at Tyburn, 1st of May, 1691

	THIS notorious offender was the bastard son of an Irish priest, and born at 
Athenrea, in the county of Galway and province of Connaught in Ireland. Coming 
young to England and not readily falling into any business was the occasion of his 
first taking to ill courses, he being exposed, as most idle fellows are, to bad company, 
which is the most common introduction to thieving, and as it were the first step 
towards Tyburn.
	The first of William Macqueer's offences was a burglary committed at 
Brentwood, in Essex, in company with three more. They entered a gentleman's house 
there, stole four diamond rings, a very large quantity of plate, and six hundred pounds 
in money. Not long after this he and one more broke open the Lord Chancellor 
Jeffreys' house, in Duke Street, Westminster, whence they carried off the purse and 
mace belonging to his office. Macqueer has been often heard to boast how he made 
his companion carry the two prizes before him through the park in the same manner as 
they were carried before the Chancellor, while he walked in state behind them, and 
swelled as much as any country cobbler could do when he arises to the dignity of 
mayor of his borough. The next morning early there was a terrible hue and cry after 
these ensigns of dignity, which Macqueer had secured in his closet at his lodgings, 
going out all day to hear what would be the event of the inquiry. The maid going up 
that day to clean his chamber found a small jewel on the floor, which had been 
dropped from the purse. This she instantly carried down to her master, who having 
heard the news that day, and not liking his lodger very well before, began to suspect 
what afterwards appeared to be the truth. For, sending for a constable and breaking 
open the door, they found both the mace and the purse, which were the same day 
restored to the Chancellor. Macqueer informed himself abroad of all that had 
happened, and never came near his landlord and house again till he broke it open 
about a quarter of a year after and stole away as many goods as were valued at eighty 
pounds, by way of revenge for what was done.
	Nothing would serve him now but the highway, and he was resolved to be 
furnished with accoutrements at the expense of the public. He stole a good horse and 
saddle out of the stable of one Councillor Thursby, in Burleigh Street, in the Strand; 
and a pair of pistols he got from Mr Robert Williams, a gunsmith in George Yard, 
Westminster. Thus equipped he set out.
	There was at that time a poet, whose name was Alexander Oldys, a man as 
deformed as AEsop, and so small that there was hardly such another to be seen. It was 
the fate of our bard to meet Macqueer between Hammersmith and Brentford, when he 
was accosted with the customary salutation. He now found he was got into other 
company than that of the Muses, and began to apprehend that his sword would do him 
small service against a pistol, upon which he gave Teague all the money he had, 
amounting in whole, as it is reported, to no more than threepence-farthing. We are 
certain the sum did not satisfy Macqueer, who deprived him of his sword also, in a 
most ungentlemanly manner; which loss was the cause of greater grief to our bard 
than any other affliction he could have suffered, except that of being obliged never to 
write any more verses.
	Not long after, Macqueer met the Lady Auverquerque coming from the bath in 
a coach-and-six, stopped her, and desired her to lend him what money she had about 
her, because he had at that time great occasion; promising her to pay the whole again 
very honestly at their next encounter, and offering to give his bond if she demanded it. 
"I believe," says the lady, "you had as good tell me at once you are come to rob me, 
for this is an odd way of borrowing. I am a stranger in this country," the Irishman 
said, "and so if I don't know the difference between robbing and borrowing, you must 
excuse me; for all I mean is, give me your money." The lady told him it was well he 
had explained himself at last, and so gave him her gold watch, two diamond rings and 
what money she had. He then shot two of the coach horses and the horses of two 
footmen that attended, and so rode off with his booty as fast as he could. Macqueer 
took a particular delight in robbing the officers of the army, because he imagined that 
in so doing he gave a greater proof of his valour than he could by any other means.
	The first he robbed was one Mr Adams, a lieutenant of the Second Regiment 
of Foot Guards, whom he met between Uxbridge and Beaconsfield. The lieutenant, 
being stopped before he was aware, gave our highwayman very good words; but 
perceiving that Macqueer was not to be talked out of his booty delivered six pounds to 
him, out of which Macqueer gave him back ten shillings to bear his charges.
	Another officer whom he robbed was Captain Shooter, a man of bravery and 
resolution, who would not tamely part with what he had, and had like to have made 
our highwayman pay dearly for his affected courage. Their meeting was on 
Hampstead Heath, where they fired several pistols at each other without doing any 
damage on either side. They then rode up together, with their swords drawn, and made 
a great many pushes. Macqueer had certainly been worsted at this exercise if he had 
not bethought himself of another pistol in his breeches' pocket, which he pulled out 
and discharged suddenly through the captain's head, when he apprehended nothing but 
the sword. He got at least fifty guineas and a silver watch by this murder. The last 
robbery he was concerned in was in company with William Selwood, alias Jenkins, 
another old offender. They took two hundred and fifty guineas from one Mr Benjamin 
Watts on Hounslow Heath. For this fact they were both taken, condemned, and on 
Friday, the 1st of May, 1691, executed together at Tyburn, Macqueer being in the 
twenty-eighth year of his age.


TOM COX 
A Handsome Highwayman who robbed the King's Jester and even held up 
men of his own Trade. Executed 3rd of June, 1691

	THOMAS COX was born at Blandford, in Dorsetshire. He was the youngest 
son of a gentleman, so that, having but a small patrimony, he soon consumed it in 
riotous living. Upon the decay of his fortune he came up to London, where he fell in 
with a gang of highwaymen, and easily complied with their measures in order to 
support himself in his dissolute course of life. He was three times tried for his life 
before the last fatal trial, and had, after all these imputations, a prospect once more of 
making himself a gentleman, so indulgent was Providence to him. A young lady fell 
in love with him at Worcester, he being a very handsome man, and she went so far as 
to communicate her passion, and almost make him a direct offer of herself and fifteen 
hundred pounds. Cox married her; but instead of settling himself in the world, and 
improving her fortune, he spent it all in less than two years, broke the poor 
gentlewoman's heart with his ill-usage, and then took to his old courses again.
	The robberies he committed after this were almost innumerable. One day he 
met with Killigrew, who had been jester to King Charles II., and ordered him to 
deliver. "Are you in earnest, friend?" said the buffoon. Tom replied: "Yes, by G-d am 
I! for though you live by jesting, I can't." Killigrew found he spoke truth; for well as 
he loved jesting, he could not conceive that to be a jest which cost him twenty-five 
guineas; for so much Tom took from him.
	Another time he robbed Mr Hitchcock, an attorney of New Inn, of three 
hundred and fifty guineas, on the road between Midhurst and Tetworth, in the county 
of Sussex, giving him in return a lesson on the corruption of his practice, and 
throwing him a single guinea to bear his charges. Mr Hitchcock was a little surprised 
at the highwayman's generosity, but more at his morality, imagining the world must 
needs be near its end when the devil undertook to reform it.
	Our offender was at last apprehended for a robbery on the highway, committed 
near Chard, in Somersetshire. But he had not been long confined in Ilchester jail 
before he found an opportunity of escaping. He broke out of his ward into the keeper's 
apartment, who, as good luck would have it, had been drunk overnight, and was now 
in a profound sleep. It was a moonlight night, and Cox could see a silver tankard on a 
table in the room, which he secured, and then let himself out with authority into the 
street, by the help of the keys, leaving the doors all unlocked as he passed. The 
tankard he had stolen was worth ten pounds, and besides that he got into a stable just 
by and took a good horse, with proper furniture, to carry him off.  It is reported of 
Tom Cox that he more than once robbed persons of his own trade. Indeed there is an 
old proverb that "Two of a trade can't agree"; but it must certainly be a very 
dangerous thing for highwaymen to make so bold one with another, because every 
one of them is so much exposed to the revenge of the rest; and as Cox sometimes 
robbed in company, it discovers that he was not an unsociable thief. Tom's last 
robbery was on a farmer, from whom he took about twenty pounds. It was not above a 
week after the fact before the said farmer came to London on business and saw Tom 
come out of his lodgings in Essex Street, in the Strand; whereupon crying out "Stop, 
thief," he was immediately apprehended in St Clement's Churchyard, and committed 
by a neighbouring magistrate to Newgate, where he lived till the sessions in an 
extravagant manner, being very full of money. Receiving sentence of death on the 
farmer's deposition at justice Hall on Wednesday, the 3rd day of June, 1691, he was 
hanged at Tyburn, in the twenty-sixth year of his age. He was so resolute to the last 
that when Mr Smith, the ordinary, asked him, a few moments before he was turned 
off, whether he would join with his fellow-sufferers in prayer — "D —n you, no!" 
says he, and kicked both ordinary and executioner out of the cart.


JACK COLLET ALIAS COLE 
Highwayman, who robbed in the Habit of a Bishop. Executed at Tyburn, 5th 
of July, 1691, for Sacrilegious Burglary

	THIS unfortunate person was the son of a grocer in the borough of Southwark, 
where he was born, and from whence, at fifteen years of age, he was put out 
apprentice to an upholsterer in Cheapside. He did not serve above four years of his 
time before he ran away from his master and took to the highway. We have not an 
account of abundance of his robberies, though it is said he committed a great many; 
but there is this remarkable particular recorded of him, that he frequently robbed in 
the habit of a bishop, with four or five of his companions at his heels in the quality of 
servants, who were ready to assist him on occasion. Collet had once the ill fortune to 
lose his canonical habit at dice, so that he was forced to take a turn or two on the road 
to supply his present necessities in unsanctifying garments. But it was not long before 
he met with a good opportunity of taking orders again and becoming as holy as ever.
	Riding from London down into Surrey, a little on this side of Farnham, he met 
with Dr Mew, Bishop of Winchester, and commanded his coachman to stop. The 
Bishop was not at all surprised at being asked for his money, because when he saw his 
coach stopped he expected that would follow. But when Collet told him he must have 
his robes too, his lordship thought him a madman. There was no resisting, however; 
the old doctor was obliged to strip into his waistcoat, besides giving him about fifty 
guineas, which Collet told him he had now a right to demand, by having the 
sacerdotal habit in his possession.
	Collet followed this trade till he was about thirty-two years of age, and, as if 
he had been determined to live by the Church, he was at last apprehended for 
sacrilege and burglary, in breaking open the vestry of Great St Bartholomew's, in 
London, in company with one Christopher Ashley, alias Brown, and stealing from 
thence the pulpit cloth and all the communion plate. For this fact he received sentence 
of death, and was executed at Tyburn on Friday, the 5th of July, in the year 1691. This 
Brown and Collet had before robbed St Saviour's Church, in Southwark, in 
conjunction.


TOM WATERS 
Highwayman, who held up Gipsies, robbed a Vice-Admiral, and was 
executed on 17th of July, 1691

	THOMAS WATERS was born of very reputable parents at Henley-on-
Thames, in Oxfordshire. His father and mother both died when he was very young, 
and left him to the care of an uncle, who put him apprentice to a Notary-Public behind 
the Royal Exchange. But business was what his mind was not turned for, and the 
servitude of seven years appeared to him a grievous thing; whereupon he gave himself 
a discharge without the leave of his master before he had served half the term. What 
little money he had was soon expended, and he was exposed to the wide world, 
without any visible way of getting a living in it. These circumstances soon inclined 
him to apply himself to the highway, as the only method he could see of supporting 
himself.
	His first exploit was on about twenty or thirty gipsies, whom he saw near 
Bromley, in Kent, as they were coming one morning early out of a barn, where they 
had lain all night. He rode up to them and commanded them to stand, threatening to 
shoot half-a-score of them through the head if they did not obey his command 
instantly. These strollers were pretty patient thus far; but when he ordered them to 
draw their purse-strings they set up an outcry as terrible as the "Hololoo" of the wild 
Irish when they lose a cock or a hen. The being robbed on the highway was something 
new to them, who had all their lives long been used to defraud everyone they met 
with. Some of them entreated his pity and compassion in a miserable tone. Others 
began to tell his fortune, promising him abundance of riches, and everything else they 
could think of that was desirable, and bestowing on him more blessings than the Pope 
would have sold for all the wealth they had to lose. Tom was not so superstitious at 
this time as to take notice either of their predictions or their blessings; he wanted the 
ready money, for the old proverb that "One bird in the hand is worth two in the bush" 
was one of his darling maxims.
	When our tribe of jugglers found he was resolutely bent upon taking what they 
had, they began to empty their pockets of a large quantity of silver spoons, tasters, 
gold rings, etc., which they either stole or persuaded some of the silly country people 
to give them for having their fortunes told. These movables, together with what 
money they produced, amounted in all to sixty pounds.
	One time he met with an ostler on the road from Yorkshire to London, who 
was once like to have betrayed him at an inn in Doncaster. This fellow had saved 
together forty pounds and was coming to town in order to improve it, either by 
jockeying or keeping an ale-house — the two ways his countrymen commonly apply 
themselves to. Tom knew him again, and the remembrance of such a gross affront was 
enough to make him a little rough; however, he promised to spare his life, though he 
did not deserve such a favour, if he delivered what he had without words. The ostler 
was conscious of what he had done and so he surrendered.
	Another of Waters's adventures was with Sir Ralph Delaval, at that time Vice-
Admiral of the English Fleet, whom he knew very well. The meeting was on the road 
between Portsmouth and Petersfield. "Well overtaken, Brother Tar," quoth Tom; 
"pray what religion are you of?" Sir Ralph stared at him, and seemed astonished at his 
impudence." What business have you," says he, "to inquire about my religion?" "Nay, 
Sir Ralph," Waters replied, "I had only a mind to ask a civil question, because I have 
been informed that you sailors have no religion at all. But since you are so crusty 
upon this head, give me leave to ask you another thing. Pray do you apprehend you 
shall be robbed before you come to the end of your journey?" "Not at all," quoth the 
Admiral," I have my footman behind me." "Now there you and I are of two opinions," 
says Tom, "for I believe you will be robbed very quickly." While he was speaking his 
pistols were out, and master and man were threatened with death if they offered to stir 
hand or foot. In this condition the Knight thought it his best way to save his life by 
delivering his money; which he did, to the tune of ninety guineas, besides a gold 
watch. For the space of five years and upwards Tom continued his robberies, during 
which time he committed an almost incredible number. His last robbery was on 
Hounslow Heath, a place where almost all of them at one time or another try their 
fortunes. He took from one John Hosey, a Bristol carrier, above fourteen hundred 
pounds in money and plate, some of which latter was found on him when he was 
apprehended. For this fact he received sentence of death; and being conveyed to 
Tyburn in a coach, on Friday, the 17th day of July, in the year 1691, he was there 
executed, in the twenty-sixth year of his age, going off the stage in a very resolute 
manner.


MOLL JONES 
Who became a Shoplifter for Love of her Husband. Executed at Tyburn 18th 
of December, 1691

	MARY JONES was born in Chancery Lane, where her parents lived in a great 
deal of credit. She was brought up to the making of hoods and scarves at the New 
Exchange in the Strand. She married an apprentice, whom she loved extremely, and 
whose extravagances were thought to be the first occasion of her taking to a dishonest 
course of life; for as he was not in a capacity to get any money himself, she was 
willing to do anything in order to furnish him with whatever he wanted, being fond of 
having him always appear like a gentleman. The first species of thieving she took to 
was picking pockets.
	One day, meeting near Rosamond's Pond, in St James's Park, with one Mr 
Price, a milliner, keeping shop in the same Exchange in which she was bred, Moll 
pretended to ask him some questions about Mrs Zouch, a servant of his, who had 
murdered her bastard child; whereupon he pulled out a tin trumpet, which he usually 
carried in his pocket to hold to his ear, being so very deaf that he could not hear 
otherwise. Whilst he was earnestly hearkening to what Moll said to him through this 
vehicle, she picked a purse out of his breeches in which were fifteen guineas and a 
broad-piece. Mr Price never missed it till he came home, and then where to find her 
he could not tell.
	Shortly after this she was apprehended for picking the pocket of one Mr Jacob 
Delafay, a Jew, who was chocolate-maker to King James II. and King William III., 
and lived over against York Buildings in the Strand. For this fact she was committed 
to Newgate and burned in the hand; which punishment making her out of conceit with 
the trade of diving or filing, she turned shoplifter, in which she was very successful 
for three or four years; at the end of which, privately stealing half-a-dozen pairs of 
silk stockings from one Mr Wansel, a hosier in Exeter 'Change, she was detected 
actually committing the theft by one Smith, a victualler, at the Rose and Crown ale-
house, over against the little Savoy Gate in the Strand, who was buying a pair of 
stockings there at the same time. This Smith, being a constable, seized her, and 
carrying her before Justice Brydal, he committed her to Newgate, after which she was 
burned in the hand again. Still following the art and mystery of shoplifting, she was 
apprehended for privately stealing a piece of satin out of a mercer's shop on Ludgate 
Hill, whither she went in a very splendid equipage and personated the late Duchess of 
Norfolk, to avoid suspicion of her dishonesty; but her graceless Grace being sent to 
Newgate, and condemned for her life at the Old Bailey, she was hanged at Tyburn in 
the twenty-fifth year of her age, on Friday, the 18th day of December, in the year 
1691.


TOM TAYLOR 
Who, getting literally hooked as a Pickpocket, turned House-breaker. 
Executed 18th of December, 1691, for using Arson as a means to Theft

	TOM TAYLOR, a parson's son, was born at Colchester, in Essex; who, 
accustoming himself to gaming from twelve years of age, was so addicted to idleness 
that he would not be brought up to any honest employment. Furthermore, rejecting the 
good counsel of his parents, and joining himself to bad company, he soon got into a 
gang of pick-pockets, with whom he often went out to learn their evil profession and 
find the ready way to the gallows. Going once, with three or four of these diving 
sparks, to Guildford, a market-town in Surrey, where there was next day a fair to be 
kept, and fearing to be discovered in that concourse of so many people, they resolved 
to do their business that very evening, when the people were very busy in fitting up 
their stalls, and some little trading was stirring besides. Their first consultation was 
how to draw the folks together to make one job of it, which was agreed on in this 
manner. Tom Taylor, pretending to be an ignorant clown, got his head into the pillory, 
which was elevated near the market-house, as if he had only a mind to be laughed at. 
The noise thereof causing the whole town to run together to see this spectacle, his 
companions so plied their work, while the people gazed, laughed and stared, that they 
left but few of them any money in their pockets. Nay, the very keeper of the pillory, 
who was as well pleased at this curious sight as anybody, was served in the same 
manner with the rest.
	Tom seeing the work was done, and having the sign given him that his 
comrades were departing, came down from his wooden machine; whereupon the 
company dispersed themselves. A little while after, some of them clapping their hands 
into their pockets, they cried out with one voice that their pockets were picked, while 
in the confusion Tom slunk away to his companions, who were out of the reach of 
apprehension.
	At last, Taylor being pretty expert at picking of pockets, he set up for himself; 
and one day going to the playhouse in Drury Lane, very well dressed, he seated 
himself by a gentleman in the pit, whose pocket he picked of about forty guineas, and 
went clean off. This good success tempted Tom to go thither the next day in a 
different suit of clothes, when, perceiving the same gentleman in the pit whose pocket 
he had picked but the day before, he takes his seat by him again. The gentleman was 
so sharp as to know his face again, for all his change of apparel, though he seemed to 
take no notice of him; whereupon putting a great quantity of guineas into the pocket 
next Tom, it was not long before he fell to diving for them. The gentleman had sewed 
fishing- hooks all round the mouth of that pocket, and our gudgeon venturing too 
deep, by unconscionably plunging down to the very bottom, his hand was caught and 
held so fast that he could in no manner of way disentangle it.
	Tom angled up and down in the pocket for nearly a quarter of an hour; the 
gentleman, all the while feeling his struggling to get his hand out, took no notice, till 
at last Tom, very courteously pulling off his hat, quoth: "Sir, by a mistake, I have 
somehow put my hand into your pocket instead of my own." The gentleman, without 
making any noise, arose and went to the Rose Tavern at the corner of Bridget Street, 
and Tom along with him, with his hand in his pocket, where it remained till he had 
sent for some of his cronies, who paid down eighty guineas to get the gudgeon out of 
this dry pond. However, the gentleman, being not altogether contented with this 
double satisfaction for his loss, most unmercifully caned him, and then turning him 
over to the mob, they as unmercifully pumped him and ducked him in a horse-pond, 
and after that so cruelly used him that they broke one of his legs and an arm.
	Tom meeting with such bad usage in his first setting up for himself, he was so 
much out of conceit with the trade of picking pockets that he left it quite off and 
followed house-breaking; in which kind of villainy he was so notorious that he had 
committed above sixty felonies and burglaries in the county of Middlesex only in less 
than fourteen months. He reigned eight years in his crimes; but at length, setting a 
barn on fire betwixt Brentford and Austirly, a little village lying about a mile north 
from that town, while the servants came from the dwelling-house to quench it he ran 
up into a chamber, pretending to help to preserve the goods, but ran away with a trunk 
in which was a great deal of plate and a hundred and forty pounds in money. He was 
apprehended before he got to Hammersmith, where, being carried before a magistrate, 
he was committed to Newgate; and receiving sentence of death at the Old Bailey, 
when about twenty-nine years of age, he was hanged at Tyburn on Friday, the 18 th 
day of December, in the year 1691.


HENRY HARRISON, GENT. 
Sentenced to Death 6th of April, 1692, for strangling Dr Clenche in a Coach

	HENRY HARRISON, gent., appeared at the Old Bailey on 6th of April, 1692, 
charged with murdering (with the assistance of some person unknown) Dr Andrew 
Clenche, by strangling him in a coach. According to witnesses Dr Clenche had 
advanced one hundred and twenty pounds to Mrs Vanwicke, a widow, on a mortgage, 
and when a trustee for her and her children, named Rowe was unable to meet his 
covenants, the doctor served an ejectment order on the tenant of the house under 
mortgage. This incensed Harrison, who was a friend of Mrs Vanwicke. Mrs Mary 
Sheriff deposed that Mrs Vanwicke and Mr Harrison came to her house; and Mrs 
Vanwicke desired the deponent to go with her to Dr Clenche, which she did; and Mrs 
Vanwicke desiring the doctor to let her have twenty pounds more, he said he would 
lend her no more so long as she kept company with Harrison, for he would spend it; 
and told her he would recommend her to be some gentleman's housekeeper, and that 
though she owed him one hundred and twenty pounds he would take one hundred 
pounds. That when they returned to the deponent's house, Mrs Vanwicke told Mr 
Harrison what the doctor said; and Mr Harrison answered: "God d —n him! Would he 
have a person of your quality go to service? He deserves to have his throat cut"; and 
added: "Let me alone; I'll manage him as never man was managed," and then Mrs 
Vanwicke and Harrison went away together. That Mr Harrison was always talking 
against the doctor, and said he was an old rogue, and Mrs Vanwicke was almost 
starved to death. John Giles, coachman, deposed that on Monday, the 4th of January, 
he set down a fare at the Green Dragon in Fleet Street about nine in the evening, and 
was driving from thence towards the Temple, when two men, who stood about Fetter 
Lane end, asked him if he knew Dr Clenche, who lived in Brownlow Street, in 
Holborn. And the deponent saying he knew the street, they came into his coach, and 
he drove them to the end of Brownlow Street; and one of them bade him go and tell 
the doctor two gentlemen in a coach desired him to go with them to see one who was 
not well. That the doctor asked the deponent if he knew them, but he said he did not; 
and the doctor dressed himself (being before in his gown and slippers); and when he 
came to the coach, one of the men removed and gave him the hinder part of the coach, 
and bade the deponent drive to Leadenhall Market: and when he came about Holborn 
Bars, one of them bade him drive faster, which he did, and came to Leadenhall. Then 
one of them bade him drive to the Pye Tavern without Aldgate, where they bade him 
ask for one Hunt, a surgeon; but no such person was there. Then one of them bade 
him drive back to Leaden- hall, and Aldgate being shut they gave the watch sixpence 
to open it; and when he stopped again at Leadenhall Gate one of them gave him three 
shillings and sixpence and bade him buy a couple of fowls of Hunt, the poulterer; but 
not being able to find such a man, he bought them of another; and coming back to his 
coach he found Dr Clenche (as he thought). sitting against the fore-seat, with his head 
against the cushion: that he pulled him and called to him, but could not get a word 
from him; and, calling the watch, he found he was strangled with a handkerchief 
about his neck, and a coal in it, placed just upon his windpipe; but the other two men 
were gone. That he could not tell what clothes the prisoner had on, but one of them 
had a light wig, and he verily believed it was the prisoner, and that the other person 
was taller, and wore his own hair. Mrs Ashbolt deposed that, being sent out on an 
errand the night Dr Clenche was murdered, she saw a coach stop at Brownlow Street 
end between nine and ten o'clock, and one in the coach bade the coachman go and tell 
Dr Clenche that two gentlemen waited for him in a coach, and one of them leaned out 
of the coach and swore at the coachman as he was going that he made no more haste. 
That the deponent went round the coach and could discern Mr Harrison's face, and she 
saw Dr Clenche go into the coach, and one of them gave his place to the doctor.
MR DARNEL (prosecuting): Tell us how you came to be so curious, and what you 
observed further.
MRS ASHBOLT: I thought they would give the coachman the slip; and I clearly 
observed Mr Harrison, there being a lamp burning on each side the coach, which 
lighted quite through; and when the men saw me look at them they pulled themselves 
back. Afterwards, when Madam Clenche desired me to go see Mr Harrison in 
Newgate, I knew the voice to be one of those who were in the coach, as he was 
talking very loud, before I came into the room, and I told the company so that were 
with me. And I knew the prisoner to be one of those who were in the coach as soon as 
I saw him. But Mr Darnel produced a record to prove that Baker, one of the prisoner's 
witnesses, was convicted of cheating the parish of St Giles's when he was a scavenger, 
by altering the figures in the book and then extorting greater sums from the 
parishioners than they ought to pay, and he called two other witnesses, who deposed 
that Maccaffee, another of Harrison's witnesses, kept a very disorderly house, where 
thieves and housebreakers and lewd women resorted. The Lord Chief justice summed 
up the evidence very impartially, and the jury withdrew to consider of their verdict; 
and, after retiring half-an-hour, they brought the prisoner in guilty of wilful murder; 
and the last day of the sessions the prisoner received sentence of death.


JOCELIN HARWOOD 
Highwayman, who committed such Barbarous Murders that his Associates 
gave him up to Justice. Executed in 1692

	JOCELIN HARWOOD was a degenerate plant from a good tree. His father 
was honest — moderately rich, and of undoubted reputation; and the greatest 
misfortune of his life was his having a child so unworthy of him. Jocelin was born in 
the year 1669, at Wateringbury, in Kent, where he was educated with all the caution 
necessary in such cases. When he grew towards seventeen years of age he ran away 
from his father, carrying off with him about sixty pounds. When he had wasted what 
he took from his father in luxury and wantonness he made no scruple of getting more 
in the same dishonest way. Being now in London, also, he had every disadvantage 
that a young man can have who has given way a little to the allurements of vice. His 
money brought him into bad company, and then that bad company persuaded him to 
seek for more money. He submitted at first only to pilfering and picking of pockets, 
which he followed for about three years, and then he resolved to move in a higher 
sphere, make a greater blaze in the world for a time, and receive his fate, when it 
came, with more honour.
	The ill success of his first adventure on the highway was enough to have 
reformed him, and deterred him from ever attempting the like again. He had stolen a 
horse, bridle, saddle, holsters and pistols, with which he set out on Black-Heath, and 
was so hardy as to order two men at once to stand and deliver. The gentlemen 
engaged him, shot his new horse, and had certainly taken him, if the wounds they had 
received in the encounter had not disabled them from exerting themselves. Harwood 
was terribly frightened at the bravery of his antagonists, and was glad he could get off 
with only the loss of a horse.
	Jocelin continued to rob on the highway for about two or three years, during 
which time he lived in all manner of excess, passing from county to county as it suited 
either his pleasure or his safety.
	The last and worst action of his life was committed at the house of Sir 
Nehemiah Burroughs, in Shropshire, where he was informed of an immense treasure 
in plate and money. In company with two more he went one night and broke open this 
house, gagging and binding all the servants as fast as they could get into their 
chambers. When the rest of the family was secure he went to the knight and bound 
him and his lady; then going into his daughters' room, one of the young ladies said to 
Harwood: "Pray, sir, use us civilly; which if you do, we will use you in the same 
manner, in case you and your companions should be taken; for I am sure we shall 
know you again." "Shall you so?" said the inhuman wretch. "I'll take care then to 
prevent your doing any mischief."; Upon this he cut them both in pieces with his 
hanger, and then running into the old people's room again — "What," says he, "and do 
you know me too?" They told him no. "D —-n you," said he, "you are only a little 
more artful than your daughters, but I shan't trust you." Then he run them both 
through, and left them wallowing in their blood, seeming as well satisfied as if he had 
done a meritorious deed.
	His companions were so astonished at the barbarity of this fellow that they 
stood like stocks, unable either to prevent him in his bloody attempts, or to apprehend 
him for them on the place, which latter they had most mind to. But the horror 
continued so strong on their minds that, though they were both old offenders 
themselves, they could not help exposing him to justice as soon as they had left the 
house of this unhappy family. Being on the road, one of them by agreement shot his 
horse, and then they joined to bind him hand and foot, and leave him on the ground, 
with a piece of the knight's plate by his side, telling him it was but a just requital for 
his inhumanity.
	The next day, an inquiry being made all over the country, he was found in the 
condition he had been left by his companions. He was sent under a strong guard to 
Shrewsbury jail, where he behaved very audaciously. At his trial he was even so 
impudent as to spit in the faces of the judge and jury, and talk to them without any 
regard to decency. The matter of fact being plainly proved against him, he was 
condemned to be first hanged on the gallows till he was dead, and then to have his 
body hanged in chains on a gibbet for a public spectacle. This sentence made no 
impression on him; so that he continued the same horrid course of oaths, profaneness 
and blasphemies till his death. When he was at the gallows, with a steady countenance 
he said that he should act the same murder again, in the same case.?quotes? This was 
all he would say to anybody. It is shocking to think that such a wretch should be but 
twenty- three years of age at the time of his death, which was in the year 1692.


SIMON FLETCHER 
A most expert Pickpocket, who captained the Thieves of London. Executed 
in 1692

	THIS offender was the son of a baker in Rosemary Lane, to which trade he 
served about four years with his father; but happening several times to fall into bad 
company, and being of a vicious inclination, he was prevailed on, without much 
difficulty, to run away from his servitude, and enter with a gang of thieves. The chief 
sort of thieving at that time was cutting off people's purses or pockets, which was in 
use long before the modern and more dexterous practice of picking out the money and 
leaving the case behind. The latter, however, must be allowed to be only an 
improvement of the former, and therefore the performances of any of our pickpockets 
cannot be said to derogate from the merit of those gentlemen of the last age; for the 
inventors of all sciences have generally been looked upon to deserve a greater share of 
praise than they that have brought those sciences to perfection, because it is much 
easier to refine upon the thought of another person than to start any new thought of 
our own.
	Simon Fletcher was looked upon to be the greatest artist of his age by all his 
contemporaries of the same trade; and it is affirmed that he was constituted captain of 
all the thieves, in and about London, by general consent. All that we know more of 
him is that he was at last taken, committed to Newgate, and hanged at Tyburn. His 
exit was in 1692, when he was about fifty-three years of age.


MADAM MARY BUTLER 
Mistress of the Duke of Buckingham, fined Five Hundred Pounds for forging 
a Bond for Forty Thousand Pounds, and died in Newgate Prison in 1692

	MADAM MARY BUTLER, alias Strickland, mistress to George Villiers, 
Duke of Buckingham, on the 13th of October, the year after his death, was indicted at 
Justice Hall, in the Old Bailey, for a misdemeanour in forging a bond in the name of 
the Worshipful Sir Robert Clayton, knight and alderman of the City of London, for 
forty thousand pounds, with a condition to pay twelve hundred pounds per annum, 
with interest, and that after the decease of the said Sir Robert Clayton there should be 
twenty thousand pounds paid her within six months; which bond had a seal, and was 
witnessed by four persons.
	The first evidence was Mr Woodward, an eminent attorney in the city, who 
deposed that Mary Butler had been his client for several years; and that about two or 
three years before that time she came to him and brought him a bond to look over, and 
desired him that another should be drawn by it, which bond was signed Robert 
Clayton, and had a seal affixed to it, and the names of four persons subscribed to the 
same, and was of the penalty of forty thousand pounds, and dated in the year 1687, or 
thereabouts, to pay twelve hundred pounds yearly so long as Sir Robert should live, 
and after his decease to pay the sum of twenty thousand pounds; and that she desired 
it might be kept a secret, and that his servants should not know anything of it, for that 
it was to be delivered up to Sir Robert, and she was to disclaim her interest by a bill in 
Chancery. And she told him she had received money upon the said bond, and desired 
him to cast up what was in arrears; which he did, and then took a copy of the bond to 
draw the other by, by reason it was a special condition (which copy he produced in 
court, and said that he did believe it to be a true copy of the same); and that afterwards 
he drew a bond of the penalty of fifty-four thousand pounds for the payment of 
twenty-seven thousand pounds; upon which he told Mrs Butler it was a great sum, and 
required people of credit to see it executed, and offered her to be one of the witnesses 
to see it done himself. Upon which she replied that Sir Robert knew him very well, 
and did not desire him to be a witness, and that she then took away the bond and the 
draft from him; and he did not know what she did with it afterwards.
	The next evidence was a very worthy gentleman, who deposed that he was 
present when she was brought before the Lord Chief Justice Holt, and that she did 
then acknowledge that she did cause the bond to be made by one Lucas, a scrivener in 
Bishopsgate Street, and owned that she did it herself and directed him to make it by 
her order.
	Mrs Butler denied the fact upon her trial, and called persons to her reputation; 
but that did not avail her: the jury found her guilty of a misdemeanour, and the Court 
fined her five hundred pounds, and ordered her to remain in prison till it was paid. But 
she never paid it, for after four years' imprisonment she died, in the common side of 
Newgate


WILLIAM JONES (ALIAS GOODWIN) AND JOHN 
BARBER 
Two Highwaymen caught at the same Robbery and &executed together on 
26th of July, 1693

	THESE two malefactors were executed at Tyburn on Wednesday, the 26th of 
July, 1693, for the same fact, which was robbing one Mr Salter, of Stoke, in 
Buckinghamshire. They had both been great offenders before, according to their age, 
though abundance of their robberies are not recorded. William Jones, alias Goodwin 
(which latter was said to be his right name, though he went by the former), was born 
in Gloucestershire, at a village near Campden, called Weston Subedge. He was kept at 
school till sixteen years of age, with one Mr Taylor, whom he was like to have killed 
with a pistol. At their breaking up at Christmas the boys had shut their master out of 
the school in the midst of their diversion, and refused him entrance. Mr Taylor upon 
this endeavouring to force open the door upon them, Jones discharged a bullet through 
the keyhole and narrowly missed his breast.
	Complaint being made to his father of this misdemeanour, he was severely 
corrected and removed to another school, the master of which was called Bedford, 
with whom he continued about two years more. He now thought himself too old to be 
restrained, and requested his parents to take him home; which was done, according to 
his desire. Some time after this he had a small estate left him by his grandfather, 
which made him still more desirous of being fully his own master; to which also his 
indulgent father consented, and promoted his liberty (if marriage may not rather be 
called a slavery) by matching him to a fortune as good as his own. The woman, 
however, not proving so good as she should do, a sense of her ill-usage made him 
extravagant. He now abandoned himself wholly to excesses. He had one night a small 
quarrel in company, when he made no more to-do but pull out his sword and stab the 
person who gave the affront to the very heart. A dread of the consequences of this 
murder made him get off as fast as he could, and the want he was in of a maintenance, 
when he was from home, and durst not send to his friends, made him take to the 
highway, where he committed a great many robberies.
	In particular, he robbed the Worcester and Bridgnorth stage-coaches several 
times over, and within the compass of a few days stopped a great number of 
passengers, horse and foot, upon Sarney Downs, near Winchester. His reign was not 
very long, but no man ever was more industrious to improve the little time that his 
fortune permitted him to go on in his villainies.
	John Barber was born at Chard, in Somersetshire, from whence, coming up to 
London when he was very young, he got into a gentleman's service, and lived, among 
others, with Dr Boorne, at the Two Twins, in Moorfields, where he was detected in 
cheating his master of small sums of money, and turned out of doors for the knavery.
	When he was out of place he took to gaming, at which he soon lost all his 
unjust gains, and whatever else he had saved. The same persons that won his money 
put him into a way to get more, by going out with them on the footpad. He was 
concerned in all the robberies that were committed by this gang from the time of his 
entering among them till he joined himself with Jones, and had more than once been 
guilty of murder, particularly at a gardener's at Fulham, whose house he broke open.
	Jones and Barber had not been long united before they came to the fatal union 
at Tyburn already mentioned. The only facts they had been concerned in together, that 
we have heard of, were the breaking open the houses of four or five farmers about 
Eversley and Blackwater, out of one of which they took a hundred and thirty pounds 
in gold and silver, and in another took away the life of one who attempted to resist 
them in their enterprise.
	When they were under sentence of death for Mr Salter's robbery they both 
behaved in a very indecent, or rather impudent, manner. At the place of execution 
they gave a great many ill words to the ordinary, who desired them to be serious in 
their last moments, and consider that they were going to appear before God to give an 
account of their actions. Just as they were going to be turned off Jones cried out: 
"What a sad, wicked, silly dog have I been to bring myself into this devilish scrape! 
Well, it is a dismal thing, for all our jesting, to be hanged up by the neck, and not to 
know where we are to be the next quarter of an hour!" Jones was twenty-six and 
Barber twenty-four years of age.


JAMES LEONARD 
Eighteen-year-old Highwayman, who tried to cut the Fatal Rope, and died 
with a Laugh in 1693

	JAMES LEONARD, a youth of no more than eighteen years old, who had 
been at the reduction of Ireland, and afterwards in Flanders, under the late King 
William (we may suppose only in the quality of a waiting-boy at first), was but just 
returned to England when he was apprehended, condemned and executed, for a 
robbery on the highway. He was so little concerned at the gallows that he smiled at his 
misfortune, and pulling a knife out of his pocket attempted to cut the rope. When he 
was asked the reason of his so doing — "Nothing more" says he, "than that I should 
have given you the trouble of buying a new rope, if my knife had been good." Leaning 
his back against his coffin as it stood on the cope of the cart, he laughed out heartily 
and spoke as follows: —
GOOD PEOPLE, — I am a Roman Catholic, and so I die. You see I am but very 
young; however I have made good use of my time, for I have been as great a rogue as 
those that are older. Methinks 'tis a plaguey cold morning; they need not have brought 
one to be hanged in such weather as will freeze a body before the job's over.


EDWARD HINTON 
Highwayman, who was such a Danger to Society that he was condemned 
and executed on the same Day, in 1694

	EDWARD HINTON was born in London, in the year 1673, of very reputable 
parents. In his younger years he discovered a strong bent to learning, which his father 
cherished by putting him to St Paul's School, that celebrated seminary for youth. This 
good turn of mind was, however, soon overcome by a vicious one, which seemed also 
to be innate, and grew stronger as he grew older. Even at nine years of age, it is said, 
he robbed one of his sisters of sixpences and other small pieces to the value of thirty 
shillings, and kept abroad in company with boys like himself till he had spent and lost 
it all.
	After a little correction young Hinton was sent to school again, upon his 
promising to be a better boy for the future. But in vain, alas, were his promises. 
Thieving soon grew into a habit with him, and there was no opportunity of getting 
money, or anything else, clandestinely that ever escaped him. He went so far at last as 
to rob his father's counting-house of a considerable sum of money, which he carried to 
a lewd woman, with whom he was soon after taken on Cambridge Heath.
	The first action which he performed in conjunction with others was the 
robbing of Admiral Carter's country house. Soon after this he and his comrades broke 
open the Lady Dartmouth's house on Black Heath, and stole plate to a great value, 
which they sold to a refiner near Cripplegate. Hinton was some time after 
apprehended for this robbery, and condemned at Maidstone Assizes; but his youth, 
and the intercession of his friends, procured him a pardon. He was again taken up for 
breaking open and robbing the house of Sir John Friend, at Hackney, for which he 
also received sentence of death; but was a second time so far indulged as to have a 
halter transmuted into transportation, in order to which he was soon after put aboard 
with other convicts. One would have thought he had now been safe enough; however 
those who thought so were mistaken, for he drew the rest of the convicts into a 
conspiracy to get the ship's company under the hatches, and make their escape in the 
long boat, which they effected near the Isle of Wight, Hinton having first beat the 
captain with a rope's end, as a return for being served so himself.
	He was no sooner ashore than he left his company and travelled alone through 
the woods and byways, being in a very torn and rusty habit. This distress obliged him 
to sink from stealing to begging, which he practised all the way to Hounslow Heath, 
telling the people a lamentable story of his having been shipwrecked. But he soon 
altered his tone when he saw a convenient opportunity; for on Hounslow Heath he 
unhorsed a country farmer and mounted in his place. Nor was it long after before he 
changed this horse for a better, and his own ragged suit for a very genteel one, with a 
gentleman he met.
	Being now got among some of his old gang, they continued some months to 
rob on the highway almost every day that passed. The Buckinghamshire lacemen and 
stage-coaches in particular were afraid to travel for them. Hinton by himself, at two 
several times, robbed a Dutch colonel of his money, horse, arms and cloak; and 
another gentleman, who had courage enough to exchange a pistol with him. This 
gentleman was wounded in the leg by Hinton's fire, and our young highwayman, 
perceiving it, was so generous as to lend him his assistance, and accompany him as far 
as within a little way of Epsom; when he left him in order to take care of himself.
	One day, after robbing the passengers in the Southampton coach, they were so 
closely pursued that some of the gang were taken; and though Hinton had the good 
fortune this time to escape, yet the society being broken, he did not care to venture 
any more on the highway alone; whereupon he returned to his old vocation of 
housebreaking, picking of pockets, etc.
	At length several bills were presented against him for robberies committed in 
the counties of Surrey and Hertford, to answer which he was detained a prisoner. One 
of his own gang had made himself an evidence against him, which made the case look 
very doubtful; yet even here he had again hopes of escaping, by stopping the mouth of 
this fellow. Some of Hinton's friends undertook to manage the matter, and they 
threatened to bring in several indictments against their false brother if he did not 
retract in court what he had before sworn; which for his own safety he did, pretending 
that he had recollected himself, and that Mr Hinton was never concerned with him in 
any robbery whatsoever.
	This, and the other assistances he received from his old friends, brought him 
off with honour at the Surrey Assizes, and he did not at all doubt but that he should 
escape as well at Hertford, there being no evidence against him that he knew of; so 
that he went thither with abundance of confidence. But when his trial came on, in 
spite of all that could be deposed in his favour, one of the gentlemen whom he had 
robbed, and whom he did not expect to appear, swore so positively that he was the 
very person who unhorsed him and took away his watch that the Court believed him. 
It is true they had begun to imagine that Hinton really must be concerned in some of 
those things that he had been acquitted of, because it is unprecedented for a man to be 
so often accused and not be at all guilty. Besides, Hinton was known to be an old 
offender, which gave room both to suspect the evidences he brought and to believe 
that he had not perfectly left off his trade, though he had art enough to make himself 
seem innocent. In a word, where Hinton fancied himself safest he met with his 
deserved fate, being convicted, condemned and executed the same day — a thing 
seldom heard of, but at this time occasioned by the judge's being informed what a 
dangerous person he was on account of his interest among the thieves, and how proper 
it would be to take him out of the way as soon as they possibly could; the jailer 
protesting that he was afraid he could not keep him a week in custody.


TOM AUSTIN 
Highwayman, guilty of unparalleled Butchery. He murdered his Aunt, Wife 
and Seven Children. Executed in August, 1694

	THOMAS Austin was born at Columpton, in Devonshire, of very honest 
parents, who at their death left him a farm of their own, worth about eighty pounds 
per annum, which is a pretty estate in that country; and as his land was without 
encumbrances, and he had a good character at that time, he soon got a wife with a 
suitable fortune, she having no less than eight hundred pounds to her portion. But this 
increase of his riches, and the thought of having so much ready money by him, made 
him neglect the improvement of his living and take to an idle, extravagant course, by 
means of which, in less than four years' time, he had consumed all that his wife had 
brought him and mortgaged his own estate.
	Being now reduced to pinching circumstances, and not knowing which way to 
turn himself for a livelihood, the devil so far got the upper hand of him as to excite 
him to the commission of all manner of unlawful actions for the support of himself 
and his family. Several frauds he was detected in, which his neighbours were so good 
as to forgive, out of respect to his family and to what he had once been. At last he was 
so desperate as to venture on the highway, where, assaulting Sir Zachary Wilmot on 
the road between Wellington and Taunton Dean, that unfortunate gentleman was 
murdered by him for making some attempts to save his money.
	The booty he got from Sir Zachary was forty-six guineas and a silver-hilted 
sword, with which he got home undiscovered and unsuspected. This did not, however, 
last him long, for he followed his old riotous course. When it was all spent he 
pretended a visit to an uncle of his, who lived at about a mile from his own habitation, 
and it was one of the bloodiest visits that ever was made.
	When he came to the house he found nobody at home but his aunt and five 
small children, who informed him that his uncle was gone out on business and would 
not be at home till evening, and desired him to stay a little and keep them company. 
He seemingly consented to stay; but had not sat many minutes before he snatched up a 
hatchet that was at hand and cleaved the skull of his aunt in two; after which he cut 
the throats of all the children and laid the dead bodies in a heap, all weltering in their 
gore. Then he went upstairs and robbed the house of sixty pounds. He made all the 
haste he could home to his wife, who, perceiving some drops of blood on his clothes, 
asked him how they came there. "You bitch," says he, "I'll soon show you the manner 
of it!" pulling at the same time the bloody razor which he had before used out of his 
pocket and cutting her throat from ear to ear. When he had gone thus far, to complete 
the tragedy he ripped out the bowels of his own two children, the elder of whom was 
not three years of age.
	Scarcely had he finished all his butcheries before his uncle, whom he had been 
to visit, came accidentally to pay him the same compliment on the way home; when, 
entering the house, and beholding the horrid spectacle, he was almost thunderstruck 
with the sight, though as yet he little thought the same tragedy had been acted on all 
his family too, as he soon after fatally found. What he saw, however, was enough to 
point out the offender, whom he immediately laid hold of, and carried him before a 
magistrate, who sent him to Exeter Jail.
	In the month of August, 1694, this inhuman wretch suffered the punishment 
provided by the law, which appears much too mild for such a black unnatural 
monster.


JAMES WHITNEY 
Notorious Highwayman, who believed in dressing well. Executed at 
Smithfield, 19th of December, 1694

	THIS notorious malefactor was born at Stevenage, in Hertfordshire, where he 
was put apprentice to a butcher as soon as he was fit for servitude. He served his time, 
as far as we have heard, very faithfully; but was not long his own master before he 
took to the irregular courses that brought destruction upon him and branded his name 
with infamy.
	He took the George Inn, at Cheshunt, in Hertfordshire, where he entertained 
all sorts of bad company; but not thriving in this way he was in a little time obliged to 
shut up his doors and entirely give over the occupation. He now came up to London, 
the common sanctuary of such men, where he lived very irregularly, and at last, when 
necessitous circumstances came on him apace, wholly gave himself up to villainy.
	It was still some time before he took to the highway, following only the 
common tricks practised by the sharpers of the town, in which he was the more 
successful as he always went dressed like a gentleman, it being easier to impose upon 
mankind with a good suit of clothes than any other way whatsoever.
	When Whitney was grown a confirmed highwayman he one day met a 
gentleman on Bagshot Heath, whom he commanded to stand and deliver. To which 
the gentleman replied: "Sir, 'tis well you spoke first, for I was just going to say the 
same thing to you." "Why, are you a gentleman thief then?" quoth Whitney. "Yes," 
said the stranger; but I have had very bad success to-day; for I have been riding up 
and down all this morning without meeting with any prize." Whitney, upon this, 
wished him better luck and took his leave, really supposing him to be what he 
pretended.
	At night it was the fortune of Whitney and this impostor to put up at the same 
inn, when our gentleman told some other travellers by what a stratagem he had 
escaped being robbed on the road. Whitney had so altered his habit and speech that 
the gentleman did not know him again; so that he heard all the story without being 
taken any notice of. Among other things he heard him tell one of the company, softly, 
that he had saved a hundred pounds by his contrivance. The person to whom he 
whispered this was going the same way the next morning, and said he also had a 
considerable sum about him, and, if he pleased, should be glad to travel with him for 
security. It was agreed between them, and Whitney at the same time resolved to make 
one with them.
	When morning came our fellow-travellers set out, and Whitney about a quarter 
of an hour after them. All the discourse of the gentlemen was about cheating the 
highwaymen, if they should meet with any, and all Whitney's thoughts were upon 
being revenged for the abuse which was put on him the day before.
	At a convenient place he got before them and bade them stand. The gentleman 
whom he had met before, not knowing him, he having disguised himself after another 
manner, briskly cried out: "We were going to say the same to you, sir." "Were you 
so?" quoth Whitney. "And are you of my profession then?" "Yes," said they both. "If 
you are," replied Whitney, "I suppose you remember the old proverb, 'Two of a trade 
can never agree,' so that you must not expect any favour on that score. But to be plain, 
gentlemen, the trick will do no longer. I know you very well, and must have your 
hundred pounds, sir; and your considerable sum, sir," turning to the other, "let it be 
what it will, or I shall make bold to send a brace of bullets through each of your 
heads. You, Mr Highwayman, should have kept your secret a little longer, and not 
have boasted so soon of having outwitted a thief. There is now nothing for you to do 
but deliver, or die." These terrible words put them both into a sad consternation. They 
were loath to lose their money, but more loath to lose their lives; so of two evils they 
chose the least, the tell-tale coxcomb disbursing his hundred pounds, and the other a 
somewhat larger sum, professing that they would be careful for the future not to count 
without their host.
	Whitney, like a great many others of the same profession, affected always to 
appear generous and noble. There is one instance of this temper in him which it may 
not be amiss to relate. Meeting one day with a gentleman on Newmarket Heath, 
whose name was Long, and having robbed him of a hundred pounds in silver, which 
was in his portmanteau tied up in a great bag, the gentleman told him that he had a 
great way to go, and as he was unknown upon the road should meet with many 
difficulties if he did not restore as much as would bear his expenses. Whitney upon 
this opened the mouth of the bag, and held it out to Mr Long. "Here," says he, "take 
what you have occasion for." Mr Long put in his hand and took out as much as he 
could hold. To which Whitney made no opposition, but only said with a smile: "I 
thought you would have had more conscience, sir."
	Not long after his arrival in town, after a series of other adventures in the 
country, he was apprehended in Whitefriars, upon the information of one Mother 
Cosens, who kept a house in Milford Lane, over against St Clement's Church. The 
magistrate who took the information committed him to Newgate, where he remained 
till the next sessions at the Old Bailey.
	After his conviction, Sir S —l L —e, Knight, Recorder of London, made an 
excellent speech before he passed sentence of death, and on Wednesday, the 19th of 
December, 1694, Whitney was carried to the place of execution, which was at Porter's 
Block, near Smithfield. When he came there, and saw no hopes of any favour, he 
addressed these few words to the people:
	"I have been a very great offender, both against God and my country, by 
transgressing all laws, both human and divine. The sentence passed on me is just, and 
I can see the footsteps of a Providence, which I had before profanely laughed at, in 
my apprehending and conviction. I hope the sense which I have of these things has 
enabled me to make my peace with Heaven, the only thing that is now of any concern 
to me. join in your prayers with me, my dear countrymen, that God will not forsake 
me in my last moments."
	Having spoken thus, and afterwards spent a few moments in private devotion, 
he was turned off, being about thirty-four years of age.


GEORGE SEAGER 
A Rogue of a Soldier, who deserted from Johnny Gibson's Regiment and 
turned Burglar. Executed 27th of January, 1697

	GEORGE SEAGER, aged twenty-six years at the time of his death, was born 
at Portsmouth, in Hampshire, where, his father and mother dying, his sister took care 
of him for a while; but she, not being able to support herself, left it to the parish to 
keep him, the overseers whereof placed him out to spin packthread. After two years 
he left that employment and went to a silk-throwster for a year and a half, when, 
running away from his master, he took to bad courses, being addicted to gaming, 
swearing, drunkenness and theft; but a gang of the Ruby man-of-war pressing him, he 
went on board that ship to sea, where, robbing the seamen's chests, he was often 
whipped at the capstan, put in the bilboes, and once keel-hauled. Keel-hauling a man 
is tying a rope round his middle, to which two other ropes are so fastened that, 
carrying him to the end of the main-yardarm on the starboard-side of the ship, he is 
flung from thence into the water and hauled under the ship by a man standing on the 
main-yardarm on the larboard-side, where a gun is fired over the criminal's head as he 
is drawn up.
	However, as no punishment would deter him from pilfering, the captain of the 
ship, rather than be plagued with him, put him ashore at Plymouth, from whence he 
begged his way to Portsmouth, where he enlisted himself into Johnny Gibson's 
Regiment, to whom he was a continual plague. The first time he mounted the guard, 
being put sentry on the ramparts and ordered by the corporal not to let the grand 
rounds pass without challenging, he said he would take care of them, imagining that if 
he challenged them he must fight them too. So the grand rounds going about at twelve 
at night, with Johnny Gibson at the head of them, Seager, who had got a whole hatful 
of stones by him, because he chose to fight at a distance, cries out: "Who comes 
there?" Being told they were the grand rounds — "Oh, d —n ye!" quoth George, "the 
grand rounds, are ye? Have at you then; for I have waited for you this hour and 
above." So pelting them with stones as fast as he could fling, the grand rounds could 
not pass any farther till they called out to the captain of Lamport Guard, who sent the 
corporal to relieve him, in order to his being examined; but Johnny Gibson finding 
him to be a raw soldier, who had never been on duty before, he escaped any 
punishment inflicted on offenders by martial law.
	After this George also ran the gauntlet several times for robbing the soldiers' 
barracks of victuals, linen or anything else that he could find; but no punishment 
deterring him from his pilfering tricks, he was in a draft sent over to Flanders, where, 
going one day into a great church in Brussels, he espied a Capuchin friar confessing a 
young woman in a very private place; and as soon as the good old Father had given 
absolution to his penitentiary, he made up to him, under pretence of confessing his 
sins, for, as it happened, the friar was an Englishman. But, instead of confessing his 
manifold crimes, his intention was to commit more; for, pulling a pistol out of his 
pocket and clapping it to his breast, quoth he: "Reverend Father, I perceived the 
young gentlewoman, whom you just now confessed, gave you something; but, let it be 
more or less, unless you surrender it to me, who have most need of it, I will shoot you 
through the heart, although I were sure to be hanged this very moment for it."
	The friar, being much surprised at these dangerous words, and deeming life 
sweet, gave him what he had got from his female penitentiary, which was two louis 
d'or; then binding him hand and foot, in a corner adjacent to his confession box, he 
went away; and that same day, deserting his regiment, he made the best of his way to 
England, where he committed several most notorious burglaries in the cities of 
London and Westminster, and the outparts thereof. But at last being apprehended, and 
sent to Newgate, for breaking open the house of the Lord Cutts and taking from 
thence plate and fine linen valued at two hundred and forty pounds, he was hanged at 
Tyburn, on Wednesday, the 27th day of January, in the year 1697.


WILLIAM JOYCE 
A Chawbacon who, coming to London, was fleeced, so took to fleecing 
others. Executed in July, 1696

	THIS unhappy criminal was the son of an honest farmer, born at Nantwich, in 
Cheshire, and brought up to his father's occupation; but at about twenty years of age, 
being very desirous to see London, he having scarce ever been ten miles from home, 
his father, who was a wealthy man, put twenty-five guineas into his pockets, and he 
set out to visit the metropolis of the nation. The father and son might have now taken 
their last farewell of each other, for they never saw one another any more.
	The very first day he came into London, which was in the forenoon, taking, 
after dinner, a walk into Moorfields to see the lunatics in Bedlam, a couple of women 
of the town, perceiving by his garb and mien that he was no small country fool, 
picked him up, and carrying him to a vaulting school they there had a very pretty 
collation both of eating and drinking; after which sweet William, being a brisk young 
fellow, had a game at hey grammar-cook with them both, in which he lost all the 
money he had in his breeches. He began to be uneasy at his loss, but they coaxing him 
up with promises of his having or finding his money again, then drank him to a pitch 
of being non compos mentis, when, falling asleep, they left him to pay the reckoning 
of four pounds odd money.
	Then he roved down to the waterside, where, seeing a waterman taking a good 
heavy trunk into his boat to carry to Fulham, without any company, he told the 
waterman, whose name was William Bennet, that he had business at Fulham too, and 
asked what he must have to carry him thither. The waterman demanded a shilling, to 
which he consented; so into the boat he steps. It being night before they arrived within 
a mile of the place, what does Joyce do but, with a good oaken plant he had in his 
hand, give the waterman such a shrewd blow under the ear that, being stunned, he fell 
all along backwards. Joyce followed it with another sharp blow on the head, then 
presently tied his hands and feet with his garters, crammed a handkerchief into his 
mouth, and rowing the boat to Barn Elms there breaks open the trunk. He found a 
great deal of good clothes, which he would not meddle with; but searching to the 
bottom, he found a hundred pounds in silver in a bag, forty guineas in a green purse, a 
gold watch, and a silver box in which were four rich diamond rings.
	With this booty he went ashore, and lived riotously up and down the country 
till it was almost consumed; and being then at Chatham, he there happened into the 
company of one James Corbet, a young reformade, just come ashore from on board 
the Royal Oak. Now, understanding that he had about fifty or sixty guineas about him, 
and that he was to ride post to London next morning, Joyce was resolved to make 
himself master of this money that night. In order thereto, pretending that he was 
invited to one Captain Mosely's house, about a mile off, to supper, where they should 
have also a most noble bowl of punch, he told the poor sailor that he should be very 
glad of his good company, and would undertake for his being as welcome as himself. 
Corbet knowing there was such a captain, and Joyce seeming a man of fashion (for he 
was well clothed, had a good watch in his fob, a diamond ring on his finger, and five 
or six guineas in his pockets, out of which he paid his own and Corbet's reckoning 
too), he condescended to go along with him. Over the fields they went, but were not 
got above half-a-mile out of Chatham ere a convenient place offered for Joyce to 
execute his design; so pulling out a couple of pistols he demanded Corbet's money, 
who, knowing it was impossible to parry bullets with a sword (which he also lost as it 
was a silver-hilted one), complied with his demands, and also suffered himself to be 
tied neck and heels. One time Joyce, meeting with one John Hicks on Putney Heath, 
commanded him to stand and deliver; but he being as stout a fellow as the 
highwayman a fight ensued betwixt them, in which they discharged several shots at 
one another without doing any damage. Joyce, admiring the courage of Hicks, said 
that if he could put so much confidence in him to think he would not betray him he 
should be very glad to drink a glass of wine with him in the town of Putney. Hicks 
being a generous-spirited man promised upon honour he would not discover him. To 
the tavern they went, and having passed the time away for an hour or two in chat, the 
highwayman paid the reckoning, presented Hicks with five guineas, and then they 
parted. But ere Joyce went far, meeting with one Robert Williams, a goldsmith, living 
in George Yard at Westminster, and one Samuel Winfield) a blacksmith, living in 
Southwark, he took from them four pounds towards defraying the charges of his late 
conversation with John Hicks.
	Afterwards he went to Bristol, where, marrying a citizen's daughter, with 
whom he had about five hundred pounds, he was by marrying her made (according to 
the custom of that city) free thereof. Now pretending he was a linen-draper by trade, 
and had fifteen hundred pounds to receive of his own father, he takes the lease of a 
great house next to an eminent goldsmith in the High Street. The key being delivered 
to him, he took some of his accomplices with him the same night into this house, 
which yet was empty, and with iron instruments forcing a hole through the party wall 
of the goldsmith's shop, they cleared, without going into it, all the plate off the shelves 
quite along that side they had made an entrance.
	They were carrying off their prize in hampers on a couple of horses when, 
being stopped by the watch at Laifford's Gate, he and two others were apprehended 
and sent to Newgate, and in some short time after, being tried and condemned for this 
fact, they were sentenced to be hanged. Accordingly they were executed (though great 
intercession in particular was made for Joyce) in July, 1696.


DR FRANCIS SALISBURY AND THOMAS HOUGHTON 
Executed at Tyburn, 3rd of November, 1697, for forging a Sixpenny Stamp

	FRANCIS SALISBURY was born in the city of Worcester, had a good 
education, was a student in divinity, and a man of an excellent acquired knowledge, as 
well as a quick natural understanding. Thomas Houghton, his brother offender, was a 
tallow-chandler, of St Margaret's, Westminster. These two were indicted at the 
sessions-house in the Old Bailey, the 15th day of October, 1697, for felony, in forging 
a counterfeit sixpenny stamp to stamp vellum, paper and parchment; and that after the 
12th of September they did stamp five hundred sheets of paper with the said stamp, 
and did utter and sell a hundred sheets of the said paper, they knowing it to be false 
and counterfeit.
	The first evidence declared that he met Dr Salisbury at the Physic Garden in 
Westminster, who told him he could put him in a way to make up his losses, and this 
way was by stamped paper; that he (the evidence) waited on the doctor the next day, 
and then he told him the rest would not entrust him with the secret till he came out of 
the country. That some time after he heard that the doctor was at the Fountain Tavern, 
in High Holborn, whither he went to him and spoke with him, and that he bade him 
come to him the next morning and he would let him have some. That this evidence 
accordingly went, and the doctor took him into a stable, and in a hole from under the 
manger he took out five quires, and gave them to him, and asked him whether it was 
well done. And then he let him out of the back door. That he met with him at another 
time after that, and he delivered him fifteen quires more, which made it up a ream, 
and that he gave him five pounds for it. Another evidence deposed that he met Dr 
Salisbury at the Thatched House, by Charing Cross, to buy some counterfeit stamped 
paper of him, and that he desired him to go into the next room, which he did, and 
believed that Houghton brought it in; and he gave Salisbury six pounds for it; and that 
they were to get him some more against the next night at the Goat Tavern, where they 
were to meet, and that Houghton told him they could not get so much done by that 
time, for the old man was sick; telling him likewise that the old man was as ingenious 
a man as any was in England; and that if they would put down thirty shillings apiece, 
they would make such a die as Captain Harris, who made the true die, should not 
discover it. And that afterwards they went to Houghton's lodgings in Westminster, 
where they found in a chest a quantity of counterfeit stamped paper.
	Salisbury altogether denied the fact, and Houghton said he had taken the paper 
for a debt; but the fact being plainly proved upon them, the jury found them both 
guilty of the indictment.
	On the day of his execution at Tyburn, after the other criminals who then 
suffered (on the 3rd of November, 1697) were tied up, Dr Salisbury came in a 
mourning-coach attended by two ministers, and being brought into the cart, he fell 
upon his knees, and, praying a considerable time by himself, he afterwards joined 
with the ordinary in the usual offices performed on such melancholy occasions, and 
then was turned off.


WILL HOLLYDAY 
Captain of the Ragged Regiment of the Black Guards, which Commission he 
threw up to take to the Highway. Executed 22nd of December, 1697

	WILLIAM HOLLYDAY was born of very poor parents, in the parish of St 
Giles-in-the-Fields, who dying when he was very young, he was forced to shift for 
himself. Entering himself upon this in the ragged regiment of the Black Guards, which 
in the reign of King Charles II. was in as great estimation as the janizaries in the 
Ottoman Court, his acute genius and prompt wit, without the advantage of any 
education, soon made him be taken notice of by the superiors of his tattered fraternity.
	But that which gained Hollyday most reputation was his being chosen Lord 
High Steward in a mock trial of the Viscount Stafford, held in the Mews at Charing 
Cross; in which, though he had not consulted Fortescue, Fleta, Plowden, Coke upon 
Littleton, or any other ancient law author, his natural parts most floridly set forth the 
heinousness of that peer's crime, whose person was represented by one of their 
tatterdermalions. But instead of executing the poor boy in jest, he was hanged in 
earnest, and in that pendent posture left till next morning; when one of the king's 
grooms, finding his lordship hanging in the stable, cut him down and delivered his 
dead body to his friends to be decently interred.
	A little after this piece of mock justice was over, Will's credit increasing more 
and more, by reason his ingenuity was attended with a great deal of courage, he was, 
by the unanimous consent of the whole regiment of the Black Guards, chosen their 
captain; in which post he behaved himself with a great deal of prudence and 
circumspection, and by virtue of the great authority he bore among them he brought 
them, nemine contradicente, to be conformable to the following orders: —
I. That none of the Black Guards should presume to wear a shirt upon pain of being 
cashiered out of the regiment for ever.
II. That none of them should reside, either by day or night, in any other places than 
stables, empty houses or under bulks.
III. That they should eat no victuals but what was given them; therefore what money 
they got by cleaning Life Guardsmen's boots or shoes, and rubbing down horses, 
should either be lost or increased by gaming among their own fraternity.
IV. That if any of them could read or write they should, by not practising either, forget 
both, like the Czar of Muscovy, for their captain would not have any under his 
command more learned than himself.
V. That they should daily appear every morning by nine of the clock on the parade in 
St James's Park, provided they were not letted by sickness, or upon any extraordinary 
duty, to receive the necessary orders which the present exigency of affairs then 
required.
VI. That none shall presume to follow the King and Court to Windsor, or upon any 
Royal progress whatever, but such as were commanded to go on that party.
VII. That if any charitable person bestowed a pair of old shoes or stockings upon any 
one of their ragged society, he should presently convert the same into money to play.
VIII. That they should not steal anything which lay out of their reach, for fear of 
bringing a scandal on their regiment.
IX. That they should not endeavour to clear themselves of vermin, by killing or eating 
them; nor for profit dispose of them to any apothecary that might now and then want a 
quillful or two to cure some lady's gentlewoman or chambermaid of the yellow 
jaundice.
X. That they should cant better than the best proficients of that language in Newgate; 
pick pockets without bungling; outlie a Quaker; outswear a losing lord at the Groom 
Porter's; and brazen out all their villainies with the unparalleled impudence of an 
Irishman.
	In this employment Will Hollyday remained till he was near twenty years of 
age, when looking upon himself as too old to continue longer in that station, wherein 
he had behaved himself with a great deal of bravery, candour and justice, he 
surrendered his commission and turned highwayman; which profession he followed 
till the hangman provided for him, on Wednesday, the 22nd of December, 1697.


JOHN SHORTER 
Highwayman, who conspired a Revolt in Newgate and saw the Ghost of 
another Malefactor there. Executed 22nd of December, 1697

	EXECUTED on 22nd of December, 1697, was a highwayman named John 
Shorter, of about thirty years of age. Whilst this fellow was in Newgate, about two 
years before, he had designed with some other malefactors to have seized on the 
waiters of Newgate, and to have burnt Mr Tofield's papers, the notary then in the 
lodge of that prison; withal designing to wrest the officers' arms from them, and to fire 
upon them if they opposed. They further designed to have bound the officers as they 
came one day from the chapel, and if they made the least opposition to have cut their 
throats; and that after their escape they would go on the highways, take travellers' 
horses, and, mounting them, would ride off. Moreover they had agreed that if anyone 
knocked at the lodge under the gate they would let them in and bind them also, and 
then lock them up with the officers in the dungeon or condemned hold. One of these 
confederates being a smith, he was to have been employed in knocking off the others' 
fetters; and if the turnkeys had any money in their pockets they would take it from 
them, to carry themselves off and buy provisions. And if the trained bands, or the 
mob, should come to seize them, they would fire upon them with the officers' 
blunderbusses, and would be masters of the prison till the King should send them a 
pardon, or else they would be starved or shot to death.
	Shorter not only confessed this crime, but also owned that he knew of the 
murder of one Lorimer, in Newgate, but was prevailed upon by one Tokefield, and 
John Hart, not to discover it; he further said that the latter of these persons carried the 
bloody knife three days in his pocket; and he verily believed that the day before he 
suffered death himself at the gallows he saw Lorimer's ghost as he was at prayers in 
the chapel of Newgate, which put him into a great consternation, as was visibly 
observed by Mr Smith, the ordinary. Thomas Randol was one of the persons 
concerned with Shorter in this conspiracy. This offender was executed on Wednesday, 
the 22nd of January, 1695, for the murder of Robert Stevens, a Quaker. He was 
conveyed in a cart to the deceased's door, in Whitechapel, and from thence to Stone 
Bridge, by Kingsland, where, after he was dead, his body was hanged in chains on the 
gibbet he suffered on, and continued there till it was consumed by the weather.


SPENCER COWPER, ESQ.; JOHN MARSON, ELLIS 
STEVENS AND WILLIAM ROGERS, GENTS. 
Tried for murder at Hertford Assizes and acquitted, 16th of July, 1699

	THE prisoners being severally arraigned, and pleading not guilty, it was 
demanded if they would join in their challenges, or challenge separately. To which Mr 
Cowper answered, if they should challenge separately, there must be so many separate 
trials; and therefore, to prevent the trouble of the Court, they were content there 
should be but one challenge for all. Then the panel was called over, and there being so 
many challenged for the King and the prisoners that there was not a full jury on the 
principal panel, Mr Cowper moved that the counsel for the King might show their 
cause of challenge, now the panel was gone through: to which Mr Jones, counsel for 
the King, answered that it never was put upon the King's Counsel to show cause; and 
insisting upon it, though the judge was of another opinion, Mr Cowper gave it up, and 
others were added to the principal panel, till twelve were sworn.
	Then the Clerk of the Arraigns read the indictment to the prisoners, which set 
forth:
	That Spencer Cowper, late of the parish of St John's, in the town of Hertford, 
in the county of Hertford, Esq.; John Marson, late of the parish and county aforesaid, 
gent.; Ellis Stevens and William Rogers, of the said parish and county, gents., not 
having the fear of God before their eyes, etc., did, on the 13th day of March, in the 
eleventh year of the King, at the parish of St John's aforesaid, make an assault upon 
Sarah Stout, spinster, and a certain rope about the neck of the said Sarah Stout did fix 
and bind, and the neck and throat of the said Sarah did hold, squeeze and grip, and 
thereby the said Sarah Stout did choke and strangle, of which choking and strangling 
she instantly died; and so the said Spencer Cowper, John Marson, Ellis Stevens and 
William Rogers did kill and murder her; and the said Sarah Stout being so choked and 
strangled, they the said Spencer Cowper, etc., in order to conceal the said murder, did 
afterwards throw her into a certain river, called the Priory river, against the King's 
peace, etc.
	Mr Jones afterwards opened the indictment and the evidence in the following 
manner: —
	" May it please your Lordship, and you gentlemen that are sworn, I am of 
counsel for the King in this cause, and it is upon an indictment by which the 
gentlemen at the bar stand accused for one of the foulest and most wicked crimes 
almost that any age can remember. I believe in your county you never knew a fact of 
this nature; for here is a young gentlewoman of this county murdered and strangled in 
the night-time. The thing was done in the dark, therefore the evidence cannot be so 
plain as otherwise might be. After she was strangled and murdered she was carried 
and thrown into a river to stifle the fact and to make it be supposed she had murdered 
herself; so that it may indeed be called a double murder, a murder accompanied with 
all the circumstances of wickedness and villainy that I can remember in all my 
practice, or ever read of.
	This fact being committed in the night-time, it was carried on very secretly. 
We have here in a manner two trials, one to acquit the party that is dead, and to satisfy 
the world and vindicate her reputation that she did not murder herself, but was 
murdered by other hands. For my part, I shall never, as counsel in the case of blood, 
aggravate; I will not improve or enlarge the evidence at all: it shall be only my 
business to set the fact as it is, and to give the evidence, and state it as it stands here in 
my instructions. My Lord, in order to lead to the fact, it will be necessary to inform 
you that upon Monday, the 13th of March, the first day of the last assizes here, Mr 
Cowper, one of the gentlemen at the bar, came to this town, and alighted at Mr 
Barefoot's house, and stayed there some time, I suppose to dry himself, the weather 
being dirty, but sent his horse to Mrs Stout's, the mother of this gentlewoman. Some 
time after he came thither himself and dined there, and stayed till four in the 
afternoon; and when he went away he told them he would come and lodge there that 
night, and sup. According to his word he came there, and had the supper he desired. 
After supper, Sarah Stout, the young gentlewoman, and he, sat together till near 
eleven o'clock. At eleven o'clock there were orders given to warm his bed, openly, in 
his hearing. The maid of the house, gentlemen, upon this, went upstairs to warm his 
bed, expecting the gentleman would have come up and followed her before she had 
done; but it seems, while she was warming the bed, she heard the door clap together; 
and that door is such that it makes a great noise at the clapping of it to, so that any 
person in the house may be sensible of another's going out. The maid, upon this, was 
concerned, and wondered at the meaning of it, as he promised to sleep there that 
night. She came down, but there was neither Mr Cowper nor Sarah Stout; so that we 
suppose they must have gone out together. After this the maid and mother came into 
the room, and, neither the young gentlewoman nor Mr Cowper returning, they sat up 
all night in the house, expecting the young gentlewoman would return. The next 
morning the first news of this lady was that she lay floating and swimming in the 
water by the mill dam. Upon that there were several persons called; for it was a 
wonder how this should come to pass. When her body came to be viewed, it was very 
much wondered at; for, in the first place, it is contrary to nature that any persons that 
drown themselves should float upon the water. We have sufficient evidence that it is a 
thing that never was. If persons go alive into the water, then they sink; if dead, then 
they float: that made some more curious to look into this matter. At first it was 
thought that such an accident might happen, though they could not imagine any cause 
for this woman to do so, who had so great prosperity, had so good an estate and had 
no occasion to do an action upon herself so wicked and so barbarous; nor can they 
learn she had any reason to induce her to such a thing. Upon viewing the body it did 
appear there had been violence used to the woman: there was a crease round her neck, 
and she was bruised about her ear, so that it seemed as if she had been strangled, 
either by hands or a rope. Gentlemen, upon the examination it was wondered how this 
matter came about; it was dark and obscure. The coroner at that time, nor these 
people, had no evidence given but the ordinary evidence, and it passed in a day.
	We must call our witnesses to this fact, that of necessity you must conclude 
she was strangled, and did not drown herself. If we give you as strong a proof as can 
be upon the nature of the fact that she was strangled, then the second matter under 
your inquiry will be to know who or what persons should be the men that did the fact. 
Truly, gentlemen, as to the persons at the bar, the evidence of the fact will be very 
short, and will be to this purpose. Mr Cowper was the last man, unfortunately, in her 
company; I could wish he had not been so with all my heart. Here happens to be three 
gentlemen, Mr Marson, Mr Rogers and Mr Stevens. As to these three men, my Lord, I 
do not hear of any business they had here, unless it was to do this matter to serve 
some interest or friend that sent them upon this message; for, my Lord, these persons, 
Mr Stevens, Mr Rogers and Mr Marson, came to town here on the 13th of March last, 
the assize day. My Lord, when they came to town they went to a house and took 
lodging at one Gurrey's, having hired a room with a large bed in it; and afterwards 
they went to the Glove and Dolphin, and then, about eight o'clock, one Marson came 
to them there. They stayed there, my Lord, from eight o'clock till eleven, as they say. 
At eleven these three gentlemen came all in to their lodging together at this Gurrey's. 
My Lord, when they came in, it was very remarkable, just as if there had been a sort 
of fate in it, for, my Lord, they called for fire, and the fire was made them; and while 
the people of the house were going about they observed and heard these gentlemen 
talk of Sarah Stout: that happened to be their discourse. One said to the other: 
"Marson, she was an old sweetheart of yours." "Aye," said he, "but she cast me off; 
but I reckon by this time a friend of mine has done her business." Another piece of 
discourse was: "I believe a friend of mine is even with her by this time." They had a 
bundle of linen with them, but what it was is not known; and one takes the bundle and 
throws it upon the bed "Well," said he, "her business is done. Mrs Sarah Stout's 
courting days are over"; and they sent for wine, my Lord. So, after they had drunk of 
the wine, they talked, and one pulled out a great deal of money. Said one to the other: 
"What money have you spent to-day?" Said the other: "Thou hast had forty or fifty 
pounds for thy share." Said the other: "I will spend all the money I have, for joy the 
business is done."
	My Lord, this discourse happened to be among them, which made people of 
the house consider and bethink themselves, when the next day they heard of Sarah 
Stout's being found in the river."
	After witnesses for the Crown had been called, Mr Cowper spoke in his own 
defence, saying: "It is utterly impossible I could be concerned in this fact, if I had had 
all the motives and provocations in the world to have done it. The maid, Sarah 
Walker, who is the single witness, I take it, that says anything in the least relating to 
me, said but now the clock had struck eleven before she carried up the coals, and 
about a quarter of an hour after, while she was warming the bed, she heard the door 
clap, and some time after she came down and found that I and her mistress were gone. 
Now, in point of time, I shall prove it utterly impossible I could be guilty of the fact I 
am accused of, being seen to come into the Glove Inn as the clock struck eleven, and 
staying there more than a quarter of an hour was, after several things done at my 
lodging, in bed before twelve o'clock, and went no more out that night, as I shall 
prove."
	After Mr Cowper the other prisoners entered upon their defence, which was 
that they did not murder Sarah Stout, and knew nothing whatever about her death. 
Medical witnesses were called, and several of the dead woman's friends testified to 
her being of a melancholy disposition. The jury, withdrawing for about half-an-hour, 
returned with their verdict that neither Mr Cowper nor any one of the other three 
prisoners was guilty; and thereupon they were all discharged.


TOM ROWLAND 
Who worked the Highway disguised as a Woman for Eighteen Years. 
Executed 24th of October, 1699

	TOM ROWLAND was born at Ware, in Hertfordshire, and by his parents was 
put an apprentice to a bricklayer; but after he had served his time, being then of a 
slothful, idle disposition, he kept such company as soon brought him to follow evil 
courses; and, to support his extravagancy in a most riotous way of living, he stole a 
horse out of the Duke of Beaufort's stables, at his seat at Badminton, in 
Gloucestershire; and then, going on the highway, committed several most notorious 
robberies, for above eighteen years; but he always robbed in women's apparel, which 
disguise was the means of his reigning so long in his villainy. Whenever he was 
pursued he then rode astride; but at last, being apprehended in this unlawful habit for 
robbing a person on Hounslow Heath of a quantity of bone-lace, to the value of 
twelve hundred pounds sterling, he was condemned for this fact, and found guilty also 
upon another indictment preferred against him for robbing another person, near 
Barnet, of eighty-four pounds, nine shillings. However, whilst he lay under sentence 
of death he was very refractory, and was so abominably wicked that the very morning 
on which he died, lying in the Press Yard, for he wanted for no money whilst under 
confinement, a common woman coming to visit him, he had the unparalleled 
audaciousness to act carnally with her, and gloried in the sin as he was going to 
execution, which was at Tyburn, on Friday, the 24th of October, 1699, aged forty 
years.


JOHN BELLINGHAM 
Son of a Justice, who took to the Highway, and was executed 27th of 
October, 1699, for Forgery

	JOHN BELLINGHAM, after having been concerned with one John Arthur in 
several highway robberies, was indicted at the Old Bailey, the 13th of October, 1699, 
upon two indictments for forgery. The first was for altering the endorsement of a bank 
note and taking out the name of Sir John Ellwell and putting in the name of Mr James 
Carr; but the evidence to this indictment being not sufficient to convict him, the jury 
acquitted him. The second indictment was for altering an Exchequer bill of five 
pounds, with a farthing a day interest, and making it a bill of forty pounds, with 
twopence a day interest for the same, and likewise altering the endorsement; and that 
he, after the 6th of August, 1699, knowing the same to be falsified, did offer the same 
in payment with an intent to cheat his Majesty's subjects.
	The first evidence deposed that, about the 18th or 19th of July last, he met Mr 
Bellingham in Lincoln's Inn Walks, who told him he had a business would do him a 
kindness; and that he had a bank bill, but it was not fairly come by; and that thereupon 
he (the witness) asked him whether it was one of Arthur's bills. To which Bellingham 
replied: "No"; and told him if he could get him some Exchequer bills, he had a friend 
could make a five-pound a ten-pound one, and he would have thirty shillings for his 
pains. With that they parted, and he communicated the matter to the trustees of the 
Exchequer and got a five-pound bill, and carried it to Bellingham, and they agreed 
together, and he was to have ten pounds for his share, which he afterwards received of 
Bellingham.
	Another evidence deposed that Bellingham's wife and one Mrs Easton came 
with the Exchequer bills, the first by the name of Hill, and the other by the name of 
Holmes, and bought as much linen as came to twenty pounds odd money, and offered 
the bill in payment which was made forty pounds; upon which he went out to advise 
with some acquaintance whether it was a good bill or no, who told him that it was a 
good bill; and then he held it up against the light, and could not see anything amiss in 
it, upon which he paid them the rest of the money, and they went away. However, 
being not thoroughly satisfied, he goes to the Exchequer, and there found it to be only 
a five-pound bill altered, the same bill that the first evidence produced to the prisoner; 
that upon this he got Bellingham apprehended, and he was carried before Secretary 
Vernon, and, being examined about it, after an hour's hesitation he asked if there was 
any mercy. To which it was replied it was not long since he had received mercy. 
Whereupon he freely confessed the fact, and said that nobody did it but himself. It 
likewise appeared that he was in the robbery with John Arthur and his brother, who 
some time before robbed the western mail, and were executed the 23rd of March 
before, and by that means he got the bank bill.
	The prisoner upon his trial objected against the first evidence, and would have 
the jury believe he had done it himself; and as for what he had confessed before 
Secretary Vernon, he said it was an old maxim in the law that what a prisoner should 
confess before a justice should not be given in evidence against him. But he was 
answered by the Court that, if there was such a maxim, it was so old it was forgotten. 
And they asked him if he could produce any such record. To which he answered, 
"No." The jury found him guilty, and he received sentence of death. On the morning 
of his execution, 27th of October, 1699, he declared that he was born in Surrey, son to 
Justice Bellingham, who kept a glasshouse at Vauxhall, by Lambeth; that he had a 
good education given him, but in his younger years hearkened to bad advice, and, 
having scarce attained to the age of thirteen years, joined with some persons who 
made it their practice to rob on the highway. He said he could not remember one half 
of the robberies that he had been concerned in, but that a great part of them were 
committed in company with Arthur, lately executed, as above-mentioned.
	He said, also, that after so many robberies justice at last overtook him, for 
committing a robbery on Bristow Causey, in Surrey. He and his gang killed the person 
they robbed — he being something obstinate, though he had no great purchase about 
him — for which he was apprehended and committed to the Marshalsea, and tried for 
the crime, and convicted the next Surrey Assizes. But after condemnation he made use 
of several stratagems to make his escape, and among the rest he, feigning himself 
sick, so deceived the keepers that, by means of the liberty they allowed him, he got 
away in woman's clothes.


WILLIAM MORELL 
A "Cavalier" Doctor and Fraudulent Impersonator, who continued his 
Cheats even after his Death in 1700

	WILLIAM MORELL was born at Banbury, in Oxfordshire, of very reputable 
parents, in 1650. He was put apprentice to a surgeon as soon as his father thought him 
fit for servitude. He went through the usual time, with abundance of satisfaction to his 
master and honour to himself, having acquired a knowledge beyond what is 
commonly found in young theorists. He understood anatomy very well, and would 
reason finely upon all the systems of the human economy. All this knowledge was 
afterwards confirmed and increased by practice when he came to set up at Banbury, 
on the death of his master, where he continued some time in very great reputation, 
which he really deserved both for his penetration and diligence. What put an end to 
his living here was his running beyond his income, though that was large, and 
exposing himself daily to vexatious suits and arrests, till at last he was obliged to 
leave the place and seek his fortune.
	The first means that presented itself to his thought was turning quack and 
travelling the country as a mountebank; for which profession he was the more fit as he 
was very capable of performing such manual operations as these impostors generally 
pretend to, and of letting the judicious see that he understood something, if the family 
should ever challenge him to a trial of skill, as it frequently happened. He was 
resolved, however, not to do any hurt with the medicines he sold, as a great many 
ignorant fellows do, who destroy the lives of others purely to maintain their own. To 
this end he made up a quantity of very innocent pills with a little fine flour and 
treacle, making use of the same powder to roll them in as other physicians do. These 
pills were a sovereign remedy for all internal distempers whatsoever. They were the 
only specific under the sun, and took up, as he said, a great deal of time, as well as 
expense, in preparing. For all green wounds, bruises and pains he had a plaster 
altogether as harmless, having no other quality than that of sticking to the skin, 
wheresoever it was placed. He had, moreover, a little spring water, tinctured with 
something that changed the colour without altering the property in the least, and this 
was to cure all the blind people in the kingdom. For agues, colds and such diseases as 
are most common among the country people he had plenty of amulets, which were to 
be disposed of to those who had most faith and least reason; for such people prefer 
remedies of this kind to those that operate in a natural way and give some rational 
ground for our expecting a good effect from them.
	Being thus prepared he set out, without any retinue at all, designing to be only 
a "cavalier" doctor, which was far less expensive than keeping a stage would be, and 
far more honourable than travelling on foot. He had still two or three good suits of 
clothes left, in all of which he appeared at several times in every place he came to. By 
his rhetoric he prevailed upon the poor ignorant country people, so that they bought 
up his remedies as fast as he could wish. It was not, however, to his interest to appear 
above two or three times in a place, which he was sensible of; and therefore he shifted 
his ground very often, living all the time in splendour, admired and even adored by his 
deluded patients. Besides what he professed to do by his medicines already named he 
also had a great deal of practice in surgery, in which he was really expert, as has been 
before noted, and this served to raise his character upon other accounts, as his 
operations were skilful and worthy of the best surgeons.
	Being in the north of England, and having quacked it from town to town as 
long as he could with safety, he had a mighty inclination to come up to London, but 
had not at that time money enough to pay the expense of such a journey, nor even to 
discharge his lodging where he now resided. How to get out of this scrape he could 
not for some days tell; for it was impossible to come at his horse without money, 
unless he broke open the stable, which was a remedy worse than the disease. What did 
he do at last but take several sheets of clean paper, folded them up, and sealed them 
very carefully in the form of letters, directing one to my Lord Middleton, another to 
another nobleman, and so on to all the officers of King James's Court at St Germains. 
Everyone knows that in the reign of King William it was high treason to hold any 
correspondence with the abdicated monarch, and consequently with any in trust under 
him. These blank letters, if I may so call them, he laid carefully on one corner of a 
table in the room where he lay, and went out, as about business,
	While he was gone, the maid went, according to custom, to make his bed, and 
being able to read writing she had the curiosity to look on our gentleman's letters, 
when she was surprised to see so many great names upon the outside of them. 
Downstairs she runs as soon as ever she had done her work and tells her master what 
great men the doctor was acquainted with. Our host was like his servant, and, indeed, 
like all of the same profession — very inquisitive. He was, moreover, pretty well 
acquainted with the national affairs of that time, by reading the news and hearing the 
conversation of gentlemen; all which Morell had before noted, and concluded from it 
that the consequence of what he had done would be as he desired it.
	The landlord goes up as fast as he could and takes hold of the papers; but what 
a consternation was he in when he beheld to whom they were directed! Treason with- 
out dispute! "Oh, Mr Doctor, we see now what you are; you don't travel to heal the 
bodies of people only, but to corrupt their minds and converse with the enemies of the 
nation. These shall all be opened, my boy, and I warrant I shall lose nothing by 
making such a discovery. My Lord Middleton and my Lord Middleton's master may 
wait long enough before they have any news from you. 'Tis like indeed that they may 
hear of you soon, when you are drawn in state up Holborn Hill on a sledge."
	The next thing was to apply to the chief magistrate of the city (for it was at 
Carlisle) for a warrant to secure the person of William Morell as a dangerous man to 
the State. This, to be sure, was readily granted, and a messenger sent to the Secretary 
of State with an account of the whole affair, who immediately dispatched a proper 
officer, with orders to bring up both prisoner and papers to town, that they might be 
examined in form.
	Now had Morell all he desired — the allowance of a State prisoner and a safe 
conduct up to town; where he was kept on his arrival at the house of a Messenger of 
State till next day, when he was carried to the Secretary's office. The secretaries were 
as much surprised at the inside of the letters as our landlord had been at the outside, 
when they saw nothing there but blank paper. All the ways they could think of to 
make the writing appear were made use of, for they imagined he had found out some 
art to conceal his business if the letters should happen to be intercepted. At last, when 
everything else was found in vain a free pardon was offered him upon condition that 
he should discover all the secrets of his correspondence, and tell the persons who were 
concerned in it here in England, that they might be apprehended.
	To make short of the story, he now frankly confessed the whole truth, begging 
pardon of their honours for giving them so much trouble, and professing he was as 
loyal a subject of King William as anyone in the three kingdoms: adding, that he had 
been reduced to extreme necessity and could think of no other way of coming up to 
London. Those who examined him could see no reason for disbelieving what he said; 
and therefore, though they were a little offended that such an insignificant fellow 
should make free with men in their high station, yet, as there appeared something so 
masterly in the invention and execution of this piece of policy, they could not help 
forgiving him, and laughing at the affair among themselves, while they dismissed him 
with an air of severity and abundance of threatenings, which they were to execute if 
ever he did such a thing again. But Morell knew as well as they could tell him that 
once was enough to play such a trick as this upon secretaries of State.
	This man was as great a gallant as anyone we have ever heard of, for his story 
informs us that he had no less than six wives living at one time in different parts of the 
kingdom, it being customary with him to marry for the sake of enjoying his desires 
when he could prevail upon the woman he had a fancy to no other way.
	There was scarce a character to be thought of in which Morell did not at one 
time or other appear, and always with success; sometimes he was a fortune-teller and 
astrologer, sometimes a decayed gentleman, sometimes a clergyman, and sometimes a 
foreigner who left his own country for the sake of religion. There was no shape, no 
pretence that might move pity but he put on, and never failed of gaining belief. Not a 
few times he was a man of great fortune, and made love to the richest young ladies he 
could hear of, having his servants at his heels, like our modern Irish fortune hunters, 
there being always men wicked enough to assist in such enterprises, with a view to 
sharing in the booty. Two or three virtuous women he married and ruined by these 
means, besides making a great many cuckolds, and winning abundance to his desires 
who never submitted to the common ceremony, most of whom he wheedled out of a 
pretty deal of money and afterwards blasted their characters, taking care to let their 
husbands know their foibles, if they were married, or, if they were single, to send an 
account of his success to their friends or sweethearts, if they had any. He continued 
these practices so long in every part of the country that it was become dangerous for 
him to continue them any longer. Several gentlemen made inquiry after him, in order 
to have him punished for personating them in places where they had interest and were 
not personally known, by which means he imposed upon abundance of tradesmen and 
cheated them of their goods. In short, he had no hopes left of hiding himself anywhere 
but in London. Being in town, and having got such information as was necessary for 
his proceeding, he applied himself for lodging to a rich baker in the Strand, telling 
him that his name was Humphry Wickham, Esq., of —.
	The baker knew the family of the Wickhams very well, being their 
countryman, though he was not acquainted with the gentleman who at present enjoyed 
the estate, as he had not been in the country for a great many years. However he made 
no scruple of entertaining our sham esquire. Nay, he was so far from it that he 
caressed him, and returned him a thousand thanks for doing him so much honour as to 
reside at his house. Morell told him that he had a private affair in town, which would 
detain him for some time, and that he came in such an obscure manner because he was 
not willing to be known; his own family, all but his steward and the man who waited 
on him, being ignorant of the place of his residence. He added that when the business 
was over he would inform him of the particulars, and take him down to his country 
seat with him for a month or two. Several days passed, and still our baker was 
satisfied, never mentioning a word to any of his friends concerning Mr Wickham, lest 
he should injure him in the business of which he spoke. A fellow in a livery came 
every morning, cap in hand, to receive his worship's commands, and was very diligent 
in dispatching everything he set him about. After about a week our good-natured host 
heard Mr Wickham talk aloud to his man about the steward's neglect in not sending 
up the linen and money which he had written for. Proud to make a merit of this 
carelessness of the servant, he took the first opportunity to tell his worship in a very 
submissive manner what he had overheard, desiring him to make use of what he had 
till his own box came, and complaining that he did not honour him so far as to let him 
know his necessity. Our pretended esquire protested he was ashamed to abuse his 
generosity. However, as he had understood how things were, he would accept of his 
love. Upon this the baker in a minute fetches down half-a-dozen of his best holland 
shirts, one of which Mr Wickham put on, and prevailed on his worship further to 
accept of fifty guineas till his money arrived.
	The next day after this Morell fell sick, and now is the time that we are to see 
him play such a farce as was never before heard of. As soon as his illness was known, 
a doctor was sent for, who found him in a high fever, and wrote a prescription to the 
apothecary, in conjunction with whom he waited on him every day afterwards. The 
baker asked him if he should write into the country, but Mr Wickham said no, for he 
had never a wife, and servants would but disturb him, so that he had rather they 
should know nothing of the matter till he saw how it was like to go with him. The 
fever began to increase, and after a few days his life was thought in danger. The 
doctor told him his sentiments freely, and he desired Mr Baker to send for an attorney 
to make his will, which was accordingly done, and the writing lodged in the hands of 
our landlord, whom he enjoined to open it as soon as he was dead, which was no 
longer than the next day. Now the neighbours are sent for and the will is unsealed. 
The baker is constituted one of the executors; a considerable estate is given him, 
besides abundance of plate, linen and jewels to his wife, and large legacies to all his 
children; several sums are allotted to charitable uses; all the servants are rewarded 
according to their places and merit. He is to be interred in town, and the whole 
management of the funeral is left to the care of his good friend the baker, who is over 
and over again mentioned with a good deal of respect. To complete all, the lawyer is 
named who has all the writings of his estates, and who is to produce the several sums 
of money at the time specified.
	The baker knew the lawyer whom he mentioned, and was certain that he used 
to do business for the family. He did not, however, go to him directly, as he had 
money in the house to defray necessary expenses, and as he was willing to show as 
much respect as possible to the deceased. His house is hung with mourning, a leaden 
coffin is made, the body is embowelled, and laid in state. The best of cloth and silk is 
bought for himself and family, besides rings and other particulars. An undertaker is 
agreed with, and in short everything is got ready for solemnising the obsequies on 
such a day, till when wax tapers are continually burning in the room where the corpse 
lies.
	The day before the interment was to be, our baker goes to the lawyer and 
invites him, telling him the particulars of Mr Wickham's will, and desiring he would 
let him have some money in a few days to pay such things as were not paid, because 
he had exhausted all his cash. The lawyer was startled to hear him talk of Mr 
Wickham's death, he having received a letter from him but the day before on some 
special business. It was a pretty while before they could come to a right 
understanding. At last all was found to be an imposture, and confirmed by a letter 
from the fellow who had waited upon Morell, and who was willing to make some 
merit of discovering a cheat which he could no longer carry on. The body was now 
stripped of all its finery and thrown with little ceremony into a common grave in St 
Clement's Churchyard.
	This was the end of Morell, in the year 1700. An account of the affair was 
soon sent to the real Mr Wickham, who, being a man of honour and generosity, made 
up the baker's loss, telling him that though he had been thus imposed on, he looked on 
the deed as though it really had been done to himself. The undertaker and all who had 
furnished anything towards the funeral considered the case, and took their goods again 
as they were.


JOHN LARKIN 
Who committed so many Forgeries and Cheats that he had not Time to 
confess them all before he died, on 19th of April, 1700

JOHN LARKIN was born at Antrim, in Ireland, of very creditable parents, who, 
observing that their son possessed a very considerable share of genius, took some 
pains to cultivate it by a liberal education.
	When he had been some years at school, and obtained a competent knowledge 
of several arts and sciences, he was entered as a student in the University of Glasgow, 
in Scotland, where he went through his studies with applause, and then, returning to 
Ireland, commenced as schoolmaster, in which station he behaved himself so well that 
he met with the greatest success; but being of an unsettled disposition he left his 
school, and taking upon him the gown visited the remotest parts of the kingdom and 
officiated in several places as a clergyman.
	After some time he came to England, and was made master of a free school in 
Lancashire, where he had about a hundred scholars under his care; but he was so bad 
an economist that he could by no means live within the bounds of his income, and was 
therefore frequently contriving some new methods by which he might support his 
extravagance. At length he came to a resolution to forge bonds and other papers, in 
which pernicious practices he became so great a proficient that he said he could forge 
almost any hand so artfully that it would be difficult for a person to know his own 
handwriting from the forgery. He acknowledged that he had frequently affixed the 
hand of a bishop and several other eminent divines to letters-testimonial, by which he 
had collected considerable sums of money, under pretence of redeeming poor 
Christian captives who were in slavery.
	He used also to forge goldsmiths' notes and bills of exchange, and continued 
these practices for a considerable time, but being at length detected he was pilloried, 
and committed to prison till such time as he should discharge a fine which was 
imposed on him, and which was so large that he had little or no hopes of regaining his 
liberty. While he remained in prison some persons, who were afterwards evidences 
against him at his trial, used to coin money, and endeavoured to prevail upon him to 
assist them; but he declared that he constantly refused to do it, that he never shared 
any money with them, and had no further concern than merely as a spectator. But as 
the contrary to this had been so positively sworn, the ordinary of Newgate suspected 
his sincerity, and urged him to make an ingenuous confession. To which he replied 
that he knew his duty extremely well, though he had acted contrary to it; but if it 
should be his fate to die, he would, at the place of execution, discover something 
which might be a warning to several persons who had been concerned in the like 
wicked practices with himself.
	At the place of execution he informed the ordinary that being confined in 
Newgate with one Charles Newey, who was convicted of felony, and had been fined 
and pilloried for suborning an evidence to swear falsely, he was prevailed upon by 
Newey, in consideration of a sum of money, to write a scurrilous libel, called The 
Case of Captain Charles Newey, containing very notorious falsehoods and scandalous 
reflections on the Lord Chief Baron, the Recorder, and other judges who tried the said 
Newey; for which he now sincerely begged pardon of those gentlemen.
	He took a decent leave of the spectators, and having returned thanks to the 
ordinary for his charitable visits to him while under condemnation, he delivered him a 
paper in which he said that though he was not guilty of the crime of coining (for 
which he died), yet that he had committed so many forgeries, cheats, etc., that it was 
almost impossible to recount them. He thought it his duty to make all the reparation in 
his power, by leaving the world a true narrative of all his irregular proceedings, but 
not having sufficient time to complete such a work, he mentioned only certain 
circumstances, which included a pretended plot, supposed to have been carried on by 
the Earls of Marlborough (whose hand he counterfeited with so much dexterity that it 
was very difficult to discern the true from the false) and Salisbury, the Bishop of 
Rochester, and several others. This malefactor was executed at Tyburn, on the 19th of 
April, 1700.


MICHAEL VAN BERGHEN, CATHERINE VAN 
BERGHEN AND DROMELIUS, THEIR SERVANT, 
PUBLICANS 
Executed 10th of July, 1700, for the Murder of their Guest, Mr Oliver Norris

	THESE criminals were natives of Holland, who, having settled in England, 
kept a public-house in East Smithfield in 1700, and where Geraldius Dromelius acted 
as their servant. Mr Oliver Norris was a country gentleman who lodged at an inn near 
Aldgate, and who went into the house of Van Berghen about eight o'clock in the 
evening, and continued to drink there till about eleven. Finding himself rather 
intoxicated, he desired the maidservant to call a coach to carry him home. As she was 
going to do so her mistress whispered to her, and bade her return in a little time and 
say that a coach was not to be procured. These directions being observed, Norris, on 
the maid's return, resolved to go without a coach, and accordingly took his leave of 
the family; but he had not gone far before he discovered that he had been robbed of a 
purse containing a sum of money; whereupon he returned and charged Van Berghen 
and his wife with having been guilty of the robbery. This they positively denied, and 
threatened to turn him out of the house; but he refused to go, and resolutely went into 
a room where the cloth was laid for supper. At this time Dromelius entered the room, 
and threatening Mr Norris in a cavalier manner, the latter resented the insult, and at 
length a quarrel ensued. At this juncture, Van Berghen seized a poker, with which he 
fractured Mr Norris's skull, and in the meantime Dromelius stabbed him in different 
parts of the body, Mrs Van Berghen being present during the perpetration of the 
horrid act. When Mr Norris was dead they stripped him of his coat, waistcoat, hat, 
wig, etc., and then Van Berghen and Dromelius carried the body and threw it into a 
ditch which communicated with the Thames; and in the meantime Mrs Van Berghen 
washed the blood of the deceased from the floor of the room. The clothes which had 
been stripped from the deceased were put up in a hamper and committed to the care of 
Dromelius, who took a boat and carried them over to Rotherhithe, where he employed 
the waterman to carry the hamper to lodgings which he had taken, and in which he 
proposed to remain until he could find a favourable opportunity of embarking for 
Holland. The next morning, at low water, the body of a man was found, and several of 
the neighbours went to take a view of it, and endeavoured to try if they could trace 
any blood to the place where the murder might have been committed; but not 
succeeding in this, some of them who were up at a very early hour recollected that 
they had seen Van Berghen and Dromelius coming almost from the spot where the 
body was found, and remarked that a light had been carried backwards and forwards 
in Van Berghen's house. Upon this the house was searched; but no discovery was 
made, except that a little blood was found behind the door of a room which appeared 
to have been lately mopped. Inquiry was made after Dromelius, but Van Berghen and 
his wife would give no other account than that he had left their service. On which they 
were taken into custody, with the servant-maid, who was the principal evidence 
against them. At this time the waterman who had carried Dromelius to Rotherhithe, 
and who knew him very well, appeared, and he was likewise taken into custody. The 
prisoners were tried by a jury of half Englishmen and half foreigners, to 
circumstances above mentioned appeared so striking that they did not hesitate to find 
the prisoners guilty, and accordingly they received sentence of death. They were 
executed near the Hartshorn brewhouse, East Smithfield, being the nearest convenient 
spot to the place where the murder was committed, on the 10th of July, in the year 
1700. The bodies of the men were hung in chains between Bow and Mile End, but the 
woman was buried.


GEORGE CADDELL 
Executed for the Cruel Murder of Miss Price, Whom he had Seduced and 
Promised Marriage

  
Caddell murdering Miss Price

	George Caddell was a native of the town of Broomsgrove, in Worcestershire, 
where he was articled to an apothecary, with whom he served his time, and then 
repaired to London, where he attended several of the hospitals to obtain an insight into 
the art of surgery. As soon as he became tolerably acquainted with the profession he 
went to Worcester, and lived with Mr. Randall, a capital surgeon of that city: in this 
situation he was equally admired for the depth of his abilities and amiableness of his 
temper. Here he married the daughter of Mr. Randall, who died in labour of her first 
child.
	After this melancholy event he went to reside at Litchfield, and continued 
upwards of two years with Mr. Dean, a surgeon of that place. During his residence 
here, he courted Mr. Dean's daughter, to whom he would probably have been married 
but for the commission of the following crime, which cost him his life:
	A young lady, named Elizabeth Price, who had been seduced by an officer in 
the army, lived near Mr. Caddell's place of residence, and, after her misfortune, 
supported herself by her skill in needle-work. Caddell becoming acquainted with her, 
a considerable degree of intimacy subsisted between them; and Miss Price, degraded 
as she was by the unfortunate step she had taken, still thought herself an equal match 
for one of Mr. Caddell's rank of life.
	As pregnancy was shortly the consequence of their intimacy, she repeatedly 
urged him to marry her, but Mr. Caddell resisted her importunities for a considerable 
time: at last Miss Price heard of his paying his addresses to Miss Dean; she then 
became more importunate than ever, and threatened, in case of his non-compliance, to 
put an end to all his prospects with that young lady, by discovering every thing that 
had passed between them. Hereupon Caddell formed the horrible resolution of 
murdering Miss Price; for he could neither bear the thought of forfeiting the esteem of 
a woman that he courted, nor of marrying her who had been as condescending to 
another as to himself.
	This dreadful scheme having entered his head, he called on Miss Price on a 
Saturday evening, and requested that she would walk in the fields with him on the 
afternoon of the following day, in order to adjust the plan of their intended marriage. 
Miss Price, thus deluded, met him at the time appointed, on the road leading towards 
Burton-upon-Trent, at a house known by the sign of the Nag's Head. Having 
accompanied her supposed lover into the fields, and walked about till towards 
evening, they then sat down under the hedge, where, after a little conversation, 
Caddell suddenly pulled out a knife, cut her throat, and made his escape. In the 
distraction of his mind, he left behind him the knife with which he had perpetrated the 
deed, together with his case of instruments.
	When he came home it was observed that he appeared exceedingly confused, 
though the reason of the perturbation of his mind could not even be guessed at. But, 
on the following morning, Miss Price being found murdered in the field, great 
numbers of people went to take a view of the body, among whom was the woman of 
the house where she lodged, who recollected that she had said she was going to walk 
with Mr. Caddell; on which the instruments were examined, and known to have 
belonged to him. He was accordingly taken into custody, and committed to the gaol of 
Stafford; and, being soon afterwards tried, was found guilty, condemned, and 
executed at Stafford on the 21st of July, 1700.
	We have no particular account of the behaviour of this malefactor while under 
sentence of death, or at the place of execution; yet his fate will afford an instructive 
lesson to youth. Let no young man, who has connexions of any kind with one woman, 
think of paying his addresses to another. There can be no such thing as honourable 
courtship while dishonourable love subsists. Mr. Caddell might have lived a credit to 
himself, and an ornament to his profession, if he had not held a criminal connexion 
with Miss Price. Her fate ought to impress on the mind of our female readers the 
importance of modest reserve to a woman. We would not be severe on the failings of 
the sex; but we cannot help observing, that a woman who has fallen a sacrifice to the 
arts of one man should be very cautious in yielding to the addresses of another. One 
false step may be recovered; but the progress of vice is a downhill road; and the 
farther we depart from the paths of virtue, still the faster we run. On the contrary, the 
ways of Virtue are pleasant; and "all her paths are paths of peace." From this story 
likewise the young officers of our army may learn an useful lesson: for, if Miss Price 
had not been debauched by one of that profession, the fatal catastrophe above-
mentioned had never happened.


JOHN HOLLIDAY OR SIMPSON 
Housebreaker and Highwayman, who robbed a King at Hertford, and a 
Church, and was hanged at Tyburn in 1700

	THIS man, whose career of villainy in England was not long, had committed a 
variety of depredations in Flanders, where he served as a soldier under King William 
III. On the Peace of Ryswick he received his discharge, and with several of his 
confederates in acts of villainy repaired to London, where they formed themselves 
into a gang of robbers, of which Holliday, under the name of Simpson, was appointed 
their captain. They were alternately highwaymen and housebreakers.
	In the year 1700 Holliday was indicted in the name of Simpson for a burglary 
in the house of Elizabeth Gawden, of stealing thereout two feather beds and other 
articles; to which he pleaded guilty, and was, for that offence, hanged at Tyburn.
	While under sentence of death he said that his name was not Simpson, but 
Holliday, and that during a great part of the war in the reign of King William he was a 
soldier in Flanders, where he used to take frequent opportunities of robbing the tents 
of the officers; and once, when the army lay before Mons, and his Majesty 
commanded in person, Simpson happened to be one of those who were selected to 
guard the Royal tent. On an evening when the King, accompanied by the Earl 
(afterwards Duke) of Marlborough and Lord Cutts, went out to take a view of the 
situation of the army, Simpson, with a degree of impudence peculiar to himself, went 
into his Majesty's tent and stole about a thousand pounds. It was some days before this 
money was missed, and when the robbery was discovered, Simpson escaped all 
suspicion. He said he had committed more robberies than he could possibly recollect, 
having been a highwayman as well as a housebreaker.
	He committed numerous robberies in Flanders as well as in England, and he 
affirmed that the gates of the city of Ghent had been twice shut up within a fortnight 
to prevent his escape; and that when he was taken, his arms, legs, back and neck were 
secured with irons; in which condition he was carried through the streets, that he 
might be seen by the crowd.
	Simpson and two of his companions used frequently to stop and rob the 
Roman Catholics at five o'clock in the morning as they were going to Mass; he 
repeatedly broke into the churches of Brussels, Mechlin and Antwerp, and stole the 
silver plate from the altar.
	This offender further acknowledged that, having killed one of his companions 
in a quarrel, he was apprehended, tried and condemned for the fact by a court martial 
of officers, and sentenced to be executed on the following day, in sight of the army, 
which was to be drawn up to see the execution. During the night, however, he found 
means to escape, and took refuge in the Church of St Peter, in Ghent, where the army 
then lay. Being thus in a place of sanctuary, he applied to the priests, who made 
interest with Prince Eugene; and their joint intercession with King William, who 
arrived in the city about four days afterwards, obtained his full pardon, and he was 
permitted immediately to join the army.
	A few days after he had obtained his pardon he broke into the church and 
robbed it of plate to the value of twelve hundred pounds; which he was the better 
enabled to do as he was acquainted with the avenues of the church and knew where 
the plate was deposited. He was apprehended on suspicion of this sacrilege; for as a 
crime of this kind is seldom committed by the natives of the country it was 
conjectured that it must have been perpetrated by some one at least of the soldiers. 
And information being given that two Jews had embarked in a boat on the Scheldt for 
Middleburg, on the day succeeding the robbery, and that Simpson had been seen in 
company with these Jews, this occasioned his being taken into custody. But as no 
proof arose that he had sold any plate to these men, it was thought necessary to 
dismiss him.


GEORGE GRIFFITHS 
Who courted his Master's Daughter and then robbed him. Hanged at Tyburn 
on 1st of August, 1700 .

	THIS young man received the education of a gentleman, was articled as clerk 
to an attorney of high repute, and enjoyed the utmost latitude of confidence in his 
master: but which a course of dissipation destroyed, and finally brought him to an 
untimely fate. His misfortunes may prove a lesson to young gentlemen intended for 
the learned professions, while the danger into which a young lady, his master's 
daughter, had through him nearly fallen into, will, we trust, be a caution to females 
against engaging their affections without the sanction of their parents.
	He was born at Thetford, in the county of Norfolk, and was the son of an 
eminent apothecary of that town. On the expiration of the term of his clerkship he was 
retained by his master, on a handsome salary, to manage his business, and he 
discharged his duty for a considerable time with great regularity; but unhappily, 
becoming acquainted with some young lawyers who possessed more money than 
discretion, he soon spent the little fortune which his father had bequeathed to him, and 
also became indebted to several of his master's employers.
	During a great part of Griffiths's servitude the only daughter of his employer 
had been at a boarding-school at Windsor for the advantage of education; and now 
returning home, her father, who was uncommonly tender of her, requested that she 
would take his domestic affairs under her own management.
	This old gentleman being frequently from home, the business of the office was 
committed to the care of Mr Griffiths; and an intimacy soon ensued between him and 
the young lady, in whose company he spent all those evenings in which he had not 
particular engagements with his old associates. The consequence was that their 
acquaintance ripened into esteem; their esteem into love. The reciprocal declaration 
soon took place, and the young lady considered Mr Griffiths as the man who was to 
be her future husband. Some short time after this attachment Griffiths was under the 
necessity of attending his master on the Norfolk Circuit, and while he was in the 
country he held a constant correspondence with the young lady; but the father was 
totally unacquainted with all that had passed, and had not formed the least idea that 
his daughter had any kind of connection with his clerk. But at length the circumstance 
of the affair transpired in the following manner.
	The daughter having gone to Windsor for a few days, on a visit to her former 
acquaintance, continued to correspond with Mr Griffiths. On a particular day, when 
Griffiths was not at home, it happened that a letter was brought to the office, directed 
to this unfortunate man; when one of the clerks, imagining that it might be of 
consequence, carried it to the master, at an adjacent coffee-house. It is impossible that 
any language could express the surprise of the old gentleman when he saw the name 
of his daughter subscribed to a letter in which she acknowledged herself as the future 
wife of the clerk.
	The father knew that Griffiths had no fortune, but he soon found that he had 
been master of sufficient art to prevail on the daughter to believe that he was 
possessed of considerable property. Hereupon he represented to his daughter the great 
impropriety of her conduct; in answer to which she said that Mr Griffiths was a man 
of fortune, though he had hitherto carefully concealed this circumstance from her 
father. However, it was not long before a discovery was made which presented Mr 
Griffiths's situation in a light equally new and contemptible.
	His master, for a considerable time past, had acted as the solicitor in a capital 
cause depending in Chancery; but the determination respecting it had been put off on 
account of Lord Somers being removed from the office of Chancellor and the Great 
Seal given in commission to Sir Nathan Wright. The solicitor had received immense 
sums while the cause was depending, which he had committed to the care of his clerk; 
but the latter, pressed for cash to supply his extravagance, purloined some of this 
money. At length the cause was determined, and Griffiths was called upon to account 
to his master for the money in his hands.
	Alarmed at this sudden demand, he knew not what course to take. He came to 
the resolution of breaking open his master's bureau, which he did while the family 
were asleep, and stole a considerable sum of money. At this time the old gentleman 
and his daughter went to Tunbridge; and during their residence at that place of 
amusement Griffiths procured a key that would unlock his master's bureau, from 
whence again he took money to a considerable amount. On the master's return he 
missed this sum, but still he did not suspect Griffiths, as the drawer was found locked; 
but hereupon he deposited his jewels in the bureau, and locked up his money in 
another place.
	The amour betwixt Griffiths and the young lady still continued, and they 
would soon have been married at the Fleet, but that a fatal circumstance now arose, 
which (happily for her) brought their connection to a period. Griffiths being (as 
already observed) possessed of a key that would open his master's bureau, and 
disposed to go out and spend a cheerful evening with his old associates, now, during 
their absence, opened the drawer, but was greatly disappointed in not meeting with the 
money that was usually left there: finding, however, jewels in its stead, he stole a 
diamond ring, which he carried to a jeweller and sold for twelve pounds, and then 
went to spend his evening as he had intended. The old lawyer came home about ten 
o'clock at night, and casually looking into his drawer found the ring was gone; and, 
being enraged at this renewed robbery, he had every person in the house carefully 
searched, but no discovery was made.
	Griffiths did not return until a late hour, and on the following day his employer 
told him what had happened, and requested that he would go to the several jeweller's 
shops, and make enquiry for the lost ring. Griffiths pretended obedience, and when he 
returned, acquainted his master that all his enquiries respecting it had been ineffectual.
	However, a discovery of the party who had been guilty of the robbery was 
made in the following singular manner. The jeweller who had bought the ring 
frequented the same coffee-house with the gentleman who had lost it, and was 
intimately acquainted with him, though he knew nothing of Griffiths. Now the 
jeweller, having carefully examined the ring after he had bought it, concluded that it 
had been obtained in an illegal manner, and, being a man who was much above the 
idea of having his integrity suspected, he related the particulars of his purchase at the 
coffee-house, which the person who had lost the ring hearing, desired to have a sight 
of it; and on the first inspection knew it to be that which he had lost.
	The person of Griffiths was now so exactly described by the jeweller that there 
could be little doubt but that he was the thief; wherefore he was desired to go to the 
chambers with a constable, and take him into custody. He was carried before a Justice 
of the Peace and accused of the crime, which he immediately confessed, and likewise 
that he had robbed his master of money.
	Griffiths was committed to Newgate, and being arraigned at the next sessions 
at the Old Bailey he pleaded guilty to the indictment, and sentence of death was 
passed on him accordingly.
	As in his situation it was natural to suppose that he would attempt to 
correspond with the young lady to whom he had aspired as a wife, a proper person 
was employed by her father to intercept her letters, a service that was performed with 
such care, that not one reached her hands, though a considerable number were written.
	When Mr Griffiths found that he had nothing to hope from the intervention of 
the royal mercy, and consequently that all the views with which he had flattered 
himself in wedlock were vanished, he began seriously to prepare himself for that state 
in which persons "neither marry, nor are given in marriage," he very justly attributed 
his misfortunes to the associating with persons who were his superiors in point of 
circumstances, and the making of an appearance which he was unable to support, in 
order to secure the object of his wishes. He died a penitent, at Tyburn, the 1st of 
August, 1700.


THE REV. THOMAS HUNTER, M.A. 
Executed on 22nd of August, 1700, near Edinburgh, for the diabolical 
Murder out of Revenge of the Two Children of Mr Gordon

  
Hunter murdering the children

	It is with deep regret that we are compelled to bring before the reader a 
murderer, in a character which ever should be held most sacred. A crime more 
premeditated, and more fraught with cruelty, never stained the annals of history. 
Ambition has often impelled tyrants to shed innocent blood; revenge has stimulated 
men to kill each other; jealousy with 'jaundiced eye' destroys the object of its love; but 
God forbid that we should ever again have to record the fact of a tutor, a minister of 
the Gospel, premeditatedly murdering his pupils! — the sons of his benefactor. When 
we add, that this most miserable sinner expiated his offence in avowing himself an 
atheist, we arrive, at once, at the very depth of human depravity. This detestable 
culprit was born in the county of Fife, in Scotland, and was the son of a rich farmer, 
who sent him to the University of St Andrews for education. When he had acquired a 
sufficient share of classical learning he was admitted to the degree of Master of Arts, 
and began to prosecute his studies in divinity with no small degree of success. Several 
of the younger clergymen act as tutors to wealthy and distinguished families till a 
proper period arrives for their entering into orders, which they never do till they 
obtain a benefice. While in this rank of life they bear the name of chaplains; and in 
this station Hunter lived about two years in the house of Mr Gordon, a very eminent 
merchant, and one of the bailies of Edinburgh, which is a rank equal to that of 
alderman of London. Mr Gordon's family consisted of himself, his lady, two sons and 
a daughter, a young woman who attended Mrs Gordon and her daughter, the 
malefactor in question, some clerks and menial servants. To the care of Hunter was 
committed the education of the two sons; and for a considerable time he discharged 
his duty in a manner highly satisfactory to the parents, who considered him as a youth 
of superior genius and great goodness of heart. Unfortunately a connection took place 
between Hunter and the young woman, which soon increased to a criminal degree, 
and was maintained for a considerable time without the knowledge of the family. One 
day, however, when Mr and Mrs Gordon were on a visit, Hunter and his girl met in 
their chamber as usual; but, having been so incautious as not to make their door fast, 
the children went into the room and found them in such a situation as could not admit 
of any doubt of the nature of their intercourse. No suspicion was entertained that these 
children would mention to their parents what had happened, the eldest boy being not 
quite ten years of age; but when the children were at supper with their parents they 
disclosed so much as left no room to doubt of what had passed. Hereupon the female 
servant was directed to quit the house on the following day; but Hunter was continued 
in the family, after making a proper apology for the crime of which he had been 
guilty, attributing it to the thoughtlessness of youth, and promising never to offend in 
the same way again. From this period he entertained the most inveterate hatred to all 
the children, on whom he determined in his own mind to wreak the most diabolical 
vengeance. Nothing less than murder was his intention; but it was a considerable time 
after he had formed this horrid plan before he had an opportunity of carrying it into 
execution. Whenever it was a fine day he was accustomed to walk in the fields with 
his pupils for an hour before dinner, and in these excursions the young lady generally 
attended her brothers. At the period immediately preceding the commission of the 
fatal act Mr Gordon and his family were at their country retreat, very near Edinburgh; 
and having received an invitation to dine in that city, he and his lady proposed to go 
thither about the time that Hunter usually took his noontide walk with the children. 
Mrs Gordon was very anxious for all the children to accompany them on this visit, but 
this was strenuously opposed by her husband, who would consent that only the little 
girl should attend them. By this circumstance Hunter's intention of murdering all the 
three children was frustrated; but he held the resolution of destroying the boys while 
they were yet in his power. With this view he took them into the fields and sat down 
as if to repose himself on the grass. This event took place soon after the middle of the 
month of August, 1700 and Hunter was preparing his knife to put a period to the lives 
of the children at the very moment they were busied in catching butterflies and 
gathering wild flowers. Having sharpened his knife, he called the lads to him, and 
when he had reprimanded them for acquainting their father and mother to the scene to 
which they had been witnesses, said that he would immediately put them to death. 
Terrified by this threat, the children ran from him; but he immediately followed and 
brought them back. He then placed his knee on the body of the one while he cut the 
throat of the other with his penknife, and then treated the second in the same inhuman 
manner that he had done the first. These horrid murders were committed within half-
a-mile of the Castle of Edinburgh; and as the deed was perpetrated in the middle of 
the day, and in the open fields, it would have been very wonderful indeed if the 
murderer had not been immediately taken into custody. At the very time a gentleman 
was walking on the Castle hill of Edinburgh, who had a tolerably perfect view of what 
passed. Alarmed by the incident, he called some people, who ran with him to the 
place where the children were lying dead. Hunter now had advanced towards a river, 
with a view to drown himself. Those who pursued came up with him just as he 
reached the brink of the river; and his person being immediately known to them, a 
messenger was instantly dispatched to Mr and Mrs Gordon, who were at that moment 
going to dinner with their friend, to inform them of the horrid murder of their sons. 
Language is too weak to describe the effects resulting from the communication of this 
dreadful news; the astonishment of the afflicted father, the agony of the frantic 
mother, may possibly be conceived, though it cannot be painted. According to an old 
Scottish law it was decreed that "if a murderer should be taken with the blood of the 
murdered person on his clothes, he should be prosecuted in the Sheriff's Court, and 
executed within three days after the commission of the fact." It was not common to 
execute this sentence with rigour; but this offender's crime was of so aggravated a 
nature, that it was not thought proper to remit anything of the utmost severity of the 
law. The prisoner was therefore committed to jail and chained down to the floor all 
night, and on the following day the sheriff issued his precept for the jury to meet; and 
in consequence of their verdict Hunter was brought to his trial, when he pleaded 
guilty, and added to the offence he had already committed the horrid crime of 
declaring that he only lamented not having murdered Mr Gordon's daughter as well as 
his sons. The sheriff now passed sentence on the convict, which was to the following 
purpose: that "on the succeeding day he should be executed on a gibbet, erected for 
that purpose on the spot where he had committed the murders; but that, previous to his 
execution, his right hand should be cut off with a hatchet, near the wrist; that then he 
should be drawn up to the gibbet by a rope, and when he was dead, hung in chains 
between Edinburgh and Leith, the knife with which he committed the murders being 
stuck through his hand, which should be advanced over his head and fixed therewith 
to the top of the gibbet." Mr Hunter was executed in strict conformity to the above 
sentence on the 22nd of August, 1700. But Mr Gordon soon afterwards petitioned the 
sheriff that the body might be removed to a more distant spot, as its hanging on the 
side of the highway, through which he frequently passed, tended to re-excite his grief 
for the occasion that had first given rise to it. This requisition was immediately 
complied with, and in a few days the body was removed to the skirts of a small village 
near Edinburgh, named Broughton. It is equally true and horrid to relate, that, at the 
place of execution, Hunter closed his life with the following shocking declaration: 
"There is no God — I do not believe there is any or if there is, I hold him in defiance." 
Yet this infidel had professed himself to be a minister of the Gospel!


JOHN COWLAND, GENTLEMAN 
Who suffered Death on 20th of December, 1700, for stabbing Sir Andrew 
Slanning, Baronet, near Drury Lane Theatre

	THE crime for which this man suffered will show the danger ever to be 
apprehended from indiscriminate connexion with females, and a caution against 
intemperance.
	John Cowland was the son of reputable parents, who apprenticed him to a 
goldsmith, but of a vicious irascible disposition. He and some other bon-vivants had 
followed Sir Andrew Slanning, Bart., who had made a temporary acquaintance with 
an orange-woman, while in the pit at Drury Lane playhouse, and retired with her as 
soon as the play was ended. They had gone but a few yards before Mr Cowland put 
his arm round the woman's neck; on which Sir Andrew desired he would desist, as she 
was his wife. Cowland, knowing that Sir Andrew was married to a woman of honour, 
gave him the lie, and swords were drawn on both sides; but some gentlemen coming 
up at this juncture, no immediate ill consequences ensued.
	They all now agreed to adjourn to the Rose Tavern, and Captain Waggett 
having there used his utmost endeavours to reconcile the offended parties, it appeared 
that his mediation was attended with success; but as they were going upstairs to drink 
a glass of wine, Mr Cowland drew his sword and stabbed Sir Andrew in the belly, 
who, finding himself wounded, cried out "Murder!" Hereupon one of Lord Warwick's 
servants and two other persons who were in the house ran up and disarmed Cowland 
of his sword, which was bloody to the depth of five inches, and took him into custody. 
Cowland now desired to see Sir Andrew, which being granted, he jumped down the 
stairs and endeavoured to make his escape, but being pursued he was easily retaken.
	He was instantly conducted before a Justice of the Peace, who committed him; 
and on the 5th of December, 1700, he was tried at the Old Bailey on three 
indictments: the first at common law, the second on the statute of stabbing, and the 
third on the coroner's inquest for the murder. The facts above mentioned were fully 
proved on the trial, and among other things it was deposed that the deceased had 
possessed an estate of twenty thousand pounds a year, that his family became extinct 
by his death, and that he had been a gentleman of great good nature, and by no means 
disposed to quarrel. Mr Cowland being found guilty on the clearest evidence received 
sentence of death, and, though great efforts were made to obtain a pardon for him, he 
was executed at Tyburn, on the 20th of December, 1700.
	From the moment of his imprisonment to the day of his death, his behaviour 
was truly contrite and penitent; he professed the most unfeigned sorrow for all his 
sins, and gave the following account of himself: that he was the son of reputable 
parents, who apprenticed him to a goldsmith; that in the early part of his life he was 
sober and religious, studying the scriptures, giving a regular attendance on divine 
worship, and devoutly reflecting on his duty towards God; but that, abandoning this 
course of life, he became an easy prey to his own intemperate passions, and proceeded 
from one degree of vice to another, till at length he committed the horrid crime for 
which he was justly doomed to fall a sacrifice to the violated laws of God and his 
Country.
	On a retrospect of this melancholy narrative, some reflections will occur, that, 
if properly attended to, may be of singular use to the reader. The dispute which cost 
Sir Andrew Slanning his life took its rise from his having associated himself with a 
woman of light character, with whom Cowland thought he had as much right to make 
free as the baronet: but Sir Andrew was originally to blame; for, as he was a married 
man, there was a great impropriety in the connexion he had formed: this, however, 
was no kind of justification of the conduct of Cowland, who could have no business to 
interfere; and his crime is greatly enhanced by his having committed the murder after 
an apparent reconciliation had taken place. To sum up our observations in a few 
words, from this sad tale let married men be taught the danger that may ensue from 
the slightest criminal connexion, and let young gentlemen learn to govern and 
moderate their passions: so may all parties live an honour to themselves, and a credit 
to their families and connexions.


CAPTAIN JOHN KIDD 
Known as the "Wizard of the Seas," who suffered for Piracy, at Execution 
Dock, 23rd of May, 1701

	PIRACY is an offence committed on the high seas, by villains who man and 
arm a vessel for the purpose of robbing fair traders. It is also piracy to rob a vessel 
lying in shore at anchor, or at a wharf. The river Thames, until the excellent 
establishment of a marine police, was infested by gangs of fresh-water pirates, who 
were continually rowing about, watching the homeward-bound vessels; which, 
whenever an opportunity offered, they boarded, and stole whatever part of their cargo 
they could hoist into their boats. But, of late years, the shipping there, collected from 
every part of the habitable globe, have lain in tolerable security against such 
disgraceful depredations, and the introduction of the dock system has further 
increased this security.
	Piracy is a capital offence by civil law, although by Act of Parliament it may 
be heard and determined according to the rules of common law, as if the offence had 
been committed on land.
	Captain John Kidd was born at Greenock, in Scotland, and being bred as a 
sailor he eventually became known as the "Wizard of the Seas." Having quitted his 
native country, he resided at New York, where he became owner of a small vessel, 
with which he traded among the pirates, obtained a thorough knowledge of their 
haunts, and could give a better account of them than any other person whatever. 
While in their company he used to converse and act as they did; yet at other times he 
would make singular professions of honesty, and intimate how easy a matter it would 
be to extirpate these abandoned people, and prevent their future depredations. His 
frequent remarks of this kind engaged the notice of several considerable planters, 
who, forming a more favourable idea of him than his true character would warrant, 
procured him the patronage with which he was afterwards honoured. For a series of 
years great complaints had been made of the piracies committed in the West Indies, 
which had been greatly encouraged by some of the inhabitants of North America, on 
account of the advantage they derived from purchasing effects thus fraudulently 
obtained. This coming to the knowledge of King William III., he, in the year 1695, 
bestowed the government of New England and New York on the Earl of Bellamont, 
an Irish nobleman of distinguished character and abilities, who immediately began to 
consider the most effectual method to redress the evils complained of, and consulted 
with Colonel Levingston, a gentleman who had great property in New York, on the 
most feasible steps to obviate the evils. At this juncture Captain Kidd had arrived 
from New York in a sloop of his own; him, therefore, the Colonel mentioned to Lord 
Bellamont as a bold and daring man, who was very fit to be employed against the 
pirates, as he was perfectly well acquainted with the places which they resorted to. 
This plan met with the fullest approbation of his lordship, who mentioned the affair to 
his Majesty, and recommended it to the notice of the Board of Admiralty. But such 
were then the hurry and confusion of public affairs that, though the design was 
approved, no steps were taken towards carrying it into execution. Accordingly 
Colonel Levingston made application to Lord Bellamont that as the affair would not 
well admit of delay it was worthy of being undertaken by some private persons of 
rank and distinction, and carried into execution at their own expense, notwithstanding 
public encouragement was denied it. His lordship approved of this project, but it was 
attended with considerable difficulty. At length, however, Lord Chancellor Somers, 
the Duke of Shrewsbury, the Earl of Romney, the Earl of Oxford and some other 
persons, with Colonel Levingston and Captain Kidd, agreed to raise six thousand 
pounds for the expense of the voyage; and the Colonel and Captain were to have a 
fifth of the profits of the whole undertaking. Matters being thus far adjusted, a 
commission in the usual form was granted to Captain Kidd to take and seize pirates, 
and bring them to justice. Accordingly a vessel was purchased and manned, and 
received the name of the Adventure galley; and in this Captain Kidd sailed for New 
York towards the close of the year 1695, and in his passage made prize of a French 
ship. From New York he sailed to the Madeira Islands, thence to Bonavista and St 
Jago, and from this last place to Madagascar. He now began to cruise at the entrance 
of the Red Sea, but not being successful in those latitudes he sailed to Calicut, and 
there took a ship of one hundred and fifty tons' burthen, which he carried to 
Madagascar and disposed of there. Having sold his prize he again put to sea, and at 
the expiration of five weeks took the Quedah merchant, a ship of above four hundred 
tons' burthen, the master of which was an Englishman named Wright, who had two 
Dutch mates on board and a French gunner, but the crew consisted of Moors, natives 
of Africa, and were about ninety in number. He carried the ship to St Mary's, near 
Madagascar, where he burned the Adventure galley, belonging to his owners, and 
divided the lading of the Quedah merchant with his crew, taking forty shares to 
himself. They then went on board the last-mentioned ship and sailed for the West 
Indies. It is uncertain whether the inhabitants of the West India Islands knew that 
Kidd was a pirate, but he was refused refreshments at Anguilla and St Thomas's, and 
therefore sailed to Mona, between Porto Rico and Hispaniola, where, through the 
management of an Englishman named Bolton, he obtained a supply of provisions 
from Curassoa. He now bought a sloop of Bolton, in which he stowed great part of his 
ill-gotten effects, and left the Quedah merchant, with eighteen of the ship's company, 
in Bolton's care. While at St Mary's, ninety men of Kidd's crew left him and went on 
board the Mocha merchant, an East India ship, which had just then commenced as 
pirate. Kidd now sailed in the sloop, and touched at several places, where he disposed 
of a great part of his cargo, and then steered for Boston, in New England. In the 
interim Bolton sold the Quedah merchant to the Spaniards, and immediately sailed as 
a passenger in a ship for Boston, where he arrived a considerable time before Kidd, 
and gave information of what had happened to Lord Bellamont. Kidd, therefore, on 
his arrival, was seized, by order of his lordship; when all he had to urge in his defence 
was that he thought the Quedah merchant was a lawful prize, as she was manned with 
Moors, though there was no kind of proof that this vessel had committed any act of 
piracy. Upon this, the Earl of Bellamont immediately dispatched an account to 
England of the circumstances that had arisen, and requested that a ship be sent for 
Kidd, who had committed several other notorious acts of piracy. The ship Rochester 
was accordingly sent to bring him to England; but this vessel, happening to be 
disabled, was obliged to return — a circumstance that greatly increased a public 
clamour which had for some time subsisted respecting this affair, and which, no 
doubt, took its rise from party prejudice. It was carried to such a height that the 
Members of Parliament for several places were instructed to move the House for an 
inquiry into the affair; and accordingly it was moved in the House of Commons that 
"The letters-patent granted to the Earl of Bellamont and others respecting the goods 
taken from pirates were dishonourable to the King, against the law of nations, 
contrary to the laws and statutes of this realm, an invasion of property, and destructive 
to commerce." Though a negative was put on this motion, yet the enemies of Lord 
Somers and the Earl of Oxford continued to charge those noblemen with giving 
countenance to pirates; and it was even insinuated that the Earl of Bellamont was not 
less culpable than the actual offenders. As soon as Kidd arrived in England he was 
sent for, and examined at the bar of the House of Commons, with a view to fix part of 
his guilt on the parties who had been concerned in sending him on the expedition; but 
nothing arose to incriminate any of those distinguished persons. Kidd, who was in 
some degree intoxicated, made a very contemptible appearance at the bar of the 
House; on which a member, who had been one of the most earnest to have him 
examined, violently exclaimed: "D —n this fellow, I thought he had been only a 
knave, but unfortunately he happens to be a fool likewise." Kidd was at length tried at 
the Old Bailey, and was convicted on the clearest evidence; but neither at that time 
nor afterwards charged any of his employers with being privy to his infamous 
proceedings. He suffered, with one of his companions (Darby Mullins), at Execution 
Dock, on the 23rd day of May 1701. After Kidd had been tied up to the gallows the 
rope broke and he fell to the ground; but being immediately tied up again, the 
ordinary, who had before exhorted him, desired to speak with him once more; and on 
this second application entreated him to make the most careful use of the few further 
moments thus providentially allotted him for the final preparation of his soul to meet 
its important change. These exhortations appeared to have the wished-for effect; and 
he was left, professing his charity to all the world, and his hopes of salvation through 
the merits of his Redeemer.
	Thus ended the life of captain Kidd, a man, who, if he had entertained a proper 
regard to the welfare of the public, or even to his own advantage, might have become 
an useful member of society, instead of a disgrace to it. The opportunities he had 
obtained of acquiring a complete knowledge of the haunts of the pirates, rendered him 
one of the most proper men in the world to have extirpated this nest of villains; but his 
own avarice defeated the generous views of some of the greatest and most 
distinguished men of the age in which he lived. Hence we may learn the destructive 
nature of avarice, which generally counteracts all its own purposes. Captain Kidd 
might have acquired a fortune, and rendered a capital service to his country, in a point 
the most essential to its interests; but he appeared to be dead to all those generous 
sensations which do honour to humanity, and materially injured his country, while he 
was bringing final disgrace on himself.
	The story of this wretched malefactor will effectually impress on the mind of 
the reader the truth of the old observation, that "Honesty is the best policy."
Henceforth let honour's paths be trod, 
Nor villains seek in vain 
To mock the sacred laws of God, 
To give their neighbours pain.


HERMAN STRODTMAN 
Executed at Tyburn, 18th of June, 1701, for the Murder of Peter Wolter, his 
Fellow-Apprentice

	HERMAN STRODTMAN was a German, being born of a respectable family 
at Revel, in Lisland, who gave him a good education and brought him up strictly in 
the tenets of the Protestant religion. About the year 1694 young Strodtman, with a 
friend and school-fellow, named Peter Wolter, were, by their respective parents, sent 
in company to London, where they were both bound apprentices to the then eminent 
Dutch house of Stein & Dorien. They served their masters some time with diligence, 
and lived together in great harmony until a sister of Wolter married very 
advantageously, which so buoyed up the brother with pride that he assumed a 
superiority over his fellow-apprentice, and this led to the fatal catastrophe. This 
arrogance produced quarrelling, and from words they proceeded to blows, and Wolter 
beat Strodtman twice, at one time in the counting-house, and at another before the 
servant-girls in the kitchen. Wolter likewise traduced Strodtman to his masters, who 
thereupon denied him the liberty and other gratifications that were allowed to his 
fellow-apprentice. Hereupon Strodtman conceived an implacable hatred against him, 
and resolved to murder him, in some way or other. His first intention was to have 
poisoned him, and with this view he mixed some white mercury with a white powder 
which Wolter used to keep in a glass in his bedroom as a remedy for the scurvy; but 
this happening to be done in the midst of winter, Wolter had declined taking the 
powder; so that the other thought of destroying him by the more expeditious method 
of stabbing.
	This scheme, however, he delayed from time to time, while Wolter's pride and 
arrogance increased to such a degree that the other thought he should at length be 
tempted to murder him in sight of the family. Hereupon Strodtman desired one of the 
maids to intimate to his masters his inclination to be sent to the West Indies; but no 
answer being given to this request, Strodtman grew again uneasy, and his enmity to 
his fellow-apprentice increased to such a degree that the Dutch maid, observing the 
agitation of his mind, advised him to a patient submission of his situation, as the most 
probable method of securing his future peace. Unfortunately he paid no regard to this 
good advice; but determined on the execution of the fatal plan which afterwards led to 
his destruction.
	On the morning of Good Friday, Strodtman was sent out on business, but 
instead of transacting it he went to Greenwich, with an intention of returning on 
Saturday to perpetrate the murder; but reflecting that his fellow-apprentice was to 
receive the Sacrament on Easter Sunday, he abhorred the thought of taking away his 
life before he had partaken of the Lord's Supper. Wherefore he sent a letter to his 
masters on the Saturday, in which he asserted that he had been impressed, and was to 
be sent to Chatham on Easter Monday and put on board a ship in the Royal Navy; but 
while he was at Greenwich he was met by a young gentleman who knew him, and 
who, returning to London, told Messrs Stein & Dorien he believed that the story of his 
being impressed was all invention. Hereupon Mr Stein went to Chatham to inquire 
into the real state of the case, when he discovered that the young gentleman's 
suspicions were but too well founded.
	Strodtman went to the church at Greenwich twice on Easter Sunday, and on 
the approach of evening came to London and slept at the Dolphin Inn, in Bishopsgate 
Street. On the following day he returned to Greenwich, and continued either at that 
place or at Woolwich and the neighbourhood till Tuesday, when he went to London, 
lodged in Lombard Street, and returned to Greenwich on the Wednesday. Coming 
again to London on the evening of the succeeding day, he did not return any more to 
Greenwich; but going to the house of his masters, he told them that what he had 
written was true, for that he had been pressed. They gave no credit to this tale, but told 
him they had inquired into the affair, and bid him quit their house. This he did, and 
took lodgings in Moorfields, where he lay on that and the following night, and on the 
Saturday he took other lodgings at the Sun, in Queen Street, London.
	Before the preceding Christmas he had procured a key on the model of that 
belonging to his masters' house, that he might go in and out at his pleasure. Originally 
he intended to have made no worse use of this key; but, it being still in his possession, 
he let himself into the house between eight and nine o'clock on the evening of the 
Saturday last mentioned, and hearing the footsteps of some persons going upstairs he 
concealed himself behind a door in the passage. As soon as the noise arising from this 
circumstance was over, he went up one pair of stairs to a room adjoining the counting-
house, where he used to sleep, and, having found a tinder-box, he lighted a candle and 
put it into his masters' dark lantern, which he carried upstairs to an empty room, next 
to that in which Peter Wolter used to lie. Here he continued a short time, when, 
hearing somebody coming upstairs, he put out his candle, and fell asleep soon 
afterwards. Awaking about twelve o'clock he listened for a while, and hearing no 
noise he imagined that the whole family were fast asleep. Hereupon he descended to 
the room on the first floor where the tinder-box lay; and having lighted his candle he 
went to the counting-house, and took a sum of money and several notes and bills. This 
being done, he took a piece of wood, with which they used to beat tobacco, and going 
upstairs again he hastily entered the room where Peter Wolter was asleep, and 
advancing to his bedside struck him violently on the head; and though his heart in 
some degree failed him, yet he continued his strokes. As the wounded youth groaned 
much, he took the pillow and, laying it on his mouth, sat down on the side of the bed 
and pressed it hard with his elbow, till no appearance of life remained. Perceiving 
Wolter to be dead, he searched his chest of drawers and pockets, and took as much 
money as, with what he had taken from his masters, amounted to above eight pounds. 
He then packed up some linen and woollen clothes, and going down one pair of stairs 
threw his bundle into a house that was uninhabited.
	He then went upstairs again, and having cut his candle, lighted both pieces, 
one of which he placed on a chair close to the bed-curtains, and the other on a chest of 
drawers, with a view to setting the house on fire, to conceal the robbery and murder of 
which he had been guilty. This being done, he went through a window into the house 
where he had thrown his bundle, and in this place he stayed till five in the morning, 
when he took the bundle with him to his lodgings in Queen Street, where he shifted 
his apparel, and went to the Swedish church in Trinity Lane. After the worship of the 
congregation was ended he heard a bill of thanks read, which his masters had sent in 
devout acknowledgment of the narrow escape that they and their neighbours had 
experienced from the fire. Struck by this circumstance, Strodtman burst into tears; but 
he endeavoured as much as possible to conceal his emotion from a gentleman who sat 
in the same pew with him, and who, on their coming out of the church, informed him 
that the house of Messrs Stein & Dorien narrowly escaped being burned the preceding 
night, by an accident then unknown, but that the destruction was providentially 
prevented by the Dutch maid smelling the fire and seeing the smoke, so that on her 
alarming her master the flames were extinguished by a pail of water.
	Strodtman made an appointment to meet the gentleman who gave him this 
information on the outer walks of the Royal Exchange in the afternoon, to go to the 
Dutch church in the Savoy; but, the gentleman not coming to his time, he went alone 
to Stepney church, and after service was ended he walked towards Mile End, where 
he saw the bodies of Michael Van Berghen and Dromelius, who had been hung in 
chains, as before mentioned. This sight gave him a shocking idea of the crime of 
which he had been guilty, and he reflected that he might soon become a like horrid 
spectacle to mankind. Hence he proceeded to Blackwall, where he saw the captain of 
a French pirate hanging in chains, which gave fresh force to the gloomy feelings of 
his mind, and again taught him to dread a similar fate. After having been thus 
providentially led to the sight of objects which he would otherwise rather have 
avoided, he returned to his lodgings in great dejection of mind, but far from repenting, 
or even being properly sensible of the crime he had committed; for, as he himself said, 
his heart did not yet relent for what he had done, and if he had failed in murdering his 
fellow-apprentice in his bed, he would have destroyed him some other way.
	On his return to his lodgings he ate his supper, said his prayers, and went to 
bed. On the following morning he went to the White Horse Inn without Cripplegate to 
receive cash for a bill of twenty pounds, which he had stolen from his masters' house; 
but the person who was to have paid it being out he was desired to call again about 
twelve o'clock. In the interim he went to the house of a banker in Lombard Street, 
who requested him to carry some money to his (the banker's) sister, who was at a 
boarding-school at Greenwich. Strodtman said he could not go till the following day, 
when he would execute the commission; but before he left the house the banker told 
him that a young man, named Green, had been to inquire for him; on which Strodtman 
said that if Mr Green returned he should be informed that he would be back at one 
o'clock. Hence he went again to the White Horse inn, where he found the party, who 
told him that he had no orders to pay the money for the bill.
	Having received this answer he went to his lodgings, where he dined, and then 
went to the banker's in Lombard Street, where his master, Stein, with Mr Green and 
another gentleman, were waiting for him. Mr Stein asked him if he would go willingly 
to his house, or be carried by porters; and he replied that he would go of his own 
accord. When he came there he was asked some questions respecting the atrocious 
crimes of which he had been guilty; but persisting that he was innocent he was 
searched, and the twenty-pound bill found in his possession. They then inquired 
where he lodged; to which he answered: "In Moorfields"; whereupon they all went 
thither together, but the people denied his lodging there at that time. Mr Stein, finding 
him unwilling to speak the truth, told him that if he would make a full discovery he 
should be sent abroad out of the reach of justice. Hereupon he mentioned his real 
lodgings; on which they went thither in a coach, and finding the bills, and other stolen 
effects, Strodtman was carried before Sir Humphrey Edwin, who committed him to 
Newgate, on his own confession.
	He was not tried at the first sessions after his commitment, and in the interval 
that he lay in prison some bad people who were confined there trumped up an idle tale 
for him to tell when he came to trial, and prevailed on him to plead not guilty — a 
circumstance which he afterwards sincerely repented of. On his trial, however, there 
were so many corroborative proofs of his guilt that the jury could not hesitate to 
convict him, and he received the sentence awarded by law.
	He died full of contrition, penitence and hope, and suffered at Tyburn, on the 
18th of June, 1701; and it was remarked that he kept his hand lifted up for a 
considerable time after the cart was drawn away.


MARY ADAMS 
Executed for privately stealing, 16th June, 1702

	THIS unhappy woman was born at Reading, in Berkshire, and, when she was 
old enough to go to service, went to live with a grocer in that town. Mary being a girl 
of vivacity and genteel figure, she unfortunately attracted the regard of the grocer's 
son, and the consequence of their connexion became very conspicuous in a short time.
	As soon as it was evident that she was pregnant, she was dismissed from her 
master's service, on which she immediately made oath that his son was the father of 
the child thereafter to be born — a circumstance that compelled the old gentleman to 
support her till she was brought to bed.
	She had not been delivered long before she went to London, and entered into 
the service of a mercer in Cheapside, where, by prudent conduct, she might have 
retrieved the character she had forfeited in the country; but, though she had already 
suffered by her indiscretion, an intimacy soon subsisted between her master and 
herself; but, as their interviews could not conveniently be held at home, they contrived 
to meet on evenings at other places, when the mistress of the house was gone to the 
theatre, or out on a visit.
	This connexion continued till the girl was far advanced in her pregnancy, 
when the master, apprehensive of disagreeable consequences at home, advised the girl 
to quarrel with her mistress, in order that she might be dismissed, and then took a 
lodging for her at Hackney, where she remained till she was delivered; and in the 
meantime the connexion between her and her master continued as before. Being 
brought to bed of a child that died in a few hours after its birth, the master thought 
himself happy, supposing he could easily free himself from the incumbrance of the 
mother, of whom he now became heartily tired.
	When the girl recovered from her lying-in, he told her that she must go to 
service, as it did not suit him to maintain her any longer; but this enraged her to the 
highest degree, and she threatened to discover the nature of their connexion to his 
wife, unless he would make her a present of twenty guineas; and with this demand he 
thought it prudent to comply, happy to get rid of her even on such terms.
	Being now in possession of money, and in no want of clothes in which to 
make a genteel appearance, she removed from Hackney to Wych Street, without 
Temple Bar, but was scarcely settled in her new lodgings before she sent a letter to the 
mercer's wife, whom she acquainted with the nature of the connexion that had 
subsisted between her late master and herself; but she did not mention her place of 
abode in this letter.
	The consequence was, that the mercer was obliged to acknowledge the crime 
of which he had been guilty, and solicit his wife's pardon in terms of the utmost 
humiliation. This pardon was promised, but whether it was ever ratified remains a 
doubt.
	Mrs. Adams had the advantage of an engaging figure, and, passing as a young 
woman in her new lodgings, she was soon married to a young fellow in the 
neighbourhood; but it was not long before he discovered the imposition that had been 
practised on him, on which he embarked on board a ship in the royal navy.
	By this time Mrs. Adams's money was almost expended; but, as her clothes 
were yet good, an attorney of Clement's Inn took her into keeping; and, after she had 
lived a short time with him, she went to another of the same profession, with whom 
she cohabited above two years; but on his marriage she was once more abandoned to 
the world.
	Fertile of invention, and too proud to condescend to accept of a common 
service, she became connected with a notorious bawd of Drury Lane, who was very 
glad of her assistance, and promised herself considerable advantage from the 
association. In this situation Mrs. Adams displayed her charms to considerable 
advantage, and was as happy as any common prostitute can expect to be: but alas! 
what is this happiness but a prelude to the extremity of misery and distress? Such 
indeed it was found by Mrs. Adams, who having been gratified by a gentleman with a 
considerable sum of money, the bawd quarrelled with her respecting the dividing of it, 
and, a battle ensuing, our heroine was turned out of the house, after she had got a 
black eye in the contest.
	After this she used to parade the Park in the day-time, and walk the streets in 
the evening, in search of casual lovers; at length she joined the practice of theft to that 
of incontinence, and few of her chance acquaintance escaped being robbed. She was 
often taken into custody for these practices, but continually escaped through defect of 
evidence.
	But an end was soon put to her depredations; for, having enticed a gentleman 
to a bagnio near Covent Garden, she picked his pocket of all his money, and a bank 
note of a large amount, and left him while he was asleep. When he awoke, he sent 
immediate notice to the Bank to stop payment; and, as Mrs. Adams came soon after to 
receive the money for the note, she was taken into custody, and lodged in prison; and, 
being in a short time tried at the Old Bailey, she was convicted, received sentence of 
death, and was executed at Tyburn, on the 16th of June, 1702.
	After her conviction she lived in the same gay and dissipated manner that she 
had done before, and was visited by many of her former acquaintance, who supplied 
her with money to support her extravagance. Agreeable to her own request, too, their 
mistaken bounty contributed to purchase her a suit of mourning, in which she was 
executed; and they buried her in as handsome a manner as if her life had been 
conducted by the rules of virtue, and she had likewise been a woman of fortune.


MARY CHANNEL 
Famous for her Wit and Beauty, compelled to marry a Man she detested, 
poisoned him, and was executed in 1703, at the age of 18

	MARY CHANNEL was the daughter of one Mr Woods, a person of good 
repute, who resided in a little village near Dorchester, in the county of Dorset. He was 
a person of known wealth and good credit, who, by his industry and diligence, daily 
increased his riches. Perceiving his daughter to be of a promising disposition, and 
amiable both in body and mind, he gave her a liberal education, to improve and refine 
those good qualifications by art and study wherewith she was liberally endowed by 
the bounty of nature. She made so speedy a progress in her learning that she soon 
outvied her schoolfellows; and the strong imagination, polite behaviour and majestic 
graces in her carriage so lively displayed themselves that she became the mirror and 
discourse of all who knew her. Though her birth gave place to those of the highest 
rank and quality, yet her education was not inferior to them; and her incomparable 
wit, united with her beautiful presence, rendered her so agreeable that she was to be 
preferred even to many of a superior rank.
	Her charms did not consist in adorning and dressing herself in magnificent and 
gay attire, decked with pearls and diamonds, which gives a false gloss of beauty to 
persons whose natures are opposite, and only serve to brighten the lustre of their 
pretended fine qualities. In a word, she was generally esteemed the most celebrated 
wit and accomplished beauty of her age.
	Being now in the flower of her youth and bloom of her beauty, she had several 
suitors of good repute, who all became captives to her beauty, and hardly did they find 
themselves ensnared but they had the boldness to flatter themselves with the hopes of 
one day possessing such a charming object. Amongst the rest, one Mr Channel, a 
wealthy grocer of Dorchester, came to pay his respects to her, who, for the great 
riches he enjoyed, was gratefully accepted by her parents, though by her altogether 
contemned and slighted. He had nothing to recommend him but his wealth, which was 
as much superior to the rest of her suitors as his person was inferior to them: his limbs 
and body were in some measure ill proportioned, and his features in no wise 
agreeable; but what rendered him the more detestable and ridiculous in her sight was 
his splay-foot, which did not in the least concur with her sublime and lofty temper. 
Her father, evidently perceiving the addresses of Mr Channel were received and 
accepted by her with scorn and reproofs, entreated her to receive him with less disdain 
and listen to his respectful addresses. Being weary, however, of his fond familiarities, 
she determined to abandon herself from him, and never more admit him into her 
presence or society. She had no sooner put her design into execution but it reached her 
father's ears, who kept a more strict guard and watchful eye over her behaviour and 
conduct, and forthwith continued his absurd and unreasonable expostulations and 
imprudent menaces to enforce and augment her love. She in vain endeavoured to 
excuse herself, by disputing the most solid and rational arguments; but how much the 
more she persisted, by so much the more her parents' resolution was incensed and 
irritated, pressing her to consent to a speedy marriage, and telling her she would 
discharge the duty under which she was obligated to them by assenting to and 
complying with their commands. At length, being continually fatigued and 
importuned by her parents to have the marriage solemnised, she consented, though 
with the greatest reluctance. And on the day appointed the ceremony was ordained.
	Having now gratified her parents' desire, and yielded to their compulsions, by 
putting the finishing stroke to her marriage, she still continued her slights and 
contempts towards her husband, and he became the entire object of her scorn. Soon 
after the solemnisation of the marriage she began to plot and contrive new scenes of 
tragedies, and her thoughts were chiefly employed and taken up in studying what 
measures to take to get rid of her husband, and set herself at liberty. Nothing would 
satisfy her enormous desires but his death, which she determined to bring about by 
poison. And, in order thereto, she sent her maid to the apothecary's for some white 
mercury, telling her it was to kill rats and mice; though it is certain her design was 
reverse, which she intended to fulfil as soon as opportunity would give reins to her 
vicious inclinations. A little after she gave orders for rice milk to be made for 
breakfast. That morning, particularly, she was observed to demonstrate a seeming 
diligence in procuring everyone their proper messes; and no one was permitted to 
serve her husband but herself. Accordingly she prepared and gave him the poisonous 
draught, mixed and infused with the mercury, which she had reserved for this 
desperate use, and which proved his fatal dish. After he had eaten somewhat liberally 
he discovered an ill savour in his milk, and said it tasted amiss. Hereupon he offered 
his wife's brother (a youth who boarded with him) to taste it; but she would by no 
means permit her brother to comply with this reasonable request, which caused a 
strong suspicion throughout the family. Then Mr Channel required the maid to taste it; 
but she had no sooner taken it into her hands than her mistress in a violent passion 
caught it from her, and forthwith conveyed it away. It was now too late to recall what 
had passed, or to seek for refuge; for his body presently began to swell vehemently, 
perceiving which, the domestics immediately sent for a doctor. But the infused 
mercury had so great an effect upon him that no remedy could expel it, and he expired 
before the physicians came to his assistance. Having thus resigned his breath, and 
there being visible proofs of his being poisoned, it was not without reason she was 
suspected to be the principal and only actress and procurer thereof. Thereupon she 
was immediately seized and conveyed before a justice, before whom she entirely 
denied the fact; nevertheless, on her servants' information he committed her to 
Dorchester jail.
	At the assizes ensuing at Dorchester the defence she made (whether it was real 
or pretended) was so full of wit and ingenuity, and uttered with such an extraordinary 
courage and humility, that it caused admiration in the judges, and pity and compassion 
in all who heard her trial. But this availed nothing; for the evidences appearing plain 
against her, and the friends of her deceased husband being very substantial people' she 
received sentence to be burned at the stake till she was dead.
	The day whereon she was to suffer being come, she was guarded by proper 
officers to the place of execution, with her hood veiled over her face. After she had 
uttered some private ejaculations she pulled off her gown and white silk hood and 
delivered them to her maid — who accompanied her to the stake — and then suffered 
death, according to the sentence before pronounced against her, declaring her faith in 
Christ; and to the last continued to exclaim against her parents' constraints, which had 
been the sole cause of her torturing death. Thus at a small distance from the town of 
Dorchester she yielded her breath, in or about the month of April, Anno Domini 1703, 
in the eighteenth year of her age, being greatly bewailed and lamented, though the 
sentence was acknowledged to be just and lawful.


TIM BUCKLEY 
Highwayman, who fell after a hot Battle, and was hanged in 1701

	TIMOTHY BUCKLEY was as unparalleled a villain as ever lived in this 
kingdom. He was born of very honest parents at Stamford, in Lincolnshire, where he 
served three years to a shoemaker; but then, running away from his master, he came 
up to London, and soon became acquainted with ill company, whose vices he 
followed to support him in a most scandalous and infamous course of life. Having 
spent a great deal of his ill-gotten money at a blind ale-house in Wapping, he once 
asked the victualler to lend him ten shillings, which favour he denied him; and Tim so 
highly resented his ingratitude that he left frequenting his house. Not long after, Tim 
and some of his thieving companions, breaking in by night, bound the victualler, his 
wife and maid, both hand and foot, and robbed the house, taking thence forty pounds 
laid by for the brewer, three silver tankards, a silver watch and eight gold rings. 
Another time, on Tim taking a walk towards Hyde Park Corner, the air of which place 
is generally very unwholesome for a thief to take, it was his fortune to meet with that 
famous merry-andrew and mountebank, Dr Cately. He commanded that illiterately 
learned gentleman to stand and deliver. Our doctor, preferring his own welfare before 
what he had about him, humbly presented Tim with six guineas and a very good 
watch, that he might keep time in spending the gold.
	An informing constable, who was a baker in St Giles-in-the-Fields parish, 
once took up Tim, sending him as a soldier into Flanders. He had not been long there 
before he deserted and came to London again; and one day meeting this baker's wife 
coming alone from Hampstead he forced her into a private place, and presenting a 
pistol to her breast swore he would shoot her dead on the spot if she refused his 
request, he being bent upon it to be revenged on her husband, who had impressed him 
a little while ago. The baker's wife being no Lucretia, to value her chastity at the loss 
of her life, was forced to submit, and Tim then commanded her to deliver her money 
and such other things of worth as she had about her. So taking from her a couple of 
gold rings and eleven shillings he sent her home to tell her husband of this adventure.
	Afterwards, Tim Buckley, stealing a very good horse in Buckinghamshire, 
turned highwayman, and riding up to London met on the road a certain pawnbroker 
living in Drury Lane. Tim having been the loser in pawning some things to him, 
which were lost for want of redeeming, was resolved to have his pennyworth out of 
him now, so commanded him to stand and deliver. The pawnbroker, being very loath 
to go to the devil before his time, ransomed himself for twenty-eight guineas, a gold 
watch, a silver tobacco-box and a couple of gold rings.
	Another time, Tim Buckley, meeting a stock-jobber on the road who had 
formerly prosecuted him for felony, upon conviction whereof he was burned in the 
hand, was resolved to be revenged on him, by robbing him of forty-eight guineas.
	Not long after, this same stock-jobber, accidentally meeting Tim Buckley in 
London, caused him to be apprehended, and committed to Newgate, and convicting 
him of this robbery, he received sentence of death. But obtaining a reprieve, and 
afterwards pleading for a free pardon, as soon as he was at liberty, resolving to be 
further revenged on this adversary who had twice sat very close on his skirts, he went 
to Hackney, where this stock-jobber had a country house within a mile of that village, 
and one night set fire to it; but a timely discovery thereof preventing it from doing 
much damage, it was quickly quenched. However, Tim made his escape, and flying 
into Leicestershire he broke open a house at a place called Ashby-de-la-Zouch, and 
from thence took above eighty pounds. He then went to a fair at Derby, where he 
bought a good horse, and went on the highway again. Being thus mounted again to 
rob on the road, within two miles of Nottingham he attempted to stop a coach in 
which were three gentlemen, besides a couple of footmen riding a little behind; but 
they being resolved not to be robbed of what they had by one villain, one of them 
fired a blunderbuss out of the coach, which killed Tim's horse, and then, all the 
gentlemen alighting, and the footmen having by this time also come up to their 
assistance, a bloody and obstinate engagement began between them, wherein Tim 
killed one of the gentlemen and a footman; but being overpowered nevertheless, after 
he had discharged eight pistols, and also grown faint through the loss of much blood 
(for he had received eleven wounds in his arms, thighs and legs), he was seized and 
committed to jail in Nottingham, where he was executed, in 1701, aged twenty-nine 
years, and afterwards hanged in chains at the place where he perpetrated the two 
murders aforesaid.


TOM JONES 
Highwayman, executed at Launceston, 25th of April, 1702, for robbing a 
Farmer's Wife

	TOM JONES was born at Newcastle-upon-Tyne, in the county of 
Northumberland, where his father, being a clothier, brought him up to the same trade. 
He followed this calling till he was two-and-twenty years of age, though not without 
discovering his vicious inclinations many years before, by running into debt and 
taking to all manner of irregular courses. At last, being reduced to extremity, he 
resolved at once to apply himself to the highway, as the only way left to retrieve his 
fortune. To make a beginning, he robbed his father of eighty pounds and a good horse, 
upon which he rode across the country with all speed, for fear of being pursued, 
galloping forty miles before he stopped; all which way he was afraid of everyone he 
saw and every noise he heard.
	After this, riding into Staffordshire, and meeting a stage-coach with several 
passengers in it, he commanded the coachman to stop, and the people within to 
deliver. Some of the gentlemen were resolute, and refused to comply with his 
demand; upon which he fired several pistols, taking care to do no hurt, and still 
preserving three or four well-loaded for his defence, if he should have occasion of 
them. The fright which the gunpowder put a couple of ladies into, who were in the 
coach, obliged the gentlemen to surrender before there was any mischief done, and 
Tom rode off with a considerable booty.
	It was after this that he met the late Lord Wharton and his lady on the road, 
stopped their coach and demanded their money, though they had three men on 
horseback to attend them. His lordship at first made some hesitation, and asked him if 
he understood what he was about. "Do you know me, sir," says he, "that you dare be 
so bold as to stop me on the road?" "Not I," replied Jones very readily; "I neither 
know nor care who you are, though, before you spoke, I took you for a brewer, 
because you carry your cooler by your side. Now, indeed, I am apt to imagine you are 
some great man, because you speak so big. But be as great as you will, sir, I must 
have you to know that there is no man upon this road so great as myself; therefore 
pray be quick in answering my demands, for delays may prove dangerous." His 
honour now saw our gentleman was resolute, so he and his lady even delivered up 
what they had about them without more words.
	The whole prize consisted of two hundred pounds in money, three diamond 
rings and two gold watches. All this being secured, Jones commanded his lordship to 
bid his servants ride on some distance before, threatening him with death if he 
refused; which being done, and the servants obeying, he had a fair opportunity of 
riding off without being pursued.
	Tom received intelligence one day that a certain gentleman was on the road 
with two hundred pounds in his coach. This, to be sure, was a sufficient invitation for 
him. He got upon a hill to wait for his customers coming, who spied him afar off 
without apprehending anything. But a steward of the gentleman, observing the 
behaviour of our chapman at a distance, told his master that he believed the man on 
the hill was a highwayman. "If you please, sir," quoth he, "to trust me with your 
money I'll ride by him, which I may do unsuspected, for he certainly waits for you." 
The gentleman was pleased at his servant's care, and liked his proposal very well. So 
giving him the bag, the steward rode on as fast as he could, and passed by Jones 
without being examined, getting out of sight before the coach came up.
	In short, the coach was stopped and the money demanded, when our 
gentleman gave him about ten guineas, assuring him that he had no more. Jones 
boldly named the sum he wanted, and swore it was in the coach, the traveller as often 
asserting that he was mistaken. At last the real state of the case came into our 
adventurer's head; whereupon, without taking his leave of the gentleman, he set spurs 
to his horse and rode after the steward full speed, who had by this time got at least a 
mile and a half from the place. Jones was well mounted, and it was five miles from 
the next town, so that he came in sight of the steward before he could get into any inn; 
but the steward saw him, mended his pace, and saved the money. This disappointment 
vexed poor Tom to the heart, but there was no remedy. As to the gentleman, he gave 
his servant a handsome gratuity for what he had done — as he deserved.
	After many adventures, most of them of a piece with the foregoing, Tom was 
apprehended, in Cornwall, for robbing a farmer's wife, and afterwards ravishing her. 
For this fact he was tried, and condemned, the assizes following, and about ten days 
afterwards executed at Launceston, on Saturday, the 25th of April, 1702, being thirty-
two years of age.


DICK BAUF 
Who executed his own Parents, and from a Pickpocket became a Cat 
Burglar, and then a Highwayman. Executed at Dublin, 15th of May, 1702

	THIS insolent offender was born in the kingdom of Ireland. At twelve years of 
age he had the wide world to shift for himself in, his parents being then forced to 
swing for their lives on a piece of cross timber, where they had the misfortune to have 
their breath stopped. Their crime was only breaking open and rifling a house, and 
murdering most of the family. Dick was present at the action, and contributed towards 
it as much as he was able, but found mercy at the assizes on account of his youth. 
Some say he was pardoned only on the hard condition of being executioner to his own 
parents, and that he was at first very unwilling to take away the lives of those who 
gave him his, but consented at last, when he found that there was no excuse that such 
a worthy family might not be entirely cut off by one single act of justice. It is added 
that on the same consideration his father and mother persuaded him to the action, and 
gave him their blessing at the hour of their departure, assuring him that they had much 
rather die by his hands than by the hands of a stranger, since they were sure of his 
prayers in their last moments. These words afforded great consolation to young 
Richard, and enabled him to get through the work with a Christian fortitude.
	Being now left an orphan, young, helpless and alone, he determined to look 
out for some gentleman whom he might serve in the quality of a skip-kennel, or some 
handicraftsman of whom he might learn a trade, for his support in an honest way. But 
all his inquiry was in vain; for the lamentable exit of his parents, and the occasion of 
it, being fresh in everyone's memory, their infamy rested on him, and there was no 
man to be found who would receive him into his house.
	Being as yet unfit to engage in any great and hazardous enterprise, he took up 
the decent occupation of a pick-pocket, at which he soon became very dexterous, 
haunting all the fairs, markets, and even churches, round the country, and in this 
manner picking up a very good living; till, being often detected, and obliged to go 
through the discipline of the horse-pond, he was obliged to think of some other order 
of sharpers in which to get himself entered.
	There is in Ireland a sort of men whom we may properly enough call satyrs, 
from their living in woods and desert places; among these Dick Bauf was next 
enrolled. These people never came to any towns, but continued in their private holds, 
stealing horses, kine, sheep and all sorts of cattle that came in their way, on which 
they subsisted. But all these inferior orders soon became tiresome to our adventurer, 
the more on account of the bad success he met with whilst he was in them. The next, 
then, therefore, was to get acquainted with a gang of Grumeis, who take their name 
from the similitude of their practice to that of the young boys who climb up to the tops 
of the masts at sea with great activity, and are called cats, or Grumeis, by the sailors. 
The thieves that bear this name are housebreakers who make use of a ladder of ropes, 
with hooks in one end of it, by which they easily ascend to the chamber windows, 
having fastened their ladders with a long pole. These robbers were very common in 
Dick Bauf's time, and did a world of mischief both in town and country, doing all with 
so much expedition that they more frequently escaped than other housebreakers, yet 
commonly with as large booties of gold, silver, linen and everything that came to 
hand as anybody at all. When they had done their work their method was to pull a 
string which was fastened to the end of the hooks, and so raise them, upon which the 
ladder fell without leaving any marks behind it.
	Next he got into a crew of wool-drawers, whose trade is to snatch away 
cloaks, hats or perukes from towners — a very sly sort of theft, practised only in the 
night, the greatest part of their cunning lying in the choice of a proper opportunity. 
They go always in companies, three or four together, about nine or ten at night, most 
commonly on dark rainy evenings, which are generally the most favourable to their 
practice. The places they choose are dark alleys and passages where a great many 
people come along, and there is a facility of escaping by a great many ways; which 
they do to prevent their being surprised by the neighbours if those that are robbed 
should cry out, as they frequently do. But Dick Bauf was at last taken in one of these 
pranks also, and burned in the hand for it at Galway; upon which he grew weary of 
the lay. He was, moreover, now a man full grown, very lusty and able-bodied; which 
determined him to take to the highway. He was not long in making provision for this 
new course; and, being in every particular well accoutred for it, he proceeded in as 
intrepid and insolent a manner as ever fellow did. All the four provinces of Ireland 
were scarce large enough for him to range in, and hardly afforded occasions enough 
for him to make proof of his courage as much as he desired. Night and day he pursued 
his villainies, and practised them on all ranks and degrees — rich and poor, old and 
young, man, woman and child were all the same to him. For he was as impartial as 
Death, and altogether as inexorable, being never softened to pity.
	He was so notoriously remarkable for the daily robberies he committed on the 
Mount of Barnsmoor that no person of quality would venture to travel that way 
without a very large retinue. In a word, he kept his residence in this place till, by an 
order of the Government, there was a guard- house built on the middle of it; and the 
regiments lying at Coleraine, Londonderry, Belfast and other garrisons in the north of 
Ireland were obliged to detach thirty or forty men thither, under a sergeant and a 
corporal, and to relieve them monthly, on purpose to secure the passengers who 
travelled that way from being interrupted by this audacious robber. These measures 
obliged him to shift his quarters and reside about Lorras. In the end, such grievous 
complaints of his frequent outrages were made to the Government by so many people 
that a proclamation was issued for the apprehending of him, with the promise of five 
hundred pounds' reward to him who could do the State this signal piece of service; 
for, in short, he began to be looked upon as a dangerous person to the whole kingdom. 
This great sum caused abundance of people to look out for him, and among others 
were several who had often had a fellow-feeling with him, by being employed to 
dispose of what he stole. Bauf was so enraged when he heard of this that he vowed 
revenge; which he thus executed.
	Some of these persons daily travelled a by-road about business. As he knew 
their time of passing, he one day waylaid them and stopped them singly as they came, 
tying them neck and heels and putting them into an old barn by the roadside. When he 
had by this means got nine or ten together, he set the barn on fire and left them to be 
consumed with it; which they all were, without remedy.
	This inhuman action was soon discovered by the persons being missed and the 
bones that were found in the rubbish; whereupon, finding the country too hot to hold 
him, he fled in disguise to Donaghadee, took shipping, and escaped to Portpatrick, in 
Scotland, from whence he designed to have gone to France. But lighting on a public-
house where there was a handsome landlady he got familiar with her, which 
occasioned him to stay longer than he intended, and, indeed, too long for him; for the 
husband, at last observing the freedom that our rover took with his wife, caused him 
to be apprehended, in a fit of jealousy, having before a suspicion who he was.
	When he was carried before a magistrate all circumstances appeared against 
him; so that he was sent back under a strong guard to Ireland, where he was soon 
known. Being committed to Newgate, in Dublin, and shortly afterwards condemned, it 
is said he offered five thousand pounds for a pardon, being worth twice the sum. But 
all proving ineffectual, he was executed at Dublin, on Friday, the 15th of May, 1702, 
aged twenty-nine years. His body was afterwards hanged in chains on Barnsmoor 
Mount, in the province of Ulster.


ALEXANDER BALFOUR 
A Man of noble Family, who was convicted for the Murder of Mr Syme, 
escaped from Prison, and lived Fifty Years after the Day fixed for his 
Execution by the "Maiden" or Guillotine

	THIS man was born in the year 1687, at the seat of his father, Lord Burleigh, 
near Kinross. He was first sent for education to a village called Orwell, near the place 
of his birth, and thence to the University of St Andrews, where he pursued his studies 
with a diligence and success that greatly distinguished him. His father, Lord Burleigh, 
had intended to have sent him into the army in Flanders, under the command of the 
Duke of Marlborough, in which he had rational expectation of his rising to 
preferment, as he was related to the Duke of Argyll and the Earl of Stair, who were 
major-generals in the army; but this scheme unhappily did not take place. Mr Balfour, 
going to his father's house during the vacation at the university, became enamoured of 
Miss Anne Robertson, who officiated as teacher to his sisters. This young lady was 
possessed of considerable talents, improved by a fine education; but Lord Burleigh 
being apprised of the connection between her and his son, she was discharged and the 
young gentleman sent to make the tour of France and Italy. Before he went abroad he 
sent the young lady a letter, informing her that if she married before his return he 
would murder her husband. Notwithstanding this threat, which she might presume had 
its origin in ungovernable passion, she married Mr Syme, a schoolmaster, at 
Inverkeithing, in the county of Fife. When Balfour returned from his travels, his first 
business was to inquire for Miss Robertson; and learning that she was married he 
proceeded immediately to Inverkeithing, when he saw Mrs Syme sitting at her 
window nursing the first child of her marriage. Recollecting his former threatenings, 
she now screamed with terror, and called to her husband to consult his safety. Mr 
Syme, unconscious of offence, paid no regard to what she said; but in the interim 
Balfour entered the schoolroom, and finding the husband shot him through the heart. 
The confusion consequent on this scene favoured his escape; but he was taken into 
custody, within a few days, at a public-house in a village four miles from Edinburgh, 
and, being brought to trial, was sentenced to die, but ordered to be beheaded by the 
"maiden," in respect to the nobility of his family, The scaffold was actually erected 
for the purpose; but on the preceding day his sister went to visit him, and, being very 
much like him in face and stature, they changed clothes, and he made his escape from 
the prison. His friends having provided horses for him, and a servant, at the west gate 
of Edinburgh, they rode to a distant village, where he changed his clothes again, and 
afterwards left the kingdom. Lord Burleigh, the father, died in the reign of Queen 
Anne; but had first obtained a pardon for his son, who succeeded to the family title 
and honours, and who lived near fifty years after his escape, having died, in 1752, a 
sincere penitent for the murder he had committed.


THOMAS ESTRICK 
Executed for housebreaking on the 10th of March, 1703.

	THOMAS ESTRICK was born in the Borough of Southwark, in the year 
1676. His father was a currier, and instructed him in his own business; but the boy 
shewed a very early attachment to pleasures and gratifications above his age, and 
incompatible with his situation.
	When the time of his apprenticeship was expired, he was of too unsettled a 
disposition to follow his business, and therefore engaged in the service of a gentleman 
of fortune at Hackney; but he had not been long in this new place before his master 
was robbed of plate, and other valuable effects, to the amount of above eighty pounds.
	The fact was, that Estrick had stolen these effects; but such was the 
ascendency that he had obtained over his master, and such the baseness of his own 
disposition, that he had art enough to impute the crime to one of the servant maids, 
who was turned out of the house with every circumstance of unmerited disgrace.
	Estrick, having quitted this service, took a shop in Cock-alley, near 
Cripplegate church, where he carried on the business to which he was bred; and while 
in this station he courted a girl of reputation, to whom he was soon afterwards 
married. It should be remarked, that he had been instigated to rob his master, at 
Hackney, by some young fellows of a profligate disposition; and he had not been 
married more than half a year when these dissolute companions threatened to give 
him up to justice, if he refused to bribe them to keep the secret.
	Estrick, terrified at the thoughts of a prosecution, gave them his note of hand 
for the sum they demanded; but when the note became due he was unable to pay it; on 
which he was arrested, and lay some time in prison, but at length obtained his liberty 
in defect of the prosecution of the suit.
	As soon as he was at large, he went to lodge with a person who kept his 
former house in Cock-Alley; but, on taking possession of his lodgings, he found that a 
woman who lodged and died in the room during his absence had left a box containing 
cash to the amount of about ninety pounds.
	Having possessed himself of this sum, he opened a shop in Long-alley, 
Moorfields; but, his old associates having propagated a report to the prejudice of his 
character, he thought he should not be safe in that situation; and therefore took 
shipping for Holland, having previously disposed of his effects. On his arrival in 
Holland he found no opportunity of employing his little money to any advantage; and 
therefore spent the greater part of it, and then returned to his native country.
	It was not long after his return before he found himself reduced to great 
distress; on which he had recourse to a variety of illegal methods to supply his 
necessities. He was guilty of privately stealing, was a housebreaker, a street-robber, 
and a highwayman. In a short time, however, the career of his wickedness was at an 
end. He was apprehended, tried, and convicted; and, in consequence thereof, was 
executed at Tyburn on the 10th of March, 1703, before he had attained the age of 
twenty-seven years.


JACK WITHERS 
A sacrilegious Villain who murdered a Footman and was executed on the 
16th of April, 1703

	JACK WITHERS was the son of a butcher, born at Lichfield, in Staffordshire, 
where he served an apprenticeship with his own father. Want of business when he was 
out of his time made him come up to London, and his evil genius, when he was there, 
soon threw him into the way of destruction, for he engaged himself with a society of 
thieves, by a conversation he got into, from whence he was sent into Flanders for a 
soldier, as was then the custom of dealing with offenders who were not judged worthy 
of death. While he was abroad he could very indifferently brook the being obliged to 
live on a foot soldier's pay, which bore no proportion to his late expenses. This put 
him on a great many shifts, and made him take all opportunities of making up the 
deficiency of his income.
	Going into a church in Ghent, where the people were all at High Mass, and 
seeing most of them cast money into a box that stood under an image of the Virgin 
Mary, it made his fingers itch for the coin; so, watching for a fair opportunity, with a 
crooked nail he picked the lock, and crammed as much of the treasure as he could into 
his pockets. But doing it over-hastily, and dropping some of the pieces, they made 
such a jingling on the marble pavement that, as ill luck would have it, he was 
discovered, seized, and dragged before a great cardinal then in that town.
	This arch-priest, examining the witnesses as to the fact, and finding it plain, 
exclaimed prodigiously against Withers, by the titles of rogue, rascal and sacrilegious 
villain; and was just going to condemn him to a severe punishment when Jack, falling 
on his knees, with uplifted hands and tears in his eyes, begged his Eminence to hear 
him. This, after much storming, was granted, and silence being made, Jack, in a 
piteous tone, told him that he was a vile, wicked wretch, bred up a Protestant and a 
heretic, and being in great distress he had made his prayers before the image of the 
Blessed Virgin to relieve him in his hard necessity, promising, in consideration 
thereof, to turn Roman Catholic, and ever be her votary; when all of a sudden the box 
under her image flew open, and she pointed with her finger to the money, making also 
a dumb show, with nodding her head, for him to supply his necessities out of it, which 
he had thankfully done, with a resolution of keeping his vow for ever. This relation 
being heard with much patience and attention, the Cardinal cried out, "A miracle! A 
miracle!" — which all the rest rehearsed out aloud, concluding that none had more 
right to dispose of that money than the Virgin, to whom it was offered. Instead of 
being punished, Jack Withers was now carried back to the church in solemn 
procession on men's shoulders, and borne round it in triumph, whilst Ave Maria was 
sung by the priests, and he placed before the High Altar; after which he was dismissed 
with great applause.
	Proving so fortunate in this cheat, he was thereby emboldened to commit 
another like it; for one day, going into a church in Antwerp, he perceived the priest 
put a silver crucifix of great value into a sepulchre, as their ceremony is in 
representing the Resurrection upon Easter Day; and whilst the spiritual juggled and 
the people were going round the church, Jack Withers was so dexterous as to convey 
the crucifix into his breeches and shuffle among the crowd; so that when the priest 
came back to it, saying these words in the Gospel, "Non est hic, surrexit enim" — that 
is, "He is not here, for He is risen" — he found it so indeed. For, after much fumbling, 
he perceived his graven god was gone — and Withers then made what haste he could 
away, for fear of a search.
	But a little after the playing of this prank, Jack, running away from his colours, 
came into England again, where, preferring an idle course of life before any lawful 
employment, he took to the highway. One day meeting with an old miser upon the 
road, who was his father's neighbour, he commanded him to stand and deliver what he 
had, or otherwise he was a dead man. The old man, being surprised, pleaded great 
poverty, in hopes of saving about a hundred guineas and broad-pieces of gold, which 
he had in the pockets of his wide knee-breeches, containing cloth enough to make a 
gentlewoman a hooped petticoat; but all his whining prevailed nothing with Jack. He 
was then for coming to composition with him, by giving him one half of his money to 
save the other, but Withers swore a great oath of the first rate that he would not abate 
him a farthing of cent. per cent. The old man, fumbling a good while in his pocket, at 
length lugged out his purse and pair of spectacles, putting which on his nose, he gave 
his money to Jack Withers.
	After this, Jack Withers, and one William Edwards, setting on a person of 
quality within a mile or two of Beaconsfield, in Buckinghamshire, the lord that was 
assaulted, who had only one footman with him, had the courage to oppose them, and 
held so hot a dispute to save what he had that Withers's horse was shot, and Edwards 
was obliged to carry him off behind him; and, a close pursuit being made after them, 
they were forced to quit that horse and make their escape on foot through by-lanes and 
over fields, where none on horseback could ride after them. Hiding themselves in a 
wood all night, the next morning they made the best of their way to London; but about 
a mile out of Uxbridge, meeting with a penny-post man, they assaulted him on the 
queen's highway, and having taken from him about eight shillings, Withers, to prevent 
his discovery of them (though much against the will of his comrade Edwards), took a 
butcher's knife out of his pocket, and with it not only cut the throat of the unhappy 
man, but ripped out his bowels, and filling the body full of stones threw it into a pond, 
where it was found the next day. None could tell the author of this in- human murder 
till Withers and his companion were apprehended, about two months after, for a 
country robbery, when, being condemned at the Lent Assizes at Norfolk, on the 16th 
of April, 1703, the day of their execution, at Thetford, Withers confessed the fact.


JOHN PETER DRAMATTI 
Executed at Tyburn, on 21st of July, 1703, for the Murder of his Wife, who 
said she was allied to the French Royal Family

	This is a case, though of the most heinous nature, yet the perpetrator is entitled 
to some commiseration. He was a foreigner, but had served the King of England with 
bravery as a soldier; and was inveigled by an artful female impostor into marriage. He 
did not seriously resent the trick played upon him, but continued his habits of industry 
and integrity, until, on being grossly assaulted by this woman who had led him a 
wretched life, he killed her in the scuffle which ensued.
	JOHN PETER DRAMATTI was the son of Protestant parents, and was born at 
Saverdun, in the county of Foix, and province of Languedoc, in France. He received a 
religious education; but when he arrived at years of maturity he left his own country 
and went into Germany, where he served as a horse grenadier under the Elector of 
Brandenburg, who was afterwards King of Prussia. When he had been in this 
condition about a year he came over to England and entered into the service of Lord 
Haversham, and afterwards enlisted as a soldier in the regiment of Colonel de la 
Meloniere. Having made two campaigns in Flanders, the regiment was ordered into 
Ireland, where it was dismissed from further service; in consequence of which 
Dramatti obtained his discharge.
	He now became acquainted with a widow, between fifty and sixty years of 
age, who pretended that she had a great fortune, and was allied to the Royal Family of 
France; and he soon married her, not only on account of her supposed wealth and 
rank, but also of her understanding English and Irish, thinking it prudent to have a 
wife who could speak the language of the country in which he proposed to spend the 
remainder of his life. As soon as he discovered that his wife had no fortune he went to 
London and offered his services to Lord Haversham, and was again admitted as one of 
his domestics. His wife, unhappy on account of their separate residence, wished to 
live with him at Lord Haversham's, which he would not consent to, saying that his 
lordship did not know he was married.
	The wife now began to evince the jealousy of her disposition, and frequent 
quarrels took place between them because he was unable to be with her so frequently 
as she desired.
	At length, on the 9th of June, 1703, Dramatti was sent to London from his 
master's house at Kensington, and calling upon his wife at her lodgings near Soho 
Square, she endeavoured to prevail upon him to stay with her. This, however, he 
refused; and finding that he was going home she went before him, and stationed 
herself at the Park gate. On his coming up, she declared that he should go no farther 
unless she accompanied him; but he quitted her abruptly and went onwards to 
Chelsea. She pursued him to the Bloody Bridge, and there seized him by the neck-
cloth, and would have strangled him, but that he beat her off with his cane. He then 
attacked her with his sword; and having wounded her in so many places as to 
conclude that he had killed her, his passion immediately began to subside, and, falling 
on his knees, he devoutly implored the pardon of God for the horrid sin of which he 
had been guilty. He went on to Kensington, where his fellow servants observing that 
his clothes were bloody, he said he had been attacked by two men in Hyde Park, who 
would have robbed him of his clothes, but that he had defended himself, and broke the 
head of one of them.
	The real fact, however, was subsequently discovered; and Dramatti being 
taken before a magistrate, to whom he confessed his crime, the body of his wife was 
found in a ditch between Hyde Park and Chelsea, and a track of blood was seen to the 
distance of twenty yards, at the end of which a piece of a sword was found sticking in 
a bank which fitted the other part of the sword in the prisoner's possession. The 
circumstances attending the murder being proved to the satisfaction of the jury, the 
culprit was found guilty, condemned, and on the 21st of July, 1703, was executed at 
Tyburn.
	If ever a criminal possessed claim to royal mercy, surely this man's case 
should have been favoured. He sought not for blood; but, impelled by assaults of the 
most foul and aggravated nature, he killed an antagonist, who ought to have cheered 
him through life. He was an ill-treated stranger too; and therein he became doubly an 
object of compassion.


THOMAS COOK 
Murdered a Constable during a Riot in Mayfair, and was executed on 11th 
of August, 1703

	How frequently do we find that the guilty, in the interval of time between the 
commission and discovery of a murder, are compelled by an irresistible infatuation to 
introduce the subject of their crime into conversation with strangers. Many years ago 
a mail robber was apprehended in a remote part of Cornwall, on suspicion, from his 
frequently speaking upon the nature and danger of plundering the public mail, and 
executed for that offence. The subject of the present memoir was taken into custody at 
Chester for a crime committed in London, merely from his constant relation of the riot 
in which lie had committed the murder. Thus, by a kind of mentalignis fatuus, the 
murderer was led on to his own detection. These are the workings of conscience, that 
earthly hell which torments those who with intentional malice have spilt the blood of 
their fellow-creatures How strongly did this mental agony appear in the conduct of 
Governor Wall; whose life shall hereafter be given. After 20 years had elapsed from 
the commission of the murder, and while he lived in personal security in a foreign 
country, his conscience afforded him no peace of mind. He voluntarily returned to 
London, sought his own apprehension, was convicted, and executed.
	Thomas Cook was the son of a butcher, a man of reputation, at Gloucester. 
When he was about fifteen years of age his father put him apprentice to a barber 
surgeon in London, with whom he lived two years, and then, running away, engaged 
himself in the service of — Needham, Esq., who was page-of-honour to King William 
III.; but his mother writing to him, and intimating in the vulgar phrase that "a 
gentleman's service was no inheritance," he quitted his place, and going to Gloucester 
engaged in the business of a butcher, being the profession of several of his ancestors. 
He followed this trade for some time, and served as master of the company of 
butchers in his native city; after which he abandoned that business and took an inn; 
but it does not appear that he was successful in it, since he soon afterwards turned 
grazier. Restless, however, in every station of life, he repaired to London, where he 
commenced as prize-fighter, at Mayfair. At this time Mayfair was a place greatly 
frequented by prize-fighters, thieves and women of bad character. Here puppet shows 
were exhibited, and it was the favourite resort of all the profligate and abandoned. At 
length the nuisance increased to such a degree that Queen Anne issued her 
proclamation for the suppression of vice and immorality, with a particular view to this 
fair; in consequence of which the justices of Peace issued their warrant to the High 
Constable, who summoned all the inferior constables to his assistance.
	When the constables came to suppress the fair, Cook, with a mob of about 
thirty soldiers and other persons, stood in defiance of the peace officers, at whom they 
threw brick bats, by which some of the latter were wounded. Cooper, the constable, 
being the most active Cook drew his sword and stabbed him in the belly, and he died 
of the wound at the expiration of four days. Thereupon Cook fled to Ireland, and (as it 
was deposed upon his trial) while he was in a public house there he swore in a profane 
manner, for which the landlord censured him, and told him there were persons in the 
house who would take him into custody for it; to which he answered: "Are there any 
of the informing dogs in Ireland? We in London drive them; for at a fair called 
Mayfair there was a noise which I went out to see six soldiers and myself the 
constables played their parts with their staves, and I played mine; and when the man 
dropped I wiped my sword, put it up, and went away." Cook, having repeatedly talked 
in this boasting and insolent manner, was at length taken into custody and sent to 
Chester, whence he was removed by writ of habeas corpus to London; and being tried 
at the Old Bailey was convicted, and received sentence of death. Having received the 
sacrament on the 21st Of July, 1703, he was taken from Newgate to be carried to 
Tyburn, but when he got to High Holborn, opposite Bloomsbury, a reprieve arrived 
for him till the following Friday. On his return to Newgate he was visited by numbers 
of his acquaintance, who rejoiced on his narrow escape, except those who would 
assist him in his devotions. On Friday he received another respite till the 11th of 
August, when he was executed.


MOLL RABY 
Who robbed many Houses, and was hanged at Tyburn on 3rd of November, 
1703

	THIS offender had almost as many names as the fabulous hydra had heads. 
She was born in the parish of St Martin's-in-the-Fields, and took betimes to ill 
courses, in which she continued till her death. Madam Ogle was not more dexterous at 
bilking hackney coaches than Moll Raby at bilking her lodging, in which species of 
fraud her talent originally lay, and at which she had more success than at anything 
else she undertook.
	One of her adventures was at a house in Great Russell Street, by Bloomsbury 
Square, where, passing for a great heiress, who was obliged to leave the country by 
reason of the importunate troublesomeness of a great many suitors, she was 
entertained with all the civility imaginable. This seemingly honest creature, who was 
a saint without but a devil within, continued there about a fortnight to increase her 
character, making a very good appearance as to her habit, for she had a tallyman in 
every quarter of the town. One day, when all the family were absent except the maid, 
she desired her to call a porter, and gave him a sham bill, drawn on a banker in 
Lombard Street, for one hundred and fifty pounds, which she desired might be all in 
gold; but fearing such a quantity of money might be a temptation to make the porter 
dishonest, she privately requested the maid to go along with him, and she, in the 
meantime, would take care of the house. The poor maid, thinking no harm, went with 
the porter to Lombard Street, where they were stopped for a couple of cheats; but they 
alleging their innocence, and proving from whence they came, a messenger was sent 
home with them, who found it to be a trick put upon the servant to rob the house; for 
before she came back, Moll Raby had gone off with above eighty pounds in money, 
one hundred and sixty pounds worth of plate, and several other things of a 
considerable value. For offences of this nature she was thrice burned in the hand, after 
which she married one Humphry Jackson, a butcher, who was taught by her to leave 
off his trade and go upon the pad in the daytime, while she went upon the "buttock 
and twang" by night; which is picking up a cull or spark, whom, pretending she would 
not expose her face in a public-house, she takes into some dark alley, where she picks 
his fob or pocket of his watch or money, and giving a sort of "Ahem!" as a signal she 
has succeeded in her design, the fellow with whom she keeps company, blundering up 
in the dark, knocks down the gallant and carries of the prize.
	But after the death of this husband Moll turned arrant thief, and in the first 
exploit she then went upon she was like to come scurvily off. The adventure was this. 
Going upon the night sneak (as the phrase of these people is), she found a door half 
open in Downing Street, at Westminster, where, stealing softly upstairs into a great 
bedchamber, she hid herself under the bed. She had not been there above an hour 
before a couple of footmen brought candles into the room, whilst the maid , with great 
diligence, was laying the cloth for supper. The table being furnished with two or three 
dishes of meat, five or six persons sat down, besides the children that were in the 
house; which so affrighted Moll that she verily thought that if their voices and the 
noise of the children had not hindered them they might have heard her very joints 
smite one against another and the teeth chatter in her head. At length supper was 
ended, and not long after they all withdrew themselves; when Moll, coming from 
under the bed, wrapped the sheets up in a quilt, and sneaking downstairs made off the 
ground as fast as she could.
	Mary or Moll Raby, alias Rogers, alias Jackson, alias Brown, was at last 
condemned for a burglary committed in the house of Lady Cavendish, in Soho 
Square, the 3rd of March, 1703, upon the information of two villains — namely, 
Arthur Chambers and Joseph Hatfield — who made themselves evidences against her. 
At the place of execution at Tyburn, on Wednesday, the 3rd of November, 1703, she 
said she was thirty years of age, that she was well brought up at first, and knew good 
things, but did not practise them, having given herself up to all manner of wickedness 
and vice.


MOLL HAWKINS 
A "Question Lay" Thief, whose End was at Tyburn, on 22nd of December, 
1703

	MOLL HAWKINS was condemned on the 3rd of March, 1703, for privately 
stealing goods out of the shop of Mrs Hobday, in Paternoster Row. She having been 
reprieved for nine months, upon account of her being then alleged quick with child — 
though she was not — she was now called down to her former judgment. When she 
came to the place of execution at Tyburn, on Wednesday, the 22nd of December, 
1703, she said she was about twenty-six years of age, born in the parish of St Giles- 
in-the-Fields; that she served three years' apprenticeship to a button-maker in Maiden 
Lane, by Covent Garden, and followed that employment for some years after, but 
withal gave way at the same time to those ill practices which were now the cause of 
her death.
	Before this Moll Hawkins projected shoplifting she went upon the "question 
lay," which is putting herself into a good handsome dress, like some exchange girl, 
and then, taking an empty bandbox in her hand, and passing for a milliner's or 
sempstress's apprentice, she goes early to a person of quality's house and, knocking at 
the door, asks the servant if the lady is stirring yet, for if she is, she has brought home, 
according to order, the suit of knots (or what else the devil puts into her head) which 
her ladyship had bespoke overnight. While the servant goes upstairs to acquaint the 
lady with this message, the custom is in the meantime to rob the house, and go away 
without an answer. Thus she one day served the Lady Arabella Howard, living in 
Soho Square. When the maid went upstairs to acquaint her ladyship that a 
gentlewoman waited below with some gloves and fans, Moll Hawkins took the 
opportunity of carrying away above fifty pounds' worth of plate, which stood on a 
sideboard in the parlour to be cleaned against dinner-time.


HARVEY HUTCHINS 
Apprenticed as a Thief and became an expert Housebreaker. Executed at 
Tyburn in 1704

	THIS malefactor, Harvey Hutchins, was born of honest parents, his father 
being a sword-blade maker by trade, who, when this unhappy son came to be about 
fourteen years of age, put him apprentice to a silversmith in Shrewsbury, but pilfering 
very often from his master, he had him sent at last to Shrewsbury Jail. In this prison 
the young lad became acquainted with some London thieves, who, following their 
calling in the county of Salop, were also committed to the same jail, and Hutchins, 
hearing them tell of the several notable and ingenious robberies that were committed 
in and about London by some of the chief masters of their profession, was resolved to 
make the best of his way thither after he obtained his liberty.
	About three or four months after his confinement came the assizes, when, 
being tried, and whipped at the cart's tail, upon his friends paying his fees he got his 
enlargement and came up to Islington, where he lurked about the town, and took up 
his lodging in a barn. But his mind still ran upon the ingenuity of the topping thieves 
in London, particularly one Constantine, whom, for the fine stories he had heard told 
of him, he admired above the rest. At last he moved into the great metropolis, where, 
getting acquainted with some young pickpockets, he inquired among them for 
Constantine, who told him he might be found at one Snotty-nose Hill's, who kept the 
Dog Tavern in Newgate Street. The young Salopian, being overjoyed at finding out 
where Mr Constantine used, one evening goes to the Dog Tavern to inquire, saying, 
after his country dialect or tone, he had "vary ennest business wod him." The drawer 
presently went upstairs to Mr Constantine, who was then drinking with a great many 
of his thieving fraternity. Constantine ordered him to be brought up to the stair-head, 
where, coming out to him, quoth he: "What is your business with me?" He answered: 
"Vy, mester, I heve ben in Shrewsbury Joil, vere haring a grot monny vine stories of 
yoa, by zum gentlemen that vare prosnert with me, I am come up to London on 
porpus to beand myzelf prontice to yow." Hereupon Constantine could not forbear 
smiling at the lad's fancy, and taking him into the room, where he repeated the story to 
his company, it caused a great deal of laughter among them.
	He gave the boy sixpence and a glass or two of wine, and bade him be sure to 
come to him at the same place about seven the next night, and he would take him 
upon trial, and according as he found him tractable, diligent and acute in his business 
he would take him apprentice. The boy, overjoyed at this good fortune (as he 
unhappily thought it), took his leave, and, according to order, was next night at the 
Dog Tavern punctually at the hour appointed, where his master, Constantine, was 
ready to go with him upon a trial of skill; which was this. Constantine having stolen a 
silver tankard, about three months before, out of an ale-house in Cheapside, had, 
nevertheless, been there in disguise several times after; and observing much plate still 
in use about the house told the boy the story going along the street, and promised him 
that if he could carry off another clean, and bring it to him at a certain house in 
Whitechapel, he would certainly take him apprentice, and make a man of him when 
he was out of his apprenticeship, at the same time intimating to him that the house 
was just before him, where he was going to drink.
	The boy took his story right, but just as his master was come to the house, 
pulling him by the sleeve, quoth he: "Mester, Mester, can yow ran well?" "Yes," 
replied his master, "as well as most men in England; I have often outran hundreds 
together before now." "Weel then," said the boy, "if you can ran well, ne'er fear but 
we'll hove a tonkad." Into the house Constantine goes first, calling for a room. The 
boy followed him to the bar, as his servant, and with a loud voice asked the man of 
the house if he did not lose a silver tankard about three months ago. "Yes," replied he. 
Constantine, overhearing this, took as fast as he could to his heels, the boy at the same 
time crying out: "That was the man that stole it." Upon which the victualler and the 
servants ran presently out in pursuit of him, but to no purpose, for he was out of sight 
in an instant, and in the meantime the boy took another silver tankard out of the bar, 
and got safely to the place appointed by his master; who no sooner saw him but he fell 
a-cursing and damning, and sinking at him like a madman, for putting him into such 
bodily fear, withal telling him that if he had been taken he should have been certainly 
hanged by the best neck he had. "But," quoth he, "sirrah, have you got a tankard?" 
"Yes," replied the boy, and taking it from under his coat gave it him, saying at the 
same time: "Mester, if yow hed not virst assored me thet yow cud ran well, I wud a 
gut et sum udder vay."
	Harvey very truly and honestly served out his time with his master. Then, 
setting up for himself, he had very pretty business in housebreaking, and lived very 
creditably and handsomely among those of his profession for about nine years, in and 
about the cities of London and Westminster, and in that time had often paid scot-and-
lot to Newgate and other jails about town; but at last, being apprehended for breaking 
open a Jew's house at Duke's Place, and robbing it of above four hundred pounds in 
money and plate, he was hanged at Tyburn, in 1704, aged twenty-six years.


TOM SHARP 
Resourceful Thief, Coiner and Trickster. Executed in Long Acre on 22nd 
September, 1704

	THOMAS SHARP was born at Reigate, in Surrey, where he served his time to 
a glover. But he had not been long out of his apprenticeship ere, by the influence of 
bad company, he was so hardened in villainy as not to be reclaimed either by 
wholesome advice, threats, or the examples of his companions, who were executed 
before him. Nothing could put an end to his roguery but the halter that put an end to 
his life.
	To prove that this fellow was not only Sharp by name but also sharp by nature, 
we need only relate the following adventure. Dressing himself one day in an old suit 
of black clothes and an old tattered canonical gown, he went to an eminent tavern in 
the city, where at that time was kept a great feast of the clergymen, and humbly 
begged one of the drawers to acquaint some of the ministers above-stairs that a poor 
scholar was waiting below who craved their charity. Accordingly the drawer 
acquainted one of the divines that there was a poor scholar below in a parson's habit. 
The gentleman going down, and commiserating his seeming poverty, introduced him 
into the company of all the clergymen, who made him eat and drink very plentifully, 
and gathered him betwixt four and five pounds, which he thankfully put into his 
pocket. One of the divines then, after asking pardon for making so free, desired to 
know of him at what university he was bred. Tom Sharp told them he was never bred 
at any. "Can you speak Greek?" the divine asked again. "No," replied Tom. "Nor 
Latin?" the divine asked. "No, Sir," said Tom. "Can you write then?" quoth the divine. 
"No, nor read neither," replied Tom. At which they fell a-laughing, and said he was a 
poor scholar indeed. "Then I have not deceived you, gentlemen," quoth Tom, and so 
he brushed off with their charitable benevolence, thinking himself not fit company for 
such learned sophists.
	This poor scholar afterwards used the Vine ale-house at Charing Cross, which 
was then kept by a rich old man, who knew not that he was a thief, and brought 
several of his gang there once a week, to keep a sort of a club, up one pair of stairs, 
with a design to rob the victualler. Accordingly they had several times struck all the 
doors above-stairs with a dub — that is, a pick-lock — but could never light on his 
mammon; whereupon one night Tom Sharp puts the candle to the old rotten hangings 
that were in the club-room and setting them in a blaze he and his company cries out 
"Fire!" The alarm brings up the old man in a trice, who in a great fright runs up to 
secure his money. Tom runs softly after him at a distance to espy where his hoard is, 
and in the meantime his associates, with two or three pails of water, have quenched 
the flame, which has done no great damage. The old man, at the news, returned down 
with a great deal of joy, leaving his money where it was before. With this information, 
the night following, Tom and two of his companions, having a great supper there, 
each with his lass, took the opportunity of taking away five hundred pounds in money; 
which, when the old cove missed, he was ready to hang himself in his own garters.
	Sharp's chiefest dexterity lay in robbing wagons, which in their canting 
language they call tumblers. They who follow this sort of thieving do generally wait 
on a dark morning in the roads betwixt London and Bow, Blackheath, Newington, 
Islington, Highgate, Kensington Gravel Pits or Knightsbridge, and going in at the tail 
of a wagon they take out packs of linen or woollen cloth, boxes, trunks or other goods. 
One time, though, Tom Sharp and his accomplices, after following a wagon along 
Tyburn Road to St Giles's Pound, had no convenience at all of entering by reason a 
man drove the team before and the master and his son, a lad of about thirteen years of 
age, rode behind, on one horse. Still they followed the wagon till it came just under 
Newgate, when Tom Sharp, who was a lusty, hale fellow, snatching the boy off the 
horse, ran down the Old Bailey with him under his arm, at which the father cried out 
to his man to stop the wagon, for a rogue had stolen away his son. So whilst the 
master rode after Tom Sharp, and the man ran after his master, one of Tom's 
comrades slipped two pieces of woollen cloth out of the wagon. The old man got his 
son again, for Tom dropped him at the sessions-house gate.
	Under this sort of thieving is also comprehended the robbing of coaches in the 
night-time in London, by cutting off trunks and boxes which are tied sometimes 
behind them; and also the chiving of bags or portmanteaux from behind horses — that 
is, cutting them off, for chive, among thieves, signifies a knife. For offences of this 
nature Tom Sharp was in Newgate no less than eighteen times before the last fatal 
time.
	Among many other arts peculiar to persons of his profession Tom learned that 
of making "black dogs," which are shillings or other pieces of money made only of 
pewter, double-washed, by means of which he maintained himself for some time. It 
may not be amiss to observe here that what the professors of this hellish art call 
"George Plateroon" is all copper within, with only a thin plate about it; and what they 
call "Compositum" is a mixed metal, which will both touch and cut, but not endure 
the fiery test. Tom had not been a great while at the trade of coining before several of 
his gang were apprehended and sent post to the gallows for their wicked ingenuity, 
which obliged him to employ all the powers of his wit and invention in the search of 
something else that might conduce to supply him in his manifold extravagances.
	In the next place he went to picking of pockets, being detected at which, he 
was committed to New Prison, where, having a great many loose women coming after 
him, who supplied him with a great deal of money, he had all the privileges 
imaginable in the jail; and going to take his trial at Hicks's Hall for his fact, one John 
Lee, a turnkey, conducting him thither, gave him the liberty of being shaved by the 
way in a barber's shop. The keeper also having a pretty long beard, quoth Tom Sharp: 
"Come, we are time enough yet; sit down, and I'll pay for taking your beard off too." 
Whilst he was being trimmed, Tom talked of one thing and another to hold him in 
discourse, till at last the barber cried: "Shut your eyes or else my ball will offend 
them." The man did as he was bid, and Tom took this occasion to slip out, the barber 
not taking him for a prisoner, and hid himself in an ale-house hard by. The turnkey, 
not hearing him talk, opened his eyes, and not seeing him in the shop rose up so 
hastily that he overthrew Cut-beard, basin, water, and all upon him, and ran out into 
the street with the barber's cloth about him, and the napkin on his head. The people 
seeing him thus, with the froth about his face, concluded him mad, and as he ran gave 
him the way. The barber, with his razor in his hand, ran after the turnkey, crying, 
"Stop thief! Stop thief!" but he, never minding the outcry, still ran, staring up and 
down, as if his wits had lately stolen away from him and be was in pursuit of them. 
Some durst not stop him, and others would not; till the barber seized him at last, and 
getting his cloth and napkin from him, made him pay sixpence besides, for being but 
half shaved, while Tom, in the time of this hurly-burly, got clear off.
	Tom's last fact was shooting a watchman who opposed him in breaking open a 
shoemaker's shop at the corner of Great Wild Street, facing up Great Queen Street. He 
was apprehended and condemned for this murder; but such was his impiety, whilst 
under sentence of death, that instead of thanking such as had so much Christianity in 
them as to bid him prepare for his latter end, he would bid them not to trouble his 
head with the idle whimsies of heaven and hell, for he was more a man than to dread 
or believe any such matter after this life. But when he came to the place of execution, 
which was at the end of Long Acre, in Drury Lane, and the halter was put about his 
neck, he then changed his tone, and began to call out for mercy with a sorrowful 
voice, which could not but awake the most lethargic conscience that ever the devil 
lulled asleep. In this manner he was turned off the cart on Friday, the 22nd day of 
September, 1704, aged twenty-nine years.


JOHN SMITH 
Who proved that a Peruke-Maker does not make a good Highwayman, for 
his Career lasted only a Week. Executed 20th of December, 1704

	JOHN SMITH was born at Winchcomb, within ten miles of Gloucester. He 
was a peruke-maker by trade, about twenty-three years of age, and carefully educated 
by his parents, to whose kindness he made but an ungrateful return, being very 
disobedient to them, and falling into many extravagances and debaucheries. He said 
that the ill habits he had contracted in his younger years were greatly confirmed by his 
being, though but a little while, at sea, and that when he returned from thence he 
became acquainted with a peruke-maker in Chancery Lane, who proposed to him to 
go and rob on the highway; which being soon agreed on, they went out with that 
intent on Sunday, the 29th of October, and as they were waiting about Paddington for 
a booty, Smith rested himself on a stile over against the gallows at Tyburn, at the sight 
of which his heart misgave him, and he could not help thinking that at one time or 
another he should end his days near the place where he was beginning to rob; which 
he mentioned to his companion, and would have persuaded him to go home. This the 
other refused to do, and encouraged him, saying: "What matters, it, Jack? It is but 
hanging, if thou shouldst come to that." So they proceeded on their design, and stole 
Mr William Birch's grey mare, which was the first robbery they committed.
	On the following day Smith set out alone upon the mare and robbed three 
stage-coaches near Epping Forest. On Wednesday, the 1st of November, he robbed 
three other stage-coaches and a hackney-coach on Hounslow Heath, and on the 
Saturday following he robbed three stage-coaches more near St Albans; in all which 
robberies he did not obtain more than twenty pounds. And lastly, he robbed Mr 
Thomas Woodcock's coach, on Finchley Common, on Monday, the 6th of November, 
taking from Mr Woodcock's lady four guineas, two keys and a silk purse; for which 
he was apprehended.
	At the Old Bailey a gentleman deposed that, as he and his servant were riding 
along, hearing that a robbery had been committed, they pursued the thief till he took 
refuge in a wood called Colefall; and that he directed his servant to ride into the wood 
while he rode round it, to observe if the prisoner attempted to make his escape out of 
it. That in their search they found a grey mare tied to a bush, soon after which seven 
or eight people came to their assistance, and at length a huntsman espied the prisoner 
lying under a tree, and advanced towards him with a blunderbuss, whereupon Smith 
desired him not to shoot him, and immediately shot off his pistols into the air. Two 
men laying hold of him, he was conducted to Muswell Hill, where, being examined, 
there was found upon him the watch and purses mentioned in the indictment, a mask, 
some powder and shot, and some money; and that the prisoner then said he would 
have made his escape but that the mare was a jade.
	The jury found him guilty, and he received sentence of death. He was executed 
at Tyburn, on the 20th of December, 1704.


EDWARD JEFFERIES 
Murderer, executed at Tyburn, on the 21st Of September, 1705.

	EDWARD JEFFERIES WAS a gentleman by birth and education; and as 
such, until the commission of the crime for which he suffered, ever deported himself. 
His crime affords a melancholy instance of the fatal effects of illicit love and jealousy. 
He was born about the year 1656, at Devizes in Wiltshire. He served his clerkship to 
an eminent attorney in London, and afterwards carried on business on his own 
account: but his father dying while he was yet young, and leaving him a considerable 
fortune, he entered into too profuse a way of living, and embarked in the debaucheries 
of the age, which dissipated his substance. Soon after, he had the good success to 
marry a young lady of St. Alban's, with whom he received a decent fortune, and might 
have lived in prosperity with her, but that he continued his former course of 
dissipation, which naturally occasioned a separation. He now associated with one 
Mrs. Elizabeth Torshell, with whom a Mr. Woodcock had likewise an illicit 
connection. Jefferies and Woodcock had frequent debates respecting this woman, but 
at length appeared to be reconciled, and dined together at the Blue-posts, near Pall-
Mall, on the day that the former committed the murder. After dinner they went into 
the fields near Chelsea, and a quarrel arising between them, respecting Mrs. Torshell, 
Jefferies drew his sword, and, before Woodcock, who was left-handed, could draw 
his, he received a wound, of which he almost immediately died. Woodcock had no 
sooner fallen, than Jefferies rubbed some of his blood upon his (the deceased's) 
sword, took something out of his pocket, and then went towards Chelsea, where he 
had appointed to meet Mrs. Torshell. There were some boys playing in the fields who 
saw the body of the deceased, and part of the transaction above-mentioned. The body 
was removed to St. Martin's churchyard to be owned; and on the following day Mrs. 
Torshell came, among a crowd of other people, to see it; and was taken into custody, 
on her saying she knew the murdered party, and expressed great concern at his fate. 
Torshell's lodgings being searched, a number of articles were found, which she owned 
Mr. Jefferies had brought thither, though they appeared to belong to Woodcock. On 
this Jefferies was also taken into custody, and both of them were committed to 
Newgate. Jefferies alleged, in his defence, that he was at another place at the time the 
murder was committed; he called several witnesses to prove an alibi; but as these did 
not agree in the circumstances, he was convicted, and received sentence of death. Mrs. 
Torshell was acquitted. All the while he lay under condemnation, he repeatedly 
denied having committed the murder, and exerted his utmost interest to obtain a 
reprieve, which he was at length promised, through the medium of the Duke of 
Ormond. September the 19th, 1705, when the procession towards Tyburn had got as 
far as St. Giles's, a respite met him, to defer his execution till the 21st of the same 
month; but on that day he was executed, his guilt being too apparent. At the place of 
execution he again denied the fact; but said he freely forgave those who had injured 
him, and died in charity with all men. He betrayed no symptoms of fear during the 
preparation for launching him into eternity.
	


JOHN SMITH 
Convicted of Robbery, reprieved while actually hanging upon the Scaffold, 
24th of December, 1705, and afterwards had two other Escapes from Death

	THOUGH the crimes committed by this man were not marked with particular 
atrocity, nor his life sufficiently remarkable for a place in these volumes, yet the 
circumstances attending his fate at the place of execution are perhaps more singular 
than any we may have to record. He was the son of a farmer at Malton, about fifteen 
miles from the city of York, who bound him apprentice to a packer in London, with 
whom he served out his time, and afterwards worked as a journeyman. He then went 
to sea in a merchantman, after which he entered on board a man-of-war, and was at 
the famous expedition against Vigo; but on the return from that expedition he was 
discharged. He had not been long disengaged from the naval service when he enlisted 
as a soldier in the regiment of guards commanded by Lord Cutts; but in this station he 
soon made bad connections, and engaged with some of his dissolute companions as a 
housebreaker.
	On the 5th of December, 1705, he was arraigned on four different indictments, 
on two of which he was convicted, and received sentence of death. While he lay under 
sentence he seemed very little affected with his situation, absolutely depending on a 
reprieve, through the interest of his friends. However, an order came for his execution 
on the 24th day of the same month, in consequence of which he was carried to 
Tyburn, where he performed his devotions, and was turned off in the usual manner; 
but when he had hung nearly fifteen minutes the people present cried out: "A 
reprieve!" On this the malefactor was cut down, and being conveyed to a house in the 
neighbourhood, soon recovered, in consequence of bleeding and other proper 
applications. When he had perfectly recovered his senses he was asked what were his 
feelings at the time of execution; to which he repeatedly replied, in substance, as 
follows. When he was turned off, he for some time was sensible of very great pain, 
occasioned by the weight of his body, and felt his spirits in a strange commotion, 
violently pressing upwards. That having forced their way to his head, he as it were 
saw a great blaze, or glaring light, which seemed to go out at his eyes with a flash, and 
then he lost all sense of pain. That after he was cut down, and began to come to 
himself, the blood and spirits, forcing themselves into their former channels, put him, 
by a sort of pricking or shooting, to such intolerable pain that he could have wished 
those hanged who had cut him down. From this circumstance he was called "Half-
hanged Smith."
	After this narrow escape from the grave, Smith pleaded to his pardon on the 
20th of February; yet such was his propensity to evil deeds that he returned to his 
former practices, and, being again apprehended, was tried at the Old Bailey for 
housebreaking; but some difficulties arising in the case, the jury brought in a special 
verdict, in consequence of which the affair was left to the opinion of the twelve 
judges, who determined in favour of the prisoner. After this second extraordinary 
escape he was a third time indicted; but the prosecutor happening to die before the day 
of trial, he once more obtained that liberty which his conduct showed he had not 
deserved. We have no account what became of this man after this third remarkable 
incident in his favour; but Christian charity inclines us to hope that he made a proper 
use of the singular dispensations of Providence evidenced in his own person.
	When once the mind has consented to the commission of sin, it is hard to be 
reclaimed. The memory of the pangs of an ignominious death could not deter this man 
from following the evil course he had begun. Thus, by giving way to small 
propensities, we imperceptibly go on to enormities: which lead us to a shameful fate. 
let us, therefore, at once resolve never to depart from the path of rectitude.
	It was not unfrequently the case that, in Dublin, men were formerly seen 
walking about who, it was known, had been sentenced to suffer the extreme penalty of 
the law, and upon whom, strange as it may appear to unenlightened eyes, the sentence 
had been carried out. The custom was that the body should hang only half-an-hour; 
and, in a mistaken lenity, the sheriff, in whose hands was entrusted the execution of 
the law, would look away after the prisoner had been turned off, while the friends of 
the culprit would hold up their companion by the waistband of his breeches, so that 
the rope should not press upon his throat. They would, at the expiration of the usual 
time, thrust their "deceased" friend into a cart, in which they would gallop him over 
all the stones and rough ground they came near, which was supposed to be a never-
failing recipe in order to revive him, professedly — and indeed in reality — with the 
intention of "waking" him.
	An anecdote is related of a fellow named Mahony, who had been convicted of 
the murder of a Connaught man in one of the numerous Munster and Connaught wars, 
and whose execution had been managed in the manner above described, who, being 
put into the cart in a coffin by his Munster friends, on his way home was so revived, 
and so overjoyed at finding himself still alive, that he sat upright and gave three 
hearty cheers, by way of assuring his friends of his safety. A "jontleman" who was 
shocked at this indecent conduct in his defunct companion, and who was, besides, 
afraid of their scheme being discovered and thwarted, immediately, with the sapling 
which he carried, hit him a thump on the head, which effectually silenced his self- 
congratulations. On their arrival at home they found that the "friendly" warning which 
had been given to the poor wretch had been more effectual than the hangman's rope; 
and the wailings and lamentations which had been employed at the place of execution 
to drown the encouraging cries of the aiders of the criminal's escape were called forth 
in reality at his wake on the same night, It was afterwards a matter of doubt whether 
the fellow who dealt the unfortunate blow ought not to have been charged with the 
murder of his half-hanged companion; but, a justice being consulted, it was thought 
no one could be successfully charged with the murder of a man who was dead in the 
law.


ROGER LOWEN 
Executed for Murder, 25th October, 1706

	Roger Lowen was a native of Hanover, where he was born about the year 
1667, and educated in the principles of the Lutheran religion. His father being 
huntsman to the Duke of Zell, that prince sent young Lowen into France, to obtain the 
qualifications of a gentleman, and, on his return from his travels, he was one of the 
pages under the duke's master of the horse.
	Coming over to England when he was between twenty and thirty years of age, 
the Duke of Shrewsbury patronised and procured him a place. Having thus obtained 
something like a settlement, he married a young English woman, with whom he lived 
in an affectionate manner for a considerable time; but in the year 1697, on his going 
abroad to attend King William at the treaty of Ryswick, he left Mrs. Lowen with her 
cousin, who was married to Mr. Richard Lloyd, of Turnham Green.
	When Lowen returned from Holland, he became, with what justice we cannot 
say, extremely jealous of his wife and he pretended to have received incontestable 
proof of her criminal conversation with Mr. Lloyd, for the murder of whom he was 
indicted at the Old Bailey, on the 20th of September, 1706, and was tried by a jury 
composed equally of Englishmen and foreigners.
	In the course of the evidence it appeared that, on the evening previous to the 
day on which the murder was committed, Lowen invited Lloyd and his wife to dine 
with him on the following day; that Mr. Lloyd, being obliged to go to Acton, did not 
come very early, at which Lowen expressed a considerable degree of uneasiness; that 
when he came, Lowen introduced him into the parlour with great apparent civility; 
that Mr. Lloyd put his sword in a corner of the room, some time after which Lowen 
invited him into the garden, to see his plants, after which they came together into the 
house, appearing to be good friends, and Lowen desired his wife to hasten the dinner; 
that while she went to obey his directions, Lowen drew Mr. Lloyd's sword a little way 
out of the scabbard, as if admiring it, and asked who was his cutler; and that while the 
deceased stood with his hand behind him, Lowen, stamping with his foot, drew the 
sword quite out of the scabbard, and stabbed Mr. Lloyd through the back; on which 
his wife (who was present at this horrid transaction) said to him, "Speak to me, my 
dear"; but he was unable to do so; and having lifted up his eyes, groaned twice, and 
then expired.
	Mr. Hawley, a justice of the peace in the neighbourhood, passing by at the 
instant, Mrs. Lloyd acquainted him with what had happened; on which he examined 
the prisoner, who confessed his intention of having committed the murder sooner, and 
was only concerned lest he had not killed Mr. Lloyd.
	The particulars respecting the murder being proved to the satisfaction of the 
jury, Lowen was convicted, and received sentence of death: in consequence of which 
he was hanged at Turnham Green, on the 25th of October, 1706.
	While he lay under sentence of death, he was attended by Messrs. Idzardi and 
Ruperti, two divines of his own country, who were assiduous to convince him of the 
atrociousness of the crime which he had committed; and he be came a sincere 
penitent, confessing with his last breath the crime he had committed in shedding 
innocent blood.
	From this melancholy narrative we may learn the fatal effects of jealousy, 
which generally judges ill of the party accused, and always renders the jealous person 
miserable. Mr. Lowen was jealous of his wife; but we have no proof that there was 
any foundation for his suspicions. Hence let married men be taught not to indulge 
unwarrantable sentiments respecting that amiable sex who are the great sources of all 
the comforts of life. A man may be wretched in a thousand instances which occur in 
life; but let him re tire to the wife of his bosom, and her advice will extricate him from 
many a difficulty, or her consolations soothe him to bear his burdens. There is a great 
wisdom in the following proverbs of Solomon: "Who can find a virtuous woman? for 
her price is far above rubies. The heart of her husband does safely trust in her, so that 
he shall have no need of spoil. She will do him good and not evil, all the days of her 
life. Her children arise up, and call her blessed; her husband also, and he praiseth her."
	Jealousy is the most dangerous passion of the mind. It generally proceeds from 
the extravagance of love. That jealousy which is moved by fond and sincere affection 
may be distinguished from the extravagance resulting from meanness and suspicion. 
When proceeding from real love, it must be owing to the suspicion of levity in the 
object, which instantly conjures up a thousand frightful phantoms. We fear that the 
charms which have subdued us have made the same impression on the heart of 
another. This is generally the foundation of jealousy in men, and is, by the immortal 
Shakespeare, called "a green-eyed monster," which, once gaining ascendancy,
	"Farewell the tranquil mind! farewell content!"


ARTHUR CHAMBERS 
A Master of Thieves' Slang, who was full of Artful Tricks, which, however, 
did not save him from the Gallows at Tyburn, where he found himself in 
1706

	ARTHUR CHAMBERS was of base extraction, and consequently void of 
education, good manners or any other qualification that was amiable. The first step, in 
his opinion, to complete him a thorough master in the thieving art was to have at his 
finger ends all the canting language (which comprehends a parcel of invented words, 
such as thieves very well know, and by which they can distinguish one another from 
the other classes of mankind), in order to the attainment whereof he put himself under 
the direction of an experienced teacher that way; and, what was soon observable, 
attended so closely to the dictates of his preceptor that he not only outrivalled him but 
became superior to any of his contemporary thieves.
	Chambers quickly demonstrated how pleasing his new language was to him, 
for he could not enter an ale house but he would be punning with the landlord: indeed 
his gay apparel (for Arthur could not endure the thought of being called a sloven) very 
often induced the masters of the houses he frequented to sit down by him and listen to 
his jocular way of talking. Sometimes, from the ignorance of some of them, he would 
impudently assert that what he now and then mixed with his ordinary English was the 
purest Greek in the world, and, to convince them he was sincere in what he advanced, 
would frequently pull out of his pocket a Greek testament and say: "Sir, this book was 
made by one of the oldest philosophers; believe me, I have studied it this dozen years, 
and every moment I looked into it I gained a twelvemonth's knowledge." The landlord 
would be gazing all the while open mouthed at Chambers, and, to be sure, he on his 
part was very intent upon something besides his Greek Testament, for, soon after, a 
general complaint was made of abundance of money being lost; but which way was 
the question. In Launceston, in Cornwall, whither he went, the inhabitants received 
him with open arms for a considerable time, and his merry disposition soon procured 
him the acquaintance of men of note in that country. He had taken care, too, before 
leaving London, to supply himself with a great number of false crown and half crown 
pieces, which, on his arrival, he uttered at all the places he frequented; but abundance 
of persons having been deceived with these pieces, and a general complaint made 
round about, search was made everywhere for the apprehending of the cheat, and poor 
Chambers was taken up; the consequence of which was the sending of him to jail, 
where he remained a year and a half before he could get his enlargement. Cornwall 
now became too hot for him to stay any longer there; so he made the best way he was 
able to London, where, on the very first day of his arrival, he performed the most 
cunning, artful and yet barefaced piece of felony that was ever heard of.
	Having alighted from the wagon, he went directly to an ale house in West 
Smithfield, where, seating himself in a box, and calling for a pint of beer and a slice 
of bread and cheese, he comfortably refreshed himself; then, falling into discourse 
with some tradesmen in the next box to him, about the country and quiet enjoyment of 
a rural life, the talk was insensibly turned upon diving or picking of pockets. "Look 
ye, gentlemen," said Chambers, "I can pick a pocket as well as any man in Great 
Britain, and yet, though I say it, am as honest as the best Englishman breathing. For 
an instance of what I say, observe the country gentleman just now passing by the 
window. I'll step out and take his watch though it is now scarce five o'clock." A wager 
of ten shillings was immediately laid that he did not perform it. Chambers answered 
the bet, and presently, pushing out of the door, made a quick round till he came to the 
end of Long Lane, where he met with the gentleman, and courteously pulling off his 
hat to him asked if he could inform him which was the nearest way to Knave's Acre; 
to which the gentleman replied: "Lackaday, friend, you ask a very ignorant person, for 
I am a stranger here, and want to know the nearest way to Moorfields." "Oh, Sir, I live 
there, and can acquaint you which way to take; excuse me, Sir, I would willingly bear 
you company thither, but extraordinary affairs calling me to find out a place called 
Knave's Acre I must necessarily be jogging on; but be pleased to take my directions." 
So saying, he pointed with his hand. "Look you, Sir, you have no other way to go than 
directly along this lane, which will bring you into a street called Barbican, that into a 
dirty lane over against it, and that into Chiswell Street, the end whereof will lead you 
into Moorfields." All this while the country gentleman was staring the way Chambers 
pointed, who in the interim made sure of his watch, and after the gentleman and he 
had left one another returned back to the company, laid down the spoil on the table, 
and claimed the wager which was accordingly paid.
	One day, being very well dressed, he goes to the Exchange and mixes with 
some Italian merchants, and after some little conversation, which ran on trade and 
shipping, calls one of them aside, who was a very comely and grave person. With him 
he seems to be in a close and eager dialogue, the merchant all the while nodding and 
biting his thumb. Meantime one of Chambers's confederates comes up and begins to 
discourse with the merchant much after the same manner as he had done. Upon which 
Chambers says: "Sir, I perceive you have no liking to my proposition, but possibly 
you may not meet with such another bargain as mine I mean as to profit." "No liking!" 
answered the merchant. "Yes, yes, Sir; I had as lief chap with you as the best man 
alive, so I find but my advantage in it." Upon this the merchant spoke a few words to 
Chambers's confederate, and then, calling Arthur to him, said: "Here is another 
gentleman who has a bargain much like yours to dispose of; if you can join together, 
we'll throw the commodities together and make but one lot of them." "Agreed," 
replied Chambers, who without any further ceremony, as the merchant stood close to 
his confederate, dived nimbly into his pockets and drew thereout a purse of gold and 
his gold watch, and imperceivably conveyed them to his confederate. But this spoil 
not satisfying the avaricious temper of our adventurer, and seeing a very good 
handkerchief hanging out of the merchant's coat pocket, he snaps at it, but unluckily 
for his first prize. The merchant, it seems, caught him in the act; and seizing him by 
the collar, called out, "Thief! thief!" which words raised abundance of persons then on 
the walks about them, and everyone was desirous to know the bottom of the matter. 
The merchant was for having our adventurer before a magistrate; and he, on his part, 
strenuously denied the fact (for by this time the purse and watch were found gone), 
and even threatened the injured tradesman to punish him for defaming his character 
among the only persons in the world he got his living by. During this contention the 
confederate, who had received the purse and watch from Chambers, had marched to 
the porter at the gate, to get proclamation to be made on the Exchange that if any 
person had lost a purse with gold in it, and a gold watch, on giving the true marks he 
might have it again. These words reaching the merchant's ears, he, glad of the 
opportunity of regaining his lost things, let go Chambers, with a thousand excuses for 
his rudeness and rash accusations, and went directly to the crier; but both Chambers 
and his confederate procured means of slipping away in the meantime.
	This disappointment but the more sharpened the wit and cunning of our 
adventurer, who was resolved to use his talents (as he called them) to a much better 
purpose than his last endeavour had produced. To this end he takes a first floor of a 
house in Soho Square, and contracts with the landlord to pay fourteen shillings a week 
for the same. For a while good harmony and understanding ruled between Chambers 
and the gentleman of the house, who took him for a man of fortune, as his dress and 
expenses might have very well argued him. One evening as they were at supper — I 
mean the family of the house our adventurer — came in, seemingly in a vast 
uneasiness, which made the good folks importune him to let them know what it was 
that disturbed him. "I have so much friendship for you, Mr Woodville" , said the 
landlord (for you must know this was the name he had given himself), "that if I can be 
of any real service to you, it is but opening your mind to me, and you may depend to 
find me both your counsellor and benefactor." Chambers, pleased with the landlord's 
frank kindness, made no further doubt to unravel the great mystery he had at his heart, 
and thus began: "It is with a thousand struggles of the soul that I find myself obliged 
to speak. Landlord, I am very sensible of the obligations I already owe you, and that 
thought makes me decline being any further burthensome to you; you must know, 
then, that, having been at Hampstead this afternoon, where I frequently used to go to 
divert myself with an affectionate brother of mine, I was there a mournful spectator of 
his death. 'Tis too much for me" (here he pretended to weep) "to acquaint you with 
every sad particular about the struggles he had before his soul departed out of his 
body; let it suffice to say that he has left me heir to his possessions (but his life would 
have been of greater value to me), and in his will appointed me to inter him in the 
cloisters in Westminster Abbey. Now, Landlord, the favour I have to desire of you is, 
for convenience of his funeral, to have his body brought here, and carried hence to his 
grave."
	These last words Chambers pronounced with a deep groan, which made the 
landlord and all the family compassionate towards him; they told him anything they 
had was at his service, the landlord left him at his own liberty to bring the corpse, and 
choose whatever room he pleased to place it in. He thanked him for his civility, and 
told him he would certainly repay it very shortly, in a way he should be very sensible 
of. Which indeed he was as good as his word to perform. Chambers accordingly went 
out the next morning, leaving word that the hearse with the corpse would be with 
them about six in the evening. And true was he to his word. For just upon six o'clock a 
stately hearse with six horses arrived at the door, and men, suborned to this end, took 
thereout a beautiful coffin, with fine hinges and nails, wherein our adventurer had put 
himself, there being private holes in the sides for respiration. The counterfeit load was 
straightway borne up one pair of stairs and placed on a table in the dining room, 
where the landlord, to grace the deceased brother of his lodger, had set out a very fine 
and rich sideboard of plate, besides other valuables. You must know Chambers was 
laid in the coffin in his clothes, and a winding sheet wrapped round him, and one of 
his confederates had taken care to draw the screws. All this time our adventurer was 
missing, which made the landlord ask the fellows where he was, who said he had bade 
them acquaint him that having a multitude of things to dispatch about the funeral, it 
was probable he might not come home that night, but should be obliged to stay with a 
friend of his in the Strand. The landlord took the excuse for granted, the hearse and 
men departed, and the family of the house, excepting the maid, at their usual hour 
went to bed, leaving Chambers to rise out of his silent mansion of death and 
perpetrate his villainous design.
	Accordingly he gets out, with his winding sheet about him, and going 
downstairs places himself in a chair over against where the maid was sitting, who, 
hereby frightened at the apparition, as she thought, screamed out, "A ghost! a ghost!" 
— and without speaking another word ran as fast as she could up into her master's 
chamber and told him and his wife the story. "A ghost!" says the master; "phoh, you 
fool, there's no such thing in nature; you have been asleep, woman, and waking 
suddenly have fancied you saw a thing there never was." Scarce were these words out 
of the mouth of the landlord when in steps, with a solemn tread, our adventurer, 
Chambers, in his winding sheet, and presenting himself and his face, which was 
covered over with flour, full to the maid, the landlord and his wife, sets himself down 
in a chair in the room, where he continued full half an hour, putting the above three 
persons into the greatest panic in the world all the time. After which the imaginary 
ghost stalks downstairs and opens the door to six of his accomplices, who, while their 
director, Chambers, raps the doors to drown the noise of more persons being in the 
house than himself, strip the dining room of all the plate and other rich furniture 
therein, and then, making a general search through out the other chambers and the 
kitchen below, rifle and carry off everything of value to the amount of six hundred 
pounds. All this while the family, believing a spirit was actually in their house, and 
making the horrid noise they heard, kept close hid under the bedclothes; but the dawn 
of day soon appearing, their fears began to abate. Where upon the maid gets up, and 
has the courage to go down and see the consequences of the late bustle. She finds all 
her pots and pans removed effectually out of the way, and a dreadful havoc made 
among the pewter, which, to the very last plate, has all vanished. She hastens to her 
master, who is still in bed, acquaints him with the spirit's having robbed the house, 
and tells him that she cannot in conscience live with him any longer, since a bad and 
thieving ghost visited his family, which proved that his house was not a good one, nor 
were the persons that composed his family fit to be lived with. Whereat the landlord 
could not forbear bursting out into an extreme laughter: "Why, thou silly jade, can it 
be supposed that ghosts, or spirits, who have neither flesh, blood nor bones, can rob? 
Phoh, banish thy foolish conceits, and let me come and see what has been a working 
all this night." The maid, displeased with her master's words, goes downstairs, and 
finding some of her fellow servants and neighbours about the door tells them what she 
had seen; whereat all seem astonished, and say they should not dare to stir an inch out 
of their houses in the night if the case was so as she related it. Meantime the landlord 
had roused his indolent body from his bed and made a strict search in those places 
where he thought the most valuable part of his movables lay, which he found entirely 
conveyed away; but coming into the dining room, and seeing the plate gone, and an 
empty shell of a coffin, he, too late, is made sensible of the imposition, which we will 
leave him to mourn, or banish the thoughts of, just as he pleases.
	Chambers during a few years committed actions the most daring and artful 
that were ever known, and he received a just recompense for his ill spent life at 
Tyburn in 1706.


JACK GOODWIN ALIAS PLUMP 
A young but expert Thief, who was executed at Tyburn in 1706 for Burglary

	WHEN silver tankards were more in vogue in the ale houses than they are at 
present, this fellow, going into one to drink, called for a tankard of ale, which being 
brought, he drank it off, and having cut out the bottom of it, paid the victualler for his 
liquor, who, seeing the tankard on the table, had no suspicion that any damage had 
been done it. But shortly after some other company came in, and the tapster, running 
into the cellar to fill for them the tankard which Mr Goodwin had been fingering, 
wondered to see the cock run and the tankard never the fuller, whereupon, turning it 
up, he could find no more bottom in it than mariners can in the ocean.
	Another time Jack Goodwin, being in the country as far as Durham, and 
destitute of money, happened to meet with another idle companion, with whom he 
made a bargain to beg their way up to London; and in order to excite people's pity the 
more, his new companion was to act the part of a blind man, and he was to be his 
guide, instead of a dog and a bell. So getting a pennyworth of cereing wax, with 
which tailors cere the edges of silk and slight stuffs, Jack Goodwin, mollifying it over 
a candle, daubed his comrade's eyelids therewith, insomuch that he could not open 
them.
	Our couple, thus proceeding on their journey, had, by their cruising or begging 
through the counties, picked up about the sum of four pounds, sixteen shillings; by 
that time they had got up to Ware. Next, making the best of their way up to London, 
within ten or eleven miles of the same, having to cross a small brook over a narrow 
wooden bridge, with a rail but on one side of it for the convenience of foot 
passengers, when they were upon it Goodwin threw his blind comrade into the water, 
where he stood up to the neck, but moving neither one way nor the other, for fear of 
being drowned. In the meantime his guide made straight to London. Soon afterwards, 
some passengers coming by took pity on the fellow, supposing him to be really blind; 
they helped him out of the brook, and setting him on terra firma, he presently, by their 
directions, arrived at a house, where, getting some warm water, he washed his eyelids, 
and having got them opened he marched after his fellow traveller to London, where he 
might hunt about long enough before he found him out, for Jack had got into some ill 
house or another, where he was as safe as a thief in a mill.
	The Duke of Bedford visiting a person of quality one night very late, whilst 
the footmen were gone to drink at some adjacent boozing ken, or ale house, and the 
coach man was taking a nap on his box, Jack Goodwin, coming by at the same time 
with some of his thieving cronies, took the two hind wheels off the coach and 
supported it up with two pieces of wood, which they got out of a house which was 
being built hard by. On his Grace not long after going into his coach, and the footmen 
getting up behind in a hurry, no sooner did the horses begin to draw but down fell his 
Grace, footmen and all; who, looking to see how the accident came, found the hind 
wheels were stolen; whereupon the Duke was obliged to go home in a hackney coach.
	This John Goodwin, alias Plump, was condemned, when he was but eleven 
years of age, for picking a merchant's pocket of one hundred and fifty guineas, and 
was afterwards several times in great danger of his life before justice took hold of him 
in earnest.
	At last, committing a burglary in company with another, when he was but 
eighteen years of age, he was apprehended and carried before Sir Thomas Stamp, 
knight and alderman of London, where, after he was examined, being searched, 
several cords were found in his pocket; upon which his Worship asked Goodwin of 
what trade he was. He replied: "A tailor." Then Sir Thomas, taking up the cords and 
looking suspiciously on them, quoth: "You use, methinks, very big thread." "Yes, Sir" 
said Goodwin, "for it is generally coarse work which I'm employed about." Next 
searching his comrade, Henry Williams, a pistol was found loaded in his bosom; upon 
which Sir Thomas asked him also of what trade he was. He replied: "A tailor too." 
"What! Both tailors?" said his Worship. "And pray what implement is this belonging 
to your trade? Quoth Williams: "That pistol, Sir, is my needle case." To conclude, Sir 
Thomas was so astonished at their impudence that he immediately made out their 
mittimus for Newgate, and being tried at Justice Hall, in the Old Bailey, they were 
both condemned to die, and soon after executed, at Tyburn, in 1706.


WILLIAM ELBY OTHERWISE DUNN 
An Armed Criminal, who was hanged for Burglary and Murder at Fulham 
on the 13th of September, 1707

	WILLIAM ELBY was indicted at the sessions in the Old Bailey for breaking 
into the house of Mr. James Barry, at Fulham, the 2nd of August, 1707, with intent to 
rob it; and likewise for the murder of Nicholas Hatfield, by giving him a mortal 
wound with a rapier near the left breast, of which he died soon after.
	The evidence deposed that, Mr. Barry hearing a noise about his house between 
twelve and two in the morning, he got up with his wife and man, Nicholas Hatfield, 
went downstairs, found a window broken open, and espied two men without, at about 
five yards' distance, one of whom was the prisoner. They then ran immediately 
upstairs for arms, but Hatfield, stepping into the kitchen, was met by Elby, who drove 
him into the pantry, and gave him a stab in the breast, of which he died twelve hours 
afterwards.
	In the scuffle between Elby and Hatfield one of the thieves fired a pistol to 
disengage them, which happened to wound Elby in the leg, and a button was found in 
the pantry which belonged to Elby's coat, also a bloody sword was found under a 
haycock, and a receipt that had been given Mr Barry for money paid. The prisoner, 
who had little to say in his defence, was found guilty of the fact, and received 
sentence accordingly, upon which he was so impious as to say: "G-d d —n you all."
	Elby owned he was guilty of the burglary, but would not confess the murder, 
neither would he discover his accomplices or any other offences he had committed, 
and in this obstinacy he all along persisted; and was so peremptory as to say that if 
any person should ask him any such questions again he would knock him down. He 
was hanged in chains at Fulham, on the 13th of September, 1707.


JOHN HERMAN BRIAN 
Executed for robbing and burning the House of Peter Persode, Esq., St 
James's Street, Westminster, in October, 1707

	The crime for which this man suffered is defined by the law to be arson, or 
arsonry; that is, wilfully setting fire to another person's house, whether by day or by 
night.
	It is in this case a capital offence; but if a man burns his own house, without 
injuring any other, it is only a misdemeanour, punishable by fine, imprisonment, or 
the pillory.
	By the 23rd of Henry VIII, cap. 1, the capital part of the offence is extended to 
persons (whether principals or accessories) burning dwelling-houses, or barns wherein 
corn is deposited; and by the 43rd of Elizabeth, cap. 13, burning barns or stacks of 
corn, in the four northern counties, is also made felony, without benefit of clergy.
	By the 22nd and 23rd of Charles II, cap. 7, it is made felony, to set fire to any 
stack of corn, hay, or grain; or other outbuildings, or kilns, maliciously, in the night 
time; punishable with transportation for seven years.
	By the 1st George I cap. 48, it is also made single felony to set fire to any 
wood, underwood, or coppice.
	Other burnings are made punishable with death, without benefit of clergy. viz, 
setting fire to any house, barn, or outhouse, or to any hovel, cock, mow, or stack of 
corn, straw, hay, or wood; or the rescuing any such offender: 9 George I cap. 22. 
— Setting fire to a coal mine: 10 George II cap. 32. — Burning, or setting fire to any 
windmill, or water-mill, or other mill (as also pulling down the same): 9 George III 
cap. 29; but the offender must be prosecuted within eighteen months. —Burning any 
ship, to the prejudice of the owners, freighters, or underwriters: 22 and 23 Charles II 
cap. 11; 1 Anne, stat. 2. cap. 9; 4 George I cap. 12. — Burning the king's ships of war 
afloat, or building; or the dockyards, or any of the buildings, arsenals, or stores 
therein; 12 George Ill cap. 24. And finally threatening by anonymous or fictitious 
letters to burn houses, barns, etc. is by the act 27 George 11 cap. 15 also made felony, 
without benefit of clergy.
	John Herman Brian was a native of Dully, a village in the bailiwick of Monge, 
in the Canton of Berne, in Switzerland, where he was born about the year 1683. He 
left Switzerland while very young, and went to Geneva, where he lived in the service 
of a gentleman above four years, and then made a tour of Italy with a person of 
fortune. On his arrival in England, he lived in several reputable families for the space 
of about three years, and last of all, for about two months, in that of Mr Persode, 
when, being discharged, in about two days after he broke open, plundered, and burned 
his dwelling house, for which he was indicted at the sessions house in the Old Bailey, 
16th of October, 1707, for burning and consuming the mansion-house of Peter 
Persode, Esq., in St James's Street, Westminster.
	He was likewise indicted a second time for breaking open the said house about 
three o'clock on the day above mentioned and taking from thence a gold tweezer case 
and chain, value fifty pounds, a gold watch, seventeen guineas, and valuables.
	Mr Persode deposed that the prisoner had been his servant for the space of two 
months, and was discharged from his service the Monday before the fact was 
committed, and that the Wednesday following, about ten o'clock at night, he left all 
his doors and windows fast. Mrs Persode deposed that when she went to bed she 
locked up her tweezer case, watch and other articles; and that about three o'clock in 
the morning she awoke and smelt a strong smell of smoke. Getting up, she went out of 
her chamber and found a lighted flambeau in the passage, which had burned the 
boards; that she then opened the door of a parlour, which was full of smoke, and 
immediately the room was all on fire, which rushed out of the stairs and raged with 
such fury that the house was consumed in a quarter of an hour, they not being able to 
save any of their goods. Mr Stevenson and Mr Acton, goldsmiths, deposed that the 
prisoner offered to sell the tweezer case to them, and asked eight pounds for it, which 
gave them reason to suspect he had stolen it, and thereupon they stopped it, but the 
prisoner went away; and upon inquiry they found it to be Mr Persode's property; that 
afterwards, he coming again to demand the goods, they seized him, and on searching 
him found two pistols and a dagger about him, with which they were informed he 
designed to shoot or stab them if they refused to return the tweezer case.
	The prisoner denied the fact, and said he bought the goods of a strange man, 
but could give no proof of it, nor where he was the night the fact was committed; 
whereupon the jury found him guilty of both indictments. All the time he was under 
condemnation at Newgate he seemed only to meditate on making his escape. He made 
repeated efforts to escape out of Newgate, by unscrewing and filing off his irons; but 
being detected, he was properly secured till the time of his execution; and being 
asked, by the ordinary of Newgate, how he could waste his precious time in such a 
fruitless attempt, he answered that "life was sweet, and that any other man, as well as 
himself, would endeavour to save it if he could". He was executed in St James's 
Street, near St James's House, Westminster; and hanged in chains at Acton Gravel 
Pits, 24th of October, 1707.


JACK HALL 
Who, with two Associates named Bunce and Low, committed many 
Robberies, and was executed at Tyburn in 1707

	JACK HALL was an expert in breaking open houses, going on the footpad, 
shoplifting or pilfering any small matter that lay in the way nay, if it were but mops 
and pails; the "drag," which is having a hook fastened to the end of a stick, with which 
they drag anything out of a shop window on a dark evening; and "filing a cly," which 
is picking pockets of watches, money, books or handkerchiefs. To this end he used to 
haunt churches, fairs, markets, public assemblies, shows, and be very busy about the 
playhouse. And he who performs this last part of thieving commonly gives what he 
takes to another, that in case he should be found with his hand in any man's pocket, he 
might prove his innocence by having nothing about him but what he can justify to be 
his own.
	Having ~L design once to rob a great merchant in the City of London, he went 
oftentimes hankering about his house, but could never effect it; whereupon he 
bethought himself of this stratagem. He was to be put into a pack done up like a bale, 
and by the contrivance of his comrade, who was very well apparelled, he was to be 
laid into this merchant's house in the evening as so much silk, which he was to see 
next morning, and buy off his hands if they agreed. Accordingly this bale full of 
iniquity, wedged inwardly on all sides with coarse cloth and fustian, was laid up in the 
warehouse. Night being come, and the apprentices weary, two of them, whilst their 
master was at supper, went to rest themselves, and by accident lay on this bale, which 
was placed by some others, insomuch that the extreme anguish of their weight being 
very heavy upon Jack Hall, he could scarce fetch his breath. Upon this he drew out a 
sharp knife, and making a great hole in the fillet of the bale he also made a deep 
wound in him that Jay most upon it, which made him rise and roar out his fellow 
apprentice had killed him. Running out to his master in his agony, his fellow 
apprentice followed him, and was innocently secured, till a further examination of the 
matter. In the meanwhile Jack Hall made his escape out of a window, taking only two 
pieces of velvet along with him. He was also very good for the "lob," which is going 
with a consort into any shop to change a pistole or guinea, and having about half of 
his change the consort cries: "What need you to change? I have silver enough to 
defray our charges where we are going." Upon this the other throws the money back 
again into the money box, but with such dexterity that he has one of the pieces, 
whether shilling or half crown, sticking in the palm of his hand, which he carries clean 
off, without any suspicion of fraud. Again, he was very expert at the "whalebone lay," 
which is having a thin piece of whalebone daubed at the end with bird lime, and going 
into a shop with a pretence to buy something, make the shopkeeper, by wanting this 
and that thing, turn his back often; and then take the opportunity of putting the 
whalebone, so daubed with bird lime, into the till of the counter, which brings up any 
single piece of money that sticks to it. After which, to give no mistrust, they buy some 
small matter, and pay the man with a pig of his own sow.
	Hall also went with some of his wicked associates upon the "running 
smobble," which is this: one of them goes into a shop and, pretending to be drunk, 
after some troublesome behaviour puts out the candles, and taking away what ever 
comes first to hand he runs off, whilst another flings handfuls of dirt and nastiness 
into the mouth and face of the person that cries out "Stop thief!" thus putting him or 
her into a sudden surprise, and giving them an opportunity of going off without 
apprehending.,
	Jack Hall, Stephen Bunce and Dick Low, going upon an enterprise at Hackney 
about twelve of the clock at night, by the help of their betties and short crows made a 
forcible entry into the house of one Clare, a baker, whose journeyman, tied neck and 
heels, they threw into the kneading trough, and the apprentice with him. Jack Hall 
stood sentry over them with a great old rusty back sword, which he found in the 
kitchen, and swore with a great grace that both their heads went off as round as a hoop 
if they offered to stir or budge. In the meantime Dick Low and Stephen Bunce went 
up to Mr Clare's room; whom they found in bed with his wife, and tied and gagged the 
old folks, without any consideration of their age, which had left them but few teeth to 
barricade their gums from the injury they might receive from those ugly instruments 
that stretched their mouths asunder.
	Finding not so much as they expected, they ungagged the old man again, to 
bring to a confession where he hoarded his money; but extorting nothing out of him, 
Jack Hall being then come up to them, for fear they should sink upon him, which is a 
usual thing among thieves, to cheat one another took up in his arms the old man's 
granddaughter, about six years old, lying in a trundle bed by him, and said: "D —n 
me, if I won't bake the child presently in a pie, and eat it, if the old rogue will not be 
civil." These scaring words made Mr Clare beg heartily that they should not hurt the 
child and he would discover what he had; so fetching, by his order, a little iron bound 
chest from under the bed, and unlocking it, they took what was in it, which was about 
eighty pounds; then obscuring their dark lanterns they bid the baker good night, and 
commanded him to return them thanks that they spared his ears, which is against the 
law for any of their occupation to wear.
	An end came to Hall's wicked crimes in the year 1707, when he deservedly 
suffered death at Tyburn, with his companions Low and Bunce.


DICK LOW 
Who started thieving at the Age of Eleven. Executed at Tyburn in 1707, 
when twenty-five years old

	DICK LOW was an expert thief at the age when others usually begin. One 
time, when he was about eleven or twelve years old, creeping privately one evening 
behind a goldsmith's counter in Cheapside, the goldsmith comes from a back room 
and goes behind the counter, insomuch that Dick Low had no opportunity of going out 
invisible; whereupon he cries: "Whoop, whoop!" At this the goldsmith cried: "Hey, 
hey, is this a place to play at Whooper's hide? Get you gone, you young rogue, and 
play in the streets." But Dick, yet lying still, cried again: "Whoop, whoop!" —which 
made the goldsmith in a great passion cry: "Get you gone, sirrah, or I'll whoop you 
with a good cane, if you want to play here." Whereupon Dick went away with a bag 
of fifty pounds, which the goldsmith missed next day.
	But as he grew up in years his stature made him past those exercises which 
they call the morning, noon or night sneak, which is privately sneaking into houses at 
any of those times and carrying off what next comes to hand; for all is fish that comes 
to net with them, who are termed Saint Peter's children, as having every finger a fish-
hook. He went also upon other lays, such as "taking lobs from behind rattlers" — that 
is to say, trunks or boxes from behind coaches; and upon the "mill," which is breaking 
open houses in the night, for which purpose they have their tinder-boxes, matches, 
flints, steels, dark lanterns, bags, cords, betties and chisels to wrench. This was then 
the manner; but at present they have a new way of using a large turning gimlet, or 
auger, boring holes with which through a wooden window they presently, with a 
knife, cut out a hole big enough to put in their hand to unbolt it, whereby an honest 
man is soon undone by these sly rascals, who call themselves "prigs," which, in their 
canting language, denotes a thief.
	After being a soldier for a short time Dick came home again, and there being 
one Mr Pemmell, an apothecary, living in Drury Lane, it was his misfortune to have a 
wife who kept company with one Davis, a glazier; but bad circumstances obliging 
him to fly for sanctuary to Thornbury, in Gloucestershire, his madonna was in great 
want of another gallant. However, she being naturally prone to liberality, and always 
extravagantly rewarding kindnesses of this nature, it was not long ere a particular 
acquaintance of hers undertook to supply her with a new lover, which was Dick. As 
soon as he was introduced into the company of the apothecary's wife she took a huge 
fancy to him, for he behaved himself so pleasantly, and his caresses were so 
agreeable, that his mistress esteemed herself the happiest woman in the world in the 
enjoyment of a person so facetious, and accomplished with all the mysteries of love. 
Whenever he came to her house, which was always when her husband was from 
home, she entertained him with such an unreserved freeness that she concealed 
nothing from her spark that might please either his fancy or curiosity. But one day, 
opening a chest of drawers, Dick espied a couple of bags of money, at which his 
mouth instantly watered; and although his mistress told him that as long as one penny 
was in them his pockets should never be unfurnished, yet he wanted to be master of 
them presently — and indeed it was not long before he had them at his command, for 
business requiring the apothecary in the country for about a week, Dick then lay in his 
house at rack and manger; and having two other rogues like himself at a great supper 
prepared for them there, they began about twelve of the clock at night to declare their 
intention with sword and pistol, saying that whoever presumed to speak but one word 
suffered present death. To work they now went, gagging and tying first the procurer. 
In the meantime the apothecary's wife, seeing how her friend was served, fell on her 
knees and heartily beseeched them not to use her so. Quoth Dick: "No, no, madam; 
we'll only tie your hands, lest you should ungag that serious, and now silent, bawd 
there." After she was secured they went down into the kitchen and gagged and tied the 
maid and apprentice; then, rifling the house, they carried away two hundred and fifty 
pounds, and some plate to a considerable value. But Dick, thinking it unmannerly to 
go away without saying anything, went to his late beloved mistress, and giving her a 
Judas kiss, quoth he: "Dear madam, farewell; and when I am gone, say I've done more 
than ever your husband did, for I've bound you to be constant now."
	Dick also industriously applied himself to picking of pockets; and one day he 
and two others of that profession, having been eight or nine miles in the country, 
where they were so extravagant as to spend all their money, as they were coming into 
Hammersmith bethought themselves on the following stratagem to get more before 
they entered London. Two of them acted the parts of drunken men in the town, 
reeling, tumbling and abusing several people, who, believing them to be really drunk, 
let them pass on without much interruption. Hereupon their sober companion, Dick 
Low, seeing nobody would take them up, resolved to do it himself; so, meeting them 
as if by chance, they gave him the jostle; which not taking so patiently as the others 
had done, he not only had high words with them, but from words they fell to blows. 
At last, two being against one, it was thought unequal, and they having been abusive 
to others a great company was assembled, and among them the constable, who, 
seizing all three, carried them before a justice, who hearing the matter, and finding by 
the testimony of the people who went with them that only the two who were drunk 
were wholly to blame, ordered them to be set in the stocks for two hours, and 
discharged Dick Low.
	This order was obeyed, and the delinquents were presently put into the stocks, 
where they behaved themselves so pleasantly in foolish discourse that a great number 
of people hovered about them. In the meantime Dick was not idle, for he had made 
such havoc among their pockets that in the two hours' time they were in the stocks he 
had gained about eight pounds by the frolic; then coming to London they fell into hard 
drinking, like so many drunken Germans, but in the midst of their cups they had the 
civility, every now and then, to drink the health of all them by whom they had fared 
the better.
	This fellow, though he was not above twenty-five years of age when he was 
hanged at Tyburn, with Jack Hall and Stephen Bunce, in 1707, had reigned long in his 
villainy; and the fortunate success which he had had in his manifold sins only made 
him repent that he had not practised them sooner.


WILLIAM GREGG 
Spy, executed at Tyburn on the 28th of April, 1708

	High treason is by the law accounted the highest civil crime which can be 
committed by any member of the community. After various alterations and 
amendments made and repealed in subsequent reigns, the definition of this offence 
was settled as it originally stood, by the Act of the 25th of Edward Ill stat. 5, cap. 2, 
and may be divided into seven different heads:
1. Compassing, or imagining, the death of the king, queen, or heir apparent.
2. Levying war against the king in his realm.
3. Adhering to the king's enemies, and giving them aid, in the realm, or elsewhere.  
[It has been thought necessary by the legislature to explain and enlarge these clauses 
of the Act 25 Edward III as not extending, with sufficient explicitness, to modern 
treasonable attempts. It is therefore provided by the Act 36 George III cap. 7, 'That if 
any person (during the life of his present Majesty, and until the end of the session of 
Parliament next after a demise of the crown) shall within the realm, or without, 
compass, imagine, invent, devise, or intend, death or destruction, or any bodily harm, 
tending to death or destruction, maim or wounding, imprisonment or restraint of the 
person of the king, his heirs and successors, or to deprive or depose him or them, from 
his style, honour, or kingly name, or to levy war against the king within this realm, in 
order by force to compel him to change his measures, or in order to put any force or 
constraint upon, or to intimidate or overawe, both houses, or either house, of 
Parliament: or to incite any foreigner to invade the dominions of the crown: and such 
compassings, etc., shall express, utter, or declare, by publishing and printing or 
writing, or by any other overt act or deed,' — the offender shall be deemed a traitor, 
and punished accordingly.]
4. Slaying the king's chancellor or judge in the execution of their offices.
5. Violating the queen, the eldest daughter of the king, or the wife of the heir 
apparent, or eldest son.
6. Counterfeiting the king's great seal, or privy seal.
7. Counterfeiting the king's money, or bringing false money into the kingdom.
	This detail shows how much the dignity and security of the king's person is 
confounded with that of his officers, and even with his effigies impressed on his coin. 
To assassinate the servant, or to counterfeit the type, is held as criminal as to destroy 
the sovereign.
	This indiscriminate blending of crimes, so different and disproportionate in 
their nature, under one common head, is certainly liable to great objections, seeing 
that the judgment in this offence is so extremely severe and terrible, viz. 'That the 
offender be drawn to the gallows on the ground or pavement; that he be hanged by the 
neck, and then cut down alive; that his entrails be taken out and burnt, while yet alive; 
that his head be cut off; that his body be divided into four parts; and that his head and 
quarters be at the king's disposal.'
	William Gregg was born at Montrose, in Scotland, and having received the 
common instructions in the grammar-school of that own, finished his education in the 
university of Aberdeen, and was intended by his friends for the study of divinity; but 
his inclination leading him to seek for advancement in the state, he came to London, 
and soon afterwards went abroad as secretary to the ambassador to the court of 
Sweden.
	Gregg, during his residence abroad, debauched a Swedish lady, and was guilty 
of some other irregularities; in consequence of which the ambassador dismissed him 
from his service, and he was glad to embark for London in the first ship that sailed.
	As soon as he arrived in London, he was engaged by Mr Secretary Harley, to 
write dispatches; and letters of great importance were left unsealed, and perused by 
Gregg. As the account of this malefactor, which was given by the ordinary of 
Newgate, is very superficial and unsatisfactory, we shall give the following extracts 
respecting him, from Bishop Burnett's history:
	At this time two discoveries were made very unlucky for Mr Harley: Tallard 
wrote often to Chamillard, but he sent the letters open to the secretary's office, to be 
perused and sealed up, and so be conveyed by the way of Holland. These were opened 
upon some suspicion in Holland, and it appeared, that one in the secretary's office put 
letters in them, in which, as he offered his service to the courts of France and St 
Germain's, so he gave an account of all transactions here. In one of these he sent a 
copy of the letter that the queen was to write in her own hand to the emperor; and he 
marked what parts were drawn by the secretary, and what additions were made to it 
by the lord treasurer. This was the letter by which the queen pressed the sending 
prince Eugene into Spain; and this, if not intercepted, would have been at Versailles 
many days before it could reach Vienna.
	He who sent this wrote, that by this they might see what service he could do 
them, if well encouraged. All this was sent over to the duke of Marlborough; and upon 
search it was found to have been written by Gregg, whom Harley had not only 
entertained, but taken into a particular confidence, without inquiring into the former 
parts of his life; for he was a vicious and a necessitous person, who had been secretary 
to the queen's envoy in Denmark, but was dismissed by him for his ill qualities. 
Harley had made use of him to get him intelligence, and he came to trust him with the 
perusal and sealing up of the letters, which the French prisoners, here in England, sent 
over to France, and by that means he got into the method of sending intelligence 
thither. He, when seized on, either upon remorse or hopes of pardon, confessed all, 
and signed his confession; upon that he was tried, and, pleading guilty, was 
condemned as a traitor, for corresponding with the queen's enemies.
	At the same time Valiere and Bara, whom Harley had employed as his spies to 
go often over to Calais, under the pretence of bringing him intelligence, were 
informed against, as spies employed by France to get intelligence from England, who 
carried over many letters to Calais and Boulogne, and, as was believed, gave such 
information of our trade and convoys, that by their means we had made our great 
losses at sea. They were often complained of upon suspicion, but they were always 
protected by Harley; yet the presumptions against them were so violent, that they 
were at last seized on, and brought up prisoners.
	The Whigs took such advantage of this circumstance, that Mr Harley was 
obliged to resign, and his enemies were inclined to carry matters still further, and 
were resolved, if possible, to find out evidence enough to affect his life. With this 
view, the House Lords ordered a committee to examine Gregg, and the other 
prisoners, who were very assiduous in the discharge of their commission, as will 
appear by the following account written by same author:
	The lords who were appointed to examine Gregg, could not find out much by 
him: he had but newly begun his designs of betraying secrets, and he had no 
associates with him in it. He told them, that all the papers of state lay so carelessly 
about the office, that every one belonging to it, even the door-keepers might have read 
them all. Harley's custom was to come to the office late on post-nights, and after he 
had given his orders, and written his letters, he usually went away, and left all to be 
copied out when he was gone. By that means he came to see every thing, in particular 
the queen's letter to the emperor. He said, he knew the design on Toulon in May last, 
but he did not discover it; for he had not entered on his ill practices till October. This 
was all he could say.
	By the examination of Valiere and Bara, and of many others who lived about 
Dover, and were employed by them, a discovery was made of a constant intercourse 
they were in with Calais, under Harley's protection. They often went over with boats 
full of wool, and brought back brandy, though both the import and export were 
severely prohibited. They, and those who belonged to the boats carried over by them, 
were well treated on the French side at the governor's house or at the commissary's: 
they were kept there till their letters were sent to Paris, and till returns could be 
brought back, and were all the while upon free cost. The order that was constantly 
given them was, that if an English or Dutch vessel came up with them, they should 
cast their letters into the sea, but that they should not do it when French ships came up 
with them: so they were looked on by all on that coast as the spies of France. They 
used to get what information they could, both of merchant-ships, and of the ships of 
war that lay in the Downs, and upon that they usually went over; and it happened that 
soon after some of those ships were taken. These men, as they were papists, so they 
behaved themselves insolently, and boasted much of their power and credit.
	Complaints had been often made of them, but they were always protected; nor 
did it appear that they ever brought any information of importance to Harley but once, 
when, according to what they swore, they told him that Fourbin was gone from 
Dunkirk, to lie in wait for the Russian fleet; which proved to be true; he both went to 
watch for them, and he took a great part of the fleet. Yet though this was the single 
piece of intelligence that they ever brought, Harley took so little notice of it, that he 
gave no advertisement to the admiralty concerning it. This particular excepted they 
only brought over common news, and the Paris gazetteer. These examinations lasted 
for some weeks. When they were ended, a full report was made of them to the house 
of lords, and they ordered the whole report, with all the examinations, to be laid 
before the queen.
	Gregg was convicted on the statute of Edward III, which declares it high 
treason 'to adhere to the king's enemies, or to give them aid either within or without 
the realm.'
	Immediately after his conviction, both houses of Parliament petitioned the 
queen that he might be executed; and he accordingly hanged at Tyburn, with 
Morgridge, on the 28th April, 1708.
	Gregg, at the place of execution, delivered a paper to the sheriff of London 
and Middlesex, in which he acknowledged the justice of his sentence, declared his 
sincere repentance of all his sins, particularly that lately committed against the queen, 
whose forgiveness he devoutly implored.
	He likewise expressed his wish to make all possible reparation for the injuries 
he had done; begged pardon in a particular manner of Mr Secretary Harley, and 
testified the perfect innocence of that gentleman, declaring that he was no way privy, 
directly or indirectly, to his writing to France. He professed that he died an unworthy 
member of the Protestant church, and that the want of money to supply his 
extravagances had tempted him to commit the fatal crime which cost him his life.


JOHN MORGRIDGE 
Murderer, executed at Tyburn, on the 28th of April, 1708.

	We now present a dreadful instance of the effect of intoxication. This 
unfortunate man, who, through the indulgence in this vice, met an untimely fate, was 
a native of Canterbury, whose ancestors had served the crown for upwards of two 
hundred years. He had been kettle-drummer to the first troop of horse-guards for a 
considerable time, and would have been promoted, had it not been for the following 
unfortunate quarrel. A Mr. Cope having obtained the rank of lieutenant in the army, 
invited several officers to dine with him at the Dolphin tavern, in Tower-street; and 
one of the parties invited Morgridge likewise to go, assuring him that he would be 
made welcome on the part of Mr. Cope. When dinner was over, Cope paid the 
reckoning, and then each man depositing half-a-crown, Morgridge and others 
adjourned to the guard room, to which place more liquor was sent. They had not been 
long there before a woman of the town came in a coach, and asked for Captain Cope. 
Being introduced to the guard-room, she remained a short time, and then said, "Who 
will pay for my coach?" Morgridge said, "I will;" having done so, he advanced to 
salute her; but she pushed him from her in a disdainful manner, and spoke to him in 
very abusive terms which induced him to treat her with the same kind of language. 
Morgridge's rudeness was resented by Cope, who took the woman's part, and a violent 
quarrel ensued between Cope and Morgridge, both of whom were intoxicated. This 
contest in creased to such a degree, that they threw the bottles at each other; till at 
length, Morgridge, inflamed with passion, drew his sword, and stabbed Cope, who 
instantly expired. Morgridge being taken into custody, was tried at the Old Bailey, 
July 5, 1706 'but a doubt arising in the breast of the jury, whether he was guilty of 
murder or manslaughter, they brought in a special verdict, and the affair was left to be 
determined by the twelve judges. The judges having consequently met at Sergeant's-
inn, the case was argued before them by counsel; when they gave an unanimous 
opinion that he was guilty of wilful murder, because he did not kill Cope with the 
weapons he was originally using, but arose from his seat and drew his sword, which 
was deemed to imply a malicious intention. Morgridge, in the interim, made his 
escape from the Marshalsea prison, and went into Flanders, where he remained about 
two years: but being uneasy to revisit his native country, he imprudently came back to 
England, and being apprehended, received sentence of death, and suffered, along with 
William Gregg, at Tyburn, on the 28th of April, 1708. When convicted he was truly 
sensible of the crime of which he had been guilty, acknowledged the justice of his 
sentence, and submitted to his fate with becoming resignation.


JACK OVET 
An amorous Highwayman, who was executed at Leicester in May, 1708

	JACK OVET, a shoemaker by trade, was born at Nottingham, where his abode 
was for four or five years after he had served his apprenticeship. But being always of 
a daring, audacious disposition, his unruly temper induced him to keep very lewd and 
quarrelsome company, and depending on his manhood, it inspired him with an 
inclination of laying aside his mechanical employment to translate himself into a 
gentleman, by maintaining that quality on the highway.
	Immediately equipping himself, as a highwayman ought, with a good horse, 
hanger and pistols, he rode towards London; and on the road had the good success of 
robbing a gentleman of twenty pounds, who, being one of great courage, told Ovet 
that if he had not come upon him unawares, and surprised him at a disadvantage, he 
should have given him some trouble before he would have parted with his money. 
Quoth Ovet: "Sir, I have ventured my life once already in committing this robbery; 
however, if you have the vanity to think yourself a better man than me, I'll venture 
once more. Here's your money again; let it be betwixt us, and whoever of us is the 
best man let him win it and wear it." The gentleman very willingly accepted the 
proposal, and making use of their swords on foot, Jack Ovet had the fortune to kill his 
antagonist on the spot.
	Not long after he killed another man in a quarrel at Leicester; but flying from 
justice he still cheated the hangman of his due, and without any dread pursued his 
unlawful courses to the highest pitch of villainy. One day, in particular, meeting the 
pack-horses of one Mr Rogers, who went from Leominster, in Herefordshire, to 
London, and being in great want of money, he turned one of them out of the main 
road into a narrow lane, where, cutting open the pack, he found therein about two 
hundred and eighty guineas in gold, besides three dozen of silver-hafted knives and 
forks and spoons, which he carried off. The other pack-horses had gone about two 
miles before Mr Rogers missed this; and then making a strict search after it, he found 
it tied to a tree, and the pack thrown off its back and rifled of what was most valuable.
	Another time Jack Ovet, meeting with the Worcester stage-coach on the road, 
in which were several young gentlewomen, robbed them all; but one of them being a 
very handsome person, he entertained such a passion for her exquisite charms that 
when he took her money from her he said: "Madam, cast not your eyes down, neither 
cover your face with those modest blushes; your charms have softened my temper, 
and I am no more the man I was. What I have taken from you (through mere necessity 
at present) is only borrowed; for as no object on earth ever had such an effect on me 
as you, assure yourself that if you please to tell me where I may direct to you, I'll upon 
honour make good your loss to the very utmost." The young gentlewoman told him 
where he might send to her, and they parted. It was not above a week after that before 
Jack sent the following letter to the aforesaid gentlewoman, who had gained such an 
absolute conquest over his soul that his mind ran now as much upon love as robbing:-
MADAM,-These few lines are to acquaint you that though I lately had the cruelty to 
rob you of twenty guineas, yet you committed a greater robbery at the same time in 
robbing me of my heart; on which you may behold yourself enthroned, and all my 
faculties paying their homage to your unparalleled beauty. Therefore be pleased to 
propose but the method how I may win your belief, and were the way to it as deep as 
from hence to the centre, I will search it out. For by all my hopes, by all those rites 
that crown a happy union, by the rosy tincture of your checks, and by your all-
subduing eyes, I prize you above all the world. Oh, then, my fair Venus, can you be 
afraid of Love? His brow is smooth, and his face beset with banks full of delight; 
about his neck hangs a chain of golden smiles. Let us taste the pleasures which Cupid 
commands, and for that unmerited favour I shall become another man, to make you 
happy. So requesting the small boon of a favourable answer to be sent me to Mr 
Walker's, who keeps an ale-house at the sign of the Bell in Thornbury, in 
Gloucestershire, give me leave to subscribe myself your most humble servant to 
command for ever, 
	JOHN BURTON.
THE GENTLEWOMAN'S ANSWER
SIR,-Yours I received with as great dissatisfaction as when you robbed me, and 
admire at your impudence of offering me yourself for a husband, when I am sensible 
'twould not be long ere you made me a hempen widow. Perhaps some foolish girl or 
another may be so bewitched as to go in white to beg the favour of marrying you 
under the gallows; but indeed I should venture neither there nor in a church to marry 
one of your profession, whose vows are treacherous, and whose smiles, words and 
actions, like small rivulets through a thousand turnings of loose passions, at last arrive 
to the dead sea of sin. Should you therefore dissolve your eyes into tears, was every 
accent a sigh in your speech, had you all the spells and magic charms of love, I should 
seal up my ears that I might not hear your dissimulation. You have already broken 
your word in not sending what you villainously took from me; but not valuing that, let 
me tell you, for fear you should have too great a conceit of yourself, that you are the 
first, to my remembrance, whom I ever hated; and sealing my hatred with the hopes of 
quickly reading your dying speech, in case you die in London, I presume to subscribe 
myself yours never to command, 
	D. C.
	This was the end of Jack Ovet's warm amour, and he was soon after as 
unsuccessful in his villainy as he was here in love; for committing a robbery in 
Leicestershire, where his comrade was killed in the attempt, he was closely pursued 
by the country, apprehended, and sent to jail, At last, the assizes being held at 
Leicester, he was condemned. Whilst he was under sentence of death he seemed to 
have no remorse at all for his wickedness, nor in the least to repent of the blood of two 
persons which he had shed; so being brought to the gallows, on Wednesday, the 5th of 
May, 1708, he was justly hanged in the thirty-second year of his age.


ANNE HARRIS 
Although only Twenty when she was executed at Tyburn, on 13th of July, 
1708, she was a notorious Shoplifter, and her two Husbands had already 
suffered the Death Penalty

	ANNE HARRIS, alias Sarah Davies, alias Thorn, alias Gothorn, was born of 
honest but poor parents, in the parish of St Giles without Cripplegate; but being 
debauched by one James Wadsworth, she soon abandoned all manner of goodness. 
This Wadsworth was otherwise called "Jemmy the Mouth" among his companions. 
He was hanged for felony and burglary at Tyburn, in the twenty-fourth year of his 
age, on Friday, the 24th of September, 1702. She next lived with one William Pulman, 
otherwise called Norwich Will, from the place of his birth, who also made his exit at 
Hyde Park Corner, on Friday, the 9th of March, 1704-1705, aged twenty-six years, for 
robbing one Mr Joseph Edwards on the highway of a pair of leather bags, a shirt, two 
neck-cloths, two pocket-books, twenty-five guineas, a half broad-piece of gold, and 
four pounds in silver. Now Nan, being twice left a hempen widow in less than three 
years, had learned in that time to be as vicious as the very worst of her sex, and was so 
absolutely enslaved to all manner of wickedness through custom and opportunity that 
good admonitions could work no good effects upon her. Her inclination was entirely 
averse to honesty. Bidding adieu to everything that looked like virtue, she drove a 
great trade among goldsmiths, to whose shops she often went to buy gold rings, but 
she only cheapened till she had the opportunity of stealing one or two; which she did 
by means of a little ale held in a spoon over the fire till it congealed thick like a syrup, 
for by rubbing some of this on the palm of her hand, any light thing would stick to it, 
without the least suspicion at all. She was as well known among the mercers, lacemen 
and linen-drapers on Ludgate Hill, Cheapside or Fleet Street as that notorious 
shoplifter, Isabel Thomas, who was condemned for the same crimes. But at last she 
was apprehended for her pranks, and being so often burned in the face that there was 
no more room left for the hangman to stigmatise her, the Court thought fit to condemn 
her for privately stealing a piece of printed calico out of the shop of one Mr John 
Andrews; and she was hanged, in the twentieth year of her age, at Tyburn, on Friday, 
13th of July, 1708.


MADAM CHURCHILL 
Who with three Men committed a Murder, and was executed at Tyburn on 
17th of December, 1708

	In this case we shall disclose one of the most consummate tricks ever played 
by woman, to defraud her creditors; and a more effectual method cannot be resorted 
to. It is a satisfaction, however, that during the perusal of the fate of Deborah 
Churchill, we know that Fleet marriages have long been de dared illegal; and 
therefore the artifice cannot now be so easily accomplished. Formerly, within the 
liberties of the Fleet, the clergy could perform the marriage rites, with as little 
ceremony as at Gretna Green, where, to the disgrace of the British empire, an ignorant 
blacksmith, or a fellow, equally mean and unfit, assumes this sacred duty of the 
church.
	Though this woman's sins were great, (yet we must admit some hardship in her 
suffering the utmost rigour of the law for the crime, of which she was found guilty,) 
but which, at the same time, is, in the eye of the law, great as in the immediate 
perpetrator of a murder. Here we deem it well to observe, that any person present 
while murder is committing, and though he may take no part in the commission of the 
crime, yet unless he does his utmost to prevent, he is considered guilty, equal with 
him who might have given the fatal blow.
	Deborah Churchill was born about the year 1678, in a village near Norwich. 
She had several children by her husband, Mr. Churchill; but her temper not being 
calculated to afford him domestic happiness, he repined at his situation, and destroyed 
himself by intoxication.
	Deborah, after this event, came to London; and being much too idle and too 
proud to think of earning a subsistence by her industry, she ran considerably in debt; 
and, in order to extricate herself from her incumbrances, bad recourse to a method 
which was formerly as common as it is unjust. Going to a public-house in Holborn, 
she saw a soldier, and asked him if he would marry her. The man immediately 
answered in the affirmative, on which they went in a coach to the Fleet, where the 
nuptial knot was instantly tied.
	Mrs. Churchill, whose maiden-name is unknown, having obtained a certificate 
of her marriage, enticed her husband to drink till he was quite inebriated, and then 
gave him the slip, happy in this contrivance to screen herself from an arrest.
	A little after this, she cohabited with a young fellow named Hunt, with whom 
she lived more than six years. Hunt appears to have been a youth of a rakish 
disposition. He behaved very ill to this unhappy woman, who, however, loved him to 
distraction; and, at length, forfeited her life in consequence of the regard she had for 
him.
	One night as Mr. Hunt and one of his associates were return ing from the 
Theatre, in company with Mrs. Churchill, a quarrel arose between the men, who 
immediately drew theft swords; while Mrs. Churchill, anxious for the safety of Hunt, 
interposed, and kept his antagonist at a distance; in consequence of which, being off 
his guard, he received a wound, of which he died almost immediately.
	No sooner was the murder committed, than Hunt effected his escape, and, 
eluding his pursuers, arrived safely in Holland; but Mrs. Churchill was apprehended 
on the spot, and being taken before a magistrate, was committed to Newgate.
	June 1708, at the sessions held at the Old Bailey, Mrs. Churchill was indicted 
as an accomplice on the act of the first year of king James the First, called the statute 
of stabbing, by which it is enacted, that "If any one stabs another, who hath not at that 
time a weapon drawn, or hath not first struck the party who stabs, is deemed guilty of 
murder, if the person stabbed dies within six months afterwards."
	Mrs. Churchill, being convicted, pleaded a state of pregnancy, in bar to her 
execution; and a jury of matrons being impannelled, declared that they were ignorant 
whether she was with child or not. Hereupon the court, willing to allow all reasonable 
time in a case of this nature, respited judgment for six months; at the end of which 
time she received sentence of death, as there was no appearance of her being 
pregnant.
	This woman's behaviour was extremely penitent; but she denied her guilt to 
the last moment of her life, having no conception that she had committed murder, 
because she did not herself stab the deceased. She suffered at Tyburn, 17th of 
December 1708.


CAPTAIN EVAN EVANS 
Clerk to Sir Edmund Andrews, in Guernsey, and later Highwayman in 
England. Executed in 1708

	THE title of Captain was only assumed by this noted criminal, who was born 
in South Wales, and his father, who kept an inn at Brecknock, the chief town in 
Brecknockshire, having given him a good education, put him apprentice to an 
attorney-at-law; but by his vicious inclinations, together with the opportunity he had 
of corresponding with some gentlemen of the road (as such rogues affected to call 
themselves) who frequented his father's house, he soon came to act in the same 
wicked courses they followed, and in a little time became the most noted highwayman 
in those parts, having made prodigious booties of the Welsh graziers and others.
	The Captain once happening to be under a guard, who were conducting him to 
Shrewsbury Jail with his legs tied under the belly of the horse, and one of his 
attendants having an excellent fowling-piece, which was then loaded, the prisoner, 
espying a pheasant perching upon a tree, with a deep sigh expressed the dexterity he 
had used formerly in killing such game; so humbly requesting the gun, that he might 
shoot at so fine a mark, the ignorant fellow readily complied with his request. But no 
sooner had the Captain got the piece into his hands than he charged upon his guard, 
and swore a whole volley of oaths that he would fire upon them if they stirred one 
step farther. Then, retreating from them on his little pony to a convenient distance, he 
commanded one of them that was best mounted to come near him and alight; which 
being done, and the bridle of the horse hung on a hedge, the poor fellow was obliged 
to throw him his pistols, and then was admitted to approach nearer the Captain, who, 
presenting one of them at his head, obliged him to loose his legs and retire to his 
companions. This being also done, he soon left his little scrub, mounted the fine 
gelding, and rode off.
	The Captain then coming to London, the country being too hot to hold him, 
upon his handsome behaviour and carriage, which was somewhat extraordinary, as 
likewise his person, he got to be clerk to Sir Edmund Andrews, then Governor of 
Guernsey, and continued there in that capacity for three or four years; but money not 
coming in fast enough in that honest employment to support his wicked inclinations, 
he soon left that service, returned to London, and took a lodging at the Three Neats' 
Tongues, in Nicholas Lane, where he passed for a Guernsey merchant, or captain of a 
ship, and took his younger brother, William Evans, as a servant to wait on him, giving 
him a livery, under the colour of which he committed several notorious robberies on 
the highways about London.
	One of his boldest and most daring robberies was committed on Squire 
Harvey, of Essex, between Mile End and Bow, in the daytime, from whom he took a 
diamond ring, and money to a considerable value, as he was riding home in his coach 
from the Cathedral Church of St Paul's, the late Queen Anne having that day 
honoured the city with her Royal presence.
	Some time after that, meeting not far from Hampstead with one Gambol, a 
writing-master, living in Exeter Street, behind Exeter Exchange, in the Strand, 
walking with his wife, he made bold to command them to deliver what money they 
had, which they very obstinately refusing, the Captain violently took what money he 
found in their pockets, which was about thirty or forty shillings, and for their 
presumption of not being obedient to the doctrine of non-resistance obliged them, 
upon pain of death, to strip themselves stark naked, and then, tying them close, bound 
them to a tree and rode off. But before he left them he had chalked in great letters just 
over their heads on the body of the tree that Gambol and his wife were Adamites, 
which is a sort of sect which teaches their proselytes, both men and women, to pray in 
their meetings, and perform other divine services, stark naked; which posture they call 
the state of innocency, and the places they assemble in Paradise.
	One remarkable robbery he committed with his brother was this. As he was 
travelling along Portsmouth Road, in Surrey, meeting a parcel of headboroughs, or 
constables, conducting about thirty poor fellows they had pressed to Portsmouth 
garrison, Captain Evans asked the reason of their being led so, as captives tied with 
cords. The officers told him they were for the service, and that they had ten shillings 
for each man they had so impressed. He highly commended them for performing their 
duty and rode off. But coming up with them again in a more convenient place, he and 
his brother attacked them with so much fury that, setting all the prisoners at liberty, 
they robbed all the headboroughs of every penny they had, and then, binding them 
hand and foot in a field, they made the best of their way off.
	Having intelligence of the Chester coach's coming with passengers to London, 
Captain Evans sent his brother William the night before to lie at Barnet, and to be in 
Baldock Lane at a certain time next morning. But the poor lad happening to light on a 
Scots cheesemonger who was travelling to Edinburgh, and he pretending to be going 
some part of the way on his master's occasions, they must needs lie together, and 
proceed on their journey next day. When they had got into Baldock Lane, a pistol, to 
the great surprise of the Scotsman, was fired over Will's head by the Captain, that 
being the signal proposed; they then soon commanded the Scotsman to lie by, and in 
sight robbed all the coaches. Then in thunderclaps of oaths the Captain, riding up to 
the Scotsman, robbed him of seven guineas and two watches; but by Will's 
intercession, who had lain with him all night, returned him his best watch, and three 
guineas to bear his charges into his own country; for which generous action the same 
Scotsman hanged them both at the assizes held at Hertford in 1708, the Captain aged 
twenty-nine years, and his brother Will twenty-three.


DICK HUGHES 
A Robber whose thoughtful Wife bought the Rope to hang him. Executed at 
Tyburn in June, 1709.

	THIS great villain, Richard Hughes, was the son of a very good yeoman living 
at Bettws, in Denbighshire, in North Wales, where he was born, and followed 
husbandry, but would now and then be pilfering in his very minority, as he found 
opportunity. When he first came up to London, on his way money being short, 
necessity compelled him to steal a pair of tongs at Pershore in Worcestershire, for 
which he was sent to Worcester Jail; and at the assizes held there, the matter of fact 
being plainly proved against him, the judge directed the jury to bring him in guilty 
only of petty larceny; and accordingly, giving in their verdict guilty to the value of 
tenpence, he came off with crying carrots and turnips, a term which rogues use for 
whipping at the cart's tail.
	After this introduction to further villainy, Dick Hughes, coming up to London, 
soon became acquainted with the most celebrated villains in this famous metropolis, 
especially with one Thomas Lawson, alias Browning, a tripe man, who was hanged at 
Tyburn on Tuesday, the 27th of May, 1712, for felony and burglary, in robbing the 
house of one Mr Hunt, at Hackney. In a very short time he became noted for his 
several robberies; but at last, breaking open a victualling-house at Lambeth, and 
taking from thence only the value of three shillings, because he could find no more, he 
was tried and condemned for that fact at the assizes held at Kingston-upon-Thames; 
but was then reprieved, and afterwards pleaded his pardon at the same place. Now 
being again at liberty, instead of becoming a new man he became rather worse than 
before, breaking open and robbing several houses, at Tottenham Cross, Harrow-on-
the-Hill, a gentlewoman's house at Hackney, a gentleman's at Hammersmith, a 
minister's near Kingston- upon-Thames, a tobacconist's house in Red Cross Street, 
and a house on Hounslow Heath.
	Burglaries being the masterpiece of Dick Hughes's villainy, he went chiefly on 
them; till at last, breaking open and robbing the house of one Mr George Clark, at 
Twickenham, he was apprehended for this fact, and committed to Newgate.
	Whilst he lay under condemnation, his wife, to whom he had been married in 
the Fleet Prison, constantly visited him at chapel. She was a very honest woman, and 
had such an extraordinary kindness for her husband under his great afflictions that 
when he went to be hanged at Tyburn, on Friday, the 24th of June, 1709, she met him 
at St Giles's Pound, where, the cart stopping, she stepped up to him, and whispering in 
his ear, said: "My dear, who must find the rope that's to hang you - me or the sheriff?" 
Her husband replied: "The sheriff, honey; for who's obliged to find him tools to do his 
work?" "Ah!" replied his wife, "I wish I had known so much before; it would have 
saved me twopence, for I have been and bought one already." "Well, well," said Dick 
again, "perhaps it mayn't be lost, for it may serve a second husband." "Yes," quoth his 
wife, "if I have any luck in good husbands, so it may." Then, the cart driving on to 
Hyde Park Corner, this notorious villain ended his days there, in the thirtieth year of 
his age; and was after anatomised at Surgeons' Hall, in London.


CHRISTOPHER SLAUGHTERFORD 
Executed at Guildford, July 9, 1709, for the murder of Jane Young

	This is a very singular case, and will excite different opinions respecting this 
unhappy man's commission of the deed for which he was executed.
	He was the son of a miller at Westbury-Green, in Surrey, who apprenticed him 
at Godalming. When his time was expired, he lived in several situations, and 
afterwards took a malt-house at Shalford, when his aunt became his housekeeper, and 
he acquired a moderate sum of money by his industry.
	He now paid his addresses to Jane Young, and it was generally supposed he 
intended to marry her. The last time he was seen in her company was on the evening 
of the 5th of October, 1703; from which day she was not heard of for a considerable 
time, on which suspicions arose that Slaughterford had murdered her.
	About a month afterwards, the body of the unfortunate girl was found in a 
pond, with several marks of violence on it; and the public suspicion being still fixed 
on Slaughterford, he voluntarily surrendered himself to two justices of the peace, who 
directed that he should be discharged; but as he was still accused by his neighbours, 
he went to a third magistrate, who, agreeable to his own solicitations, committed him 
to the Marshalsea Prison; and he was tried at the next assizes at Kingston, and 
acquitted.
	The majority of his neighbours, however, still insisted that he was guilty, and 
prevailed on the relations of the deceased to bring an appeal for a new trial; towards 
the expense of which many persons subscribed, as the father of Jane Young was in 
indigent circumstances.
	During the next term, he was tried by a Surrey jury, in the court of Queen's 
Bench, before Lord Chief Justice Holt, the appeal being lodged in the name of Henry 
Young, brother and heir to the deceased.
	The evidence given on this second trial was the same in substance as on the 
first; yet so different were the sentiments of the two juries, that Slaughterford was 
now found guilty, and received sentence of death. It may be proper to mention the 
heads of some of the depositions, that the reader may judge of the propriety of the 
verdict.
	Elizabeth Chapman, the mistress of Jane Young, deposed, that when the young 
woman left her service, she said she was going to he married to the prisoner, that she 
had purchased new clothes on the occasion, and declared she was to meet him on the 
Sunday following. That the deponent sometime afterwards inquired after Jane Young, 
and, asking if she was married, was informed that she had been seen in the company 
of Slaughterford, but no one could tell what was become of her since, and that he 
himself pretended he knew nothing of her, but thought she had been at home with Mrs 
Chapman; which had induced this witness to believe that some mischief had befallen 
her.
	Other witnesses proved that Jane Young was in company with the prisoner on 
the night that the murder was committed; and one man swore that, at three in the 
morning, he met a man and woman on a common, about a quarter of a mile from the 
place where the body was found; that the man wore light-coloured clothes, as it was 
proved the prisoner had done the preceding day; and that soon after he passed them he 
heard a shrieking, like the voice of a woman.
	It was sworn by a woman, that, after the deceased was missing, she asked 
Slaughterford what was become of his lady: to which he replied, 'I have put her off; 
do you know of any girl that has any money? I have got the way of putting them off 
now.'
	It was deposed by another woman, that, before the discovery of the murder, 
she said to Mr Slaughterford, 'What if Jane Young should lay such a child to you as 
mine is here?' at which he sighed, and said, 'It is now impossible;' and cried till the 
tears ran down his cheeks.
	In contradiction to this, the aunt of Mr Slaughterford and a young lad who 
lived in the house deposed that the prisoner lay at home on the night that the murder 
was committed.
	Slaughterford, from the time of conviction to the very hour of his death, 
solemnly declared his innocence; and, though visited by several divines, who urged 
him, by all possible arguments, to confess the fact, yet he still persisted that he was 
not guilty. He was respited from the Wednesday till Saturday, in which interim he 
desired to see Mr Woodroof, a minister of Guildford: from which it was thought he 
would make a confession; but what he said to him tended only to confirm his former 
declarations.
	As soon as the executioner had tied him up, he threw himself off, having 
previously delivered to the sheriff a paper, containing the following solemn 
declaration:
GUILDFORD, JULY 9, 1709 
	Being brought here to die, according to the sentence passed upon me at the 
Queen's-Bench bar, for a crime of which I am wholly innocent, I thought myself 
obliged to let the world know, that they may not reflect on my friends and relations, 
whom I have left behind me much troubled for my fatal end, that I know nothing of 
the death of Jane Young, nor how she came by her death, directly or indirectly, 
though some have been pleased to cast reflections on my aunt. However, I freely 
forgive all my enemies, and pray to God to give them a due sense of their errors, and 
in his due time to bring the truth to light. In the mean time, I beg every one to forbear 
reflecting on my dear mother, or any of my relations, for my unjust and unhappy fall, 
since what I have here set down is truth, and nothing but the truth, as I expect 
salvation at the hands of Almighty God; but I am heartily sorry that I should be the 
cause of persuading her to leave her dame, which is all that troubles me. As witness 
my hand this 9th day of July.
	We have already observed, that the case of Slaughterford is very 
extraordinary. We see that he surrendered himself to the justices when he might have 
ran away; and common sense tells us that a murderer would endeavour to make his 
escape; and we find him a second time surrendering himself, as if anxious to wipe 
away the stain on his character. We find him tried by a jury of his countrymen, and 
acquitted; then again tried, on an appeal, by another jury of his neighbours, found 
guilty, condemned, and executed. Here it should be observed, that after conviction on 
an appeal, which rarely happens, the king has no power to pardon; probably, had 
Slaughterford been found guilty by the first jury, as his case was dubious, he would 
have received royal mercy. Some of the depositions against him seem very striking; 
yet the testimony in his favour is equally clear. There appears nothing in the former 
part of his life to impeach his character; there is no proof of any animosity between 
him and the party murdered; and there is an apparent contradiction in part of the 
evidence against him. He is represented by one female witness as sneering at and 
highly gratified with the murder; while another proves him extremely affected and 
shedding tears on the loss of Jane Young. The charitable reader must, therefore, be 
inclined to think this man was innocent, and that he fell a sacrifice to the prejudices, 
laudable, perhaps, of his incensed neighbours. He was visited, while under sentence of 
death, by a number of divines; yet he died with the most sacred averment of his 
innocence.


GRACE TRIPP 
Convicted of Murder on Evidence of the actual Perpetrator of the Crime, 
and executed at the Age of Nineteen at Tyburn, 27th of March, 1710

	GRACE TRIPP was a native of Barton, in Lincolnshire; and after living as a 
servant at a gentleman's house in the country she came to London, was some time in a 
reputable family, and then procured a place in the house of Lord Torrington.
	During her stay in this last service she became connected with a man named 
Peters, who persuaded her to be concerned in robbing her master's house, promising 
to marry her as soon as the fact should be perpetrated. Hereupon it was concerted 
between them that she should let Peters into the house in the night, and that they 
should join in stealing and carrying off the plate.
	Peters was accordingly admitted at the appointed time, when all of the family, 
except the housekeeper, were out of town; but this housekeeper, hearing a noise, came 
into the room just as they had packed up the plate; on which Peters seized her and cut 
her throat, while Tripp held the candle. This being done, they searched the pockets of 
the deceased, in which they found about thirty guineas; with which, and the plate, they 
hastily decamped, leaving the street door open.
	The offenders were taken in a few days, when Peters having been admitted as 
evidence for the Crown, Grace Tripp was convicted, at the age of nineteen years, and 
executed at Tyburn, on 27th March, 1710.


DANIEL DAMAREE, GEORGE PURCHASE, and 
FRANCIS WILLIS 
Tried for High-Treason.

	WHEN the Whig ministry of queen Anne were turned out of; or, in the 
modern phrase, had resigned their places, the Tory ministry who succeeded them 
encouraged a young divine named Henry Sacheverell to enflame the passions of the 
public by preaching against the settlement made at the revolution, and inculcating all 
those doctrines which were then held as the favourite tenets of what was called the 
high church party. Sacheverell was a man of abilities, and eminently possessed of 
those kind of talents which are calculated to inspire such sentiments as the preacher 
wishes his auditors to possess.
	It is well known to the public in general that Dr Sacheverell's discourses 
tended to instigate the people against the house of Hanover, and to insinuate the right 
of the pretender to the throne of these realms. This caused such a general commotion 
that it became necessary to bring him to a trial in some way; and contrary to all former 
practice respecting a man of his rank, he was tried before the house of peers, and 
being convicted, was silenced for three years.
	However, in consequence of his insinuations, the passions of the populace 
were so excited, that they almost adored him as a prophet; and some of them were led 
to commit those outrages which gave rise to the following trials.
	Messieurs Bradbury and Burgess, two dissenting ministers, having made 
themselves conspicuous by preaching in behalf of the revolution settlement, and 
freedom of sentiment in matters of religion, they became the immediate objects of the 
resentment of the mob. What arose in con sequence hereof will appear from the 
following abstract of the trials of the criminals in question.
	On the 19th of April, 1710, Daniel Damaree was indicted for being concerned 
with a multitude of men, to the number of five hundred, armed with swords and clubs, 
to levy war against the queen.
	A gentleman deposed, that 'going through the Temple, he saw some thousands 
of people, who had attended Dr Sacheverell from Westminster-Hall: that some of 
them said they would pull down Dr Burgess's meeting-house that night.' Others 
differed as to the time of doing it, but all agreed on the act, and the meeting-house was 
demolished on the following night.
	Captain Orril swore that on the first of March, hearing that 'the mob had pulled 
down Dr Burgess's meeting-house, he resolved to go among them, to do what service 
he could to government, by making discoveries.'
	The captain going to Mr Bradbury's meeting, found the people plundering it, 
who obliged him to pull off his hat. After this he went to Lincoln's-Inn-Fields, where 
he saw a bonfire made of some of the materials of Dr Burgess's meeting-house, and 
saw the prisoner, who twirled his hat, and said 'D —n it, I will lead you on: G —d d 
—n me, we will have all the meeting-houses down; high church and Sacheverell, 
huzza!'
	Another evidence proved that the prisoner headed part of the mob, some of 
whom proposed to go to the meeting-house in Wild-street; but this was objected to by 
others, who recommended going to Drury-lane, saying 'that meeting-house was worth 
ten of that in Wild-street'.
	Joseph Collier swore that he saw the prisoner carry a brass sconce from Dr 
Burgess's meeting-house, and throw it into the fire in Lincoln's-Inn-Fields, huzzaing, 
and crying 'High church and Sacheverell.' There was other evidence to prove the 
concern that the prisoner had in these illegal acts; and several persons appeared in his 
behalf; but as in their testimony they contradicted each other, the jury could not credit 
their evidence; but brought in a special verdict.
	GEORGE PURCHASE was indicted for levying war against the queen, &c. in 
the same manner that Damaree had been. On this trial captain Orril deposed, that after 
seeing Dr Burgess's meeting-house demolished, and a fire made in Lincoln's-Inn-
Fields with some of the materials thereof; he met a party of the guards, whom he 
directed to go to Drury-lane, where a bonfire was made of the pews, and other 
utensils; and that there was a great mob, which was dispersed by the guards: that the 
prisoner was very active, pushing at the breasts of the horses with a drawn sword: that 
this evidence asked him what he meant, telling him that in opposing the guard he 
opposed the queen, and would have persuaded him to put up his sword, and go home; 
but instead of taking this advice, he replied, 'D —n you, who are you? for High-
Church and Sacheverell or no? I am, G —d d —n them all,' meaning the guards, 'for I 
am as good a man as any of them all': that he then called to the mob 'Come on, come 
on boys; I'll lead you on, I am for High-Church and Sacheverell, and I'll lose my life 
in the cause.'
	Captain Orril farther deposed, that after this the prisoner ran resolutely with 
his sword in his hand, and made a full pass at the officer who commanded the guards; 
and if one of the guards had not given a spring and beat down his sword, he would 
have run the officer through the left flank: that the prisoner now retired a little lower, 
and the guards had by this time dispersed the mob, having knocked down forty or fifty 
of them in the action.
	Richard Russell, one of the guards, deposed, that they were ordered by the 
serjeant to march into Drury-lane, and to return their bayonets and draw their swords; 
that when they came to Drury-lane, there was a bonfire with a large mob about it; that 
near the fire the horse were all drawn up into one line, with their tails against the wall, 
that none of the mob might come behind: that the prisoner then stood in the middle of 
the lane, huzzaing, and came up, and would have thrust himself between the horses; 
but the guards beat him off with the flats of their swords.
	The prisoner produced some witnesses; but as what they said did not 
contradict the testimony of the evidences against him, their depositions had no weight. 
The jury were satisfied with the proofs that had arisen; but having a doubt respecting 
the points of law, they brought in a special verdict.
	At the same time and place Francis Willis was tried for assisting in 
demolishing the meeting-house of Mr Bradbury in Fetter-lane, and burning the 
materials at a bonfire in Holborn; but was acquitted for want of sufficient evidence 
against him.
	The verdicts respecting Damaree and Purchase being left special, their cases 
were argued in the court of King's Bench in Westminster-Hall, the following term, 
before the lord chief justice Parker and the other judges; when, though every artifice 
of the law was made use of in their behalf; they were adjudged to be guilty; in 
consequence of which they received sentence of death, and were executed at Tyburn, 
on the 15th of June, 1710.
	From the fate of these unhappy men we may learn the extreme folly of the 
lower orders of people interesting them selves in religious and political disputes. 
These offenders were watermen to the queen; but their loyalty to their sovereign and a 
proper regard to themselves, equally called on them to discharge the duties of their 
station with punctuality, and to leave the management of the church and state to those 
to whom they immediately belonged.
	It is well known that, towards the close of the reign of queen Anne, political 
disputes were carried to a very unusual height in this kingdom. The body of the 
people were divided into two great factions, known by the names of High Church and 
Low Church: but though the church was the word, religion was almost out of the 
question; and the principal object of dispute was of a political kind. The question was, 
whether the house of HANOVER, or the family of STUART should sway the sceptre 
of these kingdoms. But it is astonishing to think that, even at that period, any son of 
the church of England could be so deluded as to think that a Catholic prince, of an 
obnoxious family, proscribed by the laws of the land, could be a proper sovereign for 
a protestant people. The supposition carries absurdity in the face of it; yet such was 
the violence of the passions of the people, that the pretender had nearly half as many 
friends in the kingdom as the rightful heir to the throne!
	With regard to the malefactors in question, their offence was of the most 
atrocious nature. Every man has an equal right to worship God according to the 
dictates of his own conscience. It was therefore in a high degree criminal to demolish 
the meeting-houses of the dissenting ministers. We should have no more spleen 
against a man for differing from us in religious sentiments, than for being taller, or 
shorter, or of a different complexion from ourselves. It was a wise saying of a 
celebrated writer, that 'I would no more quarrel with a man for his differing in 
sentiments from me, than I would for the colour of his eye-brows.'
	The operations of the mind, being free by nature, ought to be allowed the most 
unlimited scope. A good protestant will not quarrel with a Roman Catholic for the 
peculiarities of his worship: he will only pity him for those parts of it which he thinks 
absurd, and endeavour to regulate his own worship by what he deems a purer 
standard.
	Upon the whole, the fate of these malefactors ought to teach us obedience to 
our superiors, love to our neighbours, and duty to our God. There can be no peace of 
mind expected by those who do not live in the discharge of their duty; while those 
who perform it may reasonably hope for the serene comforts of a good conscience in 
this world, and console themselves with the hope of immortal happiness in the next.


JACK ADDISON 
Committed fifty-six Highway Robberies, and was executed at Tyburn in 
March, 1711

	THIS fellow was born in the parish of Lambeth, and for some time had been in 
the sea and land service, but for the most part of his life followed the trade of a 
butcher. He kept company much with ill women, especially one Kate Speed, and for 
the maintenance of her he went upon the footpad, committing several most notorious 
robberies of that nature with William Jewel and Peter Cartwright, the latter of whom 
was hanged at Tyburn, on Wednesday, the 18th of July, 1711.
	One time, meeting with a parson between Westbourne Green and Paddington, 
he took from him five guineas, which putting into his own pocket, quoth Jack: "'Tis as 
safe there as in yours." "That I believe," replied the parson; "but I hope, sir, you'll be 
so civil as to give me some of it back again." Said Jack then: "Alas, sir, I wonder how 
a man in your coat can be so unconscionable as to desire anything out of this small 
matter; but I tell you what, sir; if you can tell me what part of speech your gold is, I'll 
return it all again" The parson, thinking the money was his own again, told him it was 
a noun substantive, as anything was to which he could put "a" or "the." "No, no," 
replied Jack, "you are out now; I perceive you are no good grammarian, for where 
your gold is at present it is a noun adjective, because it can be neither seen, felt, heard 
nor understood." So, leaving the parson to ruminate on his mistake, away Jack went 
about his unlawful business again.
	A little while after this, meeting on the road betwixt Hammersmith and 
Kensington with one Palmer, a victualler, who formerly kept the King's Head ale-
house, in King's Head Court, in Drury Lane, he took from him a silver watch and 
eighteen shillings; and Mr Palmer desiring Jack to give him some small matter to bear 
his charges up to London, quoth he: "Had you been an honest tradesman, perhaps I 
might have considered you; but as I know you wear a blue flag, I will not give you a 
farthing, because all of your profession neither eat, drink nor think but at other men's 
charges."
	Afterwards meeting betwixt Hampstead and Kentish Town with a barrister of 
Lincoln's Inn, and taking from him a gold watch, a silver snuff box and two guineas, 
quoth he to Jack: "I'd have you take care what you do, for I am a lawyer; and if you 
should come into my hands I should be very severe upon you." Addison replied: "I 
value not the severity of all the lawyers in England, who only learn to frame their 
cases from public riddles and imitating Merlin's prophecies, and so set all the Cross 
Row together by the ears; yet your whole law is not able to decide Lucian's old 
controversy betwixt Tau and Sigma. So binding the lawyer hand and foot, he left him 
to plead his cause by himself.
	Not long after this exploit, Jack, meeting a serjeant of the Poultry Compter 
coming from Islington, commanded him to stand and deliver, or else he would shoot 
him through the head. The fellow being surprised gave him forty shillings, desiring at 
the same time that he would be so civil as to return him what he pleased back again. 
But Jack knowing his rascally function, quoth: "Sirrah, was the tenth part of a farthing 
to save your life, nay, your soul, I would not give it, because thou art the spawn of a 
broken shopkeeper, who takes delight in the ruin of thy fellow-creatures! The misery 
of a poor man is the offal on which you feed, and money is the crust you leap at; your 
walks in term time are up Fleet Street, but at the end of the term up Holborn and so to 
Tyburn, for the gallows is your purlieu, in which you and the hangman are quarter 
rangers; the one turns off, and the other cuts down." At these words, quoth the 
serjeant: "And I hope I shall have the happiness of cutting you down too one of these 
days." "Perhaps so," replied Jack, "but you shall devour a great many more of the 
sheriff's custards first." So tying him neck and heels, he bound the serjeant to his good 
behaviour, till some passengers came by to release him.
	He had committed fifty-six robberies thus on foot, and at last being 
apprehended, upon the information of one Will Jewel, a prisoner in the Marshalsea 
Prison, in Southwark, for robbing his Excellency the Duke d'Aumont, the French 
Ambassador here, he was committed to Newgate, and tried at Justice Hall, in the Old 
Bailey, for assaulting and robbing on the queen's highway Mr Matthew Beazly, Mr 
William Winslow, Mr Disney Stanniford, Mr Robert Sherwood and Mr Joseph 
Ashton, on the 30th of November and 20th of December, 1710, and the 6th of 
February, 1711; for which, being cast and condemned, he was hanged at Tyburn, on 
Friday, the 2nd of March following, aged twenty-three years.

END OF VOLUME 1

 
 
 
 
THE NEWGATE CALENDAR
-2-
-9-
VOLUME 1
-8-
