
The Martyrdom of Man



By

Winwood Reade


Transcribed by Jan Lloyd (villa_la_miranda@mercuryin.es) and Donal O’Danachair 
(kodak_seaside@hotmail.com)



Contents:

Note
Author’s Preface


Chapter 1 – War

Egypt
Western Asia
The Persians
The Greeks
The Macedonians
Alexandria
The Phoenicians
Carthage and Rome
Roman Africa
The Arabs




Chapter 2 – Religion

The Natural History of Religion
The Israelites
The Jews
The Prophets
The Character of Jesus
The Christians
Arabia
Mecca
The Character of Mohammed
Description of Africa
The Mohammedans in Central Africa


Chapter 3 – Liberty

Ancient Europe
The German Invasion
The Castle
The Town
The Church
Venice
Arab Spain
The Portuguese Discoveries
The Slave-Trade
Abolition in Europe
Abolition in America
Materials of Human History

Chapter 4 – Intellect

Animal Period of the Earth
Origin and early History of Man
Summary of Universal History
The Future of the Human Race
The Religion of Reason and Love














NOTE


Reade’s full name was William Winwood Reade: on the Martrydom, and 
on his last book, The Outcast, it stands as Winwood Reade, his literary 
choice.  A nephew of Charles Reade, he was born at Murrayfield, near 
Crieff, on 26 December, 1838, and died at Wimbledon, on 24th April, 
1875.  (These are the dates of Mr. Legge, who seems, however, not to 
have finally correlated them.)  He published in 1859 Charlotte and Myra; 
in 1860 Liberty Hall Oxon (his college was Magdalen, then known as 
Hertford); in 1860 The Veil of Isis, an attack on Catholicism.  His first 
visit to Africa was in 1862.  In 1865 he published See-Saw; in 1868 he 
again went to Africa, and in 1873 appeared his African Sketch Book, 
which is in part an abridgment of his Savage Africa (1863).  The 
Martyrdom of Man was published in 1872.  In 1873 he made his third trip 
to Africa, as Times correspondent in the Ashanti War, which he saw 
through, being the only civilian present at the taking of Coomassie; and in 
1874 appeared his Story of the Ashanti Campaign, embodying, with 
criticism, his Times letters.  In his last illness he wrote The Outcast 
(1875) setting forth in fiction form the fate of persecution attaching to the 
aggressive profession of “unbelief.”  Orthodox writers have stressed the 
fact that, while he again professes his disbelief in immortality, he does 
not profess to ”know.”  The Outcast reached a third edition in the year of 
its issue, but does not appear to have been since reprinted until its 
publication by Watts & Co., in the Thinker’s Library series in 1933.








AUTHOR’S PREFACE


In 1862-3 I made a tour in Western Africa, and afterwards desired to 
revisit that strange country with the view of opening up new ground and 
of studying religion and morality among the natives.  I was, however, 
unable to bear a second time the great expenses of African travel, and had 
almost given up the hope of becoming an explorer when I was introduced 
by Mr. Bates, the well known Amazon traveller and Secretary of the 
Royal Geographical Society, to one of its Associates, Mr. Andrew 
Swanzy, who had long desired to do something in the cause of African 
discovery.  He placed unlimited means at my disposal, and left me free to 
choose my own route.  I travelled in Africa for two years (1868-70) and 
made a journey which is mentioned in the test.  The narrative of my 
travels will be published in due course; I allude to them now in order to 
show that I have had some personal experience of savages.  I wish also to 
take the first opportunity of thanking Mr. Swanzy for his assistance, 
which was given not only in the most generous but also in the most 
graceful manner.

With respect to the present work, I began it intending to prove that 
“Negroland” or Inner Africa is not cut off from the main-stream of 
events, as writers of philosophical history have always maintained, but 
connected by means of Islam with the lands of the East; and also that it 
has, by means of the slave-trade, powerfully influenced the moral history 
of Europe and the political history of the United States.  But I was 
gradually led from writing the history of Africa into writing the history of 
the world.  I could not describe the Negroland of ancient times without 
describing Egypt and Carthage.  From Egypt I was drawn to Asia and to 
Greece; from Carthage I was drawn to Rome.  That is the first chapter.  
Next, having to relate the progress of the Mohammedans in Central 
Africa, it was necessary for me to explain the nature and origin of Islam, 
but that religion cannot be understood without a previous study of 
Christianity and of Judaism, and those religions cannot be understood 
without a study of religion among savages.  That is the second chapter.  
Thirdly, I sketched the history of the slave-trade, which took me back to 
the discoveries of the Portuguese, the glories of Venetian commerce, the 
revival of the arts, the Dark Ages, and the invasion of the Germans.  Thus 
finding that my outline of universal history was almost complete, I 
determined in the last chapter to give a brief summary of the whole, 
filling up the parts omitted, and adding to it the materials of another work 
suggested several years ago by The Origin of Species.

One of my reasons for revisiting Africa was to collect materials for this 
work, which I had intended to call The Origin of Mind.  However, Mr. 
Darwin’s Descent of Man has left little for me to say respecting the birth 
and infancy of the faculties and affections.  I therefore merely follow in 
his footsteps, not from blind veneration for a great master, but because I 
find that his conclusions are confirmed by the phenomena of savage life.  
On certain minor points I venture to dissent from Mr. Darwin’s views, as 
I shall show in my personal narrative, and there is probably much in this 
work of which Mr. Darwin will disapprove.  He must therefore not be 
made responsible for all the opinions of his disciple.

I had intended to give my authorities in full with notes and elucidations, 
but am prevented from doing so by want of space, this volume being 
already larger than it should be.  I wish therefore to impress upon the 
reader that there is scarcely anything in this work which I can claim as 
my own.  I have taken not only facts and ideas, but phrases and even 
paragraphs, from other writers.  I cannot pay all my debts in full, but I 
must at least do myself the pleasure of mentioning those authors who 
have been my chief guides.  On Egypt they are Wilkinson, Herodotus 
(Rawlinson’s edition), Bunsen; Ethiopia or Abyssinia,  Bruce,  Baker,  
Lepsius;  Carthage,  Heeren (African Nations),  Niebuhr,  Mommsen; 
East Africa,  Vincent (Periplus),  Guillain,  Hakluyt Society’s 
Publications;  Moslem Africa (Central),  Park,  Caillie,  Denham and 
Clapperton,  Lander,  Barth,  Ibn Batuta,  Leo Africanus; Guinea and 
South Africa,  Azurara,  Barros,  Major,  Hakluyt,  Purchas,  Livingstone; 
Assyria,  Sir H. Rawlinson,  Layard; India,  Max Muller,  Weber; Persia,  
Heeren (Asiatic Nations);  Central Asia,  Burnes,  Wolff,  Vambery; 
Arabia,  Niebuhr,  Caussin de Perceval,  Sprenger,  Deutsch,  Muir,  
Burckhardt,  Burton,  Palgrave; Palestine,  Dean Stanley,  Renan,  
Dollinger,  Spinoza,  Robinson,  Neander; Greece,  Grote,  O. Muller,  
Curtius,  Heeren,  Lewes,  Taine,  About,  Becker (Charicles);  Rome,  
Gibbon,  Macaulay,  Becker (Gallus); Dark Ages,  Hallam,  Guizot,  
Robertson,  Prescott,  Irving; Philosophy of History,  Herder,  Buckle  
Comte,  Lecky,  Mill,  Draper; Science,  Darwin,  Lyell,  Herbert,  
Spencer,  Huxley,  Tyndall,  Chambers (Vestiges of Creation),  Wallace,  
Tylor, and Lubbock.  All of the works of the above named authors 
deserve to be carefully read by the students of universal history, and in 
them he will find references to the original authorities, and to all writers 
of importance on the various subjects treated of in this work.
As for my religious sentiments, they are expressed in opposition to the 
advice and wishes of several literary friends, and of the publisher, who 
have urged me to alter certain passages which they do not like, and which 
they believe will provoke against me the anger of the public.  Now, as a 
literary workman I am thankful to be guided by the knowledge of experts, 
and I bow to the decisions of the great public, for whom alone I write, 
whom alone I care to please, and in whose broad unbiased judgment I 
place implicit trust.  But in the matter of religion I listen to no 
remonstrance; I acknowledge no decision save that of the divine monitor 
within me.  My conscience is my adviser, my audience, and my judge.  It 
bade me write as I have written, without evasion, without disguise; it bids 
me to go on as I have begun, whatever the result may be.  If therefore my 
religious opinions should be condemned, without a single exception, by 
every reader of the book, it will not make me regret having expressed 
them, and it will not prevent me from expressing then again.  It is my 
earnest and sincere conviction that those opinions are not only true, but 
also that they tend to elevate and purify the mind.  One thing at all events 
I know—that it has done me good to write this book, and therefore I do 
not think that it can injure those by whom it will be read.



























CHAPTER 1


WAR


The land of Egypt is six hundred miles long, and is bounded by two 
ranges of naked limestone hills which sometimes approach and 
sometimes retire from each other, leaving between them an average 
breadth of seven miles.  On the north they widen and disappear, giving 
place to a marshy meadow plain which extends to the Mediterranean 
coast.  On the south they are no longer of limestone, but of granite; they 
narrow to a point; they close in till they almost touch; and through the 
mountain gate thus formed the river Nile leaps with a roar into the valley, 
and runs north towards the sea.

In the winter and spring it rolls a languid stream through a dry and dusty 
plain.  But in the summer an extraordinary thing happens.  The river 
grows troubled and swift; it turns red as blood, and then green; it rises, it 
swells, till at length, overflowing its banks, it covers the adjoining lands 
to the base of the hills on either side.  The whole valley becomes a lake 
from which the villages rise like islands, for they are built on artificial 
mounds.

This catastrophe was welcomed by the Egyptians with religious gratitude 
and noisy mirth.  When their fields had entirely disappeared they thanked 
the gods and kept their harvest-home.   The tax gatherers measured the 
water as if it were grain, and announced what the crops and the budget of 
the next year would be.  Gay barges with painted sails conveyed the 
merry husbandmen from village to village and from fair to fair.  It was 
then that they had their boat tournaments, their wrestling matches, their 
bouts at single-stick and other athletic sports.  It was then that the 
thimble-riggers and jack-puddings, blind harpers and nigger minstrels 
from Central Africa, amused the holiday-hearted crowd.  It was then that 
the old people sat over draughts and dice-box in the cosy shade, while the 
boys played at mora, or at pitch and toss, and the girls at a game of ball, 
with forfeits for the one who missed a catch.  It was then that the house-
father bought new dolls for the children, and amulets or gold ear-rings or 
necklaces of porcelain bugles for the wife.  It was then that the market 
stalls abounded with joints of beef and venison, and with geese hanging 
down in long rows, and with chickens hatched by thousands under heaps 
of dung.  Salted quails, smoked fish, date sweetmeats, doura cakes, and 
cheese; leeks, garlic cucumbers, and onions; lotus seeds mashed in milk, 
roasted stalks of papyrus, jars of barley beer and palm wine, with many 
other kinds of food, were sold in unusual plenty at that festive time.

It was then also that the white-robed priests, bearing the image of a god 
and singing hymns, marched with solemn procession to the waterside, 
and cast in a sacrifice of gold.  For the water which had thus risen was 
their life.  Egypt is by nature a rainless desert which the Nile and the Nile 
only, converts into a garden every year.

Far, far away in the distant regions of the south, in the deep heart of 
Africa, lie two inland seas.  These are the headwaters of the Nile; its 
sources are in the sky.  For the clouds, laden with waters collected out of 
many seas, sail to the African equator, and there pour down a ten months’ 
rain.  This ocean of falling water is received on a region sloping towards 
the north, and is conveyed by a thousand channels to the vast rocky 
cisterns which form the Speke and Baker Lakes.** They, filled and 
bursting, cast forth the Nile, and drive it from them through a terrible and 
thirsty land.  The hot air lies on the stream and laps it as it flows.  The 
parched soil swallows it with open pores, but ton after ton of water is 
supplied from the gigantic reservoirs behind, and so it is enabled to cross 
that vast desert which spreads from the latitude of Lake Tchad to the 
borders of the Mediterranean Sea.

The existence of the Nile is due to the Nyanza Lakes alone, but the 
inundation of the river has a distinct and separate cause.  In that 
phenomenon the lakes are not concerned.

Between the Nile and the mouth of the Arabian Gulf are situated the 
highlands of Abyssinia, rising many thousand feet above the level of the 
sea, and intercepting the clouds of the Indian Ocean in their flight 
towards the north.  From these mountains, as soon as the rainy season has 
set in, two great rivers come thundering down their dried-up beds, and 
rush into the Nile.  The main stream is now forced impetuously along; in 
the Nubian desert its swelling waters are held in between walls of rock; as 
soon as it reaches the low lying lands of Egypt it naturally overflows.  

The Abyssinian tributaries do even more than this.  The waters of the      


[** Lakes Victoria and Albert]
White Nile are transparent and pure; but the Atbara and Blue Nile bring 
down from their native land a black silt which the flood strews over the 
whole valley as a kind of top-dressing or manure.  On that rich and 
unctuous mud, as soon as the waters have retired, the natives cast their 
seed.  Then their labours are completed; no changes of weather need 
afterwards be feared; no anxious looks are turned towards the sky; 
sunshine only is required to fulfil the crop, and in Egypt the sun is never 
covered by a cloud.

Thus, were it not for the White Nile, the Abyssinian rivers would be 
drunk up by the desert; and were it not for the Abyssinian rivers, the 
White Nile would be a barren stream.  The river is created by the rains of 
the equator; the land by the tropical rains condensed in one spot by the 
Abyssinian mountain pile.

In that fair Egyptian valley, fattened by a foreign soil, brightened by 
eternal sunshine, watered by terrestrial rain, the natives were able to 
obtain a year’s food in return for a few days’ toil, and so were provided 
with that wealth of time which is essential for a nation’s growth.

A people can never rise from low estate as long as they are engrossed in 
the painful struggle for daily bread.  On the other hand, leisure alone is 
not sufficient to effect the self-promotion of men.  The savage of the 
primeval forest burns down a few trees every year; his women raise an 
easy crop from the ashes which mingle with the soil.  He basks all day in 
the sunshine, or prostrates himself in his canoe with his arms behind his 
head and a fishing-line tied to his big toe.  When the meat-hunger comes 
upon him he takes up bow and arrow  and goes for a few days into the 
bush.  His life is one long torpor, with spasms of activity.  Century 
follows century, but he does not change.  Again, the shepherd tribes roam 
from pasture to pasture; their flocks and herds yield them food and dress 
and “houses of hair,” as they call their tents.  They have little work to do; 
their time is almost entirely their own.  They pass long hours in slow 
conversation, in gazing at the heavens, in the sensuous, passive oriental 
reverie.  The intellectual capacities of such men are by no means to be 
despised, as those who have lived among them are aware.  They are 
skilful interpreters of nature’s language and of the human heart; they 
compose beautiful poems; their religion is simple and sublime; yet time 
passes on, and they do not advance.  The Arab sheikh of the present day 
lives precisely as Abraham did three thousand years ago; the Tartars of 
Central Asia are the Scythians whom Herodotus described.

It is the first and indispensable condition of human progress that a people 
shall be married to a single land; that they shall wander no more from one 
region to another, but remain fixed and faithful to their soil.  Then, if the 
Earth-wife be fruitful, she will bear them children by hundreds and by 
thousands; and then calamity will come and teach them by torture to 
invent.

The Egyptians were islanders, cut off from the rest of the world by sand 
and sea.  They were rooted in their valley; they lived entirely upon its 
fruits, and happily these fruits sometimes failed.  Had they always been 
able to obtain enough to eat, they would have remained always in the 
semi-savage state.

It may appear strange that Egypt should have suffered from famine, for 
there was no country in the ancient world where food was so abundant 
and so cheap.  Not only did the land produce enormous crops of corn; the 
ditches and hollows which were filled by the overflowing Nile supplied a 
harvest of wholesome and nourishing aquatic plants, and on the borders 
of the desert thick groves of date-palms, which love a neutral soil, 
embowered the villages, and formed live granaries of fruit.

But however plentiful food may be in any country, the population of that 
country, as Malthus discovered, will outstrip it in the long run.  If food is 
unusually cheap, population will increase at an unusually rapid rate, and 
there is not limit to its ratio of increase – no limit, that is to say, except 
disease and death. On the other hand, there is a limit to the amount of 
food that can be raised, for the basis of food is land, and land is a fixed 
quantity.  Unless some discovery is made by means of which provisions 
may be manufactured with as much facility as children, the whole earth 
will some day be placed in the same predicament as the island in which 
we live, which has outgrown its food-producing power, and is preserved 
from starvation only by means of foreign corn.

At the time we speak of, Egypt was irrigated by the Nile in a natural and 
therefore imperfect manner.  Certain tracts were overflooded; others were 
left completely dry. The valley was filled with people to the brim.  When 
it was a good Nile, every ear of corn, every bunch of dates, every papyrus 
stalk and lotus root was pre-engaged.  There was no waste and no surplus 
store.  But sometimes a bad Nile came. 

The bread of the people depended on the amount of inundation, and that 
depended on the tropical rains, which vary more than is usually supposed.  
If the rainfall in the Abyssinian highlands happened to be slight, the river 
could not pay its full tribute of earth and water to the valley below; and if 
the rainfall was unusually severe, houses were swept away, cattle were 
drowned, and the water instead of returning at the usual time, became 
stagnant on the fields.  In either case famine and pestilence invariably 
ensued.  The plenty of ordinary years, like a baited trap, had produced a 
luxuriance of human life, and the massacre was proportionally severe.  
Encompassed by the wilderness, the unfortunate natives were unable to 
escape.  They died in heaps; the valley resembled a field of battle; each 
village became a charnel-house; skeletons sat grinning at street corners, 
and the winds clattered among dead men’s bones.  A few survivors 
lingered miserably through the year, browsing on the thorny shrubs of the 
desert, and sharing with the vultures their horrible repast.

“God made all men equal” is a fine sounding phrase, and has also done 
good service in its day, but it is not a scientific fact.  On the contrary, 
there is nothing so certain as the natural inequality of men.  Those who 
outlive hardships and sufferings which fall on all alike owe their 
existence to some superiority, not only of body but of mind.  It will easily 
be conceived that among such superior-minded men there would be some 
who, stimulated by the memory of that which was past and by the fear of 
that which might return, would strain to the utmost their ingenuity to 
control and guide the fickle river which had hitherto sported with their 
lives.

We shall not attempt to trace out their inventions step by step.  Humble in 
its beginnings, slow in its improvements, the art or science of hydraulics 
was finally mastered by the Egyptians.  They devised a system of dikes, 
reservoirs, and lock-canals, by means of which the excessive waters of a 
violent Nile were turned from the fields and stored up to supply the wants 
of a dry year.  Thus also the precious fluid was conveyed to tracts of land 
lying above the level of the river, and was distributed over the whole 
valley with such precision that each lot or farm received a just and equal 
share.  Next, as the inundation destroyed all landmarks, surveying 
became a necessary art in order to settle the disputes which broke out 
every year.  And, as the rising of the waters was more and more carefully 
observed, it was found that its beginning coincided with certain aspects of 
the stars.  This led to the study of astronomy and the discovery of the 
solar year.  Agriculture became a mathematical art.  It was ascertained 
that so many feet of water would yield so many quarters of corn, and 
thus, before a single seed was sown, they could count up the harvest as 
correctly as if it had been already gathered in.

A natural consequence of all this was the separation of the inventor class, 
who became at first the counsellors and afterwards the rulers of the 
people.  But while the men of mind were battling with the forces of 
Nature, a contest of another kind was also going on.  Those who dwell on 
the rich banks of a river flowing through desert lands are always liable to 
be attacked by the wandering shepherd hordes who resort to the waterside 
in summer, when the wilderness pasture is dried up.  There is nothing 
such tribes desire better than to conquer the corn-growing people of the 
river lands, and to make them pay a tribute of grain when the crops are 
taken in.  The Egyptians, as soon as they had won their harvests from the 
flood, were obliged to defend them against the robbers of the desert, and 
out of such wars arose a military caste.  These allied themselves with the 
intellectual caste, who were also priests, for among the primitive nations 
religion and science were invariably combined.  In this manner the 
bravest and wisest of the Egyptians rose above the vulgar crowd, and the 
nation was divided into two great classes, the rulers and the ruled.

Then oppression continued the work which war and famine had begun.  
The priests announced, and the armies executed, the divine decrees.  The 
people were reduced to servitude.  The soldiers discovered the gold and 
emerald mines of the adjoining hills, and filled their dark recesses with 
chained slaves and savage overseers.  They became invaders; they 
explored distant lands with the spear.  Communications with Syria and 
the fragrant countries at the mouth of the Red Sea, first opened by means 
of war, were continued by means of commerce.  Foreign produce became 
an element of Egyptian life.  The privileged classes found it necessary to 
be rich.  Formerly the priests had merely salted the bodies of the dead; 
now a fashionable corpse must be embalmed, at an expense of two 
hundred and fifty pounds, with asphalt from the Dead Sea and spices 
from the Somali groves; costly incense must be burnt on the altars of the 
gods; aristocratic heads must recline on ivory stools; fine ladies must 
glitter with gold ornaments and precious stones, and must be served by 
waiting-maids and pages with woolly hair and velvety black skins.  War 
and agriculture were no longer sufficient to supply these patrician wants.  
It was no longer sufficient that the people should feed on dates and the 
course doura-bread, while the wheat which they raised was sold by their 
masters for gewgaws and perfumes.  Manufactures were established; 
slaves laboured at a thousand looms; the linen goods of Egypt became 
celebrated throughout the world.  Laboratories were opened; remarkable 
discoveries were made.  The Egyptian priests distilled brandy and sweet 
waters.  They used the blow-pipe, and were far advanced in the chemical 
processes of art.  They fabricated glass mosaics, and counterfeited 
precious stones and porcelain of exquisite transparency and delicately 
blended hues.  With the fruits of these inventions they adorned their daily 
life, and attracted into Egypt the riches of other lands.  

Thus, when Nature selects a people to endow them with glory and with 
wealth, her first proceeding is to massacre their bodies, her second to 
debauch their minds.  She begins with famine, pestilence and war; next, 
force and rapacity above, chains and slavery below.  She uses evil as the 
raw material of good; though her aim is always noble, her earliest means 
are base and cruel.  But as soon as a certain point is reached she washes 
her black and bloody hands, and uses agents of a higher kind.  Having 
converted the animal instinct of self-defence into the ravenous lust of 
wealth and power, that also she transforms into ambition of a pure and 
lofty kind.  At first knowledge is sought only for the things which it will 
buy—the daily bread indispensable to life, and those trinkets of body and 
mind which vanity demands.  Yet those low desires do not always and 
entirely possess the human soul.  Wisdom is like the heiress of the novel 
who is at first courted only for her wealth, but whom the fortune-hunter 
learns afterwards to love for herself alone.

At first sight there seems little in the arts and sciences of Egypt which 
cannot be traced to the enlightened selfishness of the priestly caste.  For 
in the earlier times it was necessary for the priests to labour unceasingly 
to preserve the power which they had usurped.  It was necessary to 
overawe not only the people who worked in the fields, but their own 
dangerous allies, the military class; to make religion not only mysterious 
but magnificent; not only to predict the precise hour of the rising of the 
waters, or the eclipses of the moon, but also to adopt and nurture the fine 
arts, to dazzle the public with temples, monuments, and paintings.  Above 
all, it was necessary to prepare a system of government which should 
keep the labouring classes in subjection and yet stimulate them to labour 
indefatigably for the state; which should strip them of all the rewards of 
industry and yet keep that industry alive.  Expediency will therefore 
account for much that the Egyptian intellect produced, but it certainly will 
not account for all.  The invention of hieroglyphics is alone sufficient to 
prove that higher motives were at work than mere political calculation 
and the appetite of gold.  For writing was an invention which at no time 
could have added in a palpable manner to the wealth or power of the 
upper classes, and which yet could not have been finished to a system 
without a vast expenditure of time and toil.  It could not have been the 
work of a single man, but of several men labouring in the same direction, 
and in its early beginnings must have appeared as unpractical, as truly 
scientific to them, as the study of solar chemistry and the observation of 
the double stars to us.  Besides, the intense and faithful labour which is 
conspicuous in all the Egyptian works of art could only have been 
inspired by that enthusiasm which belongs to noble minds.

We may fairly presume that Egypt once possessed its chivalry of the 
intellect, its heroic age, and that the violent activity of thought generated 
by the love of life and developed by the love of power was raised to its 
full zenith by the passion for art and science, for the beautiful and the 
true.

At first the Nile valley was divided into a number of independent states, 
each possessing its own corporation of priests and soldiers, its own laws 
and system of taxation, its own tutelary god and shrine, but each a 
member of one body, united by the belief in one religion, and assembling 
from time to time to worship the national gods in an appointed place.  
There, according to general agreement ratified by solemn oaths, all feuds 
were suspended, all weapons laid aside.  There also, under the shelter of 
the sanctuary, property was secure, and the surplus commodities of the 
various districts could be conveniently interchanged.  In such a place, 
frequented by vast crowds of pilgrims and traders, a great city would 
naturally arise, and such it seems probable was the origin of Thebes.

But Egypt, which possesses a simple undivided form, and which is 
nourished by one great arterial stream, appears destined to be surmounted 
by a single head, and we perceive in the dim dawn of history a revolution 
taking place, and Menes, the Egyptian Charlemagne, founding an empire 
upon the ruins of local governments, and inspiring the various tribes with 
the sentiment of nationality.  Thebes remained the sacred city, but a new 
capital, Memphis, was built at the other end of the valley, not far from the 
spot where Cairo now stands.

By degrees the Egyptian empire assumed a consolidated form.  A regular 
constitution was established and a ritual prescribed.  The classes were 
organised in a more effective manner, and were not at first too strictly 
fixed.  All were at liberty to intermarry, excepting only the swineherds, 
who were regarded as unclean.  The system of government became 
masterly, and the servitude of the people became complete.  Designs of 
imperial magnitude were accomplished, some of them gigantic but 
useless, mere exploits of naked human strength, others structures of true 
grandeur and utility.  The valley was adorned with splendid monuments 
and temples; colossal statues were erected, which rose above the houses 
like the towers and spires of our cathedral towns.  An army of labourers 
was employed against the Nile.  The course of the mighty stream was 
altered; its waters were snatched from its bosom and stored up in Lake 
Moeris, an artificial basin hollowed out of an extensive swamp, and 
thence were conducted by a system of canals into the neighbouring 
desert, which they changed to smiling fields.  For the Sahara can always 
be revived.  It is barren only because it receives no rain.

The Empire consisted of three estates—the Monarch, the Army, and the 
Church.  There were in theory no limits to the power of the king.  His 
authority was derived directly from the gods.  He was called “the Sun”; 
he was the head of the religion and the state; he was the supreme judge 
and lawgiver; he commanded the army and led it to war.  But in reality 
his power was controlled and reduced to mere pageantry by a parliament 
of priests.  He was elected by the military class, but as soon as he was 
crowned he was initiated into the mysteries and subjected to the severe 
discipline of the holy order.  No slave or hireling might approach his 
person: the lords in waiting, with the state parasol and the ostrich-feather 
fans, were princes of the blood; his other attendants were invariably 
priests.  The royal time was filled and measured by routine: laws were 
laid down in the holy books for the order and nature of the king’s 
occupations.  At daybreak he examined and dispatched his 
correspondence; he then put on his robes and attended divine service in 
the temple.  Extracts were read from those holy books which contained 
the sayings and actions of distinguished men, and these were followed by 
a sermon from the High Priest.  He extolled the virtues of the reigning 
sovereign, but criticised severely the lives of those who had preceded 
him—a post-mortem examination to which the king knew that he would 
be subjected in his turn.

He was forbidden to commit any kind of excess: he was restricted to a 
plain diet of veal and goose, and to a measured quantity of wine.  The 
laws hung over him day and night; they governed his public and private 
action: they followed him even to the recesses of his chamber, and 
appointed a set time for the embraces of his queen.  He could not punish a 
single person except in accordance with the code; the judges took oath 
before the king that they would disobey the king if he ordered them to do 
anything contrary to law.  The ministry were responsible for the actions 
of their master, and they guarded their own safety.  They made it 
impossible for him to forfeit that reverence and affection which the 
ignorant and the religious always entertain for their anointed king.  He 
was adored as a god when living, and when he died he was mourned by 
the whole nation as if each man had lost a well-beloved child.  During 
seventy-two days the temples were closed; lamentations filled the air; and 
the people fasted, abstaining from flesh and wine, cooked food, 
ointments, baths, and the company of their wives.
The Army appears to have been severely disciplined.  To run twenty 
miles before breakfast was part of the ordinary drill.  The amusements of 
the soldiers were athletic sports and martial games.  Yet they were not 
merely fighting men.  They were also farmers.  Each warrior received 
from the state twelve acres of choice land; these gave him a solid interest 
in the prosperity of the fatherland and in the maintenance of civil peace.

The most powerful of the three estates was undoubtedly the Church.  In 
the priesthood were included not only the ministers of religion, but also 
the whole civil service and the liberal professions.  Priests were the royal 
chroniclers and keepers of the records, the engravers of inscriptions, 
physicians of the sick and embalmers of the dead, lawyers and lawgivers, 
sculptors and musicians.  Most of the skilled labour of the country was 
under their control.  In their hands were the linen manufactories and the 
quarries between the Cataracts.  Even those posts in the Army which 
required a knowledge of arithmetic and penmanship were supplied by 
them: every general was attended by young priest scribes, with papyrus 
rolls in their hands and reed pencils behind their ears.  The clergy 
preserved the monopoly of the arts which they had invented; the whole 
intellectual life of Egypt was in them.  It was they who, with the 
nilometers, took the measure of the waters, and proclaimed good harvests 
to the people or bade them prepare for hungry days.  It was they who 
studied the diseases of the country, compiled a pharmacopoeia, and 
invented the signs which are used in our prescriptions at the present day.  
It was they who judged the living and the dead, who enacted laws which 
extended beyond the grave, who issued passports to paradise, or 
condemned to eternal infamy the memories of men that were no more.

Their power was immense, but it was exercised with justice and 
discretion: they issued admirable laws, and taught the people to obey 
them by the example of their own humble, self-denying lives.

Under the tutelage of these pious and enlightened men, the Egyptians 
became a prosperous and also a highly moral people.  The monumental 
paintings reveal their whole life, but we read in them no brutal or 
licentious scenes.  Their great rivals, the Assyrians, even at a later period, 
were accustomed to impale and flay alive their prisoners of war.  The 
Egyptians granted honours to those who fought gallantly against them.  
The penalty for the murder of a slave was death; this law exists without 
parallel in the dark slavery annals both of ancient and of modern times.  
The pardoning power in cases of capital offence was a cherished 
prerogative of royalty with them as with us; and with them also as with 
us, when a pregnant woman was condemned to death the execution was 
postponed until after the birth of the guiltless child. It is a sure criterion 
of 
the civilisation of ancient Egypt that the soldiers did not carry arms 
except on duty, and that the private citizens did not carry them at all.   
Women were treated with much regard.  They were allowed to join their 
husbands in the sacrifices to the gods; the bodies of man and wife were 
united in the tomb.  When a party was given the guests were received by 
the host and hostess seated side by side in a large armchair.  In the 
paintings their mutual affection is portrayed.  Their fond manners, their 
gestures of endearment, the caresses which they lavish on their children, 
form sweet and touching scenes of domestic life.

Crimes could not be compounded, as in so many other ancient lands, by 
the payment of a fine.  The man who witnessed a crime without 
attempting to prevent it was punished as partaker.  The civil laws were 
administered in such a manner that the poor could have recourse to them 
as well as the rich.  The judges received large salaries that they might be 
placed above the temptation of bribery, and might never disgrace the 
image of Truth which they wore round their necks suspended on a golden 
chain.

But most powerful of all, to preserve the morality of the people by giving 
a tangible force to public opinion, and by impeaching those sins against 
society which no legal code can touch, was that sublime police institution 
the “Trial of the Dead.”

When the corpse had been brought back from the embalming house it was 
encased in a sycamore coffin covered with flowers, placed in a sledge, 
and drawn by oxen to the sacred lake.  The hearse was followed by the 
relations of the deceased, the men unshorn and casting dust upon their 
heads, the women beating their breasts and singing mournful hymns.   
On the banks of the lake sat forty-two judges in the shape of a crescent; 
a great crowd was assembled; in the water floated a canoe, and within it 
stood Charon the ferryman, awaiting the sentence of the chief judge.  
On the other side of the lake lay a sandy plain, and beyond it a range of 
long, low hills, in which might be discerned the black mouths of the 
caverns of the dead.

It was in the power of any man to step forward and accuse the departed 
before the body could be borne across.  If the charge was held to be 
proved, the body was denied burial in the consecrated ground, and the 
crowd silently dispersed.  If a verdict of not guilty was returned, the 
accuser suffered the penalty of the crime alleged, and the ceremony took 
its course.   The relatives began to sing with praises the biography of the 
deceased; they sang in what manner he had been brought up from a child 
till he came to man’s estate, how pious he had been towards the gods, 
how righteous he had been towards men.  And if this was true, if the 
man’s life had indeed been good, the crowd joined in chorus, clapping 
their hands, and sang back in return that he would be received into the 
glory of the just.  Then the coffin was laid in the canoe, the silent 
ferryman plied his oar, a priest read the service of the dead, and the body 
was deposited in the cemetery caves.  If he was a man of rank he was laid 
in a chamber of his own, and the sacred artists painted on the walls an 
illustrated catalogue of his possessions, the principal occupations of his 
life, and scenes of the society in which he moved.  For the priests taught 
that, since life is short and death is long, man’s dwelling-house is but a 
lodging, and his eternal habitation is the tomb.  Thus the family vault of 
the Egyptian was his picture gallery, and thus the manners and customs of 
this singular people have, like their bodies, been preserved through long 
ages by means of religious art.

There are also still existing on the walls of the temples, and in the grotto 
tombs, grand historical paintings which illuminate the terse chronicles 
engraved upon the granite.  Among these may be remarked one subject in 
particular which appears to have been a favourite with the artist and the 
public, for it again and again recurs.  The Egyptians, distinguished always 
by their smooth faces and shaven heads, are pursuing an enemy with long 
beards and flowing robes, who are surrounded by flocks and herds.  The 
Egyptians here show no mercy; they appear alive with fury and revenge.  
Sometimes the victor is depicted with a scornful air, his foot placed upon 
the neck of a prostrate foe; sometimes he is piercing the body through and 
through with a spear.  Certain sandals have also been discovered in which 
the figure of the same enemy is painted on the inner sole, so that the foot 
trod upon the portrait when the sandal was put on.

Those bearded men had inflicted on Egypt long years of dreadful disaster 
and disgrace.  They were the Bedouins of the Arabian peninsula, a 
pastoral race who wandered eternally in a burning land, each tribe or clan 
within an orbit of its own.  When they met they fought, the women 
uttering savage cries and cursing their husbands if they retreated from the 
foe.  Accustomed to struggle to the death for a handful of withered grass 
or for a little muddy water at the bottom of a well, what a rich harvest 
must Egypt have appeared to them!  In order to obtain it they were able to 
suspend all feuds, to take an oath of alliance, and to unite into a single 
horde.  They descended upon their prey and seized it at the first swoop.  
There does not appear to have been even one great battle, and this can be 
explained if, as is probable enough, the Egyptians before that invasion 
had never seen a horse.

The Arab horse, or rather mare, lived in her master’s tent and supped 
from the calabash of milk, and lay down to sleep with the other members 
of the family.  She was the playmate of the children; on her the cruel, the 
savage Bedouin lavished the one tender feeling of his heart.  He treasured 
up in his mind her pedigree as carefully as his own; he composed songs in 
honour of his beloved steed—his friend, his companion, his ally. He sang 
to her of the gazelles which they had hunted down, and of the battles 
which they had fought together--for the Arab horse was essentially a 
beast of war.  When the signal was given for the charge, when the rider, 
loudly yelling, couched his spear, she snorted and panted and bounded in 
the air.  With tail raised and spreading to the wind, with neck beautifully 
arched, mane flapping, red nostrils dilating, and eyes glaring, she rushed 
like an arrow into the midst of the melee.  Though covered with wounds, 
she would never turn restive or try to escape, but if her master was 
compelled to take to flight she would carry him till she dropped down 
dead.

It is quite possible that when the mounted army appeared in the river 
plain the inhabitants were paralysed with fright, and believed them to be 
fabulous animals, winged men.  Be that as it may, the conquest was 
speedy and complete; the imperial Memphis was taken, Egypt was 
enslaved, and the king and his family and court were compelled to seek a 
new home across the sandy seas.

On the south side of the Nubian desert was the land of Ethiopia, the 
modern Sudan, which had been conquered by the Egyptians, and which 
they used as an emporium in their caravan trade with Central Africa and 
the shores of the Red Sea.  But it could be reached only by means of a 
journey which is not without danger at the present day, and which must 
have been inexpressibly arduous at a time when the camel had not been 
introduced.

The Nile, it is true, flows through this desert, and joins Ethiopia to Egypt 
with a silver chain.  But from the time of its leaving the Sudan until it 
reaches the black granite gate which marks the Egyptian frontier, it is 
confined within a narrow, crooked, hollow way.  Navigation is 
impossible, for its bed is continually broken up by rocks and the stream is 
walled in; it cannot overflow its banks.  The reign of the Sahara is 
uninterrupted, undisturbed.  On all sides is the desert, the brown, shining 
desert, the implacable waste.  Above is a ball of fire ascending and 
descending in a steel blue sky; below, a dry and scorching sea which the 
wind ripples into gloomy waves.  The air is a cloud which rains fire, for it 
is dim with perpetual dust—each molecule a spark.  The eye is pained 
and dazzled; it can find no rest. The ear is startled; it can find no sound.  
In the soft and yielding sand the footstep perishes unheard; nothing 
murmurs, nothing rustles, nothing sings.  This silence is terrible, for it 
conveys the idea of death, and all know that in the desert death is not far 
off.  When the elements become active they assume peculiar and 
portentous forms.  If the wind blows hard a strange storm arises; the 
atmosphere is pervaded by a dull and lurid glare; pillars of sand spring up 
as if by magic, and whirl round and round in a ghastly and fantastic 
dance.  Then a mountain appearing on the horizon spreads upward in the 
sky, and a darkness more dark than night falls suddenly upon the earth.  
To those who gasp with swelled tongues and blackened lips in the last 
agonies of thirst, the mirage, like a mocking stream, exhibits lakes of 
transparent water and shady trees.  But the wells of this desert are scanty, 
and the waters found in them are salt.

The fugitives concealed the images of the gods, and taking with them the 
sacred animals, embarked upon their voyage of suffering and woe.  After 
many weary days they again sighted land; they arrived on the shores of 
Ethiopia, the country of the blacks.  Once more their eyes were refreshed 
with green pastures; once more they listened to the rustling of the palms, 
and drank the sweet waters of the Nile.  Yet soon they discovered that it 
was not their own dear river, it was not their own beloved land.  In Egypt 
Nature was a gentle handmaid; here she was a cruel and capricious queen.  
The sky flashed and bellowed against them; the rain fell in torrents, and 
battered down the houses of the Ethiopians—wretched huts like 
hay-ricks, round in body with a cone-shaped roof, built of grass and mud.  
The lowlands changed beneath the flood, not into meadows of flowers 
and fields of waving corn, but into a pestilential morass. At the rising of 
the dog-star came a terrible fly which drove even the wild beasts from the 
river banks and destroyed all flocks and herds.  At that evil season the 
Egyptian colonists were forced to migrate to the forests of the interior, 
which were filled with savage tribes.  Here were the Troglodytes who 
lived under ground.  An ointment was their only dress; their language 
resembled the hissing of serpents and the whistling of bats.  Every month 
they indulged in a carouse; every month they opened the veins of their 
sheep and drank of the warm and gurgling blood as if it had been 
delicious wine.  They made merry when they buried their dead, and, 
roaring with laughter, cast stones upon the corpse until it was concealed 
from view.  Here were the root-eaters, the twig-eaters and the seed-eaters, 
who lived entirely on such wretched kinds of food.  Here were the 
elephant-eaters, who, sitting on the tops of trees like birds, watched the 
roads, and when they had sighted a herd crept after it, and hovered round 
it till the sleepy hour of noon arrived.  Then they selected a victim, stole 
up to it snake-like from behind, hamstrung the enormous creature with a 
dexterous cut from a sharp sword, and as it lay helpless on the ground 
feasted upon morsels of its live and palpitating flesh.  Here were the 
locust-eaters, whose harvest was a passing swarm, for they lit a smoky 
fire underneath, which made the insects fall like withered leaves; they 
roasted them, pounded them, and made them into cakes with salt.  The 
fish-eaters dwelt by the coral-line borders of the Red Sea; they lived in 
wigwams thatched with seaweed, with ribs of whales for the rafters and 
the walls.  The richest men were those who possessed the largest bones.  
There was no fresh water near the shore where they hunted for their food.  
At stated times they went in herds like cattle to the distant river-side, and 
singing to one another discordant songs, lay flat on their bellies and drank 
till they were gorged. 

Such was the land to which the Pharaohs were exiled,.  In the meantime 
the Bedouins established a dynasty which ruled a considerable time, and 
is known as that of the Hyksos or Shepherd Kings.

But those barbarians were not domiciled in Egypt.  They could not 
breathe inside houses, and could not understand how the walls remained 
upright.  The camp was their true fatherland.  They lived aloof from the 
Egyptians; they did not ally themselves with the country gods; they did 
not teach the people whom they had conquered to regard them as the 
successors of the Pharaohs.  Their art of government began and ended 
with the collection of a tax.  The Shepherd Kings were associated in the 
minds of the Egyptian fellahin, not with their ancient and revered 
religion, not with the laws by which they were still governed under their 
local chiefs, but only with the tribute of corn which was extorted from 
them every harvest by the whip.  The idea of revolution was always 
present in their minds.  Misfortune bestowed upon them the ferocious 
virtues of the desert, while the vice of cities crept into the Bedouin camp.  
The invaders became corrupted by luxurious indolence and sensual 
excess, till at length a descendant of the Pharaohs raised an army in 
Ethiopia and invaded Egypt.  The uprising was general, and the Arabs 
were driven back into their own harsh and meagre land.

The period which followed the Restoration is the most brilliant in 
Egyptian history.  The expulsion of the Bedouins excited an enthusiasm 
which could not be contained within the narrow valley of the Nile.  Egypt 
became not only an independent but a conquering power.  Her armies 
overran Asia to the shores of the Euxine and of the Caspian Sea.  Her 
fleets swept over the Indian Ocean to the mud-stained shallows at the 
Indus mouth.  On the monuments we may read the proud annals of those 
campaigns.  We see the Egyptian army, with its companies of archers 
shooting from the ear like the Englishmen of old; we see their squadrons 
of light and heavy chariots of war, which skilfully skirmished or heavily 
charged the dense masses of the foe; we see their remarkable engines for 
besieging fortified towns, their scaling ladders, their movable towers, and 
their shield covered rams.  We see the Pharaoh returning in triumph, his 
car drawn by captive kings, and a long procession of prisoners bearing 
the productions of their respective lands.  The nature and variety of those 
trophies sufficiently prove how wide and distant the Egyptian conquests 
must have been, for among the animals that figure in the triumph are the 
brown bear, the baboon, the Indian elephant, and the giraffe.  Among the 
prisoners are negroes of the Sudan in aprons of bulls’ hides, or in wild-
beast skins with the tails hanging down behind.  They carry ebony, ivory, 
and gold; their chiefs are adorned with leopard robes and ostrich feathers, 
as they are at the present day.  We see also men from some cold country 
of the North, with blue eyes and yellow hair, wearing light dresses and 
long-fingered gloves, while others clothed like Indians are bearing 
beautiful vases, rich stuffs, and strings of precious stones.

When the kings came back from their campaigns, they built temples of 
the yellow and rose-tinted sandstone, with obelisks of green granite and 
long avenues of sphinxes, to commemorate their victories and 
immortalise their names.  They employed prisoners of war to erect these 
memorials of war; it became the fashion to boast that a great structure had 
been raised without a single Egyptian being doomed to work. By means 
of these victories the servitude of the lower classes was mitigated for a 
time, and the wealth of the upper classes was enormously increased.  The 
conquests it is true, were not permanent; they were merely raids on a 
large scale.  But in very ancient times, when seclusion and suspicion 
formed the foreign policy of states, and when national intercourse was 
scarcely known, invasion was often the pioneer of trade.  The wealth of 
Egypt was not derived from military spoil—which soon dissolves, 
however large it may appear—but from the new markets opened for her 
linen goods.

It is certain that the riches contained in the country were immense.  The 
house of an Egyptian gentleman was furnished in an elegant and costly 
style.  The cabinets, tables, and chairs were beautifully carved, and were 
made entirely of foreign woods—of ebony from Ethiopia, of a kind of 
mahogany from India, of deal from Syria, or of cedar from the heights of 
Lebanon.  The walls and ceilings were painted in gorgeous patterns 
similar to those which are now woven into carpets.  Every sitting room 
was adorned with a vase of perfumes, a flower-stand, and an altar for 
unburnt offerings.  The house was usually one storey high, but the roof 
was itself an apartment, sometimes covered, but always open at the sides.  
There the house-master would ascent in the evening to breathe the cool 
wind, and to watch the city waking into life when the heat was past.  The 
streets swarmed and hummed with men; the river was covered with 
gilded gondolas gliding by.  And when the sudden night had fallen, lamps 
flashed and danced below; from the house-yards came sounds of laughter 
and the tinkling of castanets; from the stream came the wailing music of 
the boatmen and the soft splashing of the lazy oar.

The Egyptian grandee had also his villa or country house.  Its large 
walled garden was watered by a canal communicating with the Nile.  One 
side of the canal was laid out in a walk shaded by trees—the leafy 
sycamore, the acacia with its yellow blossoms, and the doum or Theban 
palm.  In the centre of the garden was a vineyard, the branches being 
trained over trellis-work so as to form a boudoir of green leaves, with 
clusters of red grapes glowing like pictures on the walls.  Beyond the 
vineyard, at the further end of the garden, stood a summer house or kiosk; 
in front of it a pond which was covered with the broad leaves and blue 
flowers of the lotus, and in which waterfowl played.  It was also stocked 
with fish which the owner amused himself by spearing: or sometimes he 
angled for them as he sat on his camp-stool.  Adjoining this garden were 
the stables and coach-houses, and a large park in which gazelles were 
preserved for coursing.  The Egyptian gentry were ardent lovers of the 
chase.  They killed wild ducks with throw-sticks, made use of decoys, 
and trained cats to retrieve.  They harpooned hippopotami in the Nile; 
they went out hunting in the desert with lions trained like dogs.  They 
were enthusiastic pigeon fanciers, and had many different breeds of dogs.  
Their social enjoyments were not unlike our own.  Young ladies in Egypt 
had no croquet, but the gentle sport of archery was known among them.  
They had also boating parties on the Nile, and water picnics beneath the 
shady foliage of the Egyptian bean.  They gave dinners, to which, as in all 
civilised countries, the fair sex were invited.  The guests arrived for the 
most part in palanquins, but the young men of fashion drove up to the 
door in their cabs, and usually arrived rather late.  Each guest was 
received by a cluster of servants, who took off his sandals, gave him 
water to wash his hands, anointed and perfumed him, presented him with 
a bouquet, and offered him some raw cabbage to increase his appetite for 
wine, a glass of which was taken before dinner—the sherry and bitters of 
antiquity.

The gentlemen wore wigs and false beards, and their hands were loaded 
with rings.  The ladies wore their own hair plaited in a most elaborate 
manner, the result of many hours between their little bronze mirrors and 
the skilful fingers of their slaves.  Their eyelashes were pencilled with the 
antimonial powder, their finger-nails tinged with the henna’s golden 
juice—fashions older than the Pyramids which still govern the women of 
the East.

The guests met in the dining-room, and grace was said before they sat 
down.  They were crowned with garlands of the lotus, the violet, and the 
rose—the florists of Egypt were afterwards famous in Rome.  A band of 
musicians played during the repast on the harp, the lyre, the flute, and the 
guitar.  Some of the servants carried round glass decanters of wine 
encircled with flowers, and various dishes upon trays.  Others fanned the 
porous earth-jars which contained the almond-flavoured water of the 
Nile.  Others burnt Arabian incense or flakes of sweet-scented wood to 
perfume the air.  Others changed the garlands of the guests as soon as 
they began to fade.  Between the courses dwarfs and deformed persons 
skipped about before the company with marvellous antics and 
contortions; jugglers and gymnasts exhibited many extraordinary feats; 
girls jumped through hoops, tossed several balls into the air after the 
manner of the East, and performed dances after the manner of the West.  
Strange as it may appear, the pirouette was known to the Egyptians three 
thousand years ago, and stranger still, their ballet-girls danced it in lighter 
clothing than is worn by those who now grace the operatic boards.  At the 
beginning of the repast a mummy, richly painted and gilded, was carried 
round by a servant, who showed it to each guest in turn and said, “Look 
on this, drink and enjoy thyself, for such as it is now, so thou shalt be 
when thou art dead.”  So solemn an injunction was not disregarded, and 
the dinner often ended as might be expected from the manner in which it 
was begun.  The Hogarths of the period have painted the young dandy 
being carried home by his footman without his wig, while the lady in her 
own apartment is showing unmistakable signs of the same disorder.

But we must leave these pleasant strolls in the bypaths of history and 
return to the broad and beaten road.  The vast wealth and soft luxury of 
the New Empire undermined its strength.  It became apparent to the 
Egyptians themselves that the nation was enervated and corrupt, a 
swollen, pampered body from which all energy and vigour had for ever 
fled.  A certain Pharaoh commanded a curse to be inscribed in one of the 
temples against the name of Menes, who had first seduced the Egyptians 
from the wholesome simplicity of early times.  Filled with a spirit of 
prophecy, the king foresaw his country’s ruin, which indeed was near at 
hand, for though he himself was buried in peace, his son and successor 
was compelled to hide in the marshes from a foreign foe.

To the same cause may be traced the ruin and the fall, not only of Egypt, 
but of all the powers of the ancient world; of Nineveh and Babylon and 
Persia; of the Macedonian kingdom and the Western Empire.  As soon as 
those nations became rich they began to decay.  If this were the fifth 
century, and we were writing history in the silent and melancholy streets 
of Rome, we should probably propound a theory entirely false, yet 
justified at that time by the universal experience of mankind.  We should 
declare that nations are mortal like the individuals of which they are 
composed; that wealth is the poison, luxury the disease, which shortens 
their existence and dooms them to an early death.  We should point to the 
gigantic ruins around—to that vast and mouldering body from which the 
soul had fled—moralise about Lucullus and his thrushes, recount the 
enormous sums that had been paid for a dress, a table or a child, and 
assure our Gothic pupils that national life and health are only to be 
preserved by contented poverty and simple fare.

But what has been the history of those barbarians?  In the Dark Ages 
there was no luxury in Europe.  It was a miserable continent inhabited by 
robbers, fetishmen, and slaves.  Even the Italians of the eleventh century 
wore clothes of unlined leather, and had no taste except for horses and for 
shining arms, no pride except that of building strong towers for their lairs.  
Man and wife grabbled for their supper from the same plate, while a 
squalid boy stood by them with a torch to light their greasy fingers to 
their mouths.  Then the India trade was opened; the New World was 
discovered; Europe became rich, luxurious, and enlightened.  The 
sunshine of wealth began first to beam upon the costs of the 
Mediterranean Sea, and gradually spread towards the North.  In the 
England of Elizabeth it was declared from the pulpit that the introduction 
of forks would demoralise the people and provoke divine wrath.  But in 
spite of sermons and sumptuary laws, Italian luxuries continued to pour 
in, and national prosperity continued to increase.  At the present day the 
income of a nation affords a fair criterion of its intellect and also of its 
strength.  It may safely be asserted that the art of war will soon be 
reduced to a simple question of expenditure and credit, and that the 
largest purse will be the strongest arm.  As for luxury, a small tradesman 
at the present day is more luxurious than a king in ancient times.  It has 
been wisely and wittily remarked that Augustus Caesar had neither glass 
panes to his windows nor a shirt to his back, and the luxury of the Roman 
senators may without exaggeration be compared with that of the West 
Indian creoles in the eighteenth century.  The gentleman and his lady 
glittered with jewels; the table and sideboard blazed with plate; but the 
house itself was little better than a barn, and the attendants a crowd of 
dirty, half-naked slaves who jostled the guests as they performed the 
service of the table, and sat down in the verandah over the remnants of 
the soup before they would condescend to go to the kitchen for the fish.

In the modern world we find luxury the harbinger of progress, in the 
ancient world the omen of decline.  But how can this be? Nature does not 
contradict herself; the laws which govern the movements of society are as 
regular and unchangeable as those which govern the movements of the 
stars.

Wealth is in reality as indispensable to mankind for purposes of growth as 
water to the soil.  It is not the fault of the water if its natural circulation 
is 
interfered with, if certain portions of the land are drowned while others 
are left completely dry.  Wealth in all countries of the ancient world was 
artificially confined to a certain class.   More than half the area of the 
Greek and Roman world was shut off by slavery from the fertilising 
stream.  This single fact is sufficient to explain how that old civilisation, 
in some respects so splendid, was yet so one-sided and incomplete.

But the civilisation of Egypt was less developed still, for that country was 
enthralled by institutions from which Greece and Rome, happily for them, 
were free.

It has been shown that the instinct for self-preservation, the struggle for 
bare life against hostile nature, first aroused the mental activity of the 
Egyptian priests, while the constant attacks of the desert tribes developed 
the martial energies of the military men.  Next, the ambition of power 
produced an equally good effect.  The priests invented, the warriors 
campaigned; mines were opened, manufactories were founded; a system 
of foreign commerce was established; sloth was abolished by whip and 
chain; the lower classes were saddled, the upper classes were spurred; the 
nation careered gallantly along.  Finally, chivalrous ardour, intellectual 
passion, inspired heart and brain; war was loved for glory’s sake; the 
philosopher sought only to discover, the artist to perfect.

And then there came a race of men who, like those that inherit great 
estates, had no incentive to continue the work  which had been so 
splendidly begun.  In one generation the genius of Egypt slumbered, in 
the next it died.  Its painters and sculptors were no longer possessed of 
that fruitful faculty with which kindred spirits contemplate each other’s 
works; which not only takes, but gives; which produces from whatever it 
receives; which embraces to wrestle, and wrestles to embrace; which is 
sometimes sympathy, sometimes jealousy, sometimes hatred, sometimes 
love, but which always causes the heart to flutter, and the face to flush, 
and the mind to swell with the desire to rival and surpass; which is 
sometimes as the emulative awe with which Michael Angelo surveyed the 
dome that yet gladdens the eyes of those who sit on the height of fair 
Fiesole, or who wander afar off in silver Arno’s vale; which is sometimes 
as that rapture of admiring wrath which incited the genius of Byron when 
his great rival was pouring forth masterpiece on masterpiece with 
invention more varied, though perhaps less lofty, and with fancy more 
luxuriant even than his own. 

The creative period passed away, and the critical age set in.  Instead of 
working, the artists were content to talk.  Their admiration was sterile, yet 
still it was discerning.  But the next period was lower still.  It was that of 
blind worship and indiscriminating awe.  The past became sacred, and all 
that it had produced, good and bad, was reverenced alike.  This kind of 
idolatry invariably springs up in that interval of languor and reaction 
which succeeds an epoch of production   In the mind-history of every 
land there is a time when slavish imitation is inculcated as a duty, and 
novelty regarded as a crime.  But in Egypt the arts and sciences were 
entangled with religion.  The result will easily be guessed.  Egypt stood 
still, and theology turned her into stone.  Conventionality was admired, 
then enforced.  The development of the mind was arrested; it was 
forbidden to do any new thing.

In primitive times it is perhaps expedient that rational knowledge should 
be united with religion.  It is only by means of superstition that a rude 
people can be induced to support, and a robber soldiery to respect, an 
intellectual class.  But after a certain time this alliance must be ended, or 
harm will surely come.  The boy must leave the apartments of the women 
when he arrives at a certain age.  Theology is an excellent nurse, but a 
bad mistress for grown-up minds.  The essence of religion is inertia; the 
essence of science is change.  It is the function of the one to preserve, it is 
the function of the other to improve.  If, as in Egypt, they are firmly 
chained together, either science will advance, in which case the religion 
will be altered, or the religion will preserve its purity, and science will 
congeal.

The religious ideas of the Egyptians became associated with a certain 
style.  It was enacted that the human figure should be drawn always in the 
same manner, with the same colours, contour, and proportions.  Thus the 
artist was degraded to an artisan, and originality was strangled in its birth.

The physicians were compelled to prescribe for their patients according to 
the rules set down in the standard works.  If they adopted a treatment of 
their own and the patient did not recover, they were put to death.  Thus 
even in desperate cases heroic remedies could not be tried, and 
experiment, the first condition of discovery, was disallowed.

A censorship of literature was not required, for literature in the proper 
sense of the term did not exist.  Writing, it is true, was widely spread.  
Cattle, clothes, and workmen’s tools were marked with the owners’ 
names.  The walls of the temples were covered and adorned with that 
beautiful picture character, more like drawing than writing, which cold 
delight the eyes of those who were unable to penetrate its sense.  
Hieroglyphics may be found on everything in Egypt, from the colossal 
statue to the amulet and gem.  But the art was practised only by the 
priests, as the painted history plainly declares.  No books are to be seen in 
the furniture of houses; no female is depicted in the act of reading; the 
papyrus scroll and pencil never appear except in connection with some 
official act.

The library at Thebes was much admired.  It had a blue ceiling speckled 
with golden stars.  Allegorical pictures of a religious character and 
portraits of the sacred animals were painted on the walls.  Above the door 
were inscribed these words, “The Balsam of the Soul.”  Yet this 
magnificent building contained merely a collection of prayer books and 
ancient hymns, some astronomical almanacs, some works on religious 
philosophy, medicine, music, and geometry, and the historical archives, 
which were probably little else than a register of the names of kings, with 
the dates of certain inventions and a scanty outline of events.

Even these books, so few in number, were not open to all the members of 
the learned class.  They were the manuals of the various departments or 
professions, and each profession stood apart; each profession was even 
sub-divided within itself.  In medicine and surgery there were no general 
practitioners.  There were oculists, aurists, dentists, doctors of the head, 
doctors of the stomach, etc., and each was forbidden to invade the 
territory of his colleagues.  This specialist arrangement has been highly 
praised, but it has nothing in common with that which has arisen in 
modern times.

It is one of the first axioms of medical science that no one is competent to 
treat the disease of a single organ unless he is competent to treat the 
diseases of the whole frame.  The folly of dividing the diseases of such 
organs as the head and stomach, between which the most intimate 
sympathy exists, is evident even to the unlearned.  But the whole 
structure is united by delicate white threads, and by innumerable pipes of 
blood.  It is scarcely possible for any complaint to influence one part 
alone.  The Egyptian, however, was marked off like a chess board into 
little squares, and whenever the pain made a move a fresh doctor had to 
be called in.

This arrangement was part of a system founded on an excellent principle, 
but carried to absurd excess.  It is needless to explain that division of 
labour is highly potent in developing skill and economising time.  It is 
also clearly of advantage that in an early stage of society the son should 
follow the occupation of the father.  It is possible that hereditary skill or 
tastes come into play; it is certain that apprenticeship at home is more 
natural and more efficient than apprenticeship abroad.  The father will 
take more pains to teach, the boy will take more pains to learn, than will 
be the case when master and pupil are strangers to each other.

The founders of Egyptian civilisation were acquainted with these facts.  
Hence they established customs which their successors petrified into 
unchanging laws.  They did it no doubt with the best of motives.  They 
adored the grand and noble wisdom of their fathers; whatever came from 
them must be cherished and preserved.  They must not presume to depart 
from the guidance of those god-like men.  They must paint as they 
painted, physic as they physicked, pray as they prayed.  The separation of 
classes which they had made must be rendered rigid and eternal.

And so the arts and sciences were ordered to stand still, and society was 
divided and sub-divided into functions and professions, trades and crafts.  
Every man was doomed to follow the occupation of his father, to marry 
within his own class, to die as he was born.  Hope was torn out of the 
human life.  Egypt was no longer a nation, but an assemblage of torpid 
castes isolated from one another and breeding in and in.  It was no longer 
a body animated by the same heart, fed by the same blood, but an 
automaton neatly pieced together, of which the head was the priesthood, 
the arms were the army, and the feet the working-class.  In quiescence it 
was a perfect image of the living form, but a touch came from without, 
and the arms broke asunder at the joints and fell upon the ground.


The colony founded in the Sudan by the exiled Pharaohs became after the 
restoration an important province.  When the new empire began to 
decline a governor-general rebelled, and the kingdom of Ethiopia was 
established.  It was a medley dominion composed of brown men and 
black men, shepherds and savages, half-caste Egyptians, Arabs, Berbers, 
and negroes, ruled over by a king and a college of priests.  It was 
enriched by annual slave hunts into the Black Country, and by the 
caravan trade in ivory, gold dust, and gum.  It also received East India 
goods and Arabian produce through its ports on the Red Sea.  Meroe, its 
capital, attained the reputation of a great city; it possessed its temples and 
its pyramids like those of Egypt, but on a smaller scale.  The Ethiopian 
empire in its best days might have comprised the modern Egyptian 
provinces of Kordofan and Sennaar, with the mountain kingdom of 
Abyssinia as it existed under Theodore.  Of all the classical countries it 
was the most romantic and the most remote.  It was situated, according to 
the Greeks, on the extreme limits of the world; its inhabitants were the 
most just of men, and Jupiter dined with them twice a year.  They bathed 
in the waters of a violet-scented spring which endowed them with long 
life, noble bodies, and glossy skins.  They chained their prisoners with 
golden fetters; they had bows which none but themselves could bend.  It 
is at least certain that Ethiopia took its place among the powers of the 
ancient world.  It is mentioned in the Jewish records and in the Assyrian 
cuniform inscriptions.

So far had Egypt fallen that now it was conquered by its ancient province.  
Sabaco of Ethiopia seized the throne and sat upon it many years.  But he 
was frightened by a dream; he believed that a misfortune impended over 
him in Egypt.  He abdicated in haste and fled back to his native land.

His departure was followed by uproar and confusion, a complete 
disruption of Egyptian society, usurpation, and civil war.

But why should this have been?  Sabaco was an Egyptian by descent, 
though his blood had been darkened on the female side.  He had governed 
in the Egyptian manner.  He had abolished capital punishment, but in no 
other way had altered the ancient laws.  He had improved the public 
works.  He had taken the country rather as a native usurper than as a 
foreign foe.  His reign was merely a change of dynasty, and Egyptian 
history is numbered by dynasties as English history is numbered by kings.

But indirectly the Ethiopian conquest had prepared a revolution.  
Between the two services, the Army and the Church, there had existed a 
constant and perhaps wholesome rivalry since the days of Menes, the first 
king.  It was a victory of the warrior class which established the regal 
power.  It was a victory of the priests which assigned to themselves the 
right hand, to the officers the left hand, of the sovereign when seated on 
his throne.  It was an evident compromise between the two that the king 
should be elected from the army, and that he should be ordained as soon 
as he was crowned.  During the brilliant campaigns of the Restoration the 
military had been in power, but a long period of inaction had intervened 
since then.  The discipline of the soldiers was relaxed; their dignity was 
lowered; they no longer tilled their own land—that was done by foreign 
slaves.  Their rivals possessed the affection and reverence of the common 
people, while these soldiers, who had never seen a battle, were detested 
as idle drones who lived upon what they had not earned.  Under the new 
dynasty their position became insecure.  In Ethiopia there was no military 
casts.  The army of Sabaco had been levied from the pastoral tribes on the 
outskirts of the desert, from the Abyssinian mountaineers and the negroes 
of the river plain.  The king of Ethiopia was a priest, elected by his peers.  
He therefore regarded the soldier aristocracy with no friendly eye.  He did 
not formally invade their prescriptive rights, but he must have disarmed 
them or in some way have taken out their sting.  For as soon as he was 
gone the priests were able to form an alliance with the people, and to 
place one of their own caste upon the throne.  This king deprived the 
soldiers of their lands, and the triumph of the hierarchy was complete.

But in such a country as Egypt Disestablishment is a dangerous thing.  
During long centuries the people had been taught to associate innovation 
with impiety.  That venerable structure the Egyptian constitution had 
been raised by no human hands.  As the gods had appointed certain 
animals to swim in the water, and others to fly in the air, and others to 
move upon the earth, so they had decreed that one man should be a priest, 
and that another should be a soldier, and that another should till the 
ground.  There are times when every man feels discontented with his lot.  
But it is evident that if men were able to change their occupation 
whenever they chose, there would be a continual passing to and fro.  
Nobody would have patience to learn a trade; nobody would settle down 
in life.  In a short time the land would become a desert, and society would 
be dissolved.  To provide against this the gods had ordained that each 
man should do his duty in that state of life into which he had been called, 
and woe be to him that disobeys the gods!  Their laws are eternal and can 
never change.  Their vengeance is speedy and can never fail.

Such, no doubt, was the teaching of the Egyptian Church, and now the 
Church had shown it to be false.  The revolution had been begun, and, as 
usually happens, it could not be made to stop half way.  As soon as the 
first precedent was unloosed, down came the whole fabric with a crash.  
The priest-king Sethos reigned in peace, but as soon as he died the central 
government succumbed; the old local interests which had been lying 
dormant for ages raised their heads; the empire broke up into twelve 
states, each governed by a petty king.

We now approach the event which first brought Egypt into contact with 
the European world.  Psammiticus, one of the twelve princes, received as 
his allotment the swampy district which adjoined the sea-coast and the 
mouths of the Nile.  His fortune, as we shall see, was made by this 
position.

The commerce of Egypt had hitherto been conducted entirely by means 
of caravans.  From Arabia Felix came a long train of camels laden with 
the gums of that aromatic land, and with the more precious produce of 
countries far beyond—with the pearls of the Persian Gulf and the carpets 
of Babylon, the pepper and ginger of Malagar, the shawls of Kashmir, the 
cinnamon of Ceylon, the fine muslins of Bengal, the calicoes of 
Coromandel, the nutmegs and camphor and cloves of the Indian 
Archipelago, and even silk and musk from the distant Chinese shores.  
From Syria came other caravans with the balm of Gilead, so precious in 
medicine, asphalt from the Dead Sea for embalming, cedar from 
Lebanon, and enormous quantities of wine and olive oil in earthern jars.  
Meroe contributed the spices of the Somali country, ebony, ivory, ostrich 
feathers, slaves, and gold in twisted rings; the four latter products were 
also imported direct from Darfour, and by another route which connected 
Egypt through Fezzan with Carthage, Morocco, and the regions beyond 
the desert in the neighbourhood of Timbuktu.  In return, the beautiful 
glass wares of the Egyptians and other artistic manufactures were 
exported to Hindustan; the linen goods of Memphis were carried into the 
very heart of Africa as Manchester goods are now; and then, as now, a 
girdle of beads was the essential part of an African young lady’s dress.

On the side of the Mediterranean Egypt was a closed land, and this 
Chinese policy had not been adopted from superstitious motives.  The 
first ships which sailed that sea were pirates who had kidnapped and 
plundered the dwellers on the coast.  The government had therefore in 
self-defence placed a garrison at Rhacotis harbour, with orders to kill or 
enslave any stranger who should land.  When the Phoenicians from 
pirates had become merchants they were allowed to trade with Egypt by 
way of the land, and with this they were content.  It was left for another 
people to open up the trade by sea.

Ionia was the fairest province of Asiatic Greece.  It lay opposite to 
Athens, its motherland.  The same soft blue waters, the same fragrant 
breezes caressed their shores by turn.  It was celebrated by the poets as 
one of the gardens of the world.  There the black soil granted a rich 
harvest and the fruit hung heavily on the branches.  It was the birthplace 
of poetry, of history, of philosophy, and of art.  It was there that the 
Homeric poems were composed.  It was there that men first cast off the 
chains of authority and sought in Nature the materials of a creed.

It was, however, as a seafaring and commercial people that the Ionians 
first obtained renown.  They served on board Phoenician vessels and 
laboured in the dockyards of Tyre and Sidon until they learnt how to 
build the “sea-horses” for themselves, and how to navigate by that small 
but constant star which the Tyrians had discovered in the constellation of 
the Little Bear.  They took to the sea on their own account, and in Egypt 
they found a good market.  The wine and oil of Palestine, which the 
Phoenicians imported, were expensive luxuries; the lower classes drank 
only the fermented sap of the palm-tree and barley beer, and had only 
castor oil, with which they rubbed their bodies, but with which, for 
obvious reasons, they could not cook their food.  The Ionians were able to 
sell red wine and sweet oil at a much lower price, for in the first place 
they had vineyards and olive groves of their own, and secondly such 
bulky wares could be brought by sea more cheaply than by land.

The Greeks first appeared on the Egyptian coast as pirates clad in bronze, 
next as smugglers, welcomed by the people, but in opposition to the laws, 
and lastly as allies and honoured friends.  They took advantage of the 
confusion which followed the departure of Sabaco to push up the Nile 
with thirty vessels, each of fifty oars, and established factories upon its 
banks.  They negotiated with Psammiticus, who ascertained that their 
country produced not only oil but men.  He ordered a cargo, and 
transports arrived with troops.  Europeans for the first time entered the 
valley of the Nile.  Their gallantry and discipline were irresistible, and the 
empire of the Pharaohs was restored.

But now commenced a new regime.  There succeeded to the throne a 
series of kings who were not related to the ancient Pharaohs, who were 
not always men of noble birth, who were not even good Egyptians.  They 
were called Phil-Hellenes, or Lovers of the Greeks.  Of these 
Psammiticus was the founder and the first.  He moved Egypt towards the 
sea.  He placed his capital near the mouth of the river, that the Greek 
ships might anchor beneath its walls.  This new city of Sais, being distant 
from the quarries, was built of bricks from the black mud of the Nile, but 
it was adorned with spoils from the forsaken Memphis.  Chapels, 
obelisks, and sphinxes were brought down on rafts.  There was also a 
kind of Renaissance under the new kings; for a short time the arts again 
became alive.  Psammiticus retained the soldiers who had fought his 
battles, and sent children to the camp to be taught Greek.  Hence rose a 
class who acted as brokers, interpreters, and ciceroni to the travellers who 
soon crowded into Egypt.  The king encouraged such visits, and gave 
safe-conducts to those who desired to pass into the interior.

All this was a cause of deep offence to the people of the land.  They 
regarded their country as a temple, and all strangers as impure.  And now 
they saw men whose swords had been reddened with Egyptian blood 
swaggering as conquerors through the streets, pointing with derision at 
the sacred animals, eating things strangled and unclean.  The warriors 
were those who suffered most.  As a caste they still survived, but all their 
power and prestige were gone.  In battle the foreigners were assigned the 
post of honour—the right wing.  In times of peace the foreigners were the 
favourite regiments—the household troops, the Guards.  While the royals 
lived merrily at Sais crowned with garlands of the papyrus, and revelling 
at banquets to the music of the flute, the native troops were stationed on 
the hot and dismal frontiers of the desert; year followed year, and they 
were not relieved.  Such a state of things was no longer to be borne.  One 
king had robbed them of their lands, and now another had robbed them of 
their honour.  They were no longer soldiers, they were slaves; they 
determined to leave the country in which they were despised, and to seek 
a better fortune in the Sudan.  In number two hundred thousand, they 
gathered themselves together and began their march.

They were soon overtaken by envoys from the king, who had no desire to 
lose an army.  The soldiers were entreated to return and not to desert their 
fatherland.  They cried out, beating their shields and shaking their spears, 
that they would soon get another fatherland.  Then the messengers began 
to speak of their wives and little ones at home.  Would they leave them 
also, and go wifeless and childless to a savage land?  But one of the 
soldiers explained, with a coarse gesture, that they had the means of 
producing families wherever they might go.  This ended the conference.  
Psammiticus pursued them with his Ionians, but could not overtake them.  
In the wastes of Nubia there may yet be seen a colossal statue, on the 
right leg of which is an inscription in Greek announcing that it was there 
they gave up the chase.  The Egyptian soldiers arrived at Meroe in safety; 
the king presented them with a province which had rebelled.  They drove 
out the men, married the women, and did much to civilise the native 
tribes.

In the meantime Psammiticus and his successors opened wider and wider 
the gloomy portals of the land.  The town of Naucratis was set apart, like 
Canton, for the foreign trade.  Nine independent Greek cities had their 
separate establishments within that town, and their magistrates and 
consuls, who administered their respective laws.  The merchants met in 
the Hellenion, which was half temple, half exchange, to transact their 
business and offer sacrifices to the gods.  Naucratis was in all respects a 
European town.  There the garlic-chewing sailors, when they came on 
shore, could enjoy a holiday in the true Greek style.  They could stroll in 
the market-place, where the money-changers sat before their tables and 
the wine merchants ran about with sample flasks under their arms, and 
where garlands of flowers, strange-looking fish, and heaps of purple dates 
were set out for sale.  They could resort to the barbers’ shops and gather 
the gossip of the day, or to taverns where quail fighting was always going 
on.  Nor were the chief ornaments of sea-port society wanting to grace the 
scene.  No Egyptian girl, as Herodotus discovered, would kiss a Greek.  
But certain benevolent and enterprising men had imported a number of 
Heterae or “lady-friends,” the most famous of whom was Rhodopis, “the 
rosy-faced,” with whom Sappho’s brother fell in love, and whom the 
poetess lampooned.

The foreign policy of Egypt was now completely changed.  A long period 
of seclusion had followed the conquests of the new empire.  But the 
battle-pieces of the ancient time still glowed upon the temple walls.  With 
their vivid colours and animated scenes they seemed to incite the modern 
Pharaohs to heroic deeds.  The throne was surrounded by warlike and 
restless men.  It was determined that Egypt should become a naval power.  
For this, timber was indispensable, and the forests of Lebanon must be 
seized.  War was carried to the continent.  Syria was reduced.  A garrison 
was planted on the banks of the Euphrates.  A navy was erected in the 
Mediterranean Sea, and the Tyrians were defeated in a great sea-battle.  
The Suez Canal was opened for the first time, and an exploring 
expedition circumnavigated Africa.

Yet, for all that and all that, the Egyptian people were not content.  The 
victories won by mercenary troops excited little patriotic pride, and the 
least reverse occasioned the most gloomy forebodings, the most serious 
discontent.  The Egyptians indeed had good cause to be alarmed—the 
Phil-Hellenes were playing at a dangerous game.  Times had changed 
since Sesostris overran Asia.  A great power had arisen on the banks of 
the Tigris; a greater power still on the banks of the Euphrates.  They had 
narrowly escaped Sennacherib when Nineveh was in its glory, and now 
Babylon had arisen and Nebuchadnezzar had drawn the sword.  For a 
long time Chaldea and Egypt fought over Syria, their battle-ground and 
their prey.  At last came the decisive day of Carchemish.  The 
Phoenicians, the Syrians, and the Jews obtained new masters; the 
Egyptians were driven out of Asia. 

Yet even then the kings were not cured of their taste for war.  An 
expedition was sent against Cyrene, a Greek kingdom on the northern 
coast of Africa.  It was unsuccessful, and the sullen disaffection which 
had so long smouldered burst forth into flame.  The king was killed, and 
Amasis, a man of the people, was placed upon the throne.

This monarch did not go to war, and he contrived to favour the Greeks 
without offending the prejudices of his fellow-countrymen.  He was, 
however, a true Phil-Hellene; he encircled himself with a body-guard of 
Greeks; he married a princess of Cyrene; he gave a handsome 
subscription to the fund for rebuilding the temple at Delphi; he extended 
the commerce of Egypt and improved its manufactures.  The liberal 
policy in trade which he pursued had the most satisfactory results.  Never 
had Egypt been so rich as she was then.  But she was defenceless; she had 
lost her arms.  It is probable that under Amasis she was a vassal of 
Babylon, paying tribute every year; and now a time was coming when 
gold could no longer purchase repose, when the horrified people would 
see their temples stripped, their idols dashed to pieces, their sacred 
animals murdered, their priests scourged, and the embalmed body of their 
king snatched from its last resting-place and flung upon the flames.

A vast wilderness extends from the centre of Africa to the jungles of 
Bengal.  It consists of rugged mountain and of sandy wastes; it is 
traversed by three river basins or valley plains.

In its centre is the basin of the Tigris and Euphrates.  On its east is the 
basin of the Indus; on its west is the basin of the Nile.  Each of these river 
systems is enclosed by deserts.  The whole region may be pictured to the 
mind as a broad yellow field with three green streaks running north and 
south.

Egypt, Babylonia, and India proper, or the Punjab, are the primeval 
countries of the ancient world.  In these three desert-bound, river-watered 
valleys we find, in the earliest dawn of history, civilisation growing wild.  
Each in a similar manner had been fostered and tortured by Nature into 
progress; in each existed a people skilled in the management of land, 
acquainted with manufactures, and possessing some knowledge of 
practical science and of art.

The civilisation of India was the youngest of the three, yet Egypt and 
Chaldea were commercially its vassals and dependents.  India offered for 
sale articles not elsewhere to be found—the shining warts of the oyster; 
glass-like stones dug up out of the bowels of the earth, or gathered in the 
beds of dried-up brooks; linen which was plucked as a blossom from a 
tree, and manufactured into cloth as white as snow; transparent fabrics, 
webs of woven wind which when laid on the dewy grass melted from the 
eyes; above all, those glistening, glossy threads stolen from the body of a 
caterpillar, beautiful as the wings of the moth into which that caterpillar is 
afterwards transformed.

Neither the Indians, the Chaldeans, nor the Egyptians were in the habit of 
travelling beyond the confines of their own valleys.  They resembled 
islanders, and they had no ships.  But the intermediate seas were 
navigated by the wandering shepherd tribes, who sometimes pastured 
their flocks by the waters of the Indus, sometimes by the waters of the 
Nile.  It was by their means that the trade between the river lands was 
carried on.  They possessed the camels and other beasts of burden 
requisite for the transport of goods.  Their numbers and their warlike 
habits, their intimate acquaintance with the watering-places and seasons 
of the desert, enabled them to carry the goods in safety through a 
dangerous land, while the regular profits they derived from the trade, and 
the oaths by which they were bound, induced them to act fairly to those 
by whom they were employed.  At a later period the Chinese, who were 
once a great naval people, and who claim the discovery of the New 
World, doubled Cape Comorin in their huge junks, and sailed up the 
western coasts of India into the Persian Gulf, and along the coast of 
Arabia to the mouth of the Red Sea.  It as probably from them that the 
arts of shipbuilding and navigation were acquired by the Arabs of Yemen 
and the Indians of Guzerat, who then made it their business to supply 
Babylon and Egypt and Eastern Africa with India goods.  At a later 
period still these India goods were carried by the Phoenicians to the 
coasts of Europe, and acorn-eating savages were awakened to industry 
and ambition.  India, as a “land of desire,” has contributed much to the 
development of man.  On the routes of the India caravan, as on the banks 
of navigable rivers, arose great and wealthy cities, which perished when 
the route was changed.  Open the book of universal history at what period 
we may, it is always the India trade which is the cause of internal industry 
and foreign negotiation.

The intercourse between the Indians, Chaldeans, and Egyptians was often 
interrupted by wars, which recurred like epidemics, and which like 
epidemics closely resembled one another.  The roving tribes of the sandy 
deserts, the pastoral mountains, or the elevated steppe-plateaux pressed 
by some mysterious impulse—a famine, an enemy in their rear, or the 
ambition of a single man—swept down upon the plains of the Tigris and 
Euphrates, and thence spread their conquests right and left.  Sometimes 
they merely encamped, and the natives recovered their independence.  
But more frequently they adopted the manners of the conquered people, 
and flung themselves into luxury with the same ardour which they had 
displayed in war.  This luxury was not based on refinement but on 
sensuality, and it soon made them indolent and weak.  Sooner or later 
they suffered the fate which their fathers had inflicted, and a new race of 
invaders poured over the empire, to be supplanted in their turn when their 
time was come.

Invasions of this nature were on the whole beneficial to the human race.  
The mingling of a young, powerful people with the wise but somewhat 
weary nations of the plains produced an excellent effect.  And since the 
conquerors adopted the luxury of the conquered, they were obliged to 
adopt the same measure for supplying the foreign goods—for luxury 
means always something from abroad.  As soon as the first shock was 
over the trade routes were again opened, and perhaps extended, by the 
brand-new energies of the barbarian kings.

Babylonia or Chaldea, the alluvial country which occupies the lower 
course of the Euphrates, was undoubtedly the original abode of 
civilisation in Western Asia.  But it was on the banks of the Tigris that the 
first great empire arose—the first at least of which we know.  For who 
can tell how many cities, undreamt of by historians, lie buried beneath the 
Assyrian plains?  And Nineveh itself may have been built from some 
dead metropolis, as Babylon bricks were used in the building of Baghdad.  
Recorded history is a thing of yesterday—the narrative of modern man.  
There is, however, a science of history; by this we are enabled to restore 
in faint outline the unwritten past, and by this we are assured that 
whatever the names and number of the forgotten empires may have been , 
they merely repeated one another.  In describing the empire of Nineveh 
we describe them all.

The Assyrian empire covered a great deal of ground.  The kingdom of 
Troy was one of its fiefs.  Its rule was sometimes extended to the islands 
of the Grecian sea.  Babylon was its subject.  It stretched far away into 
Asia.  But the conquered provinces were loosely governed, or rather no 
attempt was made to govern them at all.  Phoenicia was allowed to 
remain a federation of republics.  Israel, Judah, and Damascus were 
allowed to continue their angry bickerings and petty wars.  The relations 
between the conquered rulers and their subjects were left untouched.  
Their laws, their manners, and their religion were in no way changed.  It 
was merely required that the vassal kings or senates should acknowledge 
the Emperor of Nineveh as their suzerain or lord, that they should send 
him a certain tribute every year, and that they should furnish a certain 
contingent of troops when he went to war.

As long as a vigorous and dreaded king sat upon the throne this simple 
machinery worked well enough.  Every year the tributes, with certain 
forms of homage and with complimentary presents of curiosities and 
artisans, were brought to the metropolis.  But whenever an imperial 
calamity of any kind occurred—an unsuccessful foreign war, the death or 
even sickness of the reigning prince—the tributes were withheld.  Then 
the emperor set to work to subdue the provinces again.  But this time the 
conquered were treated not as enemies only but as traitors.  The vassal 
king and his advisers were tortured to death, the cities were razed to the 
ground, and the rebels were transplanted by thousands to another land—
an effectual method of destroying their patriotism or religion of the soil.   
The Syrian expeditions of Sennacherib were provoked by the contumacy 
of Judah and of Israel.  The kingdom of Israel was blotted out, but a camp 
plague broke up the Assyrian army before Jerusalem, and not long 
afterwards the empire crumbled away.  All the vassal nations became 
free, and for a short time Nineveh stood alone, naked but unattacked.  
Then there was war in every direction, and when it was over the city was 
a heap of charred ruins, and three great kingdoms took its place.

The first kingdom was that of the Medes, who had set the example of 
rebellion, and by whom Nineveh had been destroyed.  They inhabited the 
highland regions bordering on the Tigris, Ecbatana was their capital.  
They were renowned for their luxury, and especially for their robes of 
flowing silk.  Their priests were called Magi, and formed a separate tribe 
or caste; they were dressed in white, lived only on vegetables, slept on 
beds of leaves, worshipped the sun and the element of fire, as symbols of 
the deity, and followed the precepts of Zoroaster.  The empire of the 
Medes was bounded on the west by the Tigris.  They inherited the 
Assyrian provinces in Central Asia, the boundaries of which are not 
precisely known.

The civilisation of Nineveh had been derived from Babylon, a city 
famous for its rings and gems, which were beautifully engraved, its 
carpets in which the figures of fabulous animals were interwoven, its 
magnifying glasses, its sun-dials, and its literature printed in cuneiform 
characters on clay tablets, which were then baked in the oven.  Many 
hundreds of these have lately been deciphered, and are found to consist 
chiefly of military dispatches, law papers, royal game-books, observatory 
reports, agricultural treatises, and religious documents.  In the partition of 
Assyria Babylon obtained Mesopotamia, or “the Land between the 
Rivers,” and Syria, including Phoenicia and Palestine.  Nebuchadnezzar 
was the founder of the Empire; he routed the Egyptians, he destroyed 
Jerusalem, transplanted the Jews on account of their rebellion, and 
reduced Tyre after a memorable siege.  He built a new Babylon as 
Augustus built a new Rome, and the city became one of the wonders of 
the world.  It was a vast fortified district, five or six times the area of 
London, interspersed with parks and gardens and fields, and enclosed by 
walls on which six chariots could be driven side by side.  Its position in a 
flat country made it resemble in the distance a mountain with trees 
waving at the top.  These were the “hanging gardens,” a grove of large 
trees planted on the square surface of a gigantic tower, and ingeniously 
watered from below.  Nebuchadnezzar erected this extraordinary 
structure to please his wife, who came from the highlands of Media, and 
who, weary of the interminable plains, coveted meadows on mountain 
tops such as her native land contained.  The Euphrates ran through the 
centre of the city, and was crossed by a stone bridge which was a marvel 
for its time.  But more wonderful still, there was a kind of Thames Tunnel 
passing underneath the river, and connecting palaces on either side.  The 
city was united to its provinces by roads and fortified posts; rafts inflated 
with skins, and reed boats pitched over with bitumen, floated down the 
river with timber from the mountains of Armenia and stones for the 
purposes of building.  A canal large enough for ships to ascend was dug 
from Babylon to the Persian Gulf, and on its banks were innumerable 
machines for raising the water and spreading it upon the soil.

The third kingdom was that of the Lydians, a people in manners and 
appearance resembling the Greeks.  They did not consider themselves 
behind the rest of the world.  They boasted that they had invented dice, 
coin, and the art of shop-keeping, and also that the famous Etruscan state 
was a colony of theirs.  They inhabited Asia Minor, a sterile, rugged 
tableland, but possessing a western coast enriched by nature and covered 
with the prosperous cities of the Asiatic Greeks.  Hitherto Ionia had never 
been subdued, but the cities were too jealous of one another to combine, 
and Croesus was able to conquer them one by one.  This was the man 
whose wealth is still celebrated in a proverb—he obtained his gold from 
the washings of a sandy stream.  Croesus admired the Greeks; he was the 
first of the lion-hunters, and invited all the men of the day to visit him at 
Sardis, where he had the pleasure of hearing Aesop tell some of his own 
fables.  He was anxious that his capital should form part of the grand tour 
which had already become the fashion of the Greek philosophers, and that 
they should be able to say when they returned home that they had not 
only seen the pyramids of Egypt and the ruins of Troy, but also the 
treasure-house of Croesus.  When he received a visit from one of these 
sages in cloak and beard he would show him his heaps of gold and 
silver, and ask him whether, in all his travels, he had ever seen a happier 
man—to which question he did not always receive a very courteous reply.

After long wars, peace was established between the Babylonians, the 
Lydians, and the Medes on a lasting and secure foundation.  The royal 
families were united by marriage; alliances, defensive and offensive, 
were made and ratified on oath.  Egypt was no longer able to invade, and 
there was a period of delicious calm in that stormy Asiatic world, broken 
only by the plaintive voices of the poor Jewish captives who sat by the 
waters of Babylon and sang of the Holy City that was no more.

In the twinkling of an eye all this was changed.  A band of hardy 
mountaineers rushed out of the recesses of Persia and swept like a wind 
across the plains.  They were dressed in leather from top to toe; they had 
never tasted fruit or wine; they had never seen a market; they knew not 
how to buy or sell.  They were taught only three things—to ride on 
horseback, to hurl the javelin, and to speak the truth.

All Asia was covered with blood and flames.  The allied kingdoms fell at 
once.  India and Egypt were soon afterwards added to this empire, the 
greatest that the world had ever seen.  The Persians used to boast that 
they ruled from the land of uninhabitable heat to the land of uninhabitable 
cold; that their dominion began in regions where the sun frizzled the hair 
and blackened the faces of the natives, and ended in a land where the air 
was filled with snow like feathers and the earth was hard as stone.  The 
Persian empire was in reality bounded by the deserts which divided Egypt 
from Ethiopia on the south and from Carthage on the west; by the desert 
which divided the Punjab from Bengal; by the steppes which lay on the 
other side of the Jaxartes; by the Mediterranean, the Caspian, and the 
Black Sea.

Darius, the third emperor, invented a system of provincial government 
which, though imperfect when viewed by the wisdom of modern times, 
was far superior to any that had preceded it in Asia.  He appointed satraps 
or pashas to administer the conquered provinces.  Each of these viceroys 
received with his commission a map of his province engraved on brass.  
He was at once the civil governor and commander of the troops, but his 
power was checked and supervised by a secretary or clerk of the 
accounts, and the province was visited by royal commissioners once a 
year.  The troops in each province were of two kinds; some garrisoned the 
cities; others, for the most part cavalry, lived, like the Roman legions, 
always in a camp; it was their office to keep down brigands, and to 
convey the royal treasure from place to place.  The troops were subsisted 
by the conquered people; this formed part of the tribute, and was 
collected at the point of the sword.  There was also a fixed tax in money 
and in kind, which was received by the clerk of the accounts and 
dispatched to the capital every year.

The Great King still preserved in his habits something of the nomad 
chief.  He wintered at Babylon, but in the summer the heat was terrible in 
that region; the citizens retired to their cellars, and the king went to Susa, 
which was situated on the hills, or to Ecbatana, the ancient capital of the 
Medes, or to Persepolis, the true hearth and home of the Persian race.  
When he approached one of these cities the magi came forth to meet him, 
dressed all in white and singing hymns.  The road was strewn with myrtle 
boughs and roses, and silver altars with blazing frankincense were placed 
by the wayside.

His palaces were built of precious woods, but the naked wood was never 
permitted to be seen: the walls were covered with golden plates, the roof 
with silver tiles.  The courts were adorned with white, green, and blue 
hangings, fastened with cords of fine linen to pillars of marble by silver 
rings.   The gardens were filled with rare and exotic plants; from the cold 
bosom of the snow-white stone fountains sprang upwards, sparkling in 
the air; birds of gorgeous plumage flashed from tree to tree, resembling 
flowers where they perched.  And as the sun sank low in the heavens and 
the shadows on the earth grew deep, the voice of the nightingale was 
heard in the thicket, and the low cooing of the dove.  Sounds of laughter 
proceeded from the house; lattices were opened; ponderous doors swung 
back, and out poured a troop of houris which a Persian poet alone would 
venture to describe.  For there might be seen the fair Circassian, with 
cheeks like the apple in its rosy bloom; and the Abyssinian damsel, with 
warm brown skin and voluptuous drowsy eyes; the Hindu girl, with lithe 
and undulating form and fingers which seemed created to caress; the 
Syrian, with aquiline and haughty look; the Greek with features 
brightened by intellect and vivacity; and the home-born beauty prepared 
expressly for the harem, with a complexion as white as the milk on which 
she had been fed, and a face in form and expression resembling the full 
moon.

All these dear charmers belonged to the king, and no doubt he often 
wished half of them away.  For if he felt a serious passion rising in his 
breast, etiquette compelled him to put it down.  Inconstancy was enjoined 
on him by law.  He was subjected to a rotation of kisses by the regulated 
science of the harem.  Ceremony interdicted affection and caprice.  He 
suffered from unvarying variety and the monotony of eternal change.  
The whole empire belonged to him, and all its inhabitants were his slaves.  
If he happened to be struck to the heart by a look cast from under a pair 
of black-edged eyelids, if he became enamoured of a high bosomed 
virgin, with a form like the oriental willow, he had only to say the word; 
she was at once taken to the apartments of the women, and her parents 
received the congratulations of their friends.  But then he was not allowed 
to see his beloved for a twelve-month: six months she must be prepared 
with the oil of myrrh, six months with the sweet odours, before she was 
sufficiently purified and perfumed to receive the august embraces of the 
king, and to soothe a passion which meanwhile had ample time to cool.

The Great King slept on a splendid couch, overspread by a vine of 
branching gold, with clusters of rubies representing grapes.  He wore a 
dress of purple and white, with scarlet trousers, a girdle like that of a 
woman, and a high tiara encircled by a sky-blue turban.  He lived in a 
prison of rich metal and dazzling stone.  Around him stood the courtiers 
with their hands wrapped in their robes, and covering their mouths lest he 
should be polluted by their base-born breath.  Those who desired to speak 
to his majesty prostrated themselves before him on the ground.  If any 
one entered uncalled, a hundred sabres gleamed in the air, and unless the 
king stretched out his sceptre the intruder would be killed.

An army sat down to dinner in the palace every day, and every day a herd 
of oxen was killed for them to eat.  These were only the household troops.  
But when the Great King went to war, the provinces sent in their 
contingents, and then might be seen, as in some great exhibition, a 
collection of warriors from the four quarters of the earth.  Then might be 
seen the Immortals, or Persian life-guards; their arms were of gold and 
silver, their standards were of silk.  Then might be seen the heavy-armed 
Egyptian troops, with long wooden shields reaching to the ground; the 
Greeks from Ionia, with crested helmets and breastplates of bronze; the 
fur-clad Tartars of the steppes, who “raised hair” like the Red Indians, a 
people probably belonging to the same race; the Ethiopians of Africa, 
with fleecy locks, clad in the skins of lions and armed with throw-sticks 
and with stakes, the points of which had been hardened in the fire, or 
tipped with horn or stone; the Berbers in their four-horse chariots; the 
camel cavalry of Arabia, each camel being mounted by two archers 
sitting back to back, and thus prepared for the enemy on either side; the 
wild horsemen of the Persian hills who caught the enemy with their 
lassos; the black-skinned but straight-haired aborigines of India, with 
their bows of the bamboo and their shields made of the skins of cranes; 
and above all the Hindus, dressed in white muslin and seated on the necks 
of elephants, which were clothed in Indian steel and which looked like 
moving mountains with snakes for hands.  Towers were erected on their 
backs, in which sat bow-men, who shot down the foe with unerring aim, 
while the elephants were taught to charge, to trample down the opposing 
ranks in heaps, and to take up armed men in their trunks and hand them to 
their riders.  Sometimes huge scythes were fastened to their trunks, and 
they mowed down regiments as they marched along.  The army was also 
attended by packs of enormous blood-hounds to hunt the fugitives when a 
victory had been gained, and by falcons which were trained to fly at the 
eyes of the enemy to baffle them, or even blind them as they were 
fighting.

When this enormous army began to march it devoured the whole land 
over which it passed.  At night the camp-fires reddened the sky as if a 
great city was in flames.  In the morning, a little after daybreak, a trumpet 
sounded, and the image of the sun, cased in crystal and made of 
burnished gold, was raised on the top of the king’s pavilion, which was 
built of wood, covered with cashmere shawls, and supported on silver 
poles.  As soon as the ball caught the first rays of the rising sun the march 
began.  First went the chariot with the altar and the sacred fire, drawn by 
eight milk-white horses driven by charioteers, who walked by the side 
with golden wands.  The chariot was followed by a horse of extraordinary 
magnitude, which was called the “Charger of the Sun.”  The king 
followed with the ten thousand Immortals, and with his wives in covered 
carriages drawn by mules, or in cages upon camels.  Then came the army 
without order or precision, and there rose a dust which resembled a white 
cloud, and which could be seen across the plain for miles.  The enemy, 
when this cloud drew near, could distinguish within it the gleaming of 
brazen armour, and they could hear the sound of the lash, which was 
always part of the military music of the Persians.  When a battle was 
fought the king took his seat on a golden throne, surrounded by his 
secretaries, who took notes during the engagement and recorded every 
word which fell from the royal lips.

This army was frequently required by the Persians.  They were a restless 
people, always lusting after war.  Vast as their empire was, it was not 
large enough for them.  The courtiers used to assure an enterprising 
monarch that he was greater than all the kings that were dead, and greater 
than those that were yet unborn; that it was his mission to extend the 
Persian territory as far as God’s heaven reached, in order that the sun 
might shine on no land beyond their borders.  Hyperbole apart, it was the 
aim and desire of the kings to annex the plains of Southern Russia, and so 
to make the Black Sea a lake in the interior of Persia; and to conquer 
Greece, the only land in Europe which really merited their arms.  In both 
these attempts they completely failed.  The Russian Tartars, who had no 
fixed abode and whose houses were on wheels, decoyed the Persian army 
far into the interior, eluded it in pursuit, harassed and almost destroyed it 
in retreat.  The Greeks defeated them in pitched battles on Greek soil, and 
defeated their fleets in Greek waters.

This contest, which lasted many years, to the Greeks was a matter of life 
and death, but it was merely an episode in Persian history.  The defeats of 
Plataea and Salamis caused the Great King much annoyance, and cost 
him a shred of land and sea.  But they did not directly affect the 
prosperity of his empire.  What was the loss of a few thousand slaves, and 
of a few hundred Phoenician and Egyptian and Ionian ships, to him?  
Indirectly, indeed, it decided the fate of Persia by developing the power 
of the Greeks, but ruined in any case that empire must have been, like all 
others of its kind.  The causes of its fall must be sought for within and not 
without.  In the natural course of events it would have become the prey of 
some people like the Parthian highlanders or the wandering Turks.  The 
Greek wars had this result; the empire was conquered at an earlier period 
than would otherwise have been the case, and it was conquered by a 
European instead of an Asiatic power.

There is no problem in history so interesting as the unparalleled 
development of Greece.  How was it that so small a country could exert 
so remarkable an influence on the course of events and on the intellectual 
progress of mankind?  The Greeks, as the science of language clearly 
proves, belonged to the same race as the Persians themselves.  Many 
centuries before history begins a people migrated from the highlands of 
Central Asia and overspread Europe on the one side, on the other side 
Hindustan.  Celts and Germans, Russians and Poles, Romans and Greeks, 
Persians and Hindus, all sprang from the loins of a shepherd tribe 
inhabiting the tableland of the sources of the Oxus and Jaxartes, and are 
quite distinct from the Assyrians, the Arabs, and Phoenicians, whose 
ancestors descended into the plains of Western Asia from the tableland of 
the sources of the Tigris and Euphrates.  It is also inferred from the 
evidence of language that at some remote period the Egyptians belonged 
to the same stock as the mountaineers of Armenia, the Chinese to the 
same stock as the highlanders of Central Asia, and that at a period still 
more remote the Turanian or Chinese Tartar, the Aryan or Indo-
European, and the Semitic races and languages were one.  Upon this last 
point philologists are not agreed, though the balance of authority is in 
favour of the view expressed.  But as regards the descent of the English 
and Hindus from the same tribe of Asiatic mountaineers, that is now as 
much a fact of history as the common descent of the English and the 
Normans from the same race of pirates on the Baltic shores.  The Celts 
migrated first into Europe; they were followed by the Graeco-Italian 
people, and then by the German-Slavonians, the Persians and Hindus 
remaining longest in their primeval homes.  The great difference between 
the various breeds of the Indo-European race is partly due to their 
intermixture with the natives of the countries which they colonised and 
conquered.  In India the Aryans found a black race which yet exist in the 
hills and jungles of that country, and who yet speak languages of their 
own which have nothing in common with the noble Sanskrit.  Europe was 
inhabited by a people of Tartar origin who still exist as the Basques of the 
Pyrenees, and as the Finns and Lapps of Scandinavia.  It is probable that 
these people also were intruders of comparatively recent date, and that a 
yet more primeval race existed on the gloomy banks of the Danube and 
the Rhine, in huts built on stakes in the shallow waters of the Swiss lakes, 
and in the mountain caverns of France and Spain.  The Aryans, who 
migrated into India, certainly intermarried with the blacks, and there can 
be no reasonable doubt that the Celts who first migrated into Europe took 
the wives as well as the lands of the natives.  The aborigines were 
therefore largely absorbed by the Celts, to the detriment of that race, 
before the arrival of the Germans, whose blood remained comparatively 
pure.

We may freely use the doctrine of intermarriage to explain the difference 
in colour between the sepoy and his officer.  We may apply it—though 
with less confidence—to explain the difference in character and aspect 
between the Irish and the English, but we do not think that the doctrine 
will help us much towards expounding the genius of Greece.  And if the 
superiority of that people was not dependent in any way on race 
distinction, inherent or acquired, it must have been in some way 
connected with locality and other incidents of life. 

A glance at the map is sufficient to explain how it was that Greece 
became civilised before the other European lands.  It is nearest to those 
countries in which civilisation first arose.  It is the borderland of East 
and West.  The western coast of Asia and the eastern coast of Greece lie 
side by side; the sea between them is narrow, with the islands like 
stepping-stones across a brook.  On the other hand, a mountain wall 
extends in the form of an arc from the Adriatic to the Black Sea and shuts 
off Europe from Greece, which is thus compelled to grow towards Asia 
as a tree grows towards the light.  Its coasts are indented in a peculiar 
manner by the sea.  Deep bays and snug coves, forming hospitable ports, 
abound.  The character of the Aegean is mild and humane; its atmosphere 
is clear and favourable for those who navigate by the eye from island to 
island and from point to point.  The purple shell-fish, so much in request 
with the Phoenicians for their manufactures, was found upon the coasts of 
Greece.  A trade was opened up between the two lands, and with trade 
there came arithmetic and letters to assist the trade, and from these a 
desire on the part of the Greeks for more luxury and more knowledge.  
All this was natural enough.  But how was it that whatever came into the 
hands of the Greeks was used merely as raw material—that whatever they 
touched was transmuted into gold?  How was it that Asia was only their 
dame’s school, and that they discovered the higher branches of 
knowledge for themselves?  How was it that they who were taught by the 
Babylonians to divide the day into twelve hours afterwards exalted 
astronomy to the rank of an exact science?  How was it that they who 
received from Egypt the canon of proportions and the first ideas of the 
portraiture of the human form, afterwards soared into the regions of the 
ideal, and created in marble a beauty more exquisite than can be found on 
earth—a vision, as it were, of some unknown yet not unimagined world?

The mountains of Greece are disposed in a peculiar manner, so as to 
enclose extensive tracts of land which assume the appearance of large 
basins or circular hollows, level as the ocean and consisting of rich 
alluvial soil through which rise steep insulated rocks.  The plain subsisted 
a numerous population; the rock became the Acropolis or citadel of the 
chief town, and the mountains were barriers against invasion.  Other 
districts were parcelled out by water in the same manner; their frontiers 
were swift streaming rivers or estuaries of the sea.  Each of these cantons 
became an independent city-state, and the natives of each canton became 
warmly attached to their fatherland.  Nature had given them ramparts 
which they knew how to use.  They defended with obstinacy the river and 
the pass; if those were forced the citadel became a place of refuge and 
resistance, and if the worst came to the worst they could escape to 
inaccessible mountain caves.

Each of these states possessed a constitution of its own, and each was 
home-made and differed slightly from the rest.  It may be imagined what 
a variety of ideas must have risen in the process of their manufacture.  
The laws were debated in a general assembly of the citizens; each 
community within itself was full of intellectual activity.

Self-development and independence are too often accompanied by 
isolation, and nations, like individuals, become torpid when they retire 
from the world.  But this was not the case with Greece.  Though its 
people were divided into separate states, they all spoke the same language 
and worshipped the same gods, and there existed certain institutions 
which at appointed times assembled them together as a nation.

Greece is a country which possesses the most extraordinary climate in the 
world.  Within two degrees of latitude it ranges from the beech to the 
palm.  In the morning the traveller may be shivering in a snow-storm, and 
viewing a winter landscape of naked trees; in the afternoon he may be 
sweltering beneath a tropical sun, with oleanders blooming around him 
and oranges shining in the green foliage like balls of gold.  From this 
variety of climate resulted a variety of produce which stimulated the 
natives to barter and exchange.  A central spot was chosen as the market-
place, and it was made, for the common protection, a sanctuary of Apollo.  
The people, when they met for the purposes of trade, performed at the 
same time religious rites, and also amused themselves, in the rude manner 
of the age, with boxing, wrestling, running races, and throwing the spear; 
or they listened to the minstrels, who sang the ballads of ancient times, 
and to the prophets or inspired politicians, who chanted predictions in 
hexameters.  That sanctuary became in time the famous oracle of Delphi, 
and those sports expanded into the Olympian Games.  To the great fair 
came Greeks from all parts of the land, and when chariot races were 
introduced it became necessary to make good roads from state to state, 
and to build bridges across the streams.  The administration of the 
sanctuary, the laws and regulations of the games, and the management of 
the public fund subscribed for the expenses of the fair, could only be 
arranged by means of a national council composed of deputies from all 
the states.  This congress was called the Amphictyonic League, which, 
soon extending its powers, enacted national laws, and as a supreme court 
of arbitration decided all questions that arose between state and state.

At Olympia the inhabitants of the coast displayed the scarlet cloth and the 
rich trinkets which they had obtained from Phoenician ships.  At Olympia 
those who had been kidnapped into slavery, and had afterwards been 
ransomed by their friends at home, related to an eager crowd the wonders 
which they had seen in the enchanted regions of the East.

And then throughout all Greece there was an inward stirring and a 
hankering after the unknown, and a desire to achieve great deeds.  It 
began with the expedition of Jason—an exploring voyage to the Black 
Sea; it culminated in the siege of Troy.

In such countries as the Grecian states, where the area is small, the 
community flourishing, and the frontier inexorably defined, the law of 
population operates with unusual force.  The mountain walls of the Greek 
cantons, like the deserts which surrounded Egypt, not only kept out the 
enemy but also kept in the natives; they were not only fortresses but 
prisons.  In order to exist, the Greeks were obliged to cultivate every inch 
of soil.  But when this had been done the population still continued to 
increase, and now the land could no longer be increased.  In those early 
days they had no manufactures, mines, or foreign commerce by means of 
which they could supply themselves, as we do, with food from other 
lands.  In such an emergency the government, if it acts at all, has only two 
methods to pursue.  It must either strangle or bleed the population; it must 
organise infanticide or emigration.

The first method was practised to some extent, but happily the last was 
now within their power.  The Trojan war had made them acquainted with 
the Asiatic coast, and overcrowded states began to send forth colonies by 
public act.  The emigrants consisted chiefly, as may be supposed, of the 
poor, the dangerous, and the discontented classes.  They took with them 
no women; they went forth, like the buccaneers, sword in hand.  They 
swooped down on the Ionian coast—there was at that time no power in 
Asia Minor which was able to resist them.  They obtained wives, 
sometimes by force, sometimes by peaceable arrangement with the 
natives.  In course of time the coast of Asia Minor was lined with rich and 
flourishing towns.  The mother country continued to pour forth colonies, 
and colonies also founded colonies.  The Greeks sailed and settled in 
every direction.  They braved the dark mists and the inclement seasons of 
the Black Sea, and took up their abode among a people whose faces were 
almost concealed in furs, who dwelt at the mouths of great rivers and 
cultivated boundless plains of wheat.  This wheat the Greeks exported to 
the mother country, with barrels of the salted tunny-fish, and the gold of 
Ural, and even the rich products of the Oriental trade which were brought 
across Asia from India or China by the waters of the Oxus to the Aral 
Sea, from the Aral to the Caspian Sea by land, from the Caspian to the 
Black Sea by the Volga and the Don.

But where Italy dipped her arched and lovely foot in the blue waters of an 
untroubled sea, beneath the blue roof of an unclouded sky—where the 
flowers never perished, where eternal summer smiled, where mere 
existence was voluptuous and life itself a sensual joy—there the Greek 
cities clustered richly together—cities shining with marble and built in 
fairy forms, before them the deep tranquil harbour, behind them violet 
valleys, myrtle groves, and green lakes of waving corn.

When a bank of emigrants went forth they took with them fire kindled on 
the city hearth.  Although each colony was independent, it regarded with 
reverence the mother state, and all considered themselves with pride not 
foreigners but Greeks; for Greece was not a country but a people; 
wherever the Greek language was spoken, that was Greece.  They all 
spoke the same grand and harmonious language—although the dialects 
might differ; they had the same bible, for Homer was in all their hearts, 
and the memory of their youthful glory was associated in their minds with 
the union of Greek warriors beneath the walls of Troy.  The chief colonial 
states were represented at the meetings of the Amphictyonic League, and 
any Greek from the Crimea to Marseilles might contend at the Olympian 
Games with the full rights of a Spartan or Athenian, a privilege which the 
Great King could by no means have obtained.

The intense enthusiasm which was excited by the Olympian Games was 
the chief cause of the remarkable development of Greece.  The man who 
won the olive garland on that celebrated course was famous for ever 
afterwards.  His statue was erected in the public hall at Delphi; he was 
received by his native city with all the honours of a formal triumph; he 
was not allowed to enter by the gates—a part of the city wall was beaten 
down.  The city itself became during five years the talk of Greece, and 
wherever its people travelled they were welcomed with congratulations 
and esteem.

The passion for praise is innate in the human mind.  It is only natural that 
throughout the whole Greek world a spirit of eager rivalry and emulation 
should prevail.  In every city was established a gymnasium where crowds 
of young men exercised themselves naked.  This institution was 
originally intended for those only who were in training for the Olympian 
Games, but afterwards it became a part of daily life, and the Greeks went 
to the gymnasium with the same regularity as the Romans went to the 
bath.

At first the national prizes were only for athletes, but at a later period the 
principle of competition was extended to books and musical 
compositions, paintings and statues.  There was also a competition in rich 
and elegant display.  The carriages and retinues which were exhibited 
upon the course excited a desire to obtain wealth, and gave a useful 
impulse to foreign commerce, manufactures, and mining operations.

The Greek world was composed of municipal aristocracies—societies of 
gentlemen living in towns, with their farms in the neighbourhood, and 
having all their work done for them by slaves.  They themselves had 
nothing to do but to cultivate their bodies by exercise in the gymnasium, 
and their minds by conversation in the market-place.  They lived out of 
doors while their wives remained shut up at home.  In Greece a lady 
could only enter society by adopting a mode of life which in England 
usually facilitates her exit.  The Greeks spent little money on their wives, 
their houses, or their food: the rich men were expected to give dramatic 
entertainments , and to contribute a company or a man-of-war for the 
protection of the city.  The market-place was the Greek club.  There the 
merchants talked their business—the labours of the desk were then 
unknown.  The philosopher instructed his pupils under the shade of a 
plane-tree, or strolling up and down a garden path.  Mingling with the 
song of the cicada from the boughs might be heard the chipping of the 
chisel from the workshop of the sculptor, and the laughter and shouts 
from the gymnasium.  And sometimes the tinkle of a harp would be 
heard; a crowd would be collected, and a rhapsodist would recite a scene 
from the Iliad, every word of which his audience knew by heart, as an 
audience at Naples or Milan knows every bar of the opera which is about 
to be performed.  Sometimes a citizen would announce that his guest, 
who had just arrived from the sea of Azov or the Pillars of Hercules, 
would read a paper on the manners and customs of the barbarians.  It was 
in the city that the book was first read and the statue exhibited—the 
rehearsal and the private view; it was in Olympia that they were 
published to the nation.  When the public murmured in delight around a 
picture of Xeuxis or a statue of Praxiteles, when they thundered in 
applause to an ode by Pindar or a lecture by Herodotus, how many 
hundreds of young men must have gone home with burning brows and 
throbbing hearts, devoured by the love of fame!  And when we consider 
that though the geographical Greece is a small country, the true Greece-
—that is to say, the land inhabited by the Greeks—was in reality a large 
country; when we consider with what an immense number of ideas they 
must have been brought in contact on the shores of the Black Sea, in Asia 
Minor, in Southern Italy, in Southern France, in Egypt, and in Northern 
Africa; when we consider that, owing to those noble contests of Olympia, 
city was every contending against city, and within the city man against 
man, there is surely no longer anything mysterious in the exceptional 
development of that people.

Education in Greece was not a monopoly; it was the precious privilege of 
all the free.  The business of religion was divided among three classes.  
The priests were merely the sacrificers and guardians of the sanctuary; 
they were elected, like the mayors of our towns, by their fellow citizens 
for a limited time only, and without their being withdrawn from the 
business of ordinary life.  The poets revealed the nature, and portrayed 
the character, and related the biography of the gods.  The philosophers 
undertook the education of the young, and were also the teachers and 
preachers of morality.  If a man wished to obtain the favour of the gods, 
or to take divine advice, he went to a priest; if he desired to turn his mind 
to another, though scarcely a better world, he took up his Homer or his 
Hesiod; and if he suffered from sickness or mental affliction he sent for a 
philosopher.

It will presently be shown that the philosophers invaded the territory of 
the poets, who were defended by the government and by the mob, and 
that a religious persecution was the result.  But the fine arts were free; 
and the custom which came into vogue of erecting statues to the gods, to 
the victors of the games, and to other illustrious men favoured the 
progress of sculpture, which was also aided by the manners of the land.  
The gymnasium was a school of art.  The eyes of the sculptor revelled on 
the naked form—not purchased, as in London, at eighteenpence an hour, 
but visible in marvellous perfection at all times and in every pose.  Thus 
ever present to the eye of the artist, it was ever present to his brain, and 
flowed forth from his fingers in lovely forms.  As art was fed by nature, 
so nature was fed by art.  The Greek women placed statues of Apollo or 
Narcissus in their bedrooms, that they might bear children as beautiful as 
those on whom they gazed.  Such children they prayed the gods to give 
them, for the Greeks loved beauty to distraction, and regarded ugliness as 
sin.  They had exhibitions of beauty at which prizes were given by 
celebrated artists who were appointed to the judgment-seat.  There were 
towns in which the most beautiful men were elected to the priesthood.  
There were connoisseurs who formed companies of soldiers composed 
exclusively of comely young men, and who could plead for the life of a 
beautiful youth amidst the wrath and confusion of the battlefield.

The Persian wars gave a mighty impulse to the intellect of Greece.  
Indeed, before that period Greek art had been uncouth; it was then that 
the Age of Marble really began, and that Phidias moulded the ideas of 
Homer into noble forms.  It was then that Athens, having commanded the 
Greeks in the War of Independence, retained the supremacy and became 
the centre of the nation.  Athens had died for Greece; it had been burnt by 
the Persians to the ground, and from those glorious ashes arose the 
Athens of history—the City of the Violet Crown.  To Athens were 
summoned the great artists: to Athens came every young man who had 
talent and ambition: to Athens every Greek who could afford it sent his 
boys to school.  The Academy was planted with wide-spreading plane-
trees and olive groves, laid out in walks with fountains, and surrounded 
by a wall.  A theatre was built entirely of masts which had been taken 
from the enemy.  A splendid harbour was constructed—a harbour which 
was in itself a town.  All that fancy could create, all that money could 
command, was lavished upon the city and its environs—the very 
milestones on the roads were works of art.

The Persians assisted the growth of Greece, not only by those invasions 
which had favoured the union, aroused the ardour, multiplied the desires, 
and ennobled the ambition of the Greek people, but also by their own 
conquests.  Their failure in Europe and their success in Asia were equally 
profitable to the Greeks.  Trade and travel were much facilitated by their 
extensive rule.  A government postal service had been established: royal 
couriers might by seen every day galloping at full speed along the 
splendid roads which united the provinces of the Punjab and Afghanistan 
and Bokhara on one side of the Euphrates, and of Asia Minor, Syria and 
Egypt on the other side of that river, with the imperial palaces at Babylon, 
Susa, Ecbatana, and Persepolis.  Caravanserais were fitted up for the 
reception of travellers in lonely places where no other houses were to be 
found.  Troops of mounted police patrolled the roads.  In desert tracts 
thousands of earthen jars, filled with water and planted up to their necks 
in sand, supplied the want of wells.  The old system of national isolation 
and closed ports was battered down.  The Greeks were no longer 
forbidden to enter the Phoenician ports, or compelled to trade exclusively 
at one Egyptian town.  Greek merchants were able to join in the caravan 
trade of Central Asia, and to traffic on the shores of the Indian Ocean.  
Philosophers, taking with them a venture of oil to pay expenses, could 
now visit the learned countries of the East with more profit than had 
previously been the case.  Since that country was deprived of its 
independence, the priests were inclined to encourage the cultivated 
curiosity of their new scholars.

Egypt from the earliest times had been the university of Greece.  It had 
been visited, according to tradition, by Orpheus and Homer: there Solon 
had studied law-making, there the rules and principles of the Pythagorean 
order had been obtained, there Thales had taken lessons in geometry, 
there Democritus had laughed and Xenophanes had sneered.  And now 
every intellectual Greek made the voyage to that country; it was regarded 
as a part of education, as a pilgrimage to the cradle-land of their 
mythology.  To us Egypt is a land of surpassing interest, but nevertheless 
merely a charnel-house, a museum, a valley of ruins and dry bones.  The 
Greeks saw it alive.  They saw with their own eyes the solemn and absurd 
rites of the temple—the cat solemnly enthroned, the tame crocodiles 
being fed, ibis mummies being packed up in red jars, scribes carving the 
animal language upon the granite.  They wandered in the mazes of the 
Labyrinth: they gazed on the mighty Sphinx couched on the yellow sands 
with a temple between its paws: they entered the great hall of Carnac, 
filled with columns like a forest and paved with acres of solid stone.  In 
that country Herodotus resided several years and took notes on his 
wooden tablets of everything that he saw, ascertained the existence of the 
Niger, made inquiries about the sources of the Nile, collated the traditions 
of the priests of Memphis with those of Thebes.  To Egypt came the 
divine Plato, and drank long and deeply of its ancient lore.  The house in 
which he lived at Heliopolis was afterwards shown to travellers—it was 
one of the sights of Egypt in Strabo’s day.  There are some who ascribe 
the whole civilisation of Greece, and the rapid growth of Greek literature, 
to the free trade which existed between the two lands.  Greece imported 
all its paper from Egypt, and without paper there would have been few 
books.  The skins of animals were too rare, and their preparation too 
expensive, to permit the growth of a literature for the people.

Gradually the Greeks become dispersed over the whole Asiatic world, 
and such was the influence of their superiority that countries in which 
they had no political power adopted much of their culture and their 
manners.  They surpassed the inhabitants of Asia as much in the arts of 
war as in those of peace.  They served as mercenaries in every land; 
wherever the kettledrum was beaten they assembled in crowds.

It soon became evident to keen observers that the Greeks were destined to 
inherit the Persian world.  That vast empire was beginning to decay.  The 
character of the ruling people had completely changed.  It is said that the 
Lombards of the fourth generation were terrified when they looked at the 
portraits of their savage ancestors who, with their hair shaved behind and 
hanging down over their mouths in front, had issued from the dark forests 
of Central Europe, and had streamed down from the Alps upon the green 
Italian plains.  The Persians soon ceased to be the rude and simple 
mountaineers who had scratched their heads with wonder at the sight of a 
silk dress, and who had been unable to understand the object of changing 
one thing for another.  It was remarked that no people adopted more 
readily the customs of other nations.  Whenever they heard of a new 
luxury they made it their own.  They soon became distinguished for that 
exquisite and refined politeness which they retain at the present day; their 
language cast off its guttural sounds and became melodious to the ear.  
Time went on, and their old virtues entirely departed.  They made use of 
gloves and umbrellas when they walked out in the sun; they no longer 
hunted except in battues, slaughtering without danger or fatigue the lean, 
mangy creatures of the parks.  They painted their faces and pencilled their 
eyebrows and wore bracelets and collars, and dined on a variety of 
entrees, tasting a little here and a little there, drank deep, yawned half the 
day in their harems, and had valets de chambre to help them out of bed.  
Their actions were like water, and their words were like the wind.  Once a 
Persian’s right hand had been a pledge which was never broken; now no 
one could rely on his most solemn oath.

A country in which polygamy prevails can never enjoy a well-ordered 
constitution.  There is always an uncertainty about succession.  The 
kingdom does not descend by rule to the eldest son, but to the son of the 
favourite wife; it is not determined beforehand by a national law, constant 
and unchangeable, given forth from the throne and ratified by the estates; 
it may be decided suddenly and at any moment in that hour when men are 
weak and yielding, women sovereign and strong—when right is often 
strangled by a fond embrace and reason kissed to sleep by rosy lips.  The 
fatal “Yes”! is uttered and cannot be revoked.  The heir is appointed and 
an injustice has been done.  But the rival mother has yet a hope—the 
appointed heir may die.  Then the seraglio becomes a nursery of treason; 
the harem administration is stirred by dark whispers; the cabinet of 
women and eunuchs is cajoled and bribed.  A crime is committed and is 
revenged.  The whole palace smells of blood.  The king trembles on his 
throne.  He himself is never safe; he is always encircled by soldiers; he 
never sleeps twice in the same place; his dinner is served in sealed trays; 
a man stands at his left hand who tastes from the cup before he dares to 
raise it to his lips.

The satrap form of government is far superior to that of vassal kings.  As 
long as the system of inspection is kept up there is no comparison 
between the two.  But if once the satrapies are allowed to become 
hereditary there is no difference between the two.  In the latter days of the 
Persian empire the satraps were no longer supervised by royal visitors 
and clerks of the accounts.  Each of these viceroys had his bodyguard of 
Persians and his army of mercenary Greeks.  Sometimes they fought 
against each other; sometimes they even contested for the throne.  As for 
the subject nations, they were by no means idle; revolts broke out in all 
directions.  Egypt enjoyed a long interlude of independence, though 
afterwards she was again reduced to servitude.  The Indians appear to 
have shaken themselves free, and to have attained the position of allies.  
Many provinces still recognised the emperor as their suzerain and lord, 
but did not pay him any tribute.  When he travelled from Susa to 
Persepolis he had to go through a rocky pass where he paid a toll.  The 
King of Persia could not enter Persia proper without buying the 
permission of a little shepherd tribe.

A remarkable event now occurred. A pretender to the throne hired a 
Greek army, led it to Babylon, and defeated the Great King at the gates of 
his palace.  The empire was won, but the pretender had fallen in the 
battle; his Persian adherents went over to the other side; the Greeks were 
left without a commander and without a cause.  They were in the heart of 
Asia, cut off from their home by swift streaming rivers and burning plains 
of sand.  They were only then thousand strong, yet in spite of their 
desperate condition they cut their way back to the sea.  That glorious 
victory, that still more glorious retreat, exposed the true state of affairs to 
public view, and it became known all over Greece that the Persian empire 
could be overcome.

But Greece unhappily was subject to vices and abuses of its own, and was 
not in a position to take advantage of the weakness of its neighbour.

The intellectual achievements of the Greeks have been magnificently 
praised.  And when we consider what the world was when they found it, 
and what it was when they left it, when we review their productions in 
connection with the time and the circumstances under which they were 
composed, we are forced to acknowledge that it would be difficult to 
exaggerate their excellence.  But the splendour of their just renown must 
not blind us to their moral defects, and to their exceeding narrowness as 
politicians.

In the arts and letters they were one nation, and their jealousy of one 
another only served to stimulate their inventiveness and industry.  But in 
politics this envious spirit had a very different effect; it divided them, it 
weakened them; the Ionian cities were enslaved again and again because 
they could not combine.  And one reason of their not being able to 
combine was this: they never trusted one another.  It was their inveterate 
dishonesty, their want of faith, their disregards for the sanctity of oaths, 
their hankering after money, which had much to do with their disunion 
even in the face of danger.  There are some  who desire to persuade us 
that the Greeks whom the Romans described were entirely a different 
race from the Greeks of the Persian wars.  But an unprejudiced study of 
original authorities gives no support to such a theory. From the pirates to 
the orators, from the heroic and treacherous Ulysses to the patriotic and 
venal Demosthenes, we find almost all their best men tainted with the 
same disease.  Polybius complains that the Greek statesmen would never 
keep their hands out of the till. In Xenophon’s Retreat of the Ten 
Thousand a little banter is exchanged between a Spartan and an Athenian 
which illustrates the state of public opinion in Greece.  They have come 
to a country where it is necessary to rob the natives in order to provide 
themselves with food.  The Athenian says that, as the Spartans are taught 
to steal, now is the time for them to show that they have profited by their 
education.  The Spartan replies that the Athenians will no doubt be able to 
do their share, as the Athenians appoint their best men to govern the state, 
and their best men are invariably thieves.  The same kind of pleasantry, 
no doubt, goes on in Greece at the present day; to rob a foreigner in the 
mountains, or to filch the money from the public chest, are looked upon 
in that country as “little affairs” which are not disgraceful so long as they 
are not found out.  But the modern Greeks are degenerate in every way.  
The ancient Greeks surpassed them not only in sculpture and in 
metaphysics but also in duplicity.  With their fine phrases and rhetorical 
expressions, they have even swindled history, and obtained a vast amount 
of admiration under false pretences.

The narrowness of the Greeks was not less strongly marked.  When 
Athens obtained the supremacy a wise and just policy might have formed 
the Greeks into a nation.  But Pericles had no sympathies beyond the city 
walls: he was a good Athenian but a bad Greek.  He removed the federal 
treasury from Delphi to Athens, where it was speedily emptied on the 
public works.  Since Athens had now become the university and capital 
of Greece, it appears not unjust that it should have been beautiful at the 
expense of Greece.  But it must be remembered that the Athenians 
considered themselves the only pure Greeks, and no Athenian was 
allowed to marry a Greek who was not also an Athenian.  Heavy taxes 
were laid on the allies, and were not spent entirely on works of art.  
Besides the money that was purloined by government officials, large 
sums were distributed among the citizens of Athens as payment for 
attending the law courts, the parliament, and the theatre.  It was also 
ordered that all cases of importance would be tried at Athens, and judicial 
decisions then as now were looked upon at Athens as saleable articles 
belonging to the court.  The Greeks soon discovered that the Athenians 
were harder masters than the Persians.  They began to envy the fate of the 
Ionian cities, whose municipal rights were undisturbed.  They rose up 
against their tyrant; long wars ensued; and finally the ships of Athens 
were burnt and its walls beaten down to the music of flutes.  Then Sparta 
became supreme, also tyrannised, and also fell; and then Thebes followed 
its example, till at last all the states of Greece were so exhausted that the 
ambition of supremacy died away, and each city cared only for its own 
life.

The jealousy and distrust which prevented the union of the Greeks, and 
the constant wars in which they were engaged, sufficiently explain how it 
was that they did not conquer Persian, and by this time Persia had 
discovered how to conquer them.  When Xerxes was on his famous 
march he was told by a Greek that if he chose to bribe the orators of 
Greece he could do with that country what he pleased, but that he would 
never conquer it by force.  This method of making war was now adopted 
by the king.  When Agesilaus the Spartan had already begun the conquest 
of the Persian empire, ten thousand golden coins marked with the effigy 
of a bowman were sent to the demagogues of Athens, Corinth, and 
Thebes.  Those cities at once made war upon Sparta, and Agesilaus was 
recalled—driven out of Asia, as he used to say, by ten thousand of the 
king’s archers.  In this manner the Greek orators, who were often very 
eloquent men but who never refused a bribe, kept their country 
continually at war, till at last it was in such an enfeebled state that the 
Persian had no longer anything to fear, and even used his influence in 
making peace.  The land which might have been the mistress of the East 
passed under the protection of an empire in its decay.

It was now that a new power sprang into life.  Macedonia was a hilly 
country on the northern boundaries of Greece; a Greek colony having 
settled there in ancient times, the reigning house and the language of the 
courts were Hellenic; the mass of the people were barbarians.  It was an 
old head placed on young shoulders—the intellect of the Greek united 
with the strength and sinews of wild and courageous mountaineers.

The celebrated Philip, when a young man, had passed some time in 
Greece; he had seen what could be done with money in that country; he 
conjectured what might be done if the money were sustained by arms.  
When he became king of Macedon, he made himself president of the 
Greek confederation, obtaining by force and skilful address, by bribery 
and intrigue, the position which Athens and Sparta had once possessed.  
He was preparing to conquer Persia and to avenge the ancient wrongs of 
Greece when he was murdered, and Alexander, like Frederick the Great, 
inherited an army disciplined to perfection and the great design for which 
that army had been prepared.

Alexander reduced and garrisoned the rebellious Greeks, passed over into 
Asia Minor, defeated a Persian army at the Granicus, marched along the 
Ionian coast, and crossed over the snowy range of Taurus, which the 
Persians neglected to defend.  He heard that the Great King was behind 
him with his army entangled in the mountains.  He went back, won the 
battle of Issus, and took prisoner the mother and wife and daughter of 
Darius.  He passed into Syria and laid siege to Tyre, the Cherbourg of the 
Persians, and took it after several months; this gave him possession of the 
Mediterranean Sea.  He passed down the Syrian coast, crossed the 
desert—a three days’ journey—which separates Palestine from Egypt, 
received the submission of that satrapy and made arrangements for its 
administration, visited the oracle of Jupiter Ammon in The Sahara, and 
returned to Tyre.  Thence making a long detour to avoid the sandy deserts 
of Arabia, he entered the plains of Mesopotami, inhabited only by the 
ostrich and the wild ass, and marched towards the ruins of Nineveh, near 
which he fought his third and last great battle with the Persians. He 
proceeded to Babylon, which at once opened its vast gates.  He restored 
the Chaldean priesthood and the old idolatry of Belus.  He took Susa, 
Ecbatana, and Persepolis, the other three palatial cities, reducing the 
highlanders who had so long levied black mail on the Persian monarchs.  
He pursued Darius to the moist, forest-covered shores of the Caspian Sea, 
and inflicted a terrible death on the assassins of that ill-fated king.  The 
Persian histories relate that Alexander discovered Darius apparently dead 
upon the ground.  He alighted from his horse; he raised his enemy’s head 
upon his knees; he shed tears and kissed the expiring monarch who 
opened his eyes and said, “The world has a thousand doors through which 
its tenants continually enter and pass away.”  “I swear to you,” cried 
Alexander, “ I never wished a day like this.  I desired not to see your 
royal head in the dust, nor that blood should stain these cheeks.”  The 
legend is a fiction, but it illustrates the character of Alexander.  Such 
legends are not related of Genghis Khan or of Tamerlane by the people 
whom they conquered. 

Alexander now marched by way of Mushed, Herat, and the reedy shores 
of Lake Zurrah to Kandahar and Kabul.  He entered that delightful land in 
which the magpies fluttering from tree to tree, and the white daisies 
shining in the meadow grass, reminded the soldiers of their home.  
Turning again towards the north, he climbed over the lofty back of the 
Hindu Kush, where the people are kept inside their houses half the year 
by snow, and descended into the province of Bactria, a land of low, 
waving hills, destitute of trees and covered only with a dry kind of grass.  
But as he passed on, crossing the muddy waters of the Oxus, he arrived at 
the oases of Bokhara and Samarkand, regions of garden-land with smiling 
orchards of fruit trees and poplars rustling their silvery leaves.  Finally he 
reached the banks of the Jaxartes, the frontier of the Persian empire.  
Beyond that river was an ocean of salt and sandy plains, inhabited by 
wild Tartar or Turkish tribes who boasted that they reposed beneath the 
shade neither of a tree nor of a king, who lived by rapine like beasts of 
prey, and whose wives rode forth to attack a passing caravan if their 
husbands happened to be robbing elsewhere—a practice which gave rise 
to the romantic stories of the Amazons.  These people came down to the 
banks of the river near Khojend and challenged Alexander to come across 
and fight.  He inflated the soldiers’ tents, which were made of skins, 
formed them into rafts, paddled across and gave the Tartars as much as 
they desired.  He returned to Afghanistan and marched through the 
western passes into the open plains of the Punjab, where perhaps at some 
future day hordes of drilled Mongols and Hindu sepoys will fight under 
Russian and English officers for the empire of the Asiatic world.  He built 
a fleet on the Indus, sailed down it to its mouth, and dispatched his 
general Nearchus to the Persian Gulf by sea, while he himself marched 
back through the terrific deserts which separate Persian from the Indus.

So ended Alexander’s journey of conquest, which was marked not only 
by heaps of bones on battlefields and by the blackened ashes of ruined 
towns, but also by cities and colonies which he planted as he passed. The 
memory of that extraordinary man has never perished in the East.  The 
Turkomans still speak of his deeds of war as if they had been performed a 
few years ago.  In the tea booths of Bokhara it is yet the custom to read 
aloud the biography in verse of Secunder Rooni—by some believed to be 
a prophet, by others one of the believing genii.  There are still existing 
chiefs in the valleys of the Oxus and the Indus who claim to be heirs of 
his royal person, and tribes who boast that their ancestors were soldiers of 
his army, and who refuse to give their children in marriage to those who 
are not of the same descent.

He returned to Babylon, and there found ambassadors from all parts of 
the world waiting to offer him the homage of their masters.  His success 
was incredible; it had not met with a single check.  The only men who 
had ever given him cause to be alarmed were his own countrymen and 
soldiers, but these also he had mastered by his skill and strength of mind.

The Macedonians had expected that he would adhere to the constitution 
and customs of their own country, which gave the king small power in 
time of peace and allowed full liberty and even licence of speech on the 
part of the nobles round the throne.  But Alexander now considered 
himself not king of Macedonia but emperor of Asia, and successor of 
Darius, the King of Kings.  They had supposed that he would give them 
the continent to plunder as a carcass; that they would have nothing to do 
but plunder and enjoy.  There were disappointed and alarmed when they 
found that he was reappointing Persian gentlemen as satraps, everywhere 
treating the conquered people with indulgence, everywhere levying native 
troops.  They were disgusted and alarmed when they saw him put on the 
tiara of the Great King, and the woman’s girdle, and the white and purple 
robe, and they burst into fierce wrath when he ordered that the ceremony 
of prostration should be performed in his presence as it had been in that 
of the Persian king.

In all this they saw only the presumption of a man intoxicated by success.  
But Alexander knew well that he could only govern an empire so 
immense by securing the allegiance of the Persian nobles; he knew that 
they would not respect him unless they were made to humble themselves 
before him after the manner of their country, and this they certainly 
would not do unless his own officers did the same.  He therefore 
attempted to obtain the prostration of the Macedonians, and alleged as a 
pretext for so extraordinary a demand the oracle of Ammon—that he was 
the son of Jove.

It is possible, indeed, that he believed this himself, for his vanity 
amounted to madness.  He could not endure a candid word, and was 
subject under wine and contradiction to fits of ungovernable rage.  At 
Samarkand he murdered Clitus, who had insulted him grossly but who 
was his friend and associate, and who had saved his life.  It was a 
drunken action, and his repentance was as violent as his wrath.  For 
Alexander was a man of extremes: his magnanimity and his cruelty were 
without bounds.  If he forgave it was right royally; if he punished he 
pounded to the dust and scattered to the winds.  Yet with all his faults it is 
certain that he had some conception of the art of governing a great 
empire.  Mr. Grote complains that “he had none of that sense of 
correlative right and obligation which characterised the free Greeks,” but 
Mr. Grote describes Alexander too much from the Athenian point of 
view.  In all municipalities, in all aristocratic bodies, in all corporate 
assemblies, in all robber communities, in all savage families or clans, the 
privileged members have a sense of correlative right and obligation.  The 
real question is, how far and to what extent this feeling prevails outside 
the little circle of selfish reciprocity and mutual admiration.  The 
Athenians did not include their slaves in their ideas of correlative right 
and obligation; nor their prisoners of war, when they passed a public 
decree to cut off all their thumbs, so that they might not be able to handle 
the pike, but might still be able to handle the oar; nor their allies, when 
they took their money and spent it all upon themselves.  Alexander 
committed some criminal and despotic acts, but it was his noble idea to 
blot out the word “barbarian” from the vocabulary of the Greeks, and to 
amalgamate them with the Persians.

Mr Grote declares that Alexander intended to make Greece Persian, not 
Persia Greek.  Alexander certainly intended to make Greece a satrapy, as 
it was afterwards made a Roman province.  And where would have been 
the loss?  The independence of the various Greek cities had at one time 
assisted the progress of the nation.  But that time was past.  Of late they 
had made use of their freedom only to indulge in civil war.  All that was 
worthy of being preserved in Greece was its language and its culture, and 
to that Alexander was not indifferent.  He sent thirty thousand Persian 
boys to school, and so laid the foundations of the sovereignty of Greek 
ideas.  He behaved towards the conquered people not as a robber but as a 
sovereign.  The wisdom of his policy is clearly proved by the praises of 
the Oriental writers and by the blame of the Greeks, who looked upon 
barbarians as a people destined by nature to be slaves.  But had Alexander 
governed Persia as they desired, the land would have been in a continual 
state of insurrection, and it would have been impossible for him, even had 
he lived, to have undertaken new designs.

The story that he wept because there were no more worlds for him to 
conquer would seem to imply that after the conquest of the Persian 
empire there was nothing left for him in the way of war but to go out 
savage-hunting in the forests of Europe, the steppes of Tartary, or the 
deserts of Central Africa.  However, there still remained a number of 
powerful and attractive states, even if we place China entirely aside as a 
land which could not be touched by the stream of events, however widely 
they might overflow.

Alexander no doubt often reflected to himself that after all he had only 
walked in the footsteps of other men.  It was the genius of his father 
which had given him possession of Greece; it was the genius of the 
Persians which had planted the Asia that he had gathered.  It is true that 
he had conquered the Persian empire more thoroughly than the Persians 
had ever been able to conquer it themselves.  He had not left behind him a 
single rock fortress or forest den uncarried, a single tribe untamed.  Yet 
still he had not been able to pass the frontiers which they had fixed.  He 
had once attempted to do so and had failed.  When he had reached the 
eastern river of the Punjab, or “Land of the Five Streams,” he stood on 
the brink of the empire with the Himalayas on his left and before him a 
wide expanse of sand.  Beyond that desert was a country which the 
Persians had never reached.  There a river as mighty as the Indus took its 
course towards the sea through a land of surpassing beauty and enormous 
wealth.  There ruled a king who rode on a white elephant, and who wore 
a mail coat composed entirely of precious stone; whose wives slept on a 
thousand silken mattresses and a thousand golden beds.  The imagination 
of Alexander was inflamed by these glowing tales.  He yearned to 
discover a new world, to descend upon a distant and unknown people like 
a god, to enter the land of diamonds and rubies, of gleaming and 
transparent robes—the India of the Indies, the romantic, and half-
fabulous Bengal.  But the soldiers were weary of collecting plunder 
which they could not carry, and refused to march.  Alexander spent three 
days in his tent in an agony of anger and distress.  He established 
garrisons on the banks of the Indus; there could be little doubt that some 
day or other he would resume his lost design.

There was one country which had sent him no ambassadors.  It was 
Arabia Felix, situated at the mouth of the Red Sea, abounding in forests 
of those tearful trees which shed a yellow, fragrant gum grateful to the 
gods, burnt in their honour on all the altars of the world.  Arabia was also 
enriched by the monopoly of the trade between Egypt and the coast of 
Malabar.  It was filled with rich cities.  It had never paid tribute to the 
Persians.  On the land side it was protected by deserts and by wandering 
hordes who drank from hidden wells.  But it could easily be approached 
by sea.

On the opposite side of the Arabian gulf lay Ethiopia, reputed to be the 
native land of gold, but chiefly attractive to a vain-glorious and emulative 
man from the fact that a Persian emperor had attempted its conquest and 
had failed.  There was also Carthage, the great republic of the West, and 
there were rich silver-mines in Spain.

And can it be supposed that Alexander would remain content when he 
had not yet made the circuit of the Grecian world?  Was there not Sicily, 
which Athens had attempted to conquer, and in vain?  Rome had not yet 
become great, but the Italian city-states were already famed in war.  
Alexander’s uncle had invaded that country and had been beaten back.  
He declared that Alexander had fallen on the chamber of the women and 
he on the changer of the men.  This sarcasm followed the conqueror into 
Central Asia, and was flung in his teeth by Clitus on that night of 
drunkenness and blood, every incident of which must have been 
continually present to his mind.

We might therefore fairly infer, even if we had no evidence to guide us, 
that Alexander did not consider his career accomplished.  But in point of 
fact we do know that he had given orders to fit out a thousand ships-of-
war; that he intended one fleet to attack Arabia from the Mediterranean 
Sea.  He had already arranged a plan for connecting Egypt with his North 
African possession that were to be, and had he lived a few years longer 
the features of the world might have been changed.  The Italians were 
unconquerable if united, but there was at that time no supreme city to 
unite them as they were afterwards united against Pyrrhus.  It is at least 
not impossible that Alexander might have conquered Italy; that the 
peninsula might have become a land of independent cultivated cities like 
the Venice and Genoa and Florence of the Middle Ages; that Greek might 
have been established as the reigning language, and Latin remained a 
rustic dialect and finally died away.  It is at all events certain that in a few 
more years Alexander would have made Carthage Greek, and that event 
alone would have profoundly influenced the career of Rome.

However, this was not to be.  Alexander went out in a boat among the 
marshes in the neighbourhood of Babylon and caught a fever, the first 
symptoms of which appeared after a banquet which had been kept up all 
the night and the whole of the following day.  At that time the Arabian 
expedition was prepared, and Nearchus the admiral was under sailing 
orders.  Day after day the king continued to send for his officers to give 
orders, and to converse about his future plans.  But the fever gradually 
increased, and while yet in the possession of his sense he was deprived of 
the power of speech.  The physicians announced that there was no longer 
any hope.

And then were forgotten all the crimes and follies of which he had been 
guilty—his assumption of the honours of a god, the murder of his bosom 
friend.  The Macedonian soldiers came in to him weeping to bid him the 
last farewell.  He sat up and saluted them man by man as they marched 
past his bedside.  When this last duty had been discharged he threw back 
his weary frame.  He expired on the evening of the next day.

The night, the dark, murky night, came on.  None dared light a lamp; the 
fires were extinguished.  By the glimmering of the stars and the faint 
beams of the horned moon the young nobles of the household were seen 
wandering like maniacs through the town.  On the roofs of their houses 
the Babylonians stood grave and silent, with folded hands and eyes turned 
towards heaven as if awaiting a supernatural event.  High aloft in the air 
the trees of the hanging gardens waved their moaning boughs, and the 
daughters of Babylon sang the dirge of the dead.  In that sorrowful hour 
the conquerors could not be distinguished from the conquered; the 
Persians lamented their just and merciful master; the Macedonians their 
greatest, bravest king.  In an apartment of the palace an aged woman was 
lying on the ground; her hair was torn and dishevelled; a golden crown 
had fallen from her head.  “Ah! Who will now protect my girls?” she 
said.  Then, veiling her face and turning from her grand-daughters, who 
wept at her feet, she stubbornly refused both food and light.  She who had 
survived Darius was unable to survive Alexander.  In famine and 
darkness she sat, and on the fifth day she died.

Alexander’s body lay cold and stiff.  The Egyptian and Chaldean 
embalmers were commanded to do their work.  Yet long they gazed upon 
that awful corpse before they could venture to touch it with their hands.  
Placed in a golden coffin, shrouded in a bed of fragrant herbs, it remained 
two years at Babylon, and was then carried to Egypt to be buried in the 
oasis of Ammon.  But Ptolemy stopped it on the road, and interred it at 
Alexandria in a magnificent temple, which he built for the purpose and 
surrounded with groves for the celebration of funereal rites and military 
games.  Long afterwards, when the dominion of the Macedonians had 
passed away, there came Roman emperors who gazed upon that tomb 
with reverence and awe.  The golden coffin had been sold by a degenerate 
Ptolemy, and had been changed for one of glass through which the body 
could be seen.  Augustus placed upon it a nosegay and crown.  Septimus 
Severus had the coffin sealed up in a vault.  Then came the savage 
Caracalla, who had massacred half Alexandria because he did not like the 
town.  He ordered the vault to be opened and the coffin to be exposed, 
and all feared that some act of sacrilege would be committed.  But those 
august remains could touch the better feelings which existed even in a 
monster’s heart.  He took off his purple robe, his imperial ornaments, all 
that he had of value on his person, and laid them reverently upon the 
tomb.

The empire of Alexander was partitioned into three great kingdoms—that 
of Egypt and Cyrene, that of Macedonia, including Greece, and that of 
Asia, the capital of which was at first on the banks of the Euphrates, but 
was afterwards unwisely transferred to Antioch.  In these three kingdoms, 
and in their numerous dependencies, Greek became the language of 
government and trade.  It was spoken all over the world—on the shores of 
Malabar, in the harbours of Ceylon, among the Abyssinian mountains, in 
distant Mozambique.  The shepherds of the Tartar steppes loved to listen 
to recitations of Greek poetry, and Greek tragedies were performed to 
Brahmin ”houses” by the waters of the Indus.  The history of the Greeks 
of Inner Asia, however soon comes to an end.  Sandracottus, the Rajah of 
Bengal, conquered the Greek province of the Punjab.  The rise of the 
Parthian power cut off the Greek kingdom of Bokhara from the Western 
world, and it was destroyed, according to the Chinese historians, by a 
powerful horde of Tartars a hundred and thirty years after its foundation.

We can now return to African soil, and we find that a city of 
incomparable splendour has arisen, founded by Alexander and bearing his 
name.  For as he was on his way to the oasis of Ammon, travelling along 
the seacoast, he came to a place a little west of the Nile’s mouth where an 
island close to the shore, and the peculiar formation of the land, formed a 
natural harbour, while a little way inland was a large lagoon 
communicating with the Nile.  A few houses were scattered about, and 
this, he was told, was the village of Rhacotis, where in the old days the 
Pharaohs stationed a garrison to prevent the Greek pirates from coming 
on shore.  He saw that the spot was well adapted for a city, and with his 
usual impetuosity went to work at once to mark it out.  When he returned 
from the oasis the building of the city had begun, and in a few years it 
had become the residence of Ptolemy and the capital of Egypt.  It filled 
up the space between the sea and the lagoon.  On the one side its harbour 
was filled with ships which came from Italy and Greece and the lands of 
the Atlantic with amber, timber, tin, wine, and oil.  On the other side were 
the cargo boats that came from the Nile with the precious stones, the 
spices, and the beautiful fabrics of the East.  The island on which stood 
the famous lighthouse was connected with the mainland by means of a 
gigantic mole furnished with drawbridges and forts.  It is on this mole 
that the modern city stands—the site of the old Alexandria is sand.

When Ptolemy the First, one of Alexander’s generals, mounted the throne 
he applied himself with much caution and dexterity to that difficult 
problem the government of Egypt.  Had the Greeks been the first 
conquerors of the country, it is doubtful whether the wisest policy would 
have kept its natives quiet and content.  For they were like the Jews, a 
proud, ignorant, narrow-minded, religious race who looked upon 
themselves as the chosen people of the gods, and upon all foreigners as 
unclean things.  But they had been taught wisdom by misfortune; they 
had felt the bitterness of an Oriental yoke; the feet of the Persians had 
been placed upon their necks.  On the other hand, the Greeks had lived 
for centuries among them, and had assisted them in all their revolts 
against the Persian king.  During their interlude of independence the 
towns had been garrisoned partly by Egyptian and partly by Greek 
soldiers: the two nations had grown accustomed to each other.  Persia had 
finally re-enslaved them, and Alexander had been welcomed as the 
saviour of their country.  The golden chain of the Pharaohs was broken.  
It was impossible to restore the line of ancient kings.  The Egyptians 
therefore cheerfully submitted to the Ptolemies, who reciprocated this 
kindly feeling to the full.  They patronised the Egyptian religion, they 
built many temples in the ancient style, they went to the city of Memphis 
to be crowned, they sacrificed to the Nile at the rising of the waters, and 
they assumed the divine titles of the Pharaohs.  The priests were content, 
and in Egypt the people were always guided by the priests.  The Rosetta 
Stone, that remarkable monument which, with its inscription in Greek, in 
the Egyptian vernacular, and in the sacred hieroglyphics, has afforded the 
means of deciphering the mysterious language of the Nile, was a 
memorial of gratitude from the Egyptian priests to a Greek king, to whom 
in return for favours conferred they erected an image and a golden shrine. 

But while the Ptolemies were Pharaohs to the Egyptians, they were 
Greeks to the colonists of Alexandria, and they founded or favoured that 
school of thought upon which modern science is established.

There is a great enterprise in which men have always been unconsciously 
engaged, but which they will pursue with method as a vocation and an 
art, and which they will devoutly adopt as a religious faith as soon as they 
realise its glory.  It is the conquest of the planet on which we dwell, the 
destruction or domestication of the savage forces by which we are 
tormented and enslaved.  An episode of this war occurring in ancient 
Egypt has been described; the war itself began with the rise of our 
ancestors into the human state, and when, drawing fire from wood or 
stone, they made it serve them night and day the first great victory was 
won.  But we can conquer Nature only by obeying her laws, and in order 
to obey those laws we must first learn what they are.

Storms and tides, thunder and lightning and eclipse, the movements of the 
heavenly bodies, the changing aspects of the earth, were among all 
ancient people regarded as divine phenomena.  In the Greek world there 
was no despotic caste, but the people clung fondly to their faith, and the 
study of Nature which began in Ionia was at first regarded with 
abhorrence and dismay.  The popular religion was supported by the 
genius of Homer.  The Iliad and the Odyssey were regarded not only as 
epic poems but as sacred writ; even the geography had been inspired.  
However, when the Greeks began to travel the old legends could no 
longer be received.  It was soon discovered that the places visited by 
Ulysses did not exist, that there was no River Ocean which ran round the 
earth, and that the earth was not shaped like a round saucer with the 
oracle of Delphi in its centre.  The Egyptians laughed in the faces of the 
Greeks, and called them children when they talked of their gods of 
yesterday, and so well did their pupils profit by their lesson that they soon 
laughed at the Egyptians for believing in the gods at all.  Xenophanes 
declaimed against the Egyptian myth of an earth-walking, dying 
resuscitated god.  He said that if Osiris was a man they should not 
worship him, and that if he was a god they need not lament his sufferings.  
This remarkable man was the Voltaire of Greece; there had been 
free-thinkers before his time, but they had reserved their opinions for 
their disciples.

Xenophanes declared that the truth should be made known to all.  He 
lived, like Voltaire, to a great age; he poured forth a multitude of 
controversial works; he made it his business to attack Homer, and reviled 
him bitterly for having endowed the gods of his poems with the passions 
and propensities of men; he denied the old theory of the Golden Age, and 
maintained that civilisation was the work of time and of man’s own toil.  
His views were no doubt distasteful to the vulgar crowd by whom he was 
surrounded, and even to cultivated and imaginative minds which were 
sunk in sentimental idolatry, blinded by the splendour of the Homeric 
poems.  He was, however, in no way interfered with; religious 
persecution was unknown in the Greek world except at Athens.  In that 
city free thought was especially unpopular because it was imported from 
abroad.  It was the doctrine of those talented Ionians who streamed into 
Athens after the Persian wars.  When one of these philosophers 
announced, in his open-air sermon in the market-place, that the sun which 
the common people believed to be alive—the bountiful god Helios which 
shone both on mortals and immortals—was nothing but a mass of red-hot 
iron; when he declared that those celestial spirits the stars were only 
revolving stones; when he asserted that Jupiter, and Venus and Apollo, 
Mars, Juno, and Minerva, were mere creatures of the poet’s fancy, and 
that if they really existed they ought to be despised; when he said that 
over all there reigned, not blind Fate, but a supreme, all seeing Mind, 
great wrath was excited among the people.  A prophet went about uttering 
oracles in a shrill voice, and procured the passing of a decree that all who 
denied the religion of the city or who philosophised in matters 
appertaining to the gods should be indicted as state criminals.  This law 
was soon put in force.  Damon and Anaxagoras were banished; Aspasia 
was impeached for blasphemy, and the tears of Pericles alone saved her; 
Socrates was put to death; Plato was obliged to reserve pure reason for a 
chosen few, and to adulterate it with revelation for the generality of his 
disciples; Aristotle fled from Athens for his life, and became the tutor of 
Alexander.

Alexander had a passion for the Iliad.  His edition had been corrected by 
Aristotle; he kept it in a precious casket which he had taken from the 
Persian King, and it was afterwards known as the “edition of the casket.”  
When he invaded Asia he landed on the plains of Troy, that he might see 
the ruins of that celebrated town and hang a garland upon the tomb of 
Achilles.  But it was not poetry alone that he esteemed; he had imbibed 
his master’s universal tastes.  When staying at Ephesus he used to spend 
hours in the studio of Apelles, sitting down among the boys who ground 
colours for the great painter.  He delighted in everything that was new 
and rare.  He invented exploration.  He gave a large sum of money to 
Aristotle to assist him in composing the history of animals, and employed 
a number of men to collect for him in Asia.  He sent him a copy of the 
astronomical records of the Babylonians, although by that time they had 
quarrelled—like Dionysius and Plato, Frederick and Voltaire.  It is taken 
for granted that Alexander was the one to blame, as if philosophers were 
immaculate and private tutors never in the wrong.

The Ptolemies were not unworthy followers of Alexander.  They 
established the Museum, which was a kind of college, with a hall where 
the professors dined together, with corridors for promenading lectures, 
and a theatre for scholastic festivals and public disputation.  Attached to it 
also was the Botanical Garden, filled with medicinal and exotic plants; a 
menagerie of wild beasts and rare birds; and the famous Library, where 
700,000 volumes were arranged on cedar shelves, and where hundreds of 
clerks were continually at work copying from scroll to scroll, gluing the 
separate strips of papyrus together, smoothing with pumice-stone and 
blackening the edges, writing the titles on red labels, and fastening ivory 
tops on the sticks round which the rolls were wrapped.

All the eminent men of the day were invited to take up their abode at the 
Museum, and persons were dispatched into all countries to collect books.  
It was dangerous to bring original manuscripts into Egypt—they were at 
once seized and copied, the originals being retained.  The city of Athens 
lent the autograph editions of its dramatists to one of the Ptolemies, and 
saw them no more.  It was even said that philosophers were sometimes 
detained in the same manner.

Soon after the wars of Alexander, the “barbarians” were seized with a 
desire to make known to their conquerors the history of their native lands.  
Berosus, a priest of Babylon, compiled a history of Chaldea; Menander, 
and Phoenician, a history of Tyre; and Manetho wrote in Greek, but from 
Egyptian sources, a history which Egyptology has confirmed.  It was at 
the Museum also that the Old Testament was translated under royal 
patronage into Greek, and at the same time the Zoroastrian Bible or Zend-
Avesta.

There was some good work done at the Museum.  Among works of 
imagination the pastorals of Theocritus have alone obtained the 
approbation of posterity.  But it was in Alexandria that the immortal 
works of the preceding ages were edited and arranged, and it was there 
that language was first studied for itself, and that lexicons and grammars 
were first compiled.  It was only in the Museum that anatomists could 
sometimes obtain the corpse of a criminal to dissect; elsewhere they were 
forced to content themselves with monkeys.  There Eratosthenes, the 
“Inspector of the Earth,” elevated geography to a science, and Euclid 
produced that work which, as Macaulay would say, “every schoolboy 
knows.”  There the stars were carefully catalogued and mapped, and 
chemical experiments were made.  Expeditions were sent to Abyssinia to 
ascertain the cause of the inundation of the Nile.  The Greek intellect had 
hitherto despised the realities of life: it had been considered by Plato 
unworthy of a mathematician to apply his knowledge to so vulgar a 
business as mechanics.  But this notion was corrected at Alexandria by 
the practical tendencies of Egyptian science.  The Suez Canal was 
reopened, and Archimedes taught the Alexandrians to apply his famous 
screw to the irrigation of their fields.  These Egyptian pumps, as they 
were then called, were afterwards used by the Romans to pump out the 
water from their silver-mines in Spain. 

No doubt most of the Museum professors were pitiful “Graeculi”—
narrow-minded pedants such as are always to be found where patronage 
exists, parasites of great libraries who spend their lives in learning the 
wrong things.  No doubt much of the astronomy was astrological, much 
of the medicine was magical, much of the geography was mythical, and 
much of the chemistry was alchemical—for they had already begun to 
attempt the transmutation of metals and to search for the elixir vitae and 
the philosopher’s stone.  No doubt physics were much too metaphysical, 
in spite of the example which Aristotle had given of founding philosophy 
on experiment and fact; and the alliance between science and labour, 
which is the true secret of modern civilisation, could be but faintly carried 
out in a land which was under the fatal ban of slavery.  Yet with all this it 
should be remembered that from Alexandria came the science which the 
Arabs restored to Europe, with some additions, after the Crusades.  It was 
in Alexandria that were composed those works which enabled Copernicus 
to lay the keystone of astronomy, and which emboldened Columbus to 
sail across the Western seas.

The history of the nation under the Ptolemies resembles its history under 
the Phil-Hellenes, Egypt and Asia were again rivals, and again contested 
for the vineyards of Palestine and the forests of Lebanon.  Alexander had 
organised a brigade of elephants for his army of the Indus, and these 
animals were afterwards invariably used by the Greeks in war.  Pyrrhus 
took them to Italy, and the Carthaginians adopted the idea from him.  The 
elephants of the Asiatic Greeks were brought from Hindustan.  The 
Ptolemies, like the Carthaginians, had elephant forests at their own doors.  
Shooting-boxes were built on the shores of the Red Sea: elephant hunting 
became a royal sport.  The younger members of the herd were entrapped 
in large pits, or driven into enclosures cunningly contrived; were then 
tamed by starvation, shipped off to Egypt, and drilled into beasts of war.  
On the field of battle the African elephants, distinguished by their huge, 
flapping ears and their convex brows, fought against the elephants of 
India, twisting their trunks together and endeavouring to gore one another 
with their tusks.  The Indian species is unanimously described as the 
larger animal and the better soldier of the two.

The third Ptolemy made two brilliant campaigns.  In one he overran 
Greek Asia and brought back the sacred images and vessels which had 
been carried off by the Persians centuries before; in the other he made an 
Abyssinian expedition resembling the achievement of Napier.  He landed 
his troops in Annesley Bay, which he selected as his base of operations, 
and completely subdued the mountaineers of the plateau, carrying the 
Egyptian arms, as he boasted, where the Pharaohs themselves had never 
been.  But the policy of the Ptolemies was on the whole a policy of peace.  
Their wars were chiefly waged for the purpose of obtaining timber for 
their fleet, and of keeping open their commercial routes.  They 
encouraged manufactures and trade, and it was afterwards observed that 
Alexandria was the most industrious city in the world.  “Idle people were 
there unknown.  Some were employed in the blowing of glass, others in 
the weaving of linen, others in the manufacture of the Papyrus.  Even the 
blind and the lame had occupations suited to their condition.”

The glorious reigns of the three first Ptolemies extended over nearly a 
century, and then Egypt began again to decline.  Such must always be the 
case where a despotic government prevails, and where everything 
depends on the taste and temper of a single man.  As long as a good king 
sits upon the throne all is well.  A gallant service, an intellectual 
production, merit of every kind is recognised at once.  Corrupt tax-
gatherers and judges are swiftly punished.  The enemies of the people are 
the enemies of the king.  His palace is a court of justice always open to 
his children; he will not refuse a petition from the meanest hand.  But 
sooner or later in the natural course of events the sceptre is handed to a 
weak and vicious prince, who empties the treasury of its accumulated 
wealth; who plunders the courtiers, allowing them to indemnify 
themselves at the expense of those that are beneath them; who dies, 
leaving behind him a legacy of wickedness which his successors are 
forced to accept.  Oppression has now become a custom, and custom is 
the tyrant of kings.  In Egypt the prosperity of the land depended entirely 
on the government.  Unless the public works were kept in good order half 
the land was wasted, half the revenue was lost, half the inhabitants 
perished of starvation.  But the dikes could not be repaired and the screw 
pumps could not be worked without expense, and so if the treasury was 
empty the inland revenue ceased to flow in.  The king could still live in 
luxury on the receipts of the foreign trade, but the life of the people was 
devoured, and the ruin of the country was at hand.  The Ptolemies became 
invariably tyrants and debauchees—perhaps the incestuous marriages 
practised in that family had something to do with the degeneration of the 
race.  The Greeks of Alexandria became half Orientals, and were 
regarded by their brethren of Europe with aversion and contempt.  One by 
one the possessions of Egypt abroad were lost.  The condition of the land 
became deplorable.  The empire which had excited the envy of the world 
became deficient in agriculture, and was fed by foreign corn.  Alexandria 
glittered with wealth which it was no longer able to defend.  The Greeks 
of Asia began to fix their eyes on the corrupt and prostrate land.  Armies 
gathered on the horizon like dark clouds; then was seen the flashing of 
arms; then was heard the rattling of distant drums.

The reigning Ptolemy had but one resource.  In that same year a great 
battle had been fought, a great empire had fallen on the African soil.  For 
the first time in history the sun was seen rising in the West.  Towards the 
West ambassadors from Egypt went forth with silks and spices and 
precious stones.  They returned bringing with them an ivory chair, a 
course garment of purple, and a quantity of copper coin.  These humble 
presents were received in a delirium of joy.  The Roman senate accorded 
its protection, and Alexandria was saved.  But its independence was 
forfeited, its individuality became extinct.  Here endeth the history of 
Egypt.  Let us travel to another shore.

There was a time when the waters of the Mediterranean were silent and 
bare; when nothing disturbed the solitude of that blue and tideless sea but 
the weed which floated on its surface and the gull which touched it with 
its wing.

A tribe of Canaanites, or people of the plain, driven hard by their foes, 
fled over the Lebanon and took possession of a narrow strip of land shut 
off by itself between the mountains and the sea.

The agricultural resources of the little country were soon outgrown, and 
the Phoenicians were forced to gather a harvest from the water.  They 
invented the fishing-line and net, and when the fish could no longer be 
caught from the shore they had to follow them out to sea or starve.  They 
hollowed trunks of trees with axe and fire into canoes; they bound logs of 
wood together to form a raft, with a bush stuck in it for a sail.  The 
Lebanon mountains supplied them with timber; in time they discovered 
how to make boats with keels, and to sheathe them with copper, which 
also they found in their mountains.  From those heights of Lebanon the 
island of Cyprus could plainly be seen, and the current assisted them 
across.  They colonised the island; it supplied them with pitch, timber, 
copper, and hemp—everything that was required in the architecture of a 
ship.  With smacks and cutters they followed the tunny-fish in their 
migrations; they discovered villages on other coasts, pillaged them, and 
carried off their inhabitants as slaves.  Some of these, when they had 
learnt the language, offered to pay a ransom for their release; the 
arrangement was accomplished under oath, and presents as tokens of 
goodwill were afterwards exchanged.  Each party was pleased to obtain 
something which his own country did not produce, and thus arose a 
system of barter and exchange.

The Phoenicians from fishermen became pirates, and from pirates traders: 
from simple traders they became also manufacturers.  Purple was always 
the fashionable colour in the East, and they discovered two kinds of 
shell-fish which yielded a handsome dye.  One species was found on 
rocks, the other under water.  These shells they collected by means of 
divers and pointer dogs.  When the supply on their own coast was 
exhausted they obtained them from foreign coasts, and as the shell 
yielded but a small quantity of fluid, and therefore was inconvenient to 
transport, they preferred to extract the dyeing material on the spot where 
the shells were found.  This led to the establishment of factories abroad, 
and permanent settlements were made.  Obtaining wool from the Arabs 
and other shepherd tribes, they manufactured woven goods and dyed 
them with such skill that they found a ready market in Babylonia and 
Egypt.  In this manner they purchased from those countries the produce 
and manufactures of the East, and these they sold at a great profit to the 
inhabitants of Europe.

When they sailed along the shores of that savage continent and came to a 
place where they intended to trade, they lighted a fire to attract the 
natives, pitched tents on shore, and held a six days’ fair, exhibiting in 
their bazaar the toys and trinkets manufactured at Tyre expressly for their 
naked customers, with purple robes and works of art in tinted ivory and 
gold for those who, like the Greeks, were more advanced.  At the end of 
the week they went away, sometimes kidnapping a few women and 
children to “fill up”.  But in the best trading localities the factory system 
prevailed, and their establishments were planted in the Grecian 
Archipelago and in Greece itself, on the marshy shores of the Black Sea, 
in Italy, in Sicily, on the African coast and in Spain.

Then, becoming bolder and more skilful, they would no longer be 
imprisoned within the lake-like waters of the land-locked sea.  They 
sailed out through the Straits of Gibraltar and beheld the awful 
phenomenon of tides.  They sailed on the left hand to Morocco for ivory 
and gold dust, on the right hand for amber and tin to the ice-creeks of the 
Baltic and the foaming waters of the British Isles.  They also opened up 
an inland trade.  They were the first to overcome the exclusiveness of 
Egypt, and were permitted to settle in Memphis itself.  Their quarter was 
called the Syrian camp; it was built round a grove and chapel sacred to 
Astarte.  Their caravan routes extended in every direction towards the 
treasure countries of the East.  Wandering Arabs were their sailors, and 
camels were their ships.  They made voyages by sand, more dangerous 
than those by sea, to Babylon through Palmyra or Tadmor on the skirts of 
the desert; to Arabia Felix and the market city of Petra; and to Gerrha, a 
city built entirely of salt on the rainless shores of the Persian Gulf.

Phoenicia itself was a narrow, undulating plain about a hundred miles in 
length, and at the most not more than a morning’s ride in breadth.  It was 
walled in by the mountains on the north and east.  To those who sailed 
along its coast it appeared to be one great city interspersed with gardens 
and fields.  On the lower slopes of the hills beyond gleamed the green 
vineyard patches and the villas of the merchants.  The offing was 
whitened with sails, and in every harbour was a grove of masts.  But it 
was Tyre which of all the cities was the queen.  It covered an island 
which lay at anchor off the shore.  The Greek poet Nonnus has prettily 
described the mingling around it of the sylvan and marine.  “The sailor 
furrows the sea with his oar,” he says, “and the ploughman the soil; the 
lowing of oxen and the singing of birds answer the deep roar of the main; 
the wood nymph under the tall trees hears the voice of the sea-nymph 
calling to her from the waves; the breeze from the Lebanon, while it cools 
the rustic at his midday labour, speeds the mariner who is outward 
bound.” 

These Canaanitish men are fairly entitled to our gratitude and esteem, for 
they taught our intellectual ancestors to read and write.  Wherever a 
factory trade is carried on it is found convenient to employ natives as 
subordinate agents and clerks.  And thus it was that the Greeks received 
the rudiments of education.  That the alphabet was invented by the 
Phoenicians is improbable in the extreme, but it is certain that they 
introduced it into Europe.  They were intent only on making money, it is 
true; they were not a literary or artistic people; they spread knowledge by 
accident like birds dropping seeds.  But they were gallant, hardy, 
enterprising men.  Those were true heroes who first sailed through the 
sea-valley of Gibraltar into the vast ocean and breasted its enormous 
waves.  Their unceasing activity kept the world alive.  They offered to 
every country something which it did not possess.  They roused the 
savage Briton from his torpor with a rag of scarlet cloth, and stirred him 
to sweat in the dark bowels of the earth.  They brought to the satiated 
Indian prince the luscious wines of Syria and the Grecian amber-gatherers 
of the Baltic mud to the nutmeg-growers of the equatorial groves, from 
the mulberry plantations of the Celestial Empire to the tin-mines of 
Cornwall and the silver mines of Spain, emulation was excited, new 
wants were created, and whole nations were stimulated to industry by the 
agency of the Phoenicians.

Shipbuilding and navigation were their inventions, and for a long time 
were entirely in their hands.  Phoenician shipwrights were employed to 
build the fleet of Sennacherib: Phoenician mariners were employed by 
Necho to sail round Africa.  But they could not forever monopolise the 
sea.  The Greeks built ships on the Phoenician model, and soon showed 
their masters that kidnapping and piracy was a game at which two could 
play.  The merchant kings who possessed the whole commercial world 
were too wise to stake their prosperity on a single province.  They had no 
wish to tempt a siege of Tyre which might resemble the siege of Troy.  
They quickly retired from Greece and its islands, and the western coast of 
Asia Minor and the margin of the Black Sea.  They allowed the Greeks to 
take the foot of Italy and the eastern half of Sicily, and did not molest 
their isolated colonies of Cyrene in Africa and Marseilles in Southern 
Gaul.

But in spite of all their prudence and precautions, the Greeks supplanted 
them entirely.  The Phoenicians, like the Jews, were vassals of necessity 
and by position: they lived half-way between two empires.  They found it 
cheaper to pay tribute than to go to war, and submitted to the emperor of 
Syria for the time being, sending their money with equal indifference to 
Nineveh or Memphis.

But when the empire was disputed, as in the days of Nebuchadnezzar and 
of Necho, they were compelled to choose a side.  Like the Jews, they 
chose the wrong one, and the old Tyre and Jerusalem were demolished at 
the same time.

From that day the Phoenicians began to go down the hill, and under the 
Persians their ships and sailors were forced to do service in the royal 
navy.  This was the hardest kind of tribute that they could be made to pay, 
for it deprived them not only of their profits but of the means by which 
those profits were obtained.  In the Macedonian war they went wrong 
again; they chose the side of the Persians although they had so often 
rebelled against them and Tyre was severely handled by its conqueror.  
But it was the foundation of Alexandria which ruined the Phoenician 
cities, as it ruined Athens.  Form that time Athens ceased to be 
commercial and became a university.  Tyre also ceased to be commercial, 
but remained a celebrated manufactory.  Under the Roman empire it 
enjoyed the monopoly of the sacred purple, which was afterwards 
adopted by the popes.  It prospered under the caliphs; its manufactories in 
the Middle Ages were conducted by the Jews; but it fell before the 
artillery of the Turks to rise no more.  The secret of the famous dye was 
lost, and the Vatican changed the colour of its robes.

But while Phoenicia was declining in the East its great colony, Carthage, 
was rising in the West.  This city had been founded by malcontents from 
Tyre.  But they kindly cherished the memories of their motherland, and, 
like the Pilgrim Fathers, always spoke of the country which had cast them 
forth as “Home.”  And after a time all the old wrongs were forgotten, all 
angry feelings died away.  Every year the Carthaginians sent to the 
national temple a tenth part of their revenues as a free-will offering.  
During the great Persian wars, when on all sides empires and kingdoms 
were falling to the ground, the Phoenicians refused to lend their fleet to 
the Great King to make war upon Carthage.  When Tyre was besieged by 
Alexander the nobles sent their wives and children to Carthage, where 
they were tenderly received.

The Africa of the ancients—the modern Barbary—lies between 
the Sahara and the Mediterranean Sea.  It is protected from the 
ever-encroaching waves of the sandy ocean by the Atlas range.  In its 
western parts this mountain wall is high and broad and covered with 
eternal snow.  It becomes lower as it runs towards the east, also drawing 
nearer to the sea, and dwindles and dwindles till finally it disappears, 
leaving a wide, unprotected region between Barbary and Egypt.  Over 
this the Sahara flows, forming a desert barrier tract to all intents and 
purposes itself a sea, dividing the two lands from each other as 
completely as the Mediterranean divides Italy and Greece.  This land of 
North Africa is in reality a part of Spain; the Atlas is the southern 
boundary of Europe.  Grey cork-trees clothe the lower sides of those 
magnificent mountains; their summits are covered with pines, among 
which the cross-bill flutters, and in which the European bear may still be 
found.  The flora of the range, as Dr. Hooker has lately shown, is of a 
Spanish type; the Straits of Gibraltar is merely an accident; there is 
nothing in Morocco to distinguish it from Andalusia.  The African 
animals which are there found are desert-haunting species-—the antelope 
and gazelle, the lion, the jackal, the hyena,* and certain species of the 
monkey tribe; and these might easily have found their way across the 
Sahara from oasis to oasis.  It is true that in the Carthaginian days the 
elephant abounded in the forests of the Atlas, and it could not have come 
across from central Africa, for the Sahara, before it was a desert, was a 
sea.  It is probable that the elephant of Barbary belonged to the same 
species as the small elephant of Europe, the bones of which have been 
discovered in Malta and in certain caves of Spain, and that it outlived the 
European kind on account of its isolated position in the Atlas, which was 
thinly inhabited by savage tribes.  But it did not long withstand the power 
of the Romans.  Pliny mentions that in his time the forests of Morocco 
were being ransacked for ivory, and Isidore of Seville, in the seventh 
century observes that “there are no longer any elephants in Mauritania.”

*[spelt hyaena in original text]

In Morocco the Phoenicians were settled only on the coast.  The Regency 
of Tunis and part of Algeria is the scene on which the tragedy of Carthage 
was performed.

In that part of Africa the habitable country must be divided into three 
regions; first a corn region, lying between the Atlas and the sea, 
exceedingly fertile but narrow in extent; secondly the Atlas itself, with its 
timber stores and elephant preserves; and thirdly a plateau region of poor 
sandy soil, affording a meagre pasture, interspersed with orchards of 
date-trees, abounding in ostriches, lions, and gazelles, and gradually 
fading away into the desert.

Africa belonged to a race of man whom we shall call Berbers or Moors, 
but who were known as the ancients under many names, and who still 
exist as the Kabyles or Algeria, the Shilluhs of the Atlas, and the Tuaricks 
or tawny Moors of the Sahara.  Their habits depended on the locality in 
which they dwelt.  Those who lived in the Tell or region of the coast 
cultivated the soil and lived in towns, some of which appear to have been 
of considerable size.  Those who inhabited the plateau region led a free 
Bedouin life, wandering from place to place with flocks and herds, and 
camping under oblong huts which the Romans compared to boats turned 
upside down.  In holes and caverns of the mountains dwelt a miserable 
black race, apparently the aborigines of the country, and represented to 
this day by the Rock Tibboos.  They were also found on the outskirts of 
the desert, and were hunted by the Berbers in four-horse chariots, caught 
alive, and taken to the Carthage market to be sold.

The Phoenician settlements were at first independent of one another, but 
Carthage gradually obtained the supremacy as Tyre had obtained it in 
Phoenicia.  The position of Utica towards Carthage was precisely that of 
Sidon towards Tyre.  It was the more ancient city of the two, and it 
preserved a certain kind of position without actual power.  Carthage and 
Utica, like Tyre and Sidon, were at one time always spoken of together.

The Carthaginians began by paying a quit-rent or custom to the natives, 
but that did not last very long; they made war, and exacted tribute from 
the original possessors of the soil.  When Carthage suffered from 
over-population colonies were dispatched out west along the coast, and 
down south into the interior.  These colonies were more on the Roman 
than the Greek pattern; the emigrants built cities and intermarried freely 
with the Berbers, for there was no difference of colour between them, and 
little difference of race.  In course of time the whole of the habitable 
region was subdued; the Tyrian factory became a mighty empire.  Many 
of the roving tribes were broken in; the others were driven into the desert 
or into wild Morocco.  A line of fortified posts and block-houses 
protected the cultivated land.  The desire to obtain red cloth and amber 
and blue beads secured the allegiance of many unconquerable desert 
tribes, and by their means, although the camel had not yet been 
introduced, a trade was opened up between Carthage and Timbuktu.  
Negro slaves, bearing tusks of ivory on their shoulders and tied to one 
another so as to form a chain of flesh and blood, were driven across the 
terrible desert—a caravan of death, the route of which was marked by 
bones bleaching in the sun. Gold dust also was brought over from those 
regions of the Niger, and the Carthaginian traders reached the same
land by sea.  For they were not content, like the Tyrians, to trade only 
on the Morocco coast as far as Mogadore.  By good fortune there 
has been preserved the log-book of an expedition which sailed to the 
wood-covered shores of Guinea; saw the hills covered with fire, as they 
always are in the dry season when the grass is being burnt; heard the 
music of the natives in the night; and brought home the skins of three 
chimpanzees which they probably killed near Sierra Leone.

When Phoenicia died, Carthage inherited its settlements on the coasts of 
Sicily and Spain and on the adjoining isles.  Not only were these islands 
valuable possessions in themselves—Malta as a cotton plantation, Elba as 
an iron mine, Majorca and Minorca as a recruiting ground for slingers; 
they wee also useful as naval stations to preserve the monopoly of the 
Western waters.

The foreign policy of Carthage was very different from that of the 
motherland.  The Phoenicians had maintained an army of mercenaries, 
but had used them only to protect their country from the robber kings of 
Damascus and Jerusalem.  They had many ships of war, but had used 
them only to convoy their round-bellied ships of trade and to keep off the 
attacks of the Greek and Etruscan pirates.  Their settlements were merely 
fortified factories; they made no attempt to reduce the natives of the land.  
If their settlements grew into colonies they let them go.  But Carthage 
founded many colonies and never lost a single one.  Situated among 
them, and possessing a large fleet, she was able both to punish and 
protect.  She defended them in time of war; she controlled them in time of 
peace.

A policy of concession had not saved the Phoenicians from the Greeks, 
and now these same Greeks were settling in the West and displaying 
immense activity.  The Carthaginians saw that they must resist or be 
ruined, and they went to war as a matter of business.  They first put down 
the Etruscan rovers, in which undertaking they were assisted by the 
events which occurred on the Italian main.  They next put a stop to the 
spread of the Greek power in Africa itself.

Half-way between Algeria and Egypt, in the midst of the dividing sea of 
sand, is a coast oasis formed by a tableland of sufficient height to 
condense the vapours which float over from the sea, and to chill them into 
rain.  There was a hole in the sky above it, as the natives used to say.  To 
this island-tract came a band of Greeks directed thither by the oracle at 
Delphi, where geography was studied as a part of the system.  They 
established a city and called it Cyrene.

The land was remarkably fertile, and afforded them three harvests in the 
course of the year.  One was gathered on the coast meadows, which were 
watered by the streams that flowed down from the hills; a second on the 
hill-sides; a third on the surface of the plateau,* which was about two 
thousand feet above the level of the sea.  Cyrenaica produced the 
silphium, or asafoetida, which, like the balm of Gilead, was one of the 
specifics of antiquity, and which is really a medicine of value.  It was 
found in many parts of the world—for instance, in certain districts of 
Asia Minor, and on the summit of the Hindu Kush.  But the asafoetida of 
Cyrene was the most esteemed.  Its juice, when dried, was worth its 
weight in gold; its leaves fattened cattle and cured them of all diseases.
 
*(spelt pleateau in the original text)

Some singular pits or chasms existed in the lower part of the Cyrene hills.  
Their sides were perpendicular walls of rock: it appeared impossible to 
descend to the bottom of the precipice, and yet, when the traveller peeped 
over the brink, he saw to his astonishment that the abyss beneath had 
been sown with herbs and corn.  Hence rose the legend of the Gardens of 
the Hesperides.

Cyrene was renowned as the second medical school of the Greek world.  
It produced a noted freethinker, who was a companion of Socrates and 
the founder of a school.  It was also famous for its barbs, which won 
more than one prize in the chariot races of the Grecian games.  It obtained 
the honour of more than one Pindaric ode.  But owing to internal 
dissension it never became great.  It was conquered by Persia, it 
submitted to Alexander, and Carthage speedily checked its growth 
towards the west by taking the desert which lay between them, and which 
it then garrisoned with nomad tribes.

The Carthaginians hitherto had never paid tribute, and they had never 
suffered a serious reverse.  Alcibiades talked much of invading them 
when he had done with Sicily, and the young men of his set were at one 
time always drawing plans of Carthage in the dust of the market-place at 
Athens; but the Sicilian expedition failed.  The affection of the Tyrians 
preserved them from Cambyses.  Alexander opportunely died.  Pyrrhus in 
Sicily began to collect ships to sail across, but he who tried to take up 
Italy with one hand and Carthage with the other, and who also excited the 
enmity of the Sicilian Greeks, was not a very dangerous foe.  Agathocles 
of Syracuse invaded Africa, but it was the action of a desperate and 
defeated man and bore no result.

Sicily was long the battlefield of the Carthaginians, and ultimately proved 
their ruin.  Its western side belonged to them: its eastern side was held by 
a number of independent Greek cities which were often at war with one 
another.  Of these Syracuse was the most important: its ambition was the 
same as that of Carthage—to conquer the whole island, and then to 
extend its rule over the flourishing Greek towns on the south Italian coast.  
Hence followed wars generation after generation, till at length the 
Carthaginians obtained the upper hand.  Already they were looking on the 
island as their own when a new power stepped upon the scene.

The ancient Tuscans or Etruscans had a language and certain arts peculiar 
to themselves, and Northern Italy was occupied by Celtic Gauls.  But the 
greater part of the peninsula was inhabited by a people akin to the Greeks, 
though differing much from them in character, dwelling in city states, 
using a form of the Phoenician alphabet, and educating their children in 
public schools.  The Greek cities on the coast diffused a certain amount of 
culture through the land.

A rabble of outlaws and runaway slaves banded together, built a town, 
fortified it strongly, and offered it as an asylum to all fugitives.  To Rome 
fled the over-beaten slave, the thief with his booty, the murdered with 
blood-red hands.  This city of refuge became a war-town—to use an 
African phrase—its citizens alternately fought and farmed; it became the 
dread and torment of the neighbourhood.  However, it contained no 
women, and it was hoped that in course of time the generation of robbers 
would die out.  The Romans offered their hands and hearts to the 
daughters of a neighbouring Sabine city.  The Sabines declined, and told 
them that they had better make their city an asylum for runaway women.  
The Romans took the Sabine girls by force; a war ensued, but the 
relationship had been established; the women reconciled their fathers to 
their husbands, and the tribes were united in the same city.

The hospitality which Rome had offered in its early days in order to 
sustain its life became a custom and a policy.  The Romans possessed the 
art of converting their conquered enemies into allies, and this was done 
by means of concessions which cities of respectable origin would have 
been too proud to make.

Their military career was very different from that of the Persians, who 
swept over the continent in a few months.  The Romans spent three 
centuries in establishing their rule within a circle of a hundred miles 
round the city.  Whatever they won by the sword they secured by the 
plough.  After every successful war they demanded a tract of land, and on 
this they planted a colony of Roman farmers.  The municipal 
governments of the conquered cities were left undisturbed.  The Romans 
aimed to establish, at least in appearance, a federation of states, a United 
Italy.  At the time of the first Punic War this design had nearly been 
accomplished.  Wild tribes of Celtic shepherds still roamed over the rich 
plains at the foot of the Alps, but the Italian boroughs had acknowledged 
the supremacy of Rome.  The Greek cities on the southern coast had, a 
few years before, called over Pyrrhus, King of Epirus, a soldier of fortune 
and the first general of the day.  But the legion broke the Macedonian 
phalanx, and the broadsword vanquished the Macedonian spear.  The 
Greek cities were no longer independent except in name.  Pyrrhus 
returned to Greece, and prophesied of Sicily, as he left its shores, that it 
would become the arena of the Punic and the Roman arms.

In the last war that was ever waged between the Syracusans and the 
Carthaginians, the former had employed some mercenary troops 
belonging to the Mamertines, an Italian tribe.  When the war was ended 
these soldiers were paid off and began to march home.  They passed 
through the Greek town of Messina on their road, were hospitably 
received by the citizens, and provided with quarters for the night.  In the 
middle of the night they rose up and massacred the men, married the 
widows, and settled down as rulers of Messina, each soldier beneath 
another man’s vine and fig-tree.  A Roman regiment stationed at 
Rhegium, a Greek town on the Italian side of the straits, heard of this 
exploit, considered it an excellent idea, and did the same.  The Romans 
marched upon Rhegium, took it by storm, and executed four hundred of 
the soldiers in the Forum.  The king of Syracuse, who held the same 
position in eastern Sicily as did Rome on the peninsula, marched against 
Messina.  The Mamertine bandits became alarmed; one party sent to the 
Carthaginians for assistance; another party sent to Rome, declaring that 
they were kinsmen and desired to enter the Italian league.

The Roman senate rejected this request on account of its “manifest 
absurdity.”  They had just punished their soldiers for imitating the 
Mamertines; how then could they interfere with the punishment of the 
Mamertines?  But in Rome the people possessed the sovereign power of 
making peace or war.  There was a scarcity of money at that time; a raid 
on Sicily would yield plunder, and troops were accordingly ordered to 
Messina.  For the first time Romans went outside Italy-—the vanguard of 
an army which subdued the world.  The Carthaginians were already in 
Messina: the Romans drove them out, and the war began.  The 
Syracusans were defeated in the first battle, and then went over to the 
Roman side.  It became a war between Asiatics and Europeans.

The two great republics were already well acquainted with each other.  In 
the apartment of the Aediles in the Capitol was preserved a commercial 
treaty between Carthage and Rome, inscribed on tables of brass in old 
Latin; in the time of Polybius it could scarcely be understood, for it had 
been drawn up twenty eight years before Xerxes invaded Greece.  When 
Pyrrhus invaded Italy the Carthaginians had taken the Roman side, for the 
Greeks were their hereditary enemies.  There were Carthaginian shops in 
the streets of Rome, a city in beauty and splendour far inferior to 
Carthage, which as called the metropolis of the Western world.  The 
Romans were a people of warriors and small farmers, quaint in their 
habits and simple in their tastes.  Some Carthaginian ambassadors were 
much amused at the odd fashion of their banquets, where the guests sang 
old ballads in turn while the piper played, and they discovered that there 
was only one service of plate in Rome, and that each senator borrowed it 
when he gave a dinner.  Yet there were already signs that Rome was 
inhabited by a giant race.  The vast aqueducts had been constructed; the 
tunnel-like sewers had been hollowed out; the streets were paved with 
smooth and massive slabs.  There were many temples and statues to be 
seen; each temple was the monument of a great victory; each statue was 
the memorial of a hero who had died for Rome.

The Carthaginian army was composed entirely of mercenary troops.  
Africa, Spain and Gaul were their recruiting grounds, an inexhaustible 
treasury of warriors as long as the money lasted which they received as 
pay.  The Berbers were a splendid Cossack cavalry; they rode without 
saddle or bridle, a weapon in each hand; on foot they were merely a horde 
or savages with elephant-hide shields, long spears, and bear-skins floating 
from their shoulders.  The troops of Spain were the best infantry that the 
Carthaginians possessed; they wore a white uniform with purple facings; 
they fought with pointed swords.  The Gauls were brave troops but were 
badly armed; they were naked to the waist; their cutlasses were made of 
soft iron and had to be straightened after every blow.  The Balearic 
Islands supplied a regiment of slingers whose balls of hardened clay 
whizzed through the air like bullets, broke armour, and shot men dead.  
We read much of the Sacred Legion in the Sicilian wars.  It was 
composed of young nobles, who wore dazzling white shields and 
breast-plates which were works of art; who even in the camp never drank 
except from goblets of silver and of gold.  But this corps had apparently 
become extinct, and the Carthaginians only officered their troops, who 
they looked upon as ammunition, and to whom their orders were 
delivered through interpreters.  The various regiments of the Carthaginian 
army had therefore nothing in common with one another or with those by 
whom they were led.  They rushed to battle in confusion, “with sounds, 
discordant as their various tribes,” and with no higher feeling than the 
hope of plunder or the excitement which the act of fighting arouses in the 
brave soldier.

In Rome the army was the nation: no citizen could take office unless he 
had served in ten campaigns.  All spoke the same language, all were 
inspired by the same ambition.  The officers were often small farmers like 
the men, but this civil equality produced no ill effects; the discipline was 
most severe.  It was a maxim that the soldier should fear his officer more 
than he feared his foe.  The drill was unremitting; when they were in 
winter quarters they erected sheds in which the soldiers fenced with 
swords cased in leather with buttons at the point and hurled javelins, also 
buttoned, at one another.  These foils were double the weight of the 
weapons that were actually used.  When the day’s march was over they 
took pick-axe and spade, and built their camp like a town with a twelve-
foot stockade around it, and a ditch twelve feet deep and twelve feet 
broad. When the red mantle was hung before the general’s tent each 
soldier said to himself, “Perhaps to-day I may win the golden crown.”  
Laughing and jesting they rubbed their limbs with oil, and took out of 
their cases the bright helmets and the polished shields which they used 
only on the battle-day.  As they stood ready to advance upon the foe the 
general would address them in a vigorous speech; he would tell them that 
the greatest honour which could befall a Roman was to die for his country 
on the field, and that glorious was the sorrow, enviable the woe of the 
matron who gave a husband or a son to Rome.  Then the trumpets pealed, 
and the soldiers charged, first firing a volley of javelins and then coming 
to close quarters with the solid steel.  The chief fault of the Roman 
military system at that time was in the arrangement of the chief 
command.  There were two commanders-in-chief, possessing equal 
powers, and it sometimes happened that they were both present on the 
same spot, that they commanded on alternate days, and that their tactics 
differed.  They were appointed only for the year, and when the term drew 
near its end a consul would often fight a battle at a disadvantage, or 
negotiate a premature peace, that he might prevent his successor from 
reaping the fruits of his twelve month’s toil.  The Carthaginian generals 
had thereby an advantage, but they also were liable to be recalled when 
too successful by the jealous and distrustful government at home.

The wealth of Carthage was much greater than that of Rome, but her 
method of making war was more costly, and a great deal of money was 
stolen and wasted by the men in power.  In Carthage the highest offices 
of state were openly bought from a greedy and dangerous populace, just 
as in Pompey’s time tables were set out in the streets of Rome at which 
candidates for office paid the people for their votes.  But at this time 
bribery was a capital offence at Rome.  It was a happy period in Roman 
history, the interlude between two aristocracies. There had been a time 
when a system of hereditary castes prevailed; when the plebeians were 
excluded from all share in the public lands and the higher offices of state; 
when they were often chained in the dungeons of the nobles, and marked 
with scars upon their backs: when Romans drew swords on Romans and 
the tents of the people whitened the Sacred Hill.  But the Licinian Laws 
were carried; the orders were reconciled; plebeian consuls were elected; 
and two centuries of prosperity, harmony, and victory prepared Rome for 
the prodigious contest in which she was now engaged.

To her subject people Carthage acted as a tyrant.  She had even deprived 
the old Phoenician cities of their liberty of trade.  She would not allow 
them to build walls for fear they should rebel, loaded them with heavy 
burdens grievous to be borne, treated the colonial provinces as conquered 
lands, and sent decayed nobles as governors to wring out of the people all 
they could.  If the enemies of Carthage invaded Africa they would meet 
with no resistance except from Carthage herself, and they would be 
joined by thousands of Berbers who longed to be revenged on their 
oppressors.  But if the enemies of Rome invaded Italy they would find 
everywhere walled cities ready to defend their liberties and having 
liberties to defend.  No tribute was taken by Rome from her allies except 
that of military service, which service was rewarded with a share of the 
harvest that the war brought in.

The Carthaginians were at a greater distance from the seat of war than the 
Romans, who had only to sail across a narrow strait.  However, this was 
counterbalanced by the superiority of the Punic fleet.  At that time the 
Carthaginians were completely masters of the sea; they boasted that no 
man could wash his hands in the salt water without their permission.  The 
Romans had not a single decked vessel, and in order to transport their 
troops across the straits they were obliged to borrow triremes from the 
Italian-Greeks.  But their marvellous resolution and the absolute 
necessities of the case overmastered their deficiencies and their singular 
dislike of the sea.  The wreck of a Carthaginian man-of-war served them 
as a model; they ranged benches along the beach and drilled sailors who 
had just come from the plough’s tail to the service of the oar.  The vessels 
were rudely built and the men clumsy at their work, and when the hostile 
fleets first met the Carthaginians burst into loud guffaws.  Without taking 
order of battle they flew down upon the Romans, the admiral leading the 
van in a seven-decker that had belonged to Pyrrhus.  On they went, each 
ship in a bed of creamy foam, flags flying, trumpets blowing, and the 
negroes singing and clanking their chains as they laboured at the oar.  But 
presently they perceived some odd-looking machines on the forecastles of 
the Roman ships; they had never seen such things before, and this made 
them hesitate a little.  But when they saw in what a lubberly fashion the 
ships were worked their confidence returned; they dashed in among the 
Roman vessels, which they tried to rip up with their aquiline prows.  As 
soon as they came to close quarters the machines fell down upon them 
with a crash, tore open their decks, and grappled them tightly in their iron 
jaws, forming at the same time a gangway over which the Roman soldiers 
poured.  The sea fight was made a land fight, and only a few ships with 
beaks all bent and broken succeeded in making their escape.  They 
entered the harbour of Carthage with their bows covered with skins, the 
signal of defeat.

However, by means of skilful manoeuvring the invention of Duilius was 
made of no avail, and the Carthaginians for many years remained the 
masters of the sea.  Twice the Roman fleet was entirely destroyed, and 
their treasury was now exhausted.  But he undaunted people fitted out a 
fleet by private subscription, and so rapidly was this done that the trees, 
as Florus said, were transformed into ships.  Two hundred five-deckers 
were ready before the enemy knew that they had begun to build, and so 
the Carthaginian fleet was one day surprised by the Romans in no 
fighting condition, for the vessels were laden to the gunwales with corn, 
and only sailors were on board; the whole fleet was taken or sunk, and the 
war was at an end.  Yet when all was added up it was found that the 
Romans had lost two hundred vessels more than the Carthaginians.  But 
Rome, even without large ships, could always reinforce Sicily, while the 
Carthaginians, without a full fleet, were completely cut off from the seat 
of war, and they were unable to rebuild in the manner of the Romans.

The war in Sicily had been a drawn game.  Hamilcar Barca, although 
unconquered, received orders to negotiate for peace.  The Romans 
demanded a large indemnity to pay for the expenses of the war, and took 
the Sicilian settlements which Carthage had held for four hundred years.

Peace was made, and the mercenary troops were sent back to Carthage.  
Their pay was in arrear, and there was no money left.  Matters were so 
badly managed that the soldiers were allowed to retain their arms.  They 
burst into mutiny, ravaged the country, and besieged the capital.  The 
veterans of Hamilcar could only be conquered by Hamilcar himself.  He 
saved Carthage, but the struggle was severe.  Venerable senators, ladies 
of gentle birth, innocent children, had fallen into the hands of the brutal 
mutineers, and had been crucified, torn to pieces, tortured to death in a 
hundred ways.  During those awful orgies of Spendius and Matho the 
Roman war had almost been forgotten; the disasters over which men had 
mourned became by comparison happiness and peace.  The destruction of 
the fleet was viewed as a slight calamity when death was howling at the 
city gates.  At last Hamilcar triumphed, and the rebels were cast to the 
elephants, who kneaded their bodies with their feet and gored them with 
their tusks; and Carthage, exhausted, faint from loss of blood, attempted 
to repose.

But all was not yet over. The troops that were stationed in Sardinia 
rebelled, and Hamilcar prepared to sail with an armament against them.

The Romans had acted in the noblest manner towards the Carthaginians 
during the civil war.  The Italian merchants had been allowed to supply 
Carthage with provisions, and had been forbidden to communicate with 
the rebels.  When the Sardinian troops mutinied they offered the island to 
Rome; the city of Utica had also offered itself to Rome, but the Senate 
had refused both applications.  And now all of a sudden, as if possessed 
by an evil spirit, they pretended that the Carthaginian armament had been 
prepared against Rome, and declared war.  When Carthage, in the last 
stage of misery and prostration, prayed for peace in the name of all the 
pitiful gods, it was granted.  But Rome had been put to some expense on 
account of this intended war; they must therefore pay an additional 
indemnity, and surrender Corsica and Sardinia.  Poor Carthage was made 
to bite the dust indeed.

Hamilcar Barca was appointed commander-in-chief.  He was the 
favourite of the people.  He had to the last remained unconquered in 
Sicily.  He had saved the city from the mutineers.  His honour was 
unstained, his patriotism was pure.

In that hour of calamity and shame, when the city was hung with black, 
when the spacious docks were empty and bare, when there was woe in 
every face and the memory of death in every house, faction was forced to 
be silent, and the people were permitted to be heard, and those who loved 
their country more than their party rejoiced to see a Man at the head of 
affairs.  But Hamilcar knew well that he was hated by the leaders of the 
government, the politicians by profession, those men who had devoured 
the gold which was the very heart of Carthage, and had brought upon her 
by their dishonesty this last distressing war; those men who by their 
miserable suspicions and intrigues had ever deprived their best generals 
of their commands as soon as they began to succeed, and appointed 
generals whom they--and the enemy—had no cause to fear.  To him was 
entrusted by the patriots the office of regenerating Carthage.  But how 
was it to be done?  Without money he was powerless; without money he 
could not keep his army together; without money he could not even retain 
his command.  He had been given it by the people, but the people were 
accustomed to be bribed.  Gold they must have from the men in power; if 
he had none to give they would go to those who had.  His enemies he 
knew would be able to employ the state revenues against him.  What 
could he do?  Where was the money to be found?  He saw before him 
nothing but defeat, disgrace, and even an ignominious death—for in 
Carthage they sometimes crucified their generals.  Often he thought that it 
would be better to give up public life, to abandon the corrupt and ruined 
city, and to sail to those sweet islands which the Carthaginians had 
discovered in the Atlantic Sea.  There the earth was always verdant, the 
sky was always pure.  No fiery sirocco blew, and no cold rain fell in that 
delicious land.  Odoriferous balm dripped from the branches of the trees; 
canary birds sang among the leaves; streams of silver water rippled 
downwards to the sea.  There Nature was a calm and gentle mother: there 
the turmoils of the world might be forgotten; there the weary heart might 
be at rest.

Yet how could he desert his fatherland in its affliction?  To him the nation 
turned its sorrowful eyes; on him the people called as men call upon their 
gods.  At this feet lay the poor, torn, and wounded Carthage—the 
Carthage once so beautiful and so strong, the Carthage who had fed him 
from her full breast with riches and with power, the Carthage who had 
made him what he was.  And should he, who had never turned his back 
upon her enemies, desert her now?

Then a glorious idea flashed in upon his brain.  He saw a way of restoring 
Carthage to her ancient glory, of making her stronger than she had ever 
been, of making her a match for Rome.  He announced to the senate that 
he intended to take the army to Tangiers to reduce a native tribe which 
had caused some trouble in the neighbourhood.  He quickly made all 
arrangements for the march.  A few vessels had been prepared for the 
expedition to Sardinia.  These were commanded by his brother, and he 
ordered that they should be sailed along the coast side by side with the 
army as it marched.  It might have appeared strange to some persons that 
he should require ships to make war against a tribe of Moors on land.  But 
there was no fear of his enemies suspecting his design.  It was so strange 
and wild that when it had been actually accomplished they could scarcely 
believe that it was real.

The night before he marched he went to the Great Temple to offer the 
sacrifice of propitiation and entreaty.  He took with him his son, a boy 
nine years of age.  When the libations and other rites were ended and the 
victim lay divided on the altar, he ordered the attendants to withdraw.  He 
remained alone with his son.

The temple of Baal was a magnificent building supported by enormous 
columns, covered with gold, or formed of a glass-like substance which 
began to glitter and sparkle in a curious manner as the night came on.  
Around the temple walls were idols representing the Phoenician gods; 
prominent among them was the hideous statue of Moloch, with its 
downward-sloping hands and the fiery furnace at its feet.  There also 
might be seen beautiful Greek statues, trophies of the Sicilian 
Wars—especially the Diana which the Carthaginians had taken from 
Segesta, which was afterwards restored to that city by the Romans, which 
Verres placed in his celebrated gallery and Cicero in his celebrated 
speech.  There also might be seen the famous brazen bull which an 
Athenian invented for the amusement of Phalaris.  Human beings were 
put inside, a fire was lit underneath, and the throat was so contrived that 
the shrieks and groans of the victims made the bull bellow as if he was 
alive.  The first experiment was made by King Phalaris upon the artist, 
and the last by the people upon King Phalaris.

Hamilcar caressed his son and asked him if he would like to go to the 
war; when the boy said yes, and showed much delight, Hamilcar took his 
little hands and placed them upon the altar, and made him swear that he 
would hate the Romans to his dying day.  Long years afterwards, when 
that boy was an exile in a foreign land—the most glorious, the most 
unfortunate of men—he was accused by his royal host of secretly 
intriguing with the Romans.  He then related this circumstance, and asked 
if it was likely that he would ever be a friend to Rome.

Hamilcar marched.  The politicians supposed that he was merely engaged 
in a third-rate war, and were quite easy in their minds.  But one day there 
came a courier from Tangiers.  He brought tidings which plunged the 
whole city in a tumult of wonder and excitement.  The three great streets 
which led to the market-place were filled with streaming crowds.  A 
multitude collected round the city hall, in which sat the senators 
anxiously deliberating.  Women appeared on the roofs of the houses and 
bent eagerly over the parapets, while men ran along bawling out the 
news.  Hamilcar Barca had gone clean off.  He was no longer in Africa.  
He had crossed the sea.  The Tangier expedition was a trick.  He had 
taken the army right over into Spain, and was fighting with the native 
chiefs who had always been the friends and allies of Carthage.

By a strange fortuity, Spain was the Peru of the ancient world.  The 
horrors of the mines in South America, the sufferings of the Indians, were 
copied, so to speak, from the early history of the people who inflicted 
them.  When the Phoenicians first entered the harbours of Andalusia they 
found themselves in a land where silver was used as iron.  They loaded 
their vessel with the precious metal to the water’s edge, cast away their 
wooden lead-weighted anchor, and substituted a lump of pure silver in its 
stead.  Afterwards factories were established, arrangements were made 
with the chiefs for the supply of labour, and the mining was conducted on 
scientific principles.  The Carthaginians succeeded the Phoenicians, and 
remained, like them, only on the coast.

It was Hamilcar’s design to conquer the whole country, to exact tribute 
from the inhabitants, to create a Spanish army.  His success was splendid 
and complete.  The peninsula of Spain became almost entirely a Punic 
province.  Hamilcar built a city which he called New Carthage—the 
Carthagena of modern times—and discovered in its neighbourhood rich 
mines of silver-lead which have lately been reopened.  He acquired a 
private fortune, formed a native army, fed his party at Carthage, and 
enriched the treasury of the state.  He administered the province nine 
years, and then dying, was succeeded by his brother, who, after governing 
or reigning a few years, also died.  Hannibal, the son of Hamilcar, 
became Viceroy of Spain.

It appears strange that Rome should so tamely have allowed the 
Carthaginians to take Spain.  The truth was that the Romans just then had 
enough to do to look after their own affairs.  The Gauls of Lombardy had 
furiously attacked the Italian cities, and had called to their aid the Gauls 
who lived beyond the Alps.  Before the Romans had beaten off the 
barbarians the conquest in Spain had been accomplished.  The Romans 
therefore accepted the fact, and contented themselves with a treaty by 
which the government of Carthage pledged itself not to pass beyond the 
Ebro.

But Hannibal cared nothing about treaties made at Carthage.  As 
Hamilcar without orders had invaded Spain, so he without orders invaded 
Italy.  The expedition of the Gauls had shown him that it was possible to 
cross the Alps, and he chose that extraordinary route.  The Roman army 
was about to embark for Spain, which it was supposed would be the seat 
or war, when the news arrived that Hannibal had alighted in Italy with 
elephants and cavalry, like a man descending from the clouds.

If wars were always decided by individual exploits and pitched battles 
Hannibal would have conquered Italy.  He defeated the Romans so often 
and so thoroughly that at last they found it their best policy not to fight 
with him at all.  He could do nothing then but sweep over the country 
with his Cossack cavalry, plunder, and destroy.  It was impossible for him 
to take Rome, which was protected by walls strong as rocks and by rocks 
steep as walls.  When he did march on Rome, encamping within three 
miles of the city and raising a panic during an afternoon, it was done 
merely as a ruse to draw away the Roman army from the siege of Capua.  
But it did not have even that effect.  The army before Capua remained 
where it was, and another army appeared as if by magic to defend the 
city.  Rome appeared to be inexhaustible, and so in reality it was.

Hannibal knew well that Italy could be conquered only by Italians.  So 
great a general could never have supposed that with a handful of cavalry 
he could subdue a country which had a million armed men to bring into 
the field.  He had taken it for granted that if he could gain some success at 
first he would be joined by the subject cities.  But in spite of his great 
victories they remained true to Rome.  Nothing shows so clearly the 
immense resources of the Italian Republic as that second Punic War. 
Hannibal was in their country, but they employed against him only a 
portion of their troops.  A second army was in Sicily waging war against 
his Greek allies; a third army was in Spain, attacking his operations at the 
base, pulling Carthage out of Europe by the roots.  Added to which, it 
was now the Romans who ruled the sea.  When Scipio had taken New 
Carthage and conquered Spain, he crossed over into Africa, and Hannibal 
was of necessity recalled.  He met on the field of Zama a general whose 
genius was little inferior to his own, and who possessed an infinitely 
better army.  Hannibal lost the day, and the fate of Carthage was decided.  
It was not the battle which did that; it was the nature and constitution of 
the state.  In itself the battle of Zama was not a more ruinous defeat than 
the battle of Cannae.  But Carthage was made of different stuff from that 
of Rome.  How could a war between those two people have ended 
otherwise than as it did?  Rome was an armed nation fighting in Italy for 
hearth and home, in Africa for glory and revenge.  Carthage was a city of 
merchants, who paid men to fight for them, and whose army was 
dissolved as soon as the exchequer was exhausted.  Rome could fight to 
its last man; Carthage could fight only to its last dollar.  At the beginning 
of both wars the Carthaginians did wonders, but as they became poor they 
became feeble; their strength dribbled out with their gold; the refusal of 
Alexandria to negotiate a loan perhaps injured them more deeply than the 
victory of Scipio.

The fall of the Carthaginian empire is not a matter for regret.  Outside the 
walls of the city existed hopeless slavery on the part of the subject, 
shameless extortion on the part of the officials.  Throughout Africa 
Carthage was never named without a curse.  In the time of the mercenary 
war the Moorish women, taking oath to keep nothing back, stripped off 
their gold ornaments and brought them all to the men who were resisting 
their oppressors.  That city, that Carthage, fed like a vulture upon the 
land.  A corrupt and grasping aristocracy, a corrupt and turbulent 
populace, divided between them the prey.  The Carthaginian customs 
were barbarous in the extreme.  When a battle had been won they 
sacrificed their handsomest prisoners to the gods; when a battle had been 
lost the children of their noblest families were cast into the furnace.  Their 
Asiatic character was strongly marked.  They were a people false and 
sweet-worded, effeminate and cruel, tyrannical and servile, devout and 
licentious, merciless in triumph, faint-hearted in danger, divinely heroic 
in despair.

Let us therefore admit that, as an imperial city, Carthage merited her fate.  
But henceforth we must regard her from a different point of view.  In 
order to obtain peace she had given up her colonies abroad, her provinces 
at home, her vessels and elephants of war.  The empire was reduced to a 
municipality.  Nothing was left but the city and a piece of ground.  The 
merchant princes took off their crowns and went back into the glass and 
purple business.  It was only as a town of manufacture and trade that 
Carthage continued to exist, and as such her existence was of unmixed 
service to the world.

Hannibal was made prime minister, and at once set to work to reform the 
constitution.  The aristocratic party informed the Romans that he was 
secretly stirring up the people to war.  The Romans demanded that he 
should be surrendered; he escaped to the court of Antiochus, the Greek 
king in Asia Minor, and there he did attempt to raise war against Rome.  
The senate were justified in expelling him from Carthage, for he was 
really a dangerous man.  But the persecution to which he was afterwards 
subjected was not very creditable to their good fame.  Driven from place 
to place, he at last took refuge in Bithynia, on the desolate shores of the 
Black Sea, and a Roman consul, who wished to obtain some notoriety by 
taking home the great Carthaginian as a show, commanded the prince 
under whose protection he was living to give him up.  When Hannibal 
heard of this he took poison, saying, ”Let me deliver the Romans from 
their cares and anxieties since they think it too tedious and too dangerous 
to wait for the death of a poor, hated old man.”  The news of this 
occurrence excited anger in Rome, but it was the presage of a greater 
crime which was soon to be committed in the Roman name.

There was a Berber chief named Masinissa who had been deprived of his 
estates, and who during the war had rendered important services to Rome.  
He was made king of Numidia, and it was stipulated in the treaty that the 
Carthaginians should restore the lands and cities which had belonged to 
him and to his ancestors.  The lands which they had taken from him were 
accordingly surrendered, and then Masinissa sent in a claim for certain 
lands which he said had been taken from his ancestors.  The wording of 
the treaty was ambiguous.  He might easily declare that the whole of the 
sea-coast had belonged to his family in ancient times, and who could 
disprove the evidence of a tradition?  He made no secret of his design; it 
was to drive the Phoenician strangers out of Africa and to reign at 
Carthage in their stead.  He soon showed that he was worthy to be called 
the King of Numidia and the Friend of Rome.  He drilled his bandits into 
soldiers; he taught his wandering shepherds to till the ground.  He made 
his capital, Constantine, a great city; he opened schools in which the sons 
of native chiefs were taught to read and write in the Punic tongue.  He 
allied himself with the powers of Morocco and the Atlas.  He reminded 
the Berbers that it was to them the soil belonged, that the Phoenicians 
were intruders who had come with presents in their hands and with 
promises in their mouths, declaring that they had met with trouble in their 
own country, and praying for a place where they might repose from the 
weary sea.  Their fathers had trusted them; their fathers had been bitterly 
deceived.  By force and by fraud the Carthaginians had taken all the lands 
which they possessed; they had stolen the ground on which their city 
stood.

In the meantime Rome advanced into the East.  As soon as the battle of 
Zama had been fought Alexandria demanded her protection.  This 
brought the Romans into contact with the Graeco-Asiatic world; they 
found it in much the same condition as the English found Hindustan, and 
they conquered it in much the same manner.

Time went on.  The generation of Hannibal had almost become extinct.  
In Carthage war had become a tradition of the past.  The business of that 
city was again as flourishing as it had ever been.  Again ships sailed to 
the coasts of Cornwall and Guinea; again the streets were lined with the 
workshops of industrious artisans.  Such is the  vis medicatrix, the 
restoring power of a widely extended commerce, combined with active 
manufactures and the skilful management of soil, that the city soon 
regained its ancient wealth.  The Romans had imposed an enormous 
indemnity which was to be paid off by instalments extending over a series 
of years.  The Carthaginians paid it off at once.

But in the midst of all their prosperity and happiness there were grave and 
anxious hearts.  They saw ever before them the menacing figure of 
Masinissa.  The very slowness of his movements was portentous.  He was 
in all things deliberate, gradual, and calm.  From time to time he 
demanded a tract of land; if it was not given up at once he took it by 
force.  Then, waiting as if to digest it, he left them for a while in peace.

They were bound by treaty not to make war against the Friend of Rome. 
They therefore petitioned the senate that commissioners should be sent 
and the boundary definitely settled.  But the senate had no desire that 
Carthage should be left in peace.  The commissioners were instructed to 
report in such a manner that Masinissa might be encouraged to continue 
his depredations.  They brought back astonishing accounts of the 
magnificence and activity of the African metropolis; and among these 
commissioners there was one man who never ceased to declare that the 
country was in danger, and who never rose to speak in the House without 
saying before he sat down: “And it is my opinion, fathers, that Carthage 
must be destroyed.”

Cato the censor has been called the last of the old Romans.  That class of 
patriot farmers had been extinguished by Hannibal’s invasion. In order to 
live during the long war they had been obliged to borrow money on their 
lands.  When the war was over the prices of everything rose to an 
unnatural height; the farmers could not recover themselves, and the 
Roman law of debt was severe.  They were ejected by thousands—it was 
the favourite method to turn the women and children out of doors while 
the poor man was working in the fields.  Italy was converted into a 
plantation; slaves in chains tilled the land.  No change was made in the 
letter of the constitution, but the commonwealth ceased to exist.  Society 
was now composed of the nobles, the money-merchants or city men, and 
a mob like that of Carthage which lived on saleable votes, sometimes 
raging for agrarian laws, and which was afterwards fed at government 
expense like a wild beast every day.

At this time a few refined and intellectual men began to cultivate a taste 
for Greek literature and the fine arts.  They collected libraries, and 
adorned them with busts of celebrated men and with antiques of 
Corinthian bronze.  Crowds of imitators soon arose, and the conquests in 
the East awakened new ideas.  In the days of old the Romans had been 
content to decorate their door-posts with trophies obtained in single 
combat, and their halls with the waxen portraits of their ancestors.  The 
only spoils which they could then display were flocks and herds, wagons 
of rude structure, and heaps of spears and helmets.  But now the arts of 
Greece and the riches of Asia adorned the triumphs of their generals, and 
the reign of taste and luxury commenced.  A race of dandies appeared 
who wore semi-transparent robes, and who were always passing their 
hands in an affected manner through their hair—who lounged with the 
languor of the Sybarite, and spoke with the lisp of Alcibiades.  The wives 
of senators and bankers became genteel, kept a herd of ladies’ maids, 
passed hours before their full-length silver mirrors, bathed in asses’ milk, 
rouged their cheeks and dyed their hair, never went out except in 
palanquins, gabbled Greek phrases, and called their slaves by Greek 
names even when they happened to be of Latin birth.  The houses of the 
great were paved with mosaic floors, and the painted walls were works of 
art: sideboards were covered with gold and silver plate, with vessels of 
amber and of the tinted Alexandrine glass.  The bathrooms were of 
marble, with the water issuing from silver tubes.

New amusements were invented, and new customs began to reign.  An 
academy was established, in which five hundred boys and girls were 
taught castanet dances of anything but a decorous kind.  The dinner hour 
was made later, and instead of sitting at table they adopted the style of 
lying down to eat on sofas inlaid with tortoiseshell and gold.  It was 
chiefly in the luxuries of the cuisine that the Romans exhibited their 
wealth.  Prodigious prices were paid for a good Greek cook.  Every 
patrician villa was a castle of gastronomical delight: it was provided with 
its salt-water tank for fish and oysters, and an aviary which was filled 
with field-fares, ortolans, nightingales, and thrushes; a white dove-cot, 
like a tower, stood beside the house, and beneath it was a dark dungeon 
for fattening the birds; there was also a poultry ground, with pea-fowl, 
guinea-fowl, and pink feathered flamingoes imported from the East, 
while an orchard of fig-trees, honey-apples, and other fruits, and a garden 
in which the trees of cypress and yew were clipped into fantastic shapes, 
conferred an aspect of rural beauty on the scene.  The hills round the Bay 
of Naples were covered with these villas; and to that charming region it 
became the fashion to resort at a certain season of the year.  In such 
places gambling, drinking, and lovemaking shook off all restraints.  
Black-eyed soubrettes tripped perpetually about with billets-doux in 
Greek; the rattle of the ivory dice-box could be heard in the streets, like 
the click of billiard balls in the Parisian boulevards; and many a boat with 
purple sails and with garlands of roses twined round its mast floated 
softly along the water, laughter and sweet music sounding from the prow.

Happily for Cato’s peace of mind, he died before the casino with its 
cachucha—or cancan, or whatever it might have been—was introduced, 
and before the fashions of Asia had been added to those of Greece.  But 
he lived long enough to see the Graeco-maniacs triumphant.  In earlier 
and happier days he had been able to expel two philosophers from Rome, 
but now he saw them swarming in the streets with their ragged cloaks and 
greasy beards, and everywhere obtaining seats as domestic chaplains at 
the tables of the rich.  He could now do no more than protest in his bitter 
and extravagant style against the corruption of the age.  He prophesied 
that as soon as Rome had thoroughly imbibed the Greek philosophy she 
would lose the empire of the world; he declared that Socrates was a 
prating, seditious fellow who well deserved his fate; and he warned his 
son to beware of the Greek physicians, for the Greeks had laid a plot to 
kill all the Romans, and the doctors had been deputed to put it into 
execution with their medicines.

Cato was a man of an iron body which was covered with honourable 
scars, a loud, harsh voice, greenish-grey eyes, foxy hair, and enormous 
teeth resembling tusks.  His face was so hideous and forbidding that, 
according to one of the hundred epigrams that were composed against 
him, he would wander for ever on the banks of the Styx, for hell itself 
would be afraid to let him in.  He was distinguished as a general, as an 
orator, and as an author, but he pretended that it was his chief ambition to 
be considered a good farmer.  He lived in a little cottage on his Sabine 
estate, and went in the morning to practise as an advocate in the 
neighbouring town.  When he came home he stripped to the skin 
and worked in the fields with his slaves, drinking as they did the 
vinegar-water or the thin, sour wine.  In the evening he used to boil the 
turnips for his supper while his wife made the bread.  Although he cared 
so little about external things, if he gave an entertainment and the slaves 
had not cooked it or waited to his liking, he used to chastise them with 
leather thongs.  It was one of his maxims to sell his slaves when they 
grew old—the worst cruelty that a slave-owner can commit.  “For my 
part,” says Plutarch, “I should never have the heart to sell an ox that had 
grown old in my service, still less my aged slave.”

Cato’s old-fashioned virtue paid very well.  He gratified his personal 
antipathies and obtained the character of the people’s friend.  He was 
always impeaching the great men of his country, and was himself 
impeached nearly fifty times.  The man who sets up as being much better 
than his age is always to be suspected, and Cato is perhaps the best 
specimen of the rugged hypocrite and austere charlatan that history can 
produce.  This censor of morals bred slaves for sale.  He made laws 
against usury and then turned usurer himself.  He was always preaching 
about the vanity of riches, and wrote an excellent work on the best way of 
getting rich.  He degraded a Roman knight for kissing his wife in the 
day-time in the presence of his daughter, and he himself, while he was 
living under his daughter-in-law’s roof, bestowed his favours on one of 
the servant girls of the establishment, and allowed her to be impudent to 
her young mistress.  “Old age,” he once said to a grey-headed debauchee, 
“has deformities enough of its own.  Do not add to it the deformity of 
vice.”  At the time of the amorous affair above mentioned Cato was 
nearly eighty years of age.

On the other hand, he was a most faithful servant to his country; he was a 
truly religious man, and his god was the Commonwealth of Rome.  Nor 
was he destitute of the domestic virtues, though sadly deficient in that 
respect.  He used to say that those who beat their wives and children laid 
their sacrilegious hands on the holiest things in the world.  He educated 
his son himself, taught him to box, to ride, and to swim, and wrote out for 
him a history of Rome in large pothook characters, that he might become 
acquainted at an early age with the great actions of the ancient Romans. 
He was as careful in what he said before the child as if he had been in the 
presence of the vestal virgins.

This Cato was the man on whom rests chiefly the guilt of the murder 
which we must now relate.  In public and in private, by direct 
denunciation, by skilful innuendo, by appealing to the fears of some and 
to the interests of others, he laboured incessantly towards his end.  Once, 
after he had made a speech against Carthage in the senate, he shook the 
skirt of his robe as if by accident, and some African figs fell upon the 
ground.  When all had looked and wondered at their size and beauty he 
observed that the place where they grew was only three days’ sail from 
Rome.

It is possible that Cato was sincere in his alarms, for he was one of the 
few survivors of the second Punic War.  He had felt the arm of Carthage 
in its strength.  He could remember that day when even Romans had 
turned pale; when the old men covered their faces with their mantles; 
when the young men clambered on the walls; when the women ran 
wailing round the temples of the gods, praying for protection and 
sweeping the shrines with their hair; when a cry went forth that Hannibal 
was at the gates; when a panic seized the city; when the people, collecting 
on the roofs, flung tiles at Roman soldiers, believing them to be the 
enemy already in the town; when all over the Campagna could be seen 
the smoke of ricks and farmhouses mounting in the air, and the wild 
Berber horsemen driving herds of cattle to the Punic camp.

Besides, it was his theory that the annihilation of foreign powers was the 
building up of Rome.  He used to boast that in his Peninsular campaign 
he had demolished a Spanish town a day.  There were in the senate many 
enlightened men who denied that the prosperity of Rome could be 
assisted by the destruction of trading cities, and Carthage was 
defended by the Scipio party.  But the influence of the banker class 
was employed on Cato’s side.  They wanted every penny that was spent 
in the Mediterranean world to pass through their books.  Carthage and 
Corinth were rival firms which it was to their profit to destroy.  These 
money-mongers possessed great power in the senate and the state, and at 
last they carried the day.  It was privately resolved that Carthage should 
be attacked as soon as an opportunity occurred.

Thus in Africa and in Italy Masinissa and Cato prepared the minds of 
men for the deed of blood.  It was as if the Furies of the slaughtered dead 
had entered the bodies of those two old men and kept them alive beyond 
their natural term.  Cato had done his share.  It was now Masinissa’s turn.  
As soon as he was assured that he would be supported by the Romans he 
struck again and again the wretched people, who were afraid to resist and 
yet who soon saw that it would be folly to submit.  It was evident that 
Rome would not interfere.  If Masinissa was not checked he would strip 
them of their cornfields; he would starve them to death.  The war party at 
last prevailed; the city was fortified and armed.  Masinissa descended on 
their villas, their gardens, and their farms.  Driven to despair, the 
Carthaginians went forth to defend the crops which their own hands had 
sown.  A great battle was fought, and Masinissa was victorious.

On a hill near the battle-field sat a young Roman officer, Scipio 
Aemilianus, a relative of the man who had defeated Hannibal.  He had 
been sent over from Spain for a squadron of elephants, and arrived in 
Masinissa’s camp at this interesting crisis.  The news of the battle was 
soon despatched by him to Rome.  The treaty had now been broken, and 
the senate declared war.

The Carthaginians fell into an agony of alarm.  They were now so broken 
down that a vassal of Rome could defeat them in the open field.  What 
had they to expect in a war with Rome?  Ambassadors were at once 
dispatched with full powers to obtain peace—peace at any price—from 
the terrible Republic. The envoys presented themselves before the senate; 
they offered the submission of the Carthaginians, who formally disowned 
the act of war, who had put the two leaders of the war-party to death, and 
who desired nothing but the alliance and goodwill of Rome.  The answer 
which they received was this: “Since the Carthaginians are so well 
advised, the senate returns them their country, their laws, their sepulchres, 
their liberties, and their estates, if they will surrender three hundred sons 
of their senators as hostages, and obey the orders of the consuls.”

The Roman army had already disembarked.  When the consuls landed on 
the coast no resistance was made.  They demanded provisions.  Then the 
city gates were opened, and long trains of bullocks and mules laden with 
corn were driven to the Roman camp.  The hostages were demanded.  
Then the senators brought forth their children and gave them to the city; 
the city gave them to the Romans; the Romans placed them on board the 
galleys, which at once spread their sails and departed from the coast.  The 
roofs of the palaces of Carthage were crowded with women who watched 
these receding sails with straining eyes and outstretched arms.  Never 
more would they see their beloved ones.  Yet they would not perhaps 
have grieved so much at the children leaving Carthage had they known 
what was to come.

The city gates again opened.  The senate sent its council to the Roman 
camp.  A company of venerable men clad in purple, with golden chains, 
presented themselves at headquarters and requested to know what were 
the “orders of the consuls.”  They were told that Carthage must disarm.  
They returned to the city and at once sent out to the camp all their 
fleet-material and artillery, all the military stores in the public magazines, 
and all the arms that could be found in the possession of private 
individuals.  Three thousand catapults and two hundred thousand sets of 
armour were given up. 

They again came out to the camp.  The military council was assembled to 
receive them.  The old men saluted the Roman ensigns, and bowed low to 
the consuls, placing their hands upon their breasts.  The orders of the 
consuls, they said, had been obeyed.  Was there anything more that their 
lords had to command?

The senior consul rose up and said that there was something more.  He 
was instructed by the Roman senate to inform the senators of Carthage 
that the city must be destroyed, but that in accordance with the promise of 
the Roman senate their country, their laws, their sepulchres, their 
liberties, and their estates would be preserved, and they might build 
another city.  Only it must be without walls, and at a distance of at least 
ten miles from the sea.

The Carthaginians cast themselves upon the ground, and the whole 
assembly fell into confusion.  The consul explained that he could exercise 
no choice: he had received his orders, and they must be carried out.  He 
requested them to return and apprise their fellow-townsmen.  Some of the 
senators remained in the Roman camp; others ventured to go back.  When 
they drew near the city the people came running out to meet them, and 
asked them the news.  They answered only by weeping and beating their 
foreheads, and stretching out their hands and calling on the gods.  They 
went on to the senate house; the members were summoned; an enormous 
crowd gathered in the market-place.  Presently the doors opened; the 
senators came forth, and the orders of the consuls were announced. 

And then there rose in the air a fierce, despairing shriek, a yell of agony 
and rage.  The mob rushed through the city and tore limb from limb the 
Italians who were living in the town.  With one voice it was resolved that 
the city should be defended to the last.  They would not so tamely give up 
their beautiful Carthage, their dear and venerable home beside the sea.  If 
it was to be burnt to ashes, their ashes should be mingled with it, and their 
enemies’ as well.

All the slaves were set free.  Old and young, rich and poor, worked 
together day and night forging arms.  The public buildings were pulled 
down to procure timber and metal.  The women cut off their hair to make 
strings for the catapults.  A humble message was sent in true Oriental 
style to the consul, praying for a little time.  Days passed, and Carthage 
gave no signs of life.  Tired of waiting, the consul marched towards the 
city, which he expected to enter like an open village.  He found, to his 
horror, the gates closed, and the battlements bristling with artillery.

Carthage was strongly fortified, and it was held by men who had 
abandoned hope.  The siege lasted more than three years.  Cato did not 
live to see his darling wish fulfilled.  Masinissa also died while the siege 
was going on, and bitter was his end.  The policy of the Romans had been 
death to all his hopes.  His dream of a great African empire was 
dissolved.  He sullenly refused to co-operate with the Romans-—it was 
his Carthage which they had decreed should be levelled to the ground.

There was a time when it seemed as if the great city would prove itself to 
be impregnable; the siege was conducted with small skill or vigour by the 
Roman generals.  More than one reputation found its grave before the 
walls of Carthage.  But when Scipio Aemilianus obtained the command 
he at once displayed the genius of his house.  Perceiving that it would be 
impossible to subdue the city as long as smuggling traders could run into 
the port with provisions, he constructed a stone mole across the mouth of 
the harbour.  Having thus cut off the city from the sea, he pitched his 
camp on the neck of the isthmus—for Carthage was built on a 
peninsula—and so cut it off completely from the land.  For the first time 
in the siege the blockade was complete: the city was enclosed in a stone 
and iron cage.  The Carthaginians in their fury brought forth the prisoners 
whom they had taken in their sallies, and hurled them headlong from the 
walls.  There were many in the city who protested against this outrage.  
They were denounced as traitors; a reign of terror commenced; the men 
of the moderate party were crucified in the streets.  The hideous idol of 
Moloch found victims in that day; children were placed on its 
outstretched and downward sloping hands and rolled off them into the 
fiery furnace which was burning at its feet.  Nor were there wanting 
patriots who sacrificed themselves upon the altars that the gods might 
have compassion upon those who survived.  But among these pestilence 
and famine had begun to work, and the sentinels could scarcely stand to 
their duty on the walls.  Gangs of robbers went from house to house and 
tortured people to make them give up their food; mothers fed upon their 
children; a terrible disease broke out; corpses lay scattered in the streets; 
men who were burying the dead fell dead upon them; others dug their 
own graves and laid down in them to die; houses in which all had 
perished were used as public sepulchres, and were quickly filled.

And then, as if the birds of the air had carried the news, it became known 
all over Northern Africa that Carthage was about to fall.  And then from 
the dark and dismal corners of the land, from the wasted frontiers of the 
desert, from the snow lairs, and caverns of the Atlas, there came creeping 
and crawling to the coast the most abject of the human race—black, 
naked, withered beings, their bodies covered with red paint, their hair cut 
in strange fashions, their language composed of muttering and whistling 
sounds.  By day they prowled round the camp and fought with the dogs 
for the offal and the bones. If they found a skin they roasted it on ashes 
and danced round it in glee, wriggling their bodies and uttering 
abominable cries.  When the feast was over they cowered together on 
their hams, and fixed their gloating eyes upon the city, and expanded their 
blubber lips, and showed their white fangs.

At last the day came.  The harbour walls were carried by assault, and the 
Roman soldiers pressed into the narrow streets which led down to the 
water side.  The houses were six or seven storeys high, and each house 
was a fortress which had to be stormed.  Lean and haggard creatures, with 
eyes of flame, defended their homesteads from room to room, onwards, 
upwards, to the death struggle on the broad, flat roof.

Day followed day, and still that horrible music did not cease—the shouts 
and songs of the besiegers, the yells and shrieks of the besieged, the 
moans of the wounded, the feeble cries of children divided by the sword.  
Night followed night, and still the deadly work went on; there was no 
sleep and no darkness; the Romans lighted houses that they might see to 
kill.

Six days passed thus, and only the citadel was left.  It was a steep rock in 
the middle of the town; a temple of the God of Healing crowned its 
summit.

The rock was covered with people, who could be seen extending their 
arms to heaven and uniting with one another in the last embrace.  Their 
piteous lamentations, like the cries of wounded animals, ascended in the 
air, and behind the iron circle which enclosed them could be heard the 
crackling of the fire and the dull boom of falling beams.

The soldiers were weary with smiting: they were filled with blood.  Nine-
tenths of the inhabitants had been already killed.  The people on the rock 
were offered their lives; they descended with bare hands and passed 
under the yoke.  Some of them eneded their days in prison; the greater 
part were sold as slaves.

But in the temple on the summit of the rocky hill nine hundred Roman 
deserters, for whom there could be no pardon, stood at bay.  The trumpets 
sounded; the soldiers, clashing their bucklers with their swords and 
uttering the war-cry alala! alala! Advanced to the attack.  Of a sudden 
the sea of steel recoiled, the standards reeled; a long tongue of flame 
sprang forth upon them through the temple door.  The deserters had set 
the building on fire that they might escape the ignominious death of 
martial law.

A man dressed in purple rushed out of the temple with an olive-branch in 
his hand.  This was Hasdrubal, the commander-in-chief, and the 
Robespierre of the reign of terror.  His life was given him; he would do 
for the triumph.  And as he bowed the knee before the consul a woman 
appeared on the roof of the temple with two children in her arms.  She 
poured forth some scornful words upon her husband, and then plunged 
with her children into the flames.

Carthage burned seventeen days before it was entirely consumed.  Then 
the plough was passed over the soil to put an end in legal form to the 
existence of the city.  House might never again be built, corn might never 
again be sown, upon the ground where it had stood.  A hundred years 
afterwards Julius Caesar founded another Carthage and planted a Roman 
colony therein.  But it was not built upon the same spot.  The old site 
remained accursed; it was a browsing ground for cattle, a field of blood.  
When recently the remains of the city walls were disinterred they were 
found to be covered with a layer of ashes from four to five feet deep.  
Filled with half-charred pieces of wood, fragments of iron, and 
projectiles.

The possessions of the Carthaginians were formed into a Roman province 
which was called Africa.  The governor resided at Utica, which with the 
other old Phoenician towns received municipal rights, but paid a fixed 
stipend to the state exchequer.  The territory of Carthage itself became 
Roman domain land, and was let on lease.  Italian merchants flocked to 
Utica in great numbers and reopened the inland trade, but the famous sea 
trade was not revived.  The Britons of Cornwall might in vain gather on 
high places and strain their eyes towards the west.  The ships which had 
brought them beads and purple cloth would come again no more.

A descendant of Masinissa, who inherited his genius, defied the Roman 
power in a long war.  He was finally conquered by Sylla and Marius, 
caught, and carried off to Rome.  Apparelled in barbaric splendour, he 
was paraded through the streets.  But when the triumph was over his 
guards rushed upon him and struggled for the finery in which he had been 
dressed.  They tore the rings from his ears with such force that the flesh 
came away; they cast him naked into a dungeon under ground.  “O 
Romans, you give me a cold bath!” were the last words of the valiant 
Jugurtha.

The next Numidian prince who appeared at a triumph was the young 
Juba, who had taken the side of Pompey against Caesar.  “It proved to be 
a happy captivity for him,” says Plutarch, “for from a barbarous and 
unlettered Numidian he became an historian worthy to be numbered 
amongst the learned men of Greece.”

When the empire became established the kingdoms of Numidia, of 
Cyrene, and of Egypt were swept away.  Africa was divided into seven 
fruitful provinces ranging along the coast from Tripoli to Tangiers.  Egypt 
was made a province, with the tropical line for its southern frontier.  The 
oasis of Cyrene, with its fields of asafoetida, was a middle station 
between the two.  But still the history of Northern Africa and the history 
of Egypt remain distinct.  The Roman empire, though held together for a 
time by strong and skilful hands, was divided by customs and modes of 
thought arising out of language into the Greek and Latin worlds.  In the 
countries which had been civilised by the Romans Latin had been 
introduced.  In the countries which before the Roman conquest had been 
conquered by Alexander, the Greek language maintained its ground.  
Greece, Macedonia, Asia Minor, Syria, Egypt, and Cyrene belonged to 
the Greek world; Italy Gaul, Spain, and Africa belonged to the Latin 
world.  Greek was never spoken in Roman Carthage except by a few 
merchants and learned men.  Latin was never spoken in Alexandria 
except in the law courts and at Government House.  Whenever there was 
a partition of the empire Egypt was assigned to one emperor, Carthage to 
the other.  In the Church history of Africa the same phenomenon may be 
observed.  The Church of Africa was the daughter of the Church of 
Rome, and was chiefly occupied with questions of discipline and law.  
The Church of Egypt was essentially a Greek church; it was occupied 
entirely with definitions of the undefinable and solutions of problems in 
theology.

In one respect, however, the histories of Egypt and Africa are the same.  
They were both of them cornfields, and both of them were ruined by the 
Romans.  In the early days of the empire there was a noble reform in 
provincial affairs resembling that which Clive accomplished in British 
India when he visited that country for the last time.  There was then an 
end to that tyrant of prey who under the republic had contrived in a few 
years to extort an enormous fortune from his proconsulate, and who was 
often accompanied by a wife more rapacious than himself; who returned 
to Rome with herds of slaves and cargoes of bullion and of works of art.  
Governors were appointed with fixed salaries; the Roman law was 
everywhere introduced; vast sums of money were expended on the public 
works.

Unhappily this did not last.  Rome was devoured by a population of mean 
whites, the result of foreign slavery, which invariably degrades labour.  
This vast rabble was maintained by the state; rations of bread and oil 
were served out to it every day.  When the evil time came and the 
exchequer was exhausted, the governors of Africa and Egypt were 
required to send the usual quantity of grain all the same, and to obtain 
their percentage as best they could.  They were transformed into satraps 
or pashas.  The great landowners were accused of conspiracy, and their 
estates escheated to the crown.  The agriculturists were reduced to 
serfdom.  There might be a scarcity of food in Africa, but there must be 
none in Rome.  Every year were to be seen the huge ships lying in the 
harbours of Alexandria and Carthage, and the mountains of corn piled 
high upon the quays.  When the seat of empire was transferred to the 
Bosphorus the evil became greater still.  Each province was forced to do 
double work.  There was now a populace in Constantinople which was 
fed entirely by Egypt, and Africa supported the populace of Rome.  While 
the Egyptian fellah and the Moorish peasant were labouring in the fields, 
the sturdy beggars of Byzantium and Rome were amusing themselves at 
the circus or basking on marble in the sun.

But Africa was not only a plantation of corn and oil for their imperial 
majesties the Italian lazzaroni.  It also contained the preserves of Rome.  
The lion was a royal beast; it was licensed to feed upon the flock of the 
shepherds, and upon the shepherd himself if it preferred him.  The 
unfortunate Moor could not defend his life without a violation of the 
game laws, which were quite as ferocious as the lion.  It will easily be 
imagined that the Roman rule was not agreeable to the native population.  
They had fallen beneath a power compared with which that of the 
Carthaginians was feeble and kind; which possessed the strength of 
civilisation without its mercy.  But when that power began to decline they 
lifted up their heads and joined the foreign invaders as soon as they 
appeared, as their fathers had joined the Romans in the ancient days.

These invaders were the Vandals, a tribe of Germans from the North who 
had conquered Spain and who, now pouring over the Gibraltar Straits, 
took Carthage and ruled there a hundred years.  The Romans struggled 
hard to regain their cornfileds, and the old duel of Rome and Carthage 
was resumed.  This time it was Carthage that was triumphant.  It repelled 
the Romans when they invaded Africa.  It became a naval power, scoured 
the Mediterranean, re-conquered Sicily and Sardinia, plundered the 
shores of Italy, and encamped beneath the mouldering walls of Rome.  
The gates of the city were opened, and the bishop of Rome, attended by 
his clergy, came forth in solemn procession to offer the submission of 
Rome, and to pray for mercy to the churches and their captives.  
Doubtless in that army of Germans and Moors by whom they were 
received there were men of Phoenician descent who had read in history of 
a similar scene.  Rome was more fortunate than ancient Carthage: the city 
was sacked, but it was not destroyed.  Not long afterwards it was taken by 
the Goths.  Kings dressed in furs sat opposite each other on the thrones of 
Carthage and of Rome.

The Emperor of the East sent the celebrated Belisarius against the 
Carthaginian Vandals, who had become corrupted by luxury and whom 
he speedily subdued.  Thus Africa was restored to Rome, but it was a 
Greek speaking Rome, and the citizens of Carthage still felt themselves to 
be under foreign rule.  Besides, the war had reduced the country to a 
wilderness. One might travel for days without meeting a human being in 
those fair coast lands which had once been filled with olive groves, and 
vineyards, and fields of waving corn.  The savage Berber tribes pressed 
more and more fiercely on the cultivated territory which still remained.  It 
is probable that if the Arabs had not come the Moors would have driven 
the Byzantines out of the land, or at least have forced them to remain as 
prisoners behind their walls.

With the invasion of the Arabs the proper history of Africa begins.  It is 
now that we are able for the first time to leave the coasts of the 
Mediterranean and the banks of the Nile, and to penetrate into that vast 
and mysterious world of which the ancient geographers had but a faint 
and incorrect idea.

It is evident enough from the facts which have been adduced in the 
foregoing sketch that Egypt and Carthage contributed much to human 
progress—Egypt by instructing Greece, Carthage by drawing forth Rome 
to the conquest of the world.

But these countries did little for Africa itself.  The ambition of Egypt was 
with good reason turned towards Asia, that of Carthage towards Europe.  
The influence of Carthage on the regions of the Niger was similar to that 
of Egypt on the negro regions of the Nile.  In each case it became the 
fashion for the native chiefs to wear Egyptian linen or the Tyrian purple, 
and to decorate their wives with beads which are often discovered by the 
negroes of the present day in ancient and forgotten graves.  Elephants 
were hunted and gold pits were dug in Central Africa, that these luxuries 
might be procured; but the chief article of export was the slave, and this 
commodity was obtained by means of war.  The negroes have often been 
accused of rejecting the civilisation of the Egyptians and Carthaginians, 
but they were never brought into contact with those people.  The 
intercourse between them was conducted by the intermediate Berber 
tribes.

Those Berber tribes who inhabited the regions adjoining Egypt and 
Cyrene appear to have been in some degree improved.  But they were a 
roving people, and civilisation can never ripen under tents.  Something, 
however, was accomplished among those who were settled in cities or the 
regions of the coast.  That the Berber race possesses a remarkable 
capacity for culture has been amply proved.  It is probable that Terence 
was a Moor.  It is certain that Juba, whose works have been unfortunately 
lost, was of unmixed Berber blood.  Reading and writing were common 
among them, and they used a character of their own.  When the Romans 
took Carthage they gave the public library and archives to the Berber 
chiefs.  At one time it seemed as if Barbary was destined to become a 
civilised province after the pattern of Spain and Gaul.  Numidian princes 
adopted the culture of the Greeks, and Juba was placed on his ancestral 
throne that he might tame his wild subjects into Roman citizens.  But this 
movement soon perished, and the Moorish chiefs fell back into their 
bandit life.

The African Church has obtained imperishable fame.  In the days of 
suffering it brought forth martyrs whose fiery ardour and serene 
endurance have never been surpassed.  In the days of victory it brought 
forth minds by whose imperial writings thousands of cultivated men have 
been enslaved.  But this church was for the most part confined to the 
walled cities on the coast, to the farming villages in which the Punic 
speech was still preserved, and to a few Moorish tribes who lived under 
Roman rule.  In the days of St. Augustine Christianity was in its zenith, 
and St. Augustine complains that there were hundreds of Berber chiefs 
who had never heard the name of Christ.  Even in Roman Africa the 
triumph of Christianity was not complete.  In Carthage itself Astarte and 
Moloch were still adored, and a bare-footed monk could not show himself 
in the streets without being pelted by the populace.  At a later date the 
Moorish tribes became an heretical and hostile sect; the religious 
persecutions of the Arian Vandals were succeeded by the persecutions of 
the Byzantine Greeks.  Christianity was divided and almost dead when 
the Arabs appeared, and the Church which had withstood ten imperial 
persecutions succumbed to the tax which the conquerors imposed on “the 
people of the book.”

The failure of Christianity in Africa was owing to the imperfection of the 
Roman conquest.  Their occupation was of a purely military kind, and it 
did not embrace an extensive area.  The Romans were entirely distinct 
from the natives in manners and ideas.  It was natural that the Berbers 
should reject the religion of a people whose language they did not 
understand, whose tyranny they detested, and whose power most of them 
defied.  But the Arabs were accustomed to deserts; they did not settle, 
like the Romans and the Carthaginians, on the coast; they covered the 
whole land; they penetrated into the recesses of the Atlas; they pursued 
their enemies into the depths of the Sahara.  But they also mingled 
persuasion with force.  They believed that the Berbers were Arabs like 
themselves, and invited them as kinsmen to accept the mission of the 
prophet.  They married the daughters of the land; they gathered round 
their standards the warriors whom they had defeated, and led them to the 
glorious conquest of Spain.  The two peoples became one; the language 
and religion of the Arabs were accepted by the Moors.

With this event the biography of ancient Africa is closed, and the history 
of Asiatic Africa begins.  But I have in this work a twofold story to 
unfold.  I have to describe the Dark Continent: to show in what way it is 
connected with universal history; what it has received and what it has 
contributed to the development of man.  And I have also to sketch in 
broad outline the human history itself.  This task has been forced upon me 
in the course of my inquiries.  It is impossible to measure a tributary and 
to estimate its value with precision except by comparing it with the other 
affluents, and by carefully mapping the main stream.  In writing a history 
of Africa I am compelled to write the history of the world, in order that 
Africa’s true position may be defined.

And now, passing to the general questions discussed in this chapter, it 
will be observed that war is the chief agent of civilisation in the period 
which I have attempted to portray.  It was war which drove the Egyptians 
into those frightful deserts in the midst of which their Happy Valley was 
discovered.  It was war which under the Persians opened lands which had 
been either closed against foreigners or jealously held ajar.  It was war 
which colonised Syria and Asia Minor with Greek ideas, and which 
planted in Alexandria the experimental philosophy which will win for us 
in time the dominion of the earth.  It was war which united the Greek and 
Latin worlds into a splendid harmony of empire.  And when that ancient 
world had been overcome by languor and had fallen into Oriental sleep; 
when nothing was taught in the schools which had not been taught a 
hundred years before; when the rapacity of tyrants had extinguished the 
ambition of the rich and the industry of the poor; when the Church also 
had become inert, and roused itself only to be cruel—then again came 
war across the Rhine and the Danube and the Alps, and laid the 
foundations of European life among the ruins of the Latin world.  In the 
same manner Asia awoke as if by magic, and won back from Europe the 
lands which she had lost.  But this latter conquest, though effected by 
means of war, was preserved by means of religion, an element of history 
which must be analysed with scientific care.  In the next chapter I shall 
explain the origin of the religious sentiment and theory in savage life.  I 
shall sketch the early career of the three great Semitic creeds and the 
characters of three men—Moses, Jesus, and Mohammed—who, whatever 
may have been their faults, are entitled to the eternal gratitude of the 
human race.  Then, resuming the history of Africa, I shall follow the 
course of Islam over the Great Desert into the Sudan, and shall describe 
its progress in that country by means of the sword and of the school, 
something of which I have seen and studied under both forms.









































CHAPTER 2


Religion


When the poet invokes in his splendid frenzy the shining spheres of 
heaven, the murmuring fountains, and the rushing streams; when he calls 
upon the earth to hearken, and bids the wild sea listen to his song; when 
he communes with the sweet secluded valleys and the haughty-headed 
hills as if those inanimate objects were alive, as if those masses of brute 
matter were endowed with sense and thought, we do not smile, we do not 
sneer, we do not reason, but we feel.  A secret chord is touched within us: 
a slumbering sympathy is awakened into life.  Who has not felt an 
impulse of hatred, and perhaps expressed it in a senseless curse, against a 
fiery stroke of sunlight or a sudden gust of wind?  Who has not felt a 
pang of pity for a flower torn and trampled in the dust, a shell dashed to 
fragments by the waves?  Such emotions or ideas last only for a moment; 
they do not belong to us; they are the fossil fancies of a bygone age; they 
are a heritage of thought from the childhood of our race.  For there was a 
time when they possessed the human mind.  There was a time when the 
phrases of modern poetry were the facts of ordinary life.  There was a 
time when man lived in fellowship with nature, believing that all things 
which moved or changed had minds and bodies kindred to his own.

To those primeval people the sun was a great being who brightened them 
in his pleasure and who scorched then in his wrath.  The earth was a 
sleeping monster: sometimes it rose a little and turned itself in bed.  They 
walked upon its back when living; they were put into its belly when they 
died.  Fire was a savage animal which bit when it was touched.  The birds 
and beasts were foreigners possessing languages and customs of their 
own.  The plants were dumb creatures with characters good or bad, 
sometimes gloomy in aspect, malignant in their fruit, sometimes 
dispensing wholesome food and pleasant shade.

These various forms of nature they treated precisely as if they had been 
men.  They sometimes adorned a handsome tree with bracelets like a girl; 
they offered up prayers to the fruit trees, and made them presents to coax 
them to a liberal return.  They forbade the destruction of certain animals 
which they revered on account of their wisdom, or feared on account of 
their fierceness, or valued on account of their utility.  They submitted to 
the tyranny of the more formidable beasts of prey, never venturing to 
attack them for fear the nation or species should retaliate, but making 
them propitiatory gifts.  In the same manner they offered sacrifices to 
avert the fury of the elements, or in gratitude for blessings which had 
been bestowed.  But often a courageous people, when invaded, would go 
to war, not only with the tiger and the bear but with powers which to 
them were not less human-like and real.  They would cut with their 
swords at the hot wind of the desert, hurl their spears into the swollen 
river, stab the earth, flog the sea, shoot their arrows at the flashing clouds, 
and build up towers to carry heaven by assault.

But when through the operation of the law of growth the intellectual 
faculties of men become improved, they begin to observe their own 
nature, and in course of time a curious discovery is made.  They ascertain 
that there is something which resides within them entirely independent 
and distinct from the body in which it is contained.  They perceive that it 
is this mind, or soul, or genius, or spirit, which thinks and desires and 
decides.  It commands the body as the chief commands the slave.  While 
the body is asleep it is busy weaving thoughts in the sleeper’s brain, or 
wanders into other lands and converses with people whom he, while 
awake, has never seen.  They hear words of wisdom issuing from the 
toothless mouth of a decrepit old man.  It is evident that this soul does not 
grow old, and therefore it does not die.  The body, it is clear, is only a 
garment which is in time destroyed, and then where does its inmate go?

When a loved one has been taken she haunts the memory of him who 
weeps till the image imprinted on the heart is reflected on the curtain of 
the eye.  Her vision appears not when he is quite asleep, as in an ordinary 
dream, but as he is passing into sleep.  He meets her in the twilight land 
which divides the world of darkness from the world of day.  He sees her 
form distinctly; he clasps it in his arms; he hears the accents of her sweet 
and gentle voice; he feels the pressure of her lips upon his own.  He 
awakes, and the illusion is dispelled; yet with some it is so complete that 
they firmly believe it was a spirit whom they saw.

Among savages it is not love which can thus excite the imagination and 
deceive the sense, but reverence and fear.  The great chief is dead.  His 
vision appears in a half-waking dream: it threatens and it speaks.  The 
dreamer believes that the form and the voice are real, and therefore he 
believes that the great chief still exists.  It is thus that the grand idea is 
born.  There is life after death.  When the house or garment of the body is 
destroyed the soul wanders forth into the air.  Like the wind it is unseen; 
like the wind it can be soft and kind; like the wind it can be terrible and 
cruel.  The savage then believes that the pains of sickness are inflicted by 
the hand which so often inflicted pain upon him when it was in the flesh, 
and he also believes that in battle the departed warrior is still fighting 
with unseen weapons at the head of his own clan.  In order to obtain the 
goodwill of the father-spirit, prayers are offered up to him and food is 
placed beside his grave. He is, in fact, still recognised as king, and to such 
phantom monarchs the distinctive title of god is assigned.  Each chief is 
deified and worshipped when he dies.  The offerings and prayers are 
established by rule; the reigning chief becomes the family priest; he 
pretends to receive communications from the dead, and issues laws in 
their name.  The deeds of valour which the chiefs performed in their 
lifetime are set to song; their biographies descend from generation to 
generation, changing in their course, and thus a regular religion and 
mythology are formed.

It is the nature of man to reason from himself outwards.  The savage now 
ascribes to the various forms of matter souls or spirits such as he 
imagines that he has discovered in himself.  The food which he places at 
the grave has a soul or essence, and it is this which is eaten by the spirit 
of the dead, while the body of the food remains unchanged.  The river is 
not mere water which may dry up and perish, but there dwells within it a 
soul which never dies; and so with everything that lives and moves, from 
the blade of grass which shivers in the wind to the star which slowly 
moves across the sky.  But as men become more and more capable of 
general ideas, of classing facts into systems and of arranging phenomena 
into groups, they believe in a god of the forests, a god of the waters, and a 
god of the sky, instead of ascribing a separate god to every tree, to every 
river, and to every star.  Nature is placed under the dominion of a 
federation of deities.  In some cases the ancestor gods are identified with 
these; in others their worship is kept distinct.  The trees and the animals, 
which were once worshipped for themselves from love or fear, are now 
supposed to be objects of affection to the gods, and are held sacred for 
their sake.

These gods are looked upon as kings.  Their characters are human, and 
are reflected from the minds of those who have created them.  Whatever 
the arithmetical arrangement of the gods may be—single or triune, dual 
or plural—they are in all countries and in all times made by man in his 
own image.  In the plural period some of the gods are good and some are 
bad, just as there are good and evil kings.  The wicked gods can be 
softened by flattery and presents, the good ones can be made fierce by 
neglect.  The wicked gods obtain the largest offerings and the longest 
prayers, just as in despotic countries the wicked kings obtain the most 
liberal presents—which are merely taxes in disguise.

The savage has been led by indigestion and by dreams to believe in the 
existence of the soul after death—or, using simpler language, to believe 
in ghosts.  At first these souls or ghosts have no fixed abode; they live 
among the graves.  At a later period the savage invents a world to which 
the ghosts depart and in which they reside.  It is situated underground.  In 
that world the ghosts live precisely as they lived on earth.  There is no 
retribution and no reward for the actions of the earthly life; that life is 
merely continued in another region of the world.  Death is in fact 
regarded as a migration in which, as in all migrations, the emigrants 
preserve their relative positions.  When a man of importance dies his 
family furnish him with an outfit of slaves and wives, and pack up in his 
grave his arms and ornaments and clothes, that he may make his 
appearance in the under-world in a manner befitting his rank and fortune.  
It is believed that the souls of the clothes, as well as of the persons 
sacrificed, accompany him there, and it is sometimes believed that all the 
clothes which he has worn in his life will then have their resurrection day.

The under-world and the upper-world are governed by the same gods or 
unseen kings.  Man’s life in the upper-world is short: his life in the under-
world is long.  But as regards the existence of the worlds themselves, 
both are eternal, without beginning and without end.  This idea is not a 
creation of the ripened intellect, as is usually supposed.  It is a product of 
limited experience, and expression of a seeming fact.  The savage did not 
see the world begin; therefore it had no beginning.  He has not seen it 
grow older; therefore it will have no end.

The two worlds adjoin each other, and the frontier between them is very 
faintly marked.  The gods often dress themselves in flesh and blood and 
visit the earth to do evil or to do good—to make love to women, to 
torment their enemies, to converse with their favourites and friends.  On 
the other hand there are men who possess the power of leaving their 
bodies in their beds and of passing into the other world to obtain divine 
poisons which they malignantly employ.  The ghosts of the dead often 
come and sit by their old firesides and eat what is set apart for them.  
Sometimes a departed spirit will re-enter the family, assuming a body 
which resembles in its features the one he previously wore.  
Distinguished heroes and prophets are often supposed to be hybrids or 
mulattoes, the result of a union between a woman and a god.  Sometimes 
it is believed that a god has come down on earth out of love for a certain 
nation, to offer himself up as a sacrifice, and so to quench the blood-thirst 
of some sullen and revengeful god who has that nation in his power.  
Sometimes a savage people believe that their kings are gods who have 
deigned to take upon them a perishable body for a time, and there are 
countries in which a still more remarkable superstition prevails.  The 
royal body even is immortal.  The king never eats, never sleeps, and 
never dies.  This kind of monarch is visible only to his priests.  When the 
people wish to present a petition he gives them audience seated behind a 
curtain, from beneath which he thrusts out his foot in token of assent.  
When he dies he is secretly buried by the priests, and a new puppet is 
elected in his stead.

The savage lives in a strange world, a world of special providences and 
divine interpositions, not happening at long intervals and for some great 
end, but every day and almost at every hour.  A pain, a dream, a sensation 
of any kind, a stroke of good or bad luck—whatever, in short, does not 
proceed from man, whatever we ascribe, for want of a better word, to 
chance--is by him ascribed to the direct interference of the gods.  He 
knows nothing about the laws of nature.  Death itself is not a natural 
event. Sooner or later men make the gods angry and are killed.

It is difficult for those who have not lived among savages perfectly to 
realise their faith.  When told that his gods do not exist the savage merely 
laughs in mild wonder at such an extraordinary observation being made.  
It seems quite natural to him that his gods should be as his parents and 
grandparents have described; he believes as he breathes, without an 
effort; he feels that what he has been taught is true.  His creed is in 
harmony with his intellect, and cannot be changed until his intellect is 
changed.  If a god in a dream, or through the priests, has made him a 
promise and the promise is broken, he does not on that account doubt the 
existence of the god.  He merely supposes that the god has told a lie.  Nor 
does it seem strange to him that a god should tell a lie.  His god is only a 
gigantic man, a sensual, despotic king who orders his subjects to give him 
the first fruits of the fields, the firstlings of the flock, virgins for his 
harem, human bodies for his cannibal repasts.  As for himself, he is the 
slave of that god or king; he prays, that is to say, he begs; he sings hymns, 
that is to say, he flatters; he sacrifices, that is to say, he pays tribute, 
chiefly out of fear, but partly in the hope of getting something better in 
return—long life, riches, and fruitful wives.  He is usually afraid to say of 
the gods what he thinks, or even to utter their real name.  But sometimes 
he gives vent to the hatred which is burning in his heart.  Writhing on a 
bed of sickness, he heaps curses on the god who he declares is “eating his 
inside”; and when he is converted prematurely to a higher creed his god is 
still to him the invisible but human king.  “O Allah!” a Somali woman 
was heard to say, “O Allah! May thy teeth ache like mine! O Allah! May 
thy gums be sore as mine!”  That Christian monarch the late King Peppel 
once exclaimed, when he thought of his approaching end, that if he could 
see God he would kill him at once because he made men die.

The arithmetical arrangement of the gods depends entirely upon 
the intellectual faculties of the people concerned.  In the period of 
thing-worship, as it may be termed, every brook, tree, hill, and star is 
itself a living creature, benevolent or malignant, asleep or awake.  In the 
next stage every object and phenomenon is inhabited or presided over by 
a genius or spirit, and with some nations the virtues and the vices are also 
endowed with personality.  As the reasoning powers of men expand their 
gods diminish in number and rule over larger areas, till finally it is 
perceived that there is unity in nature, that everything which exists is a 
part of one harmonious whole.  It is then asserted that one being 
manufactured the world and rules over it supreme.  But at first the Great 
Being is distant and indifferent, “a god sitting outside the universe”; and 
the old gods become viceroys to whom he has deputed the government of 
the world.  They are afterwards degraded to the rank of messengers or 
angels, and it is believed that God is everywhere present; that he fills the 
earth and sky; that from him directly proceeds both the evil and the good.  
In some systems of belief, however, he is believed to be the author of 
good alone, and the dominion of evil is assigned to a rebellious angel or a 
rival god.

So far as we have gone at present, there has been no question of morality.  
All doctrines relating to the creation of the world, the government of man 
by superior being, and his destiny after death, are conjectures which have 
been given out as facts, handed down with many adornments by tradition, 
and accepted by posterity as “revealed religion.”  They are theories more 
or less rational which uncivilised men have devised in order to explain 
the facts of life, and which civilised men believe that they believe.  These 
doctrines are not in themselves of any moral value.  It is of no 
consequence, morally speaking, whether a man believes that the world 
has been made by one god or by twenty.  A savage is not of necessity a 
better man because he believes that he lives under the dominion of 
invisible tyrants who will compel him some day or other to migrate to 
another land.

There is a moral sentiment in the human breast which, like intelligence, is 
born of obscure instincts, and which gradually becomes developed.  Since 
the gods of men are the reflected images of men, it is evident that as men 
become developed in morality the character of their gods will also be 
improved.  The king of a savage land punishes only offences against 
himself and his dependents.  But when that people become more civilised 
the king is regarded as the representative of public law.  In the same 
manner the gods of a savage people demand nothing from their subjects 
but taxes and homage.  They punish only heresy, which is equivalent to 
treason; blasphemy, which is equivalent to insult; and the withholding of 
tribute and adoration, which is equivalent to rebellion.  And these are the 
offences which even among civilised nations the gods are supposed to 
punish most severely.  But the civilised gods also require that men shall 
act justly to one another.  They are still despots, for they order men to 
flatter them and to give them money.  But they are not mere selfish 
despots; they will reward those who do good, they will punish those who 
do evil to their fellow-men.

That vice should be sometimes triumphant and virtue sometimes in 
distress creates no difficulty to the savage mind.  If a good man meets 
with misfortune it is supposed that he is being punished for the sins of an 
ancestor or a relation.  In a certain stage of barbarism society is composed 
not of individuals but of families.  If a murder is committed the avengers 
of blood kill the first man they meet belonging to the guilty clan.  If the 
life cannot be obtained in that generation the feud passes on, for the 
family never dies.  It is considered just and proper that children should be 
punished for the sins of their fathers unto the third and fourth generation.

In a higher state of society this family system disappears; individualism 
becomes established.  And as soon as this point is reached the human 
mind takes a vast stride.  It is discovered that the moral government of 
this world is defective, and it is supposed that poetical justice will be 
administered in the next.  The doctrine of rewards and punishments in a 
future state comes into vogue.  The world of ghosts is now divided into 
two compartments.  One is the abode of malignant spirits, the kingdom of 
darkness and of pain to which are condemned the blasphemers and the 
rebels, the murderers and the thieves.  The other is the habitation of the 
gods, the kingdom of joy and light, to which angels welcome the obedient 
and the good.  They are dressed in white robes and adorned with golden 
crowns; they dwell eternally in the royal presence, gazing upon his 
lustrous countenance and singing his praises in chorus round the throne.

To the active European mind such a prospect is not by any means 
inviting; but heaven was invented in the East, and in the East to be a 
courtier has always been regarded as the supreme felicity.  The feelings 
of men towards their god in the period at which we have now arrived are 
precisely those of an Eastern subject towards his king.  The Oriental king 
is the lord of all the land; his subjects are his children and his slaves.  The 
man who is doomed to death kisses the fatal firman and submits with 
reverence to his fate.  The man who is robbed by the king of all that he 
has earned will fold his hands and say “The king gave and the king taketh 
away.  Blessed be the name of the king!”  The man who lives in a distant 
province, who knows the king only by means of the taxes which are 
collected in his name, will snatch up his arms if he hears that his sacred 
person is in danger, and will defend him as he defends his children and 
his home.  He will sacrifice his life for one whom he has never seen, and 
who has never done him anything but harm.

This kind of devotion is called loyalty when exhibited towards a king, 
piety when exhibited towards a god.  But in either case the sentiment is 
precisely the same.  It cannot be too often repeated that god is only a 
special name for king; that religion is a form of government, its precepts a 
code of laws; that priests are gatherers of divine taxes, officers of divine 
police; that men resort to churches to fall on their knees and to sing 
hymns from the same servile propensity which makes the Oriental delight 
in prostrating himself before the throne; that the noble enthusiasm which 
inspires men to devote themselves to the service of their god, and to 
suffer death rather than deny his name, is identical with the devotion of 
the faithful subject who, to serve his royal master, gives up his fortune or 
his life without the faintest prospect of reward.  The religious sentiment, 
about which so much has been said, has nothing distinctive in itself.  
Love and fear, self-denial and devotion, existed before those phantoms 
were created which men call gods, and men have merely applied to 
invisible kings the sentiments which they had previously felt towards 
their earthly kings.  If they are a people in a savage state they hate both 
kings and gods within their hearts, and obey them only out of fear.  If 
they are a people in a higher state love is mingled with their fear, 
producing an affectionate awe which in itself is pleasing to the mind.  
That the worship of the unseen king should survive the worship of the 
earthly king is natural enough, but even that will not endure for ever; the 
time is coming when the crowned idea will be cast aside and the despotic 
shadow disappear.

By thus translating, or by re-translating, god into king, piety into loyalty, 
and so on; by bearing in mind that the gods were not abstract ideas to our 
ancestors as they are to us, but bona fide men differing only from men on 
earth in their invisibility and other magic powers; by noting that the moral 
disposition of a god is an image of the moral sense of those who worship 
him—their beau-ideal of what a king should be; by observing that the 
number and arrangement of the gods depend exclusively on the 
intellectual faculties of the people concerned, on their knowledge of 
nature, and perhaps to some extent on the political forms of government 
under which they live: above all by remembering that there is a gradual 
development in supernatural ideas, the student of comparative religion 
will be able to sift and classify with ease and clearness dense masses of 
mythology.  But he must understand that the various stages overlap.  Just 
as sailing vessels and four-horse coaches are still used in this age of 
steam, and as stone implements were still to be found in use long after the 
age of iron had set in, so in the early period of god-belief thing-worship 
still to a certain extent endured.  In a treaty between Hannibal and Philip 
of Macedonia which Polybius preserved, the contracting parties take oath 
with one another “n the presence of Jupiter, Juno, and Apollo; in the 
presence of the deity of the Carthaginians and of Hercules and of Iolaus; 
in the presence of Mars, Triton, and Neptune; in the presence of all the 
gods who are with us in the camp; and of the sun, the moon, and the 
earth; the rivers, the lakes, and the waters.”  In the time of Socrates the 
Athenians regarded the sun as an individual.  Alexander, according to 
Arian, sacrificed not only to the gods of the sea but “the sea itself was 
honoured with is munificence.”  Even in Job, the purest of all 
monotheistic works, the stars are supposed to be live creatures which sing 
around the heavenly throne.

Again, in those countries where two distinct classes of men exist, the one 
intellectual and learned, the other illiterate and degraded, there will be in 
reality two religions, though nominally there may be only one.  Among 
the ancient Sabaeans the one class adored spirits who inhabited the stars, 
the other class adored the stars themselves.  Among the worshippers of 
fire that element to one class was merely an emblem, to the other an 
actual person.  Wherever idols or images are used the same phenomenon 
occurs.  These idols are intended by the priests as aids to devotion, as 
books for those who cannot read.  But the savage believes that his god 
inhabits the image, or even regards the image as itself a god.  His feelings 
towards it are those of a child towards her doll.  She knows that it is filled 
with sawdust and made of painted wood, and yet she loves it as if it were 
alive.  Such is precisely the illusion of the savage, for he possesses the 
imagination of a child.  He talks to his idol fondly and washes its face 
with oil or rum, beats it if it will not give him what he asks, and hides it in 
his waistcloth if he is going to do something which he does not wish it to 
see.

There is one other point which it is necessary to observe.  A god´s moral 
disposition, his ideas of right and wrong, are those of the people by whom 
he is created.  Wandering tribes do not as a rule consider it wrong to rob 
outside the circle of their clan: their god is therefore a robber like 
themselves.  If they settle in a fertile country, pass into the agricultural 
state, build towns, and become peaceful citizens with property of their 
own they change their views respecting theft, and accordingly their god 
forbids it in his laws.  But it sometimes happens that the sayings and 
doings of the tent-god are preserved in writings which are accepted as 
revelation by the people of a later and better age.  Then may be observed 
the curious and by no means pleasing spectacle of a people outgrowing 
their religion, and believing that their god performed actions which would 
be punished with the gallows if they were done by men.

The mind of an ordinary man is in so imperfect a condition that it requires 
a creed—that is to say, a theory concerning the unknown and the 
unknowable in which it may place its deluded faith and be at rest.  But 
whatever the creed may be, it should be one which is on a level with the 
intellect, and which inquiry will strengthen not destroy.

As for minds of the highest order, they must ever remain in suspension of 
judgement and in doubt.  Not only do they reflect the absurd traditions of 
the Jews, but also the most ingenious attempts which have been made to 
explain on rational and moral grounds the origine and purpose of the 
universe.  Intense and long-continued labour reveals to them this alone, 
that there are regions of thought so subtle and so sublime that the human 
mine is unable therein to expand its wings, to exercise its strength.  But 
there is a wide speculative field in which man is permitted to toil with the 
hope of rich reward, in which observation and experience can supply 
materials to his imagination and his reason.  In this field two great 
discoveries have been already made.  First, that there is a unity of plan in 
nature, that the universe resembles a body in which all the limbs and 
organs are connected with one another; and second, that all phenomena, 
physical and moral, are subject to laws as invariable as those which 
regulate the rising and setting of the sun.  It is in reality as foolish to pray 
for rain or a fair wind as it would be to pray that the sun should set in the 
middle of the day.  It is as foolish to pray for the healing of a disease or 
for daily bread as it is to pray for rain or a fair wind.  It is as foolish to 
pray for a pure heart or for mental repose as it is to pray for help in 
sickness or misfortune.  All the events which occur upon the earth result 
from law: even those actions which are entirely dependent on the caprices 
of the memory or the impulse of the passions are shown by statistics to 
be, when taken in the gross entirely independent of the human will.  As a 
single atom man is an enigma: as a whole he is a mathematical problem.  
As an individual he is a free agent, as a species the offspring of necessity.

The unity of the universe is a scientific fact.  To assert that it is the 
operation of a single mind is a conjecture based upon analogy, and 
analogy may be a deceptive guide.  It is the most reasonable guess that 
can be made, but still it is no more than a guess, and it is one by which 
nothing after all is really gained.  It tells us that the earth rests upon the 
tortoise: it does not tell us on what the tortoise rests.  God issued the laws 
which manufactured the universe and which rule it in its growth.  But 
who made God?  Theologians declare that he made himself, materialists 
declare that matter made itself, and both utter barren phrases, idle words.  
The whole subject is beyond the powers of the human intellect in its 
present state.  All that we can ascertain is this: that we are governed by 
physical laws which it is our duty as scholars of Nature to investigate, and 
by moral laws which it is our duty as citizens of Nature to obey.

The dogma of a single deity who created the heavens and the earth may 
therefore be regarded as an imperfect method of expressing an undoubted 
truth.  Of all religious creeds it is the least objectionable from a scientific 
point of view.  Yet it was not a Greek who first discovered or invented 
the one god, but the wild Bedouin of the desert.  At first sight this appears 
a very extraordinary fact.  How, in a matter which depended entirely upon 
the intellect, could these barbarians have preceded the Greeks, so far their 
superiors in every other respect?  The anomaly, however, can be easily 
explained.  In the first theological epoch every object and every 
phenomenon of Nature was supposed to be a creature, in the second 
epoch the dwelling or expression of a god.  It is evident that the more 
numerous the objects and phenomena, the more numerous would be the 
gods, the more difficult it would be to unravel Nature, to detect the 
connection between phenomena, to discover the unity which underlies 
them all.  In Greece there is a remarkable variety of climate and contour; 
hills, groves, and streams diversify the scene; rugged, snow-covered 
peaks and warm coast lands with waving palms lie side by side.  But in 
the land of the Bedouins Nature may be seen in the nude.  The sky is 
uncovered; the earth is stripped and bare.  It is as difficult for the 
inhabitants of such a country to believe that there are many gods as for 
the people of such a land as Greece to believe that there is only one.  The 
earth and the wells and some uncouth stones, the sun, the moon, and the 
stars are almost the only materials of superstition that the Bedouin can 
employ; and that they were so employed we know.  Stone worship and 
star idolatry, with the adoration of ancestral shades, prevailed within 
Arabia in ancient times, and even now are not extinct. “The servant of the 
sun” was one of the titles of their ancient kings.  Certain honours are yet 
paid to the morning star.  But in that country the one-god belief was 
always that of the higher class of minds, at least within historic time; it is 
therefore not incorrect to term it the Arabian creed.  We shall now 
proceed to show in what manner that belief, having mingled with foreign 
elements, became a national religion, and how from that religion sprang 
two other religions which overspread the world.

Long after the building of the Pyramids, but before the dawn of Greek 
and Roman life, a Bedouin sheikh named Abraham, accompanied by his 
nephew Lot, migrated from the plains which lie between the Tigris and 
Euphrates, crossed over the Syro-Arabian desert, and entered Canaan, a 
country about the size of Wales lying below Phoenicia between the desert 
and the Mediterranean Sea.  They found it inhabited by a people of 
farmers and vine-dressers, living in walled cities and subsisting on the 
produce of the soil.  But only a portion of the country was under 
cultivation: they discovered wide pastoral regions unoccupied by men, 
and wandered at their pleasure from pasture to pasture and from plain to 
plain.  Their flocks and herds were nourished to the full, and multiplied 
so fast that the Malthusian Law came into force; the herdsmen of 
Abraham and Lot began to struggle for existence; the land could no 
longer bear them both. It was therefore agreed that each should select a 
region for himself.  A similar arrangement was repeated more than once 
in the lifetime of the patriarch.  When his illegitimate sons grew up to 
man´s estate he gave them cattle and sent them off in the direction of the 
east.

At certain seasons of the year he encamped beneath the walls of cities, 
and exchanged the wool of his flocks for flour, oil, and wine.  He 
established friendships with the native kings, and joined them in their 
wars.  He was honoured by them as a prince, for he could bring three 
hundred armed slaves into the field, and his circle of tents might fairly be 
regarded as a town.  Before their canvas doors sat the women spinning 
wool and singing the Mesopotamian airs, while the aged patriarch in the 
Great Tent, which served as the forum and the guesthouse, measured out 
the rations for the day, gave orders to the young men about the stock, and 
sat in judgement on the cases which were brought before him, as king and 
father to decide.

He bought from the people of the land a field and a cave, in which he 
buried his wife and in which he was afterwards himself interred.  He was 
succeeded by Isaac as head of the family.  Esau and Jacob, the two sons 
of Isaac, appear to have been equally powerful and rich.

Up to this time the children of Abraham were Bedouin Arabs—nothing 
more.  They worshipped Eloah or Allah, sometimes erecting to him a 
rude altar on which they sacrificed a ram or kid; sometimes a stone pillar 
on which they poured a drink, and then smeared it with oil to his honour 
and glory.  Sometimes they planted a sacred tree.  The life which they led 
was precisely that of the wandering Arabs who pasture their flocks on the 
outskirts of Palestine at the present day.  Not only Ishmael, but also Lot, 
Esau, and various Abrahamites of lesser note became the fathers of 
Arabian tribes.  The Beni-Israel did not differ in manners and religion 
from the Beni-Ishmael and Beni-Esau, and Beni-Lot.  It was the 
settlement of the clan in a foreign country, the influence of foreign 
institutions, which made the Israelites a peculiar people.  It was the sale 
of the shepherd boy—at first a house-slave, then a prisoner, then a 
favourite of the Pharaoh—which created a destiny for the House of Jacob, 
separated it from the Arab tribes, and educated it into a nationality.  
When Joseph became a great man he obtained permission to send for his 
father and his brethren.  The clan of seventy persons, with their women 
and their slaves, came across the desert by the route of the Syrian 
caravan.  The old Arab, in his course woollen gown and with his staff in 
his hand, was ushered into the royal presence.  He gave the king his 
blessing in the solemn manner of the East, and after a short conversation 
was dismissed with a splendid gift of land.  When Jacob died his 
embalmed corpse was carried up to Canaan with an Egyptian escort and 
buried in the cave which Abraham had bought.  Joseph had married the 
daughter of a priest of Heliopolis, but his two sons did not become 
Egyptians; they were formally admitted into the family by Jacob himself 
before he died.

When Joseph also died the connection between the Israelites and the 
court came to an end.  They led the life of shepherds in the fertile 
pasturelands which had been bestowed upon them by the king.  In course 
of time the twelve families expanded into twelve tribes, and the tribe 
itself became a nation.  The government of Memphis observed the rapid 
increase of this people with alarm.  The Israelites belonged to the same 
race as the hated Hyksos or Shepherd Kings.  With their long beards and 
flowing robes they reminded the Egyptians of the old oppressors.  It was 
argued that the Bedouins might again invade Egypt, and in that case the 
Israelites would take their side.  By way of precaution the Israelites were 
treated as prisoners of war, disarmed, and employed on the public works.  
And as they still continued to increase it was ordered that all their male 
children should be killed.  It was doubtless the intention of the 
government to marry the girls as they grew up to Egyptians, and so to 
exterminate the race.

One day the king´s daughter, as she went down with her girls to the Nile 
to bathe, found a Hebrew child exposed on the waters in obedience to the 
new decree.  She adopted the boy and gave him an Egyptian name.  He 
was educated as a priest, and became a member of the university of 
Heliopolis.  But although his face was shaved and he wore the surplice, 
Moses remained a Hebrew in his heart.  He was so overcome by passion 
when he saw an Egyptian ill-using an Israelite that he killed the man upon 
the spot.  The crime became known: there was a hue and cry; he escaped 
to the peninsula of Sinai, and entered the family of an Arab sheikh.

The peninsula of Sinai lies clasped between two arms of the Red Sea.  It 
is a wilderness of mountains covered with a thin, almost transparent 
coating of vegetation which serves as pasture to the Bedouin flocks.  
There is one spot only—the oasis of Feiran—where the traveller can tread 
on black, soft earth and hear the warbling of birds among the trees, which 
stand so thickly together that he is obliged as he walks to part the 
branches from his face.  The peninsula had not escaped the Egyptian 
arms; tablets may yet be seen on which are recorded in paintings and 
hieroglyphics five thousand years old the victories of the Pharaohs over 
the people of the land.  They also worked mines of copper in the 
mountains, and heaps of slag still remain.  But most curious of all are the 
Sinaitic inscriptions, as they are called—figures of animals rudely 
scrawled on the upright surface of the black rocks and mysterious 
sentences in an undeciphered tongue.

Among the hills which crown the high plateau there is one which at that 
time was called the Mount of God. It was holy ground to the Egyptians, 
and also to the Arabs, who ascended it as pilgrims and drew off their 
sandals when they reached the top.  Nor is it strange that Sinai should 
have excited reverence and dread; it is indeed a weird and awful land.  
Vast and stern stand the mountains, with their five granite peaks pointing 
to the sky; avalanches like those of the Alps, but of sand, not of snow, 
rush down their naked sides with a clear and tinkling sound resembling 
convent bells; a peculiar property resides in the air; the human voice can 
be heard at a surprising distance, and swells out into a reverberating roar; 
and sometimes there rises from among the hills a dull booming sound like 
the distant firing of heavy guns.

Let us attempt to realise what Moses must have felt when he was driven 
out of Egypt into such a harsh and rugged land.  Imagine this man, the 
adopted son of a royal personage, the initiated priest, sometimes turning 
the astrolabe towards the sky, perusing the papyrus scroll, or watching the 
crucible and the alembic; sometimes at the great metropolis enjoying the 
busy turmoil of the street, the splendid pageants of the court, reclining in 
a carpeted gondola or staying with a noble at his country house.  In a 
moment all is changed.  He is alone on the mountain-side, a shepherd´s 
crook in his hand.  He is a man dwelling in a tent; he is married to the 
daughter of a barbarian; his career is at an end.  Never more will he enter 
that palace where once he was received with honour, where now his name 
is uttered only with contempt.  Never more will he discourse with grave 
and learned men in the peaceful college gardens, beneath the willows that 
hang over the Fountain of the Sun.  Never more will he see the people of 
his tribe whom he loves so dearly, and for whom he endures this 
miserable fate.  They will suffer, but he will not see them; they will 
mourn, but he will not hear them—or only in his dreams. In his dreams he 
hears them and sees them, alas, too well.  He hears the whistling of the 
lash and the convulsive sobs and groans.  He sees the poor slaves toiling 
in the field, their hands brown with the clammy clay.  He sees the 
daughters of Israel carried off to the harem with struggling arms and 
streaming hair, and then—O lamentable sight!—the chamber of the 
woman in labour—the seated shuddering, writhing form—the mother 
struggling against maternity—the tortured one dreading her release—for 
the kings´s officer is standing by the door, and as soon as the male child 
is born its life is at an end.

The Arabs with whom he was living were also children of Abraham, and 
they related to him legends of the ancient days.  They told him of the 
patriarchs who lay buried in Canaan with their wives; they told him of 
Eloah, whom his fathers had adored.  Then, as one who returns to a long 
lost home, the Egyptian priest returned to the simple faith of the desert, to 
the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob.  As he wandered on the 
mountain heights he looked to the west and he saw a desert: beyond it lay 
Egypt, the house of captivity, the land of bandage. He looked to the east 
and he saw a desert: beyond it lay Canaan, the home of his ancestors, a 
land of peace and soon to be a land of hope.  For now new ideas rose 
tumultuously within him.  He began to see visions and to dream dreams.  
He heard voices and beheld no form; he saw trees which blazed with fire 
and yet were not consumed.  He became a prophet; he entered the ecstatic 
state.

Meanwhile the king had died; a new Pharaoh had mounted on the throne; 
Moses was able to return to Egypt and to carry out the great design which 
he had formed.  He announced to the elders of the people, to the heads of 
houses and the sheikhs of tribes, that Eloah, the God of Abraham, had 
appeared to him in Sinai and had revealed his true name—it was 
Jehovah—and had sent him to Egypt to bring away his people, to carry 
them to Canaan.  The elders believed in his mission and accepted him as 
their chief.  He went to Pharaoh and delivered the message of Jehovah: 
the king received it as he would have received the message of an Arab 
chief—gods were plentiful in Egypt.  But whenever a public calamity 
occurred Moses declared that Jehovah was its author, and there were 
Egyptians who said that their own gods were angry with them for 
detaining a people who were irreligious, filthy in their habits, and 
affected with unpleasant diseases of the skin.  The king gave them 
permission to go and offer a sacrifice to their desert god.  The Israelites 
stole away, taking with them the mummy of Joseph and some jewellery 
belonging to their masters.  Guides marched in front bearing a lighted 
apparatus like that which was used in Alexander´s camp, which gave a 
pillar of smoke by day and a flame by night.  Moses led them by way of 
Suez into Asia, and then along the weed-strewn, shell-strewn shore of the 
Red Sea to the wilderness of Sinai and the Mount of God.  There with 
many solemn and imposing rites he delivered laws which he said had 
been issued to him from the clouds. He assembled the elders to represent 
the people, and drew up a contract between them and Jehovah.  It was 
agreed that they should obey the laws of Jehovah, and pay the taxes 
which he might impose, while he engaged on his part to protect them 
from danger in their march through the desert and to give them 
possession of the Promised Land.  An ark or chest of acacia-wood was 
made in the Egyptian style, and the agreement was deposited therein with 
the ten fundamental laws which Moses had engraved on stone.  A tent of 
dyed skins was prepared and fitted with church furniture by voluntary 
subscription, partly out of stolen goods. This became the temple of the 
people and the residence of Jehovah, who left his own dwelling above the 
vaulted sky that he might be able to protect them on the way.  Moses 
appointed his brother Aaron and his sons to serve as priests; they wore 
the surplice, but to distinguish them from Egyptian priests they were 
ordered not to shave their heads.  The men of Levi, to which tribe Moses 
himself belonged, were set apart for the service of the sacred tent. They 
were in reality his bodyguard, and by their means he put down a mutiny 
at Sinai, slaughtering three thousand men.

When thus the nation had been organised the march began.  At daybreak 
two silver trumpets were blown, the tents were struck, the tribes 
assembled under their respective banners, and the men who bore the ark 
went first with the guides to show the road and to choose an encampment 
for the night.  The Israelites crossed a stony desert, suffering much on the 
way.  Water was scarce; they had no provisions, and were forced to 
subsist on manna or angel´s bread, a gummy substance which exudes 
from a desert shrub and is a pleasant syrup and a mild purge, but not a 
nourishing article of food.

As they drew near the land of Canaan the trees of the desert, the palm and 
the acacia, disappeared.  But the earth became carpeted with green plants 
and spotted with red anemones like drops of blood.  Here and there might 
be seen a patch of corn, and at last in the distance rounded hills with trees 
standing against the sky.  They encamped, and a man from each tribe was 
deputed to spy the land.  In six weeks they returned bringing with them a 
load of grapes.  Two scouts only were in favour of invasion.  The other 
ten declared that the land was a good land, as the fruits showed—a land 
flowing with milk and honey; but the people were like giants; their cities 
were walled and very great; the Israelites were as grasshoppers in 
comparison, and would not be able to prevail against them.

This opinion was undoubtedly correct.  The children of Israel were a 
rabble of field slaves who had never taken a weapon in their hands.  The 
business before them was by no means to their taste, and it was not what 
Moses had led them to expect.  He had agreed on the part of Jehovah to 
give them a land.  They had expected to find it unoccupied and prepared 
for their reception like a new house.  They did not require a prophet to 
inform them that a country should be theirs if they were strong enough to 
take it by the sword, and this it was clear they could not do.  So they 
poured forth the vials of their anger and their grief.  They lifted up their 
voice and cried; they wept all the night.  Would to God they had died in 
the wilderness!  Would to God they had died in Egypt!  Jehovah had 
brought them there that they might fall by the sword, and that their wives 
and little ones might be a prey.  They would choose another captain; they 
would go back to Egypt.  Joshua and Caleb, the two scouts who had 
recommended invasion, tried to cheer them up, and were nearly stoned to 
death for their pains.  Next day the people of Canaan marched out against 
them: a skirmish took place and the Israelites were defeated.  They went 
back to the desert, and wandered forty years in the shepherd or Bedouin 
state.

And then there was an end of that miserable race who were always 
whining under hardship, hankering after the fleshpots of the old slave life.  
In their stead rose up a new generation—genuine children of the desert—
who could live on a few dates soaked in butter and a mouthful of milk a 
day; who were practised from their childhood in predatory wars; to whom 
rapine was a business, and massacre a sport.  The conquest of Canaan 
was an idea which they had imbibed at their mothers´ breasts, and they 
were now quite ready for the work. Moses before his death drew up a 
second agreement between Jehovah and the people.  It was to the same 
effect as the covenant of Sinai.  Loyalty and taxes were demanded by 
Jehovah; long life, success in war, and fruitful crops were promised in 
return.  Within this contract was included a code of laws which Moses 
had enacted from time to time, in addition to the ten commandments; and 
this second agreement was binding not only on those who were present 
but on their posterity as well.

Moses died; Joshua was made commander-in-chief, and the Israelites 
began their march of war.  This time they approached the land not from 
the south but from the east.

The river Jordan rises in the Lebanon mountains, half way between Tyre 
and Damascus; it runs due south, and ends its curling, twisting course in 
the dismal waters of the Dead Sea.  Its basin belongs to the desert, for it 
does not overflow its banks.

Along the coast of the Mediterranean Sea, parallel to the valley of the 
Jordan, lies a fertile strip of land without good harbours, but otherwise 
resembling Phoenicia, from which it is divided by two large 
promontories, the Tyrian Ladder and the White Cape.

And thirdly, between the naked valley of the Jordan and this corn-
producing line of coast there rises a tableland of limestone formation, 
honeycombed with caves, watered by running streams of no great size, 
and intersected by ravines and also by flat, extensive valley plains.

The coast belonged to the Philistines, the basin of the Jordan and the 
pastoral regions on the south to roving Arab tribes; the tableland was 
inhabited by farmers whose towns and villages were always perched on 
the tops of hills, and who cultivated the vine on terraces, each vineyard 
being guarded by a watch tower and a wall; the valley plains were 
inhabited by Canaanites or lowlanders, who possessed cavalry and iron 
chariots of war.

The Israelites differed from other Bedouin tribes in one respect—they 
were not mounted, and they were unable to stand their ground against the 
horsemen of the plain.  The Philistines, a warlike people probably of the 
Aryan race, also retained their independence.  The conquests of the 
Israelites were confined to the land of the south, the Jordan valley and the 
mountain regions, though even in the highlands the conquest under 
Joshua was not complete.  However, the greater part of Palestine was 
taken and partitioned among the Israelitish tribes.  Some of these inclined 
to the pastoral and others to the agricultural condition, and each was 
governed by its own sheikh.  During four hundred years Ephraim 
remained the dominant tribe, and with Ephraim the high priest took up his 
abode.  At a place called Shiloh there was erected an enclosure of low 
stone walls over which the sacred tent was drawn.  This was the oracle 
establishment, or House of God, to which all the tribes resorted three 
times a year to celebrate the holy feasts with prayer and sacrifice, and 
psalmody, and the sacred dance. 

The Levites had no political power and no share in civil life, but they had 
cities of their own, and they also travelled about like mendicant friars 
from place to place performing certain functions of religion, and 
supported by the alms of the devout. 

It was owing to these two institutions, the oracle and the monkish order, 
that the nationality of Israel was preserved.  Yet though it escaped 
extinction it did not retain its unity and strength.  So far from extending 
their conquests, after their first inroad under Joshua the Israelites 
constantly lost ground.  They were divided into twelve petty states, 
always jealous of one another and often engaged in civil war.  The natives 
took advantage of these dissensions, and subdued them one by one.  Now 
and then a hero would arise, rouse them to a war of independence, and 
rule over them as judge for a few years.  Then again they would fall apart, 
and again be conquered, sometimes paying tribute as vassals, sometimes 
hiding in the mountain caves.  However, at last there came a change. The 
temporal and spiritual powers, united in the hands of Moses, were divided 
at his death.  Joshua became the general of Jehovah; the high priest 
became his grand vizier.  Joshua could do nothing of importance without 
consulting the high priest, who read the commands of the Divine Sheikh 
in the light and play of Urim and Thummim, the oracular shining stones.  
On the other hand, the high priest could not issue laws; he could only 
give decisions and replies.  But now a Nazarite or servant of the Church, 
named Samuel, usurped the office, or at all events the powers, of high 
priest which belonged to the family of Aaron, and also obtained the 
dignity of president or judge. He professed to be the recipient of private 
instructions from Jehovah, issued laws in his name, and went round on 
circuit judging the twelve tribes.

In his old age he delegated this office to his sons, who gave false 
judgments and took bribes.  The elders of the people came to Samuel and 
asked him to appoint them a king.

Samuel had established a papacy, intending to make it hereditary in his 
house, and now the evil conduct of his sons frustrated all his hopes.  He 
protested in the name of Jehovah against this change in the constitution; 
he appealed to his own blameless life; he drew a vivid picture of the 
horrors of despotism; but in vain.  The people persisted in their demand; 
they were at that time in the vassal state, and their liege lords, the 
Philistines, did not permit them to have smiths lest they should make 
weapons and rebel.  Samuel himself had united the tribes, and had 
inspired them with the sentiments of nationality.  They yearned to be free, 
and they observed that they lost battles because their enemies were better 
officered than themselves.  They saw that they needed a military chief 
who would himself lead them to the charge, instead of sacrificing a 
sucking lamb or kneeling on a neighbouring hill with this hands up in the 
air.

Samuel, still protesting, elected Saul to the royal office.  The young man 
was gladly accepted by the people on account of his personal beauty, and 
as he belonged to the poorest family of the poorest tribe in Israel, Samuel 
hoped that he would be able to preserve the real power in his own hands. 
But it so happened that Saul was not only a brave soldier and a good 
general; he was also at times a “god-intoxicated man,” and did not require 
a third person to bring him the instructions of Jehovah.  He made himself 
the Head of the Church, as well as of the state, and Samuel was 
compelled to retire into private life.  It is for this reason that Saul´s 
character has been so bitterly attacked by the priest-historians of the Jews.  
For what after all are the crimes of which he was guilty?  He administered 
the battle-offering himself, and he spared the life of a man whom Samuel 
had commanded him to kill as a human sacrifice to Jehovah.  Saul was by 
no means faultless, but his character was pure as snow when compared 
with that of his successor.  David was undoubtedly the greater general of 
the two, yet it was Saul who laid the foundations of the Jewish kingdom.  
It was Saul who conquered the Philistines and won freedom for the nation 
with no better weapons than their mattocks and their axes and their 
sharpened goads.  Saul´s persecution of David is the worst stain upon his 
life, yet if it is true that David had been in Saul´s lifetime privately 
anointed king, he was guilty of treason and deserved to die.  But that 
story of the anointing might have been invented afterwards to justify his 
succession to the throne.

At first David took refuge with the Philistines and fought against his own 
countrymen.  Next he turned brigand, and was joined by all the criminals 
and outlaws of the land.  The cave of Adullam was his lair, whence he 
sallied forth to levy blackmail on the rich farmers and graziers of the 
neighbourhood, cutting their throats when they refused to pay.  At the 
same time, he was a very religious man, and never went on a plundering 
expedition without consulting a little image which revealed to him the 
orders and wishes of Jehovah, just as the Bedouins always pray to Allah 
before they commit a crime, and thank him for his assistance when it has 
been successfully performed.

Saul was succeeded by his son Ishbosheth, who was accepted by eleven 
tribes.  But David, supported by his own tribe and by his band of well-
trained robbers, defied the nation and made war upon his lawful king.  He 
had not the shadow of a claim; however, with the help of treason and 
assassination he finally obtained the crown.  His military genius had then 
full scope.  He took Jerusalem, a pagan stronghold which during four 
hundred years had maintained its independence.  He conquered the coast 
of the Philistines, the plains of Canaan, the great city of Damascus, and 
the tribes of the desert far and near.  He garrisoned Arabia Petraea.  He 
ruled from Euphrates to the Red Sea.

This man after God´s own heart had a well-stocked harem, and the usual 
intrigues took place.  He disinherited his eldest son and left the kingdom 
to the son of his favourite wife—a woman for whom he had committed a 
crime which had offended the not over-delicate Jehovah.  The nation 
seemed taken by surprise, and Solomon, in order to preserve the 
undivided affections of his people, at once killed his brother and his 
party—a coronation ceremony not uncommon in the East.

The wisdom of Solomon has become proverbial.  But whatever his 
intellectual attainments may have been, he did not possess that kind of 
wisdom which alone is worthy of a king.  He did not attempt to make his 
monarchy enduring, his people prosperous and content. He was a true 
Oriental sultan, sleek and sensual, luxurious and magnificent, short-
sighted and unscrupulous, cutting down the tree to eat the fruit. The 
capital of a despot is always favoured, and with the citizens of Jerusalem 
he was popular enough.  They were in a measure his guests and 
companions, the inmates of his house.  They saw their city encircled with 
enormous walls, and paved with slabs of black and shining stone.  Their 
eyes were dazzled and their vanity delighted with the splendid buildings 
which he raised—the ivory palace, the cedar palace, and the temple.  The 
pilgrims who thronged to the sanctuary from all quarters of the land, and 
the travellers who came for the purposes of trade, brought wealth into the 
city.  Foreign commerce was a court monopoly, but the city was a part of 
the court.  Outside the city walls, however, or at least beyond the circle of 
the city lands, it was a very different affair.  The rural districts were 
severely taxed, especially those at a distance from the capital.  The tribes 
of Israel, which but a few years before had been on terms of complete 
equality among themselves, were now trampled underfoot by this upstart 
of the House of Judah.  The tribe of Ephraim, which had so long enjoyed 
supremacy, became restless beneath the yoke.  While Solomon yet 
reigned the standard of revolt was raised; as soon as he died this empire 
of a day dissolved.  Damascus became again an independent state.  The 
Arabs cut the road to the Red Sea.  The King of Egypt, who had probably 
been Solomon´s liege lord, dispatched an army to fetch away the 
treasures of the temple and the palace.  The ten tribes seceded, and two 
distinct kingdoms were established.

The ten tribes of Israel, or the Kingdom of the North, extended over the 
lands of Samaria and Galilee.  Its capital was Shechem, its sanctuary 
Mount Gerizim.

Judah and Benjamin, the royal tribes, occupied the highlands of Judea.  
Jerusalem was their capital; its temple was their sanctuary, and the 
Levites, whom the Israelites had discarded, were their priests.  It is 
needless to relate the wars which were almost incessantly being waged 
between these two miserable kingdoms.  When the empire of the Tigris 
took the place of Egypt as suzerain of Syria both Israel and Judah sent 
their tribute to Nineveh; and as the cuneiform history relates, both of 
them afterwards rebelled.  Sennacherib marched against them and carried 
off the ten tribes into captivity.  Judea was more mountainous, and on that 
account more difficult to conquer than the land of the North.  The Jews, 
as they may now be called, defended themselves stoutly, and a camp 
plague broke up the army before Jerusalem.  By this occurrence Egypt 
also was preserved from conquest.  At that time Sethos, the priest, was 
king, and the soldiers, whose lands he had taken, refused to fight.  Both 
the Egyptians and the Jews ascribed their escape to a miracle performed 
by their respective gods.

Great events now took place.  The Assyrian empire fell to pieces, and 
Nineveh was destroyed.  The Medes inherited its power on the east of the 
Euphrates; the Chaldeans inherited its power on the west.  Egypt under 
the Phil-Hellenes was again spreading into Asia, and a terrific duel took 
place between the two powers.  The Jews managed so well that when the 
Egyptian star was in the ascendant they took the side of Babylon; and 
when the Babylonians had won the battle of Carchemish the Jews 
intrigued with the fallen nation.  Nebuchadnezzar gave them repeated 
warnings, but at last his patience was exhausted and he levelled the 
rebellious city to the ground.  Some of the citizens escaped to Egypt; the 
aristocracy and priesthood were carried off to Babylon; the peasants alone 
were left to cultivate the soil.

At Babylon there was a collection of captive kings, each of whom was 
assigned his daily allowance and his throne.  In this palace of shadows the 
unfortunate Jehoiachin ended his days.  But the Jewish people were not 
treated as captives or as slaves, and they soon began to thrive.

When the ten tribes seceded they virtually abandoned their religion.  They 
withdrew from the temple which they had once acknowledged as the 
dwelling of Jehovah; they had no hereditary priesthood; they had no holy 
books; and so as soon as they ceased to possess a country they ceased to 
exist as a race.  But the Jews preserved their nationality intact.

Moses had been an Egyptian priest, and the unity of God was a 
fundamental article of that religion.  The unity of God was also the tenet 
of the more intelligent Arabs of the desert.  Whether therefore we regard 
that great man as an Egyptian or as an Arab, it can scarcely be doubted 
that the views which he held of the Deity were as truly unitarian as those 
of Mohammed and Abdul-Wahhab.  It is, however, quite certain that to 
the people whom he led Jehovah was merely an invisible Bedouin chief 
who travelled with them in a tent, who walked about the camp at night 
and wanted it kept clean, who manoeuvred the troops in battle, who 
delighted in massacres and human sacrifice, who murdered people in 
sudden fits of rage, who changed his mind, who enjoyed petty larceny 
and employed angels to tell lies—who, in short, possessed all the vices of 
the Arab character.  He also possessed their ideal virtues, for he 
prohibited immorality and commanded them to be hospitable to the 
stranger, to be charitable to the poor, and to treat with kindness the 
domestic beast and the captive wife.

It was impossible for Moses to raise their minds to a nobler conception of 
the Deity; it would have been as easy to make them see Roman noses 
when they looked into a mirror.  He therefore made use of their 
superstition in order to rule them for their own good, and descended to 
trumpetings and fire-tricks which chamber moralists may condemn with 
virtuous indignation, but which those who have known what it is to 
command a savage mob will not be inclined to criticise severely.

When the settlement in Canaan took place the course of events gave rise 
to a theory about Jehovah which not only the Israelites held but also the 
Philistines.  It was believed that he was a mountain god and could not 
fight on level ground.  He was unlike the pagan gods in one respect, 
namely, that he ordered his people to destroy the groves and idols of his 
rivals, and threatened to punish them if they worshipped any god but him. 
However, as might be supposed, although the Israelites were very loyal 
on the mountains, they worshipped other gods when they fought upon the 
plains.  Whenever they won a battle they sang a song in honour of 
Jehovah and declared that he was “a man of war,” but when they lost a 
battle they supposed that Baal or Dagon had trodden Jehovah under foot.  
The result of this was a mixed religion: they worshipped Jehovah, but 
they worshipped other gods as well.  Solomon declared when he opened 
the temple that Jehovah filled the sky, that there were no other gods but 
he.  But this was merely Oriental flattery.  Solomon must have believed 
that there were other gods because he worshipped other gods.  His temple 
was in fact a Pantheon, and altars were raised on the Mount of Olives to 
Moloch and Astarte.  After the reign of Solomon, however, the Jews 
became a civilised people; a literary class arose.  Jerusalem, situated on 
the highway between the Euphrates and the Nile, obtained a place in the 
Asiatic world.  The minds of the citizens became elevated and refined, 
and that reflection of their minds which they called Jehovah assumed a 
pure and noble form: he was recognised as the one God, the Creator of 
the world.

During all these years Moses had been forgotten, but now his code of 
laws (so runs the legend) was discovered in a corner of the temple, and 
laws of a higher kind adapted to a civilised people were issued under his 
name.  The idols were broken, the foreign priests were expelled.  It was in 
the midst of this great religious revival that Jerusalem was destroyed, and 
it may well be that the law which forbade the Jews to render homage to a 
foreign king was the chief cause of their contumacy and their dispersal.  It 
was certainly the cause of all their subsequent calamities: it was their 
loyalty to Jehovah which provoked the destruction of the city by the 
Romans: it was their fidelity to the law which brought down upon them 
all the curses of the law.

The reformation in the first period had been by no means complete: there 
had been many relapses and back-slidings, and they therefore readily 
believed that the captivity was a judgment upon them for their sins.  By 
the waters of Babylon they repented with bitter tears; in a strange land 
they returned to the god of their fathers and never deserted him again.  
Henceforth religion was their patriotism.  Education became general: 
divine worship was organised: schools and synagogues were established 
wherever Jews were to be found.

And soon they were to be found in all the cities of the Eastern world.  
They had no land, and therefore adopted commerce as their pursuit; they 
became a trading and a travelling people, and the financial abilities which 
they displayed obtained them employment in the households and 
treasuries of kings.

The dispersion of the Jews must be dated from this period and not from 
the second destruction of the city.  When Cyrus conquered Babylon he 
restored to the Jews their golden candlesticks and holy vessels, allowed 
them to return home, and rendered them assistance partly from religious 
sympathy—for the Jews made him believe that his coming had been 
predicted by their prophets—and partly from motives of policy.  Palestine 
was the key to Egypt, against which Cyrus had designs, and it was wise to 
plant in Palestine a people on whom he could rely.  But not all the Jews 
availed themselves of his decree.  The merchants and officials who were 
now making their fortunes by the waters of Babylon were not inclined to 
return to the modest farmer life of Judea.  Their piety was warm and 
sincere, but it was no longer combined with a passion for the soil.  They 
began to regard Jerusalem as the Mohammedans regard Mecca.  The 
people who did return were chiefly the fanatics, the clergy, and the 
paupers.  The harvest, as we shall find was worthy of the seed.

Beneath the Persian yoke the Jews of Judea were content, and paid their 
tribute with fidelity.  They could do so without scruple, for they identified 
Ormuzd with Jehovah, took lessons in theology from the doctors of the 
Zend-Avesta, and recognised the Great King as God´s viceroy on earth.  
But when the Persian empire was broken up Palestine was again tossed 
upon the waves.  The Greek kings of Alexandria and Antioch repeated 
the wars of Nebuchadnezzar and Necho.  Again Egypt was worsted, and 
Syria became a province of the Graeco-Asiatic empire.  The government 
encouraged emigration into the newly conquered lands, and soon 
Palestine was covered with Greek towns and filled with Greek settlers.  
Judea alone remained like an island in the flood.  European culture was 
detested by the doctors of the law, who inflicted the same penalty for 
learning Greek as for eating pork.  They therefore resisted the spread of 
civilisation, and Jerusalem was closed against the Greeks.

In the Hellenic world toleration was the universal rule.  An oracle at 
Delphi had expressed the opinion of all when it declared that the proper 
religion for each man was the religion of his fatherland.  Governments, 
therefore, did not interfere with the religious opinions of the people, but 
on the other hand the religious opinions of the people did not interfere 
with their civil duties.  We allow the inhabitants of the holy city of 
Benares to celebrate the rites of their pilgrimage in their own manner, and 
to torture themselves in moderation, but we should at once begin what 
they would call a religious persecution if they were to purify the town by 
destroying the shops of the beef-butchers and other institutions which are 
an abomination in their eyes.  Antiochus Epiphanes was by nature a 
humane and enlightened prince; he attempted to Europeanise Jerusalem; 
he could do this only by abolishing the Jewish laws; he could abolish 
their laws only by destroying their religion; and thus he was gradually 
drawn into barbarous and useless crimes of which he afterwards repented, 
but which have gained him the reputation of a Nero.

At first, however, it appeared as if he would succeed.  The aristocratic 
party of Jerusalem were won over to the cause.  A gymnasium was 
erected, and Jews with artificial foreskins appeared naked in the arena.  
Riots broke out.  Then royal edicts were issued forbidding circumcision, 
and keeping of the Sabbath, and the use of the law.  A pagan altar was set 
up in the Holy of Holies, and swine were sacrificed upon it to the 
Olympian Jove.  The riots increased.  Then a Greek regiment garrisoned 
the city; all new-born children that were found to be circumcised were 
hurled with their mothers from the walls; altar pork was offered as a test 
of loyalty to the elders of the Church, and those who refused to eat were 
put to death with tortures too horrible to be described.  And now the Jews 
no longer raised riots: they rebelled.  The empire was at that time in a 
state of weakness and disorder, and under the gallant Maccabees the 
independence of Judea was achieved.  Yet it is only in adversity that the 
Jews can be admired.  As soon as they obtained the power of self- 
government they showed themselves unworthy to possess it, and in the 
midst of a civil war they were enveloped by the Roman power, which had 
extended them its protection in the period of the Maccabees.  The senate 
placed Herod the great, an Arab price, upon the throne.

Herod was a man of the world, and his policy resembled that of the 
Ptolemies in Egypt. He built the Temple at Jerusalem and a theatre at 
Caesarea, in which city he preferred to dwell.  The kingdom at his death 
was divided between his three sons: they were merely rajahs under the 
rule of Rome, and the one who governed Judea having been removed for 
misbehaviour, that country was attached to the pro-consulate of Syria.  A 
lieutenant-governor was appointed to reside in the turbulent district to 
collect the revenues and maintain order.  The position of the first 
commandant whom Russia sends to garrison Bokhara will resemble that 
of the procurator who took up his winter quarters at Jerusalem.

Those Jews of Judea, those Hebrews of the Hebrews, regarded all the 
Gentiles as enemies of God; they considered it a sin to live abroad, or to 
speak a foreign language, or to rub their limbs with foreign oil.  Of all the 
trees, the Lord had chosen but one vine; and of all the flowers but one 
lily; and of all the birds but one dove; and of all the cattle but one lamb; 
and of all the builded cities only Sion; and among all the multitude of 
peoples he had elected the Jews as a peculiar treasure, and had made them 
a nation of priests and holy men.  For their sake God had made the world.  
On their account alone empires rose and fell.  Babylon had triumphed 
because God was angry with his people; Babylon had fallen because he 
had forgiven them.  It may be imagined that it was not easy to govern 
such a race.  They acknowledged no king but Jehovah, no laws but the 
precepts of their holy books.  In paying tribute they yielded to absolute 
necessity, but the tax-gatherers were looked upon as unclean creatures; no 
respectable men would eat with them or pray with them; their evidence 
was not accepted in the courts of justice.

Their own government consisted of a Sanhedrin or Council of Elders, 
presided over by the High Priest.  They had power to administer their 
own laws, but could not inflict the punishment of death without the 
permission of the procurator.  All persons of consideration devoted 
themselves to the study of the law.  Hebrew had become a dead language, 
and some learning was therefore requisite for the exercise of this 
profession, which was not the prerogative of a single class.  It was a 
rabbinical axiom that the crown of the kingdom was deposited in Judah, 
and the crown of the priesthood in the seed of Aaron, but that the crown 
of the law was common to all Israel.  Those who gained distinction as 
expounders of the sacred books were saluted with the title of rabbi, and 
were called scribes and doctors of the law.  The people were ruled by the 
scribes, but the scribes were recruited from the people.  It was not an idle 
caste—an established Church—but an order which was filled and refilled 
with the pious, the earnest, and the ambitious members of the nation.

There were two great religious sects which were also political parties, as 
must always be the case where law and religion are combined. The 
Sadducees were the rich, the indolent, and the passive aristocrats; they 
were the descendants of those who had belonged to the Greek party in the 
reign of Antiochus, and it was said that they themselves were tainted with 
the Greek philosophy.  They professed, however, to belong to the 
conservative Scripture and original Mosaic school.  As the Protestants 
reject the traditions of the ancient Church, some of which have doubtless 
descended viva voce from apostolic times, so all traditions, good and bad, 
were rejected by the Sadduccees.  As Protestants always inquire 
respecting a custom or doctrine, “Is it in the Bible?” so the Sadduccees 
would accept nothing that could not be shown them in the law.  They did 
not believe in heaven and hell because there was nothing about heaven 
and hell in the books of Moses.  The morality which their doctors 
preached was cold and pure, and adapted only for enlightened minds.  
They taught that men should be virtuous without the fear of punishment 
and without the hope of reward, and that such virtue alone is of any 
worth.

The Pharisees were mostly persons of low birth.  They were the 
prominent representatives of the popular belief, zealots in patriotism as 
well as in religion—the teaching, the preaching, and the proselytising 
party.  Among them were to be found two kinds of men.  Those Puritans 
of the Commonwealth with lank hair and sour visage and upturned eyes, 
who wore sombre garments, sniffled through their noses, and garnished 
their discourse with Scripture texts, were an exact reproduction, so far as 
the difference of place and period would allow, of certain Jerusalem 
Pharisees who veiled their faces when they went abroad lest they should 
behold a woman or some unclean thing; who strained the water which 
they drank for fear they should swallow the forbidden gnat; who gave 
alms to the sound of trumpet, and uttered long prayers in a loud voice; 
who wore texts embroidered on their robes and bound upon their brows; 
who followed minutely the observances of the ceremonial law; who 
added to it with their traditions; who lengthened the hours and deepened 
the gloom of the Sabbath day, and increased the taxes which it had been 
ordered should be paid upon the altar.

On the other hand, there had been among the Puritans many men of pure 
and gentle lives, and a similar class existed among the Pharisees.  The 
good Pharisee, says the Talmud, is he who obeys the law because he 
loves the Lord.  They addressed their god by the name of “Father” when 
they prayed.  “Do unto others as you would be done by” was an adage 
often on their lips.  That is the law, they said; all the rest is mere 
commentary.  To the Pharisees belonged all that was best and all that was 
worst in the Hebrew religious life.

The traditions of the Pharisees related partly to ceremonial matters which 
in the written law were already diffuse and intricate enough.  But it must 
also be remembered that without traditions the Hebrew theology was 
barbarous and incomplete.  Before the captivity the doctrine of rewards 
and punishments in a future state had not been known.  The Sheol of the 
Jews was a land of shades in which there was neither joy nor sorrow, in 
which all ghosts or souls dwelt promiscuously together.  When the Jews 
came in contact with the Persian priests they were made acquainted with 
the heaven and hell of the Zend-Avesta.  It is probable, indeed, that 
without foreign assistance they would in time have developed a similar 
doctrine for themselves.  Already in the Psalms and Book of Job are signs 
that the Hebrew mind was in a transition state.  When Ezekiel declared 
that the son should not be responsible for the iniquity of the father nor the 
father for the iniquity of the son, that the righteousness of the righteous 
should be upon him, and that the wickedness of the wicked should be 
upon him, he was preparing the way for a new system of ideas in regard 
to retribution.  But as it was, the Jews were indebted to the Zend-Avesta 
for their traditional theory of a future life, and they also adopted the 
Persian ideas of the resurrection of the body, the rivalry of the evil spirit, 
and the approaching destruction and renovation of the world.

The Satan of Job is not a rebellious angel, still less a contending god: he 
is merely a mischievous and malignant sprite.  But the Satan of the 
restored Jews was a powerful prince who went about like a roaring lion, 
and to whom this world belonged.  He was copied from Ahriman, the 
God of Darkness, who was ever contending with Ormuzd, the God of 
Light.  The Persians believed that Ormuzd would finally triumph, and 
that a prophet would be sent to announce the gospel or good tidings of his 
approaching victory.  Terrible calamities would then take place; the stars 
would fall down from heaven; the earth itself would be destroyed.  After 
which it would come forth new from the hands of the Creator; a kind of 
Millennium would be established; there would be one law, one language, 
and one government for men, and universal peace would reign.

This theory became blended in the Jewish minds with certain 
expectations of their own.  In the days of captivity their prophets had 
predicted that a Messiah or anointed king would be sent, that the kingdom 
of David would be restored, and that Jerusalem would become the 
headquarters of God on earth.  All the nations would come to Jerusalem 
to keep the feast of tabernacles and to worship God.  Those who did not 
come should have no rain; and as the Egyptians could do without rain, if 
they did not come they should have the plague.  The Jewish people would 
become one vast priest-hood, and all nations would pay them tithe.  Their 
seed would inherit the Gentiles.  They would suck the milk of the 
Gentiles.  They would eat the riches of the Gentiles.  These same 
unfortunate Gentiles would be their ploughmen and their vine-dressers.  
Bowing down would come those that afflicted Jerusalem, and would lick 
the dust off her feet.  Strangers would build up her walls, and kings would 
minister unto her.  Many people and strong nations would come to see the 
Lord of Hosts in Jerusalem.  Ten men in that day would lay hold of the 
skirt of a Jew saying, “We will go with you, for we have heard that God 
is with you.”  It was an idea worthy of the Jews that they should keep the 
Creator to themselves in Jerusalem, and make their fortunes out of the 
monopoly.

In the meantime these prophecies had not been fulfilled, and the Jews 
were in daily expectation of the Messiah—as they are still, and as they 
are likely to be for some time to come.  It was the belief of the vulgar that 
this Messiah would be a man belonging to the family of David, who 
would liberate them from the Romans and become their king; so they 
were always on the watch, and whenever a remarkable man appeared they 
concluded that he was the son of David, the Holy One of Israel, and were 
ready at once to proclaim him king and to burst into rebellion.  This 
illusion gave rise to repeated riots or revolts, and at last brought about the 
destruction of the city. 

But among the higher class of minds the expectation of the Messiah, 
though not less ardent, was of a more spiritual kind.  They believed that 
the Messiah was that prophet, often called the Son of Man who would be 
send by God to proclaim the defeat of Satan and the renovation of the 
world.  They interpreted the prophets after a manner of their own: the 
kingdom foretold was the kingdom of heaven, and the new Jerusalem was 
not a Jerusalem on earth but a celestial city built of precious stones and 
watered by the Stream of Life. 

Such were the hopes of the Jews.  The whole nation trembled with 
excitement and suspense; the mob of Judea awaiting the Messiah or king 
who should lead them to the conquest of the world; the more noble-
minded Jews of Palestine, and especially the foreign Jews, awaiting the 
Messiah or Son of Man who should proclaim the approach of the most 
terrible of all events.  There were many pious men and women who 
withdrew entirely from the cares of ordinary life, and passed their days in 
watching and in prayer.

The Neo-Jewish or Persian-Hebrew religion, with its sublime theory of a 
single god, with its clearly defined doctrine of rewards and punishments, 
with its one grand duty of faith or allegiance to a divine king, was so 
attractive to the mind on account of its simplicity that it could not fail to 
conquer the discordant and jarring creeds of the pagan world as soon as it 
should be propagated in the right manner.  There is a kind of natural 
selection in religion; the creed which is best adapted to the mental world 
will invariably prevail, and the mental world is being gradually prepared 
for the reception of higher and higher forms of religious life.  At this 
period Europe was ready for the reception of the one-god species of 
belief, but it existed only in the Jewish area, and was there confined by 
artificial checks.  The Jews held the doctrine that none but Jews could be 
saved, and most of them looked forward to the eternal torture of Greek 
and Roman souls with equanimity, if not with satisfaction.  They were not 
in the least desirous to redeem them; they hoarded up their religion as 
they did their money, and considered it a heritage, a patrimony, a kind of 
entailed estate.  There were some Jews in foreign parts who esteemed it a 
work of piety to bring the Gentiles to a knowledge of the true God, and as 
it was one of the popular amusements of the Romans to attend the service 
at the synagogue a convert was occasionally made.  But such cases were 
very rare, for in order to embrace the Jewish religion it was necessary to 
undergo a dangerous operation and to abstain from eating with the 
pagans—in short, to become a Jew.  It was therefore indispensable for the 
success of the Hebrew religion that it should be divested of its local 
customs.  But however much the Pharisees and Sadducees might differ on 
matters of tradition, they were perfectly agreed on this point, that the 
ceremonial laws were necessary for salvation.   These laws could never 
be given up by Jews unless they first became heretics, and this was what 
eventually occurred.  A schism arose among the Jews: the sectarians were 
defeated and expelled.  Foiled in their first object, they cast aside the law 
of Moses and offered the Hebrew religion without the Hebrew 
ceremonies to the Greek and Roman world.  We shall now sketch the 
character of the man who prepared the way for this remarkable event.

It was a custom in Israel for the members of each family to meet together 
once a year that they might celebrate a sacred feast.  A lamb roasted 
whole was placed upon the table, and a cup of wine was filled.  Then the 
eldest son said, “Father, what is the meaning of this feast?”  And the 
father replied that it was held in memory of the sufferings of their 
ancestors, and of the mercy of the Lord their God.  For while they were 
weeping and bleeding in the land of Egypt there came his voice unto 
Moses and said that each father of a family should select a lamb without 
blemish from his flock, and should kill it on the tenth day of the month 
Abib, at the time of the setting of the sun; and should put the blood in a 
basin, and should take a sprig of hyssop and sprinkle the door-posts and 
lintel with the blood; and should then roast the lamb and eat it with 
unleavened bread and bitter herbs.  They should eat it as if in haste, each 
one standing with his loins girt, his sandals on his feet, and his staff in his 
hand.  That night the angel of the Lord slew the first born of the 
Egyptians, and that night Israel was delivered from her bonds.

When the father had thus spoken the lamb was eaten, and four cups of 
wine were drunk, and the family sang a hymn.  At this beautiful and 
solemn festival all persons of the same kin endeavoured to meet together, 
and Hebrew pilgrims from all parts of the world journeyed to Jerusalem.  
When they came within sight of the Holy City and saw the Temple 
shining in the distance like a mountain of snow, some clamoured with 
cries of joy, some uttered low and painful sobs.   Drawing closer together, 
they advanced towards the gates singing the Psalms of David, and 
offering up prayers for the restoration of Israel.

At this time the subscriptions from the various churches abroad were 
brought to Jerusalem, and were carried to the Temple treasury in solemn 
state; and at this time also the citizens of Jerusalem witnessed a 
procession which they did not like so well.  A company of Roman 
soldiers escorted the lieutenant-governor, who came up from Caesarea for 
the festival that he might give out the vestments of the High Priest, 
which, being the insignia of government, the Romans kept under lock and 
key.

It was the nineteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar.  Pontius Pilate 
had taken up his quarters in the city, and the time of the Passover was at 
hand.  Not only Jerusalem, but also the neighbouring villages, were filled 
with pilgrims, and many were obliged to encamp in tents outside the 
walls.

It happened one day that a sound of shouting was heard; the men ran up 
to the roofs of their houses, and the maidens peeped through their latticed 
windows.  A young man mounted on a donkey was riding towards the 
city.  A crowd streamed out to meet him, and a crowd followed him 
behind.  The people cast their mantles on the road before him, and also 
covered it with green boughs.  He rode through the city gates straight to 
the Temple, dismounted, and entered the holy building.

In the outer courts there was a kind of bazaar in connection with the 
Temple worship.  Pure white lambs, pigeons, and other animals of the 
requisite age and appearance were there sold, and money merchants, 
sitting at their tables, changed the foreign coin with which the pilgrims 
were provided.  The young man at once proceeded to upset the tables and 
to drive their astonished owners from the Temple, while the crowd 
shouted and the little gamins, who were not the least active in the riot, 
cried out, “Hurrah for the son of David!”  Then people suffering from 
diseases were brought to him, and he laid his hands upon them and told 
them to have faith and they would be healed.
When strangers inquired the meaning of this disturbance they were told 
that it was Joshua—or—as the Greek Jews called him, Jesus—the 
Prophet of Nazareth.  It was believed by the common people that he was 
the Messiah.  But the Pharisees did not acknowledge his mission.  For 
Jesus belonged to Galilee, and the natives of that country spoke a vile 
patois, and their orthodoxy was in bad repute.  “Out of Galilee,” said the 
Pharisees with scorn, “out of Galilee there cometh no prophet.”

All persons of imaginative minds know what it is to be startled by a 
thought; they know how ideas flash into the mind as if from without, and 
what physical excitement they can at times produce.  They also know 
what it is to be possessed by a presentiment, a deep, overpowering 
conviction of things to come.  They know how often such presentiments 
are true, and also how often they are false.

The prophet or seer is a man of strong imaginative powers which have 
not been calmed by education.  The ideas which occur to his mind often 
present themselves to his eyes and ears in corresponding sights and 
sounds.  As one in a dream he hears voices and sees forms; his whole 
mien is that of a man who is possessed; his face sometimes becomes 
transfigured and appears to glow with light; but usually the symptoms are 
of a more painful kind, such as foaming of the mouth, writhing of the 
limbs, and a bubbling ebullition of the voice.  He is sometimes seized by 
these violent ideas against his will.  But he can to a certain extent produce 
them by long fasting and by long prayer, or in other words by the 
continued concentration of the mind upon a single point; by music, 
dancing, and fumigations.  The disease is contagious, as is shown by the 
anecdote of Saul among the prophets, and similar scenes have been 
frequently witnessed by travellers in the East.

Prophets have existed in all countries and at all times, but the gift 
becomes rare in the same proportion as people learn to read and write.  
Second sight in the Highlands disappeared before the school, and so it has 
been in other lands.  Prophets were numerous in ancient Greece.  In the 
Homeric period they opposed the royal power and constituted another 
authority by the grace of God.  Herodotus alludes to men who went about 
prophesying in hexameters.  Thucydides says that while the 
Peloponnesians were ravaging the lands of Athens there were prophets 
within the city uttering all kinds of oracles, some for going out and some 
for remaining in.  It was a prophet who obtained the passing of that law 
under which Socrates was afterwards condemned to death.  In Greece, 
Egypt, and in Israel the priests adopted and localised the prophetic power.  
The oracles of Amon, Delphi, and Shiloh bore the same relation to 
individual prophets as an Established Church to itinerant preachers.  Syria 
was especially fertile in prophets.  Marius kept a Syrian prophetess 
named Martha, who attended him in all his campaigns.  It matters nothing 
what the Syrian religion might be; the same phenomenon again and again 
recurs.  Balaam was a prophet before Israel was established.   Then came 
the prophets of the Jews, and they again have been succeeded by the 
Christian cave saint and the Moslem dervish, whom the Arabs have 
always regarded with equal veneration.  But it was among the Jews from 
the time of Samuel to the captivity that prophets or dervishes were most 
abundant.  They were then as plentiful as politicians—and politicians in 
fact they were, and prophesied against each other.  Some would be for 
peace and some would be for war: some were partisans of Egypt, others 
were partisans of Babylon.  The prophetic ideas differ in no respect from 
those of ordinary men except in the sublime or ridiculous effect which 
they produce on the prophetic mind and body.  Sometimes the predictions 
of the Jewish prophets were fulfilled, and sometimes they were not.  To 
use the Greek phrase, their oracles were often of base metal, and in such a 
case the unfortunate dervish was jeered at as a false prophet, and would in 
his turn reproach the Lord for having made him a fool before men.

The Jewish prophet was an extraordinary being.  He was something more 
and something less than a man.  He spoke like an angel; he acted like a 
beast.  As soon as he received his mission he ceased to wash.  He often 
retired to the mountains, where he might be seen skipping from rock to 
rock like a goat; or he wandered in the desert with a leather girdle round 
his loins, eating roots and wild honey, or sometimes browsing on grass 
and flowers.  He always adapted his actions to the idea which he desired 
to convey.  He not only taught in parables but performed them.  For 
instance, Isaiah walked naked through the streets to show that the Lord 
would strip Jerusalem, and make her bare.  Ezekiel cut off his hair and 
beard and weighed it in the scales: a third part he burnt with fire, a third 
part he strewed about with a knife, and a third part he scattered to the 
wind.  This was also intended to illustrate the calamities which would 
befall the Jews.  Moreover he wore a rotten girdle as a sign that their city 
would decay, and buttered his bread in a manner we would rather not 
describe, as a sign that they would eat defiled bread among the Gentiles.  
Jeremiah wore a wooden yoke as a sign that they should be taken into 
captivity.  As a sign that the Jews were guilty of wantonness in 
worshipping idols, Hosea cohabited three years with a woman of the 
town; and as a sign that they committed adultery in turning from the Lord 
their God, he went and lived with another man´s wife.

Such is the ludicrous side of Jewish prophecy; yet it has also its serious 
and noble side.  The prophets were always the tribunes of the people, the 
protectors of the poor.  As the tyrant revelled in his palace on the taxes 
extorted from industrious peasants, a strange figure would descend from 
the mountains and, stalking to the throne, would stretch forth a lean and 
swarthy arm and denounce him in the name of Jehovah, and bid him 
repent, or the Lord´s wrath should fall upon him and dogs should drink 
his blood.  In the first period of the Jewish life the prophets exercised 
these functions of censor and of tribune, and preached loyalty to the god 
who had brought them up out of Egypt with a strong hand.  They were 
also intensely fanatical, and published Jehovah´s wrath not only against 
the king who was guilty of idolatry and vice, but also against the king 
who took a census, or imported horses, or made treaties of friendship with 
his neighbours.  In the second period the prophets declared the unity of 
God and exposed the folly of idol-worship.  They did even more than 
this.  They opposed the ceremonial law, and preached the religion of the 
heart.  They declared that God did not care for their Sabbaths and their 
festivals, and their new moons, and their prayers and church services and 
ablutions, and their sacrifices of meat and oil and of incense from Arabia 
and of the sweet cane from a far country.  “Cease to do evil,” said they; 
“learn to do well; relieve the oppressed; judge the fatherless; plead for the 
widow.”  It is certain that the doctrines of the great prophets were 
heretical.  Jeremiah flatly declared that in the day that God brought them 
from the land of Egypt he did not command them concerning burnt-
offerings or sacrifices, and this statement would be of historical value if 
prophets always spoke the truth.

They were bitter adversaries of the kings and priests, and the consolers of 
the oppressed.  “The Lord hath appointed me,” says one whose oracles 
have been edited with those of Isaiah, but whose period was later and 
whose true name is not known, “the Lord hath appointed me to preach 
good tidings unto the meek; he that sent me to bind up the broken-
hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, to give unto them that mourn 
beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for lamentation, the garment of praise for 
the spirit of heaviness.”

The aristocracy who lived by the altar did not receive these attacks in a 
spirit of submission.  There was a law ascribed to Moses—like all the 
other Jewish laws, but undoubtedly enacted by the priest party under the 
kings—that false prophets should be put to death; and though it was 
dangerous to touch prophets on account of the people, who were always 
on their side, they were frequently subjected to persecution.  Urijah fled 
from King Jehoiakim to Egypt; armed men were sent after him; he was 
arrested, brought back and killed.  Zachariah was stoned to death in the 
courts of the Temple.  Jeremiah was formally tried and was acquitted, but 
he had a narrow escape: he was led, as he remarked, like a sheep to the 
slaughter.  At another time he was imprisoned; at another time he was let 
down by ropes into a dry well; and there is a tradition that he was stoned 
to death by the Jews in Egypt after all.  The nominal Isaiah chants the 
requiem of such a martyr in a poem of exquisite beauty and grandeur.  
The prophet is described as one of hideous appearance, so that people hid 
their faces from him.  “His visage was marred more than any man, and 
his form more than the sons of men.”  The people rejected his mission 
and refused to acknowledge him as a prophet.  “He was despised and 
rejected of men, a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief.”  He was 
arraigned on a charge of false prophecy; he made no defence, and he was 
put to death.  “He was oppressed and afflicted, yet he opened not his 
mouth: he was brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before 
her shearers is dumb, so he opened not his mouth.  He was taken from the 
prison to the judgment; he was cut off from the land of the living.”  It was 
believed by the Jews that the death of such a man was accepted by God as 
a human sacrifice, an atonement for the sins of the people, just as the 
priest in the olden time heaped the sins of the people on the scapegoat and 
sent him out into the wilderness. “He bare the sins of many, and made 
intercession for the transgressors.  The Lord hath laid on him the iniquity 
of us all.  Surely he hath borne our griefs and hath carried our sorrows.  
His soul was made an offering for sin.  He was wounded for our 
transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, and with his stripes we 
are healed.”

There are many worthy people who think it a very extraordinary thing 
that this poem can be used almost word for word to describe the rejected 
mission and martyrdom of Jesus.  But as the Hebrew prophets resembled 
one another, and were tried before the same tribunal under the same law, 
the coincidence is not surprising.  A poetical description, in vague and 
general terms, of the rebellion of the English people and the execution of 
Charles the First would apply equally well to the rebellion of the French 
people and the execution of the Louis the Sixteenth.

The Prophet of Nazareth did not differ in temperament and character 
from the noble prophets of the ancient period.  He preached, as they did, 
the religion of the heart; he attacked, as they did, the ceremonial laws; he 
offered, as they did, consolation to the poor; he poured forth, as they did, 
invectives against the rulers and the rich.  But his predictions were 
entirely different from theirs, for he lived, theologically speaking, in 
another world.  The old prophets could only urge men to do good that the 
Lord might make them prosperous on earth, or at the most that they might 
obtain an everlasting name.  They could only promise to the people the 
restoration of Jerusalem and the good things of the Gentiles; the 
reconciliation of Judah and Ephraim, and the gathering of the dispersed.  
The morality which Jesus preached was also supported by promises and 
threats, but by promises and threats of a more exalted kind: it was also 
based upon self-interest, but upon self-interest applied to a future life.  
For this he was indebted to the age in which he lived. He was superior as 
a prophet to Isaiah, as Newton as an astronomer was superior to Kepler, 
Kepler to Copernicus, Copernicus to Ptolemy, Ptolemy to Hipparchus, 
and Hipparchus to the unknown Egyptian or Chaldean priest who first 
began to register eclipses and to catalogue the stars.  Jesus was a 
carpenter by trade, and was urged by a prophetic call to leave his 
workshop and to go forth into the world, preaching the gospel which he 
had received.  The current fancies respecting the approaching destruction 
of the world, the conquest of the Evil Power, and the reign of God had 
fermented in his mind, and had made him the subject of a remarkable 
hallucination.  He believed that he was the promised Messiah or Son of 
Man, who would be sent to prepare the world for the kingdom of God, 
and who would be appointed to judge the souls of men and to reign over 
them on earth.  He was a man of the people, a rustic and an artisan: he 
was also an imitator of the ancient prophets, whose works he studied and 
whose words were always on his lips.  Thus he was led as man and 
prophet to take the part of the poor.  He sympathised deeply with the 
outcasts, the afflicted, and the oppressed.  To children and to women; to 
all who suffered and shed tears; to all from whom men turned with 
loathing and contempt; to the girl of evil life who bemoaned her shame; 
to the tax-gatherer who crouched before his God in humility and woe; to 
the sorrowful in spirit and the weak in heart; to the weary and the heavy 
laden, Jesus appeared as a shining angel with words sweet as the 
honeycomb and bright as the golden day.  He laid his hands on the heads 
of the lowly; he bade the sorrowful be of good cheer, for the day of their 
deliverance and their glory was at hand.

If we regard Jesus only in his relations with those whose brief and bitter 
lives he purified from evil and illumined with ideal joys, we might 
believe him to have been the perfect type of a meek and suffering saint.  
But his character had two sides, and we must look at both.  Such is the 
imperfection of human nature that extreme love is counterbalanced by 
extreme hate; every virtue has its attendant vice, which is excited by the 
same stimulants, which is nourished by the same food.  Martyrs and 
persecutors resemble one another; their minds are composed of the same 
materials.  The man who will suffer death for his religious faith will 
endeavour to enforce it even unto death. In fact, if Christianity were true 
religious persecution would become a pious and charitable duty: if God 
designs to punish men for their opinions it would be an act of mercy to 
mankind to extinguish such opinions.  By burning the bodies of those 
who diffuse them many souls would be saved that would otherwise be 
lost, and so there would be an economy of torment in the long run.  It is 
therefore not surprising that enthusiasts should be intolerant.  Jesus was 
not able to display the spirit of a persecutor in his deeds, but he displayed 
it in his words.  Believing that it was in his power to condemn his fellow-
creatures to eternal torture, he did so condemn by anticipation all the rich 
and almost all the learned men among the Jews.  It was his belief that 
God reigned in heaven but that Satan reigned on earth.  In a few years 
God would invade and subdue the earth.  It was therefore his prayer, 
“Thy kingdom come; thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.”  God´s 
will was not at that time done on earth, which was in the possession of the 
Prince of Darkness. It was evident, therefore, that all prosperous men 
were favourites of Satan, and that the unfortunate were favourites of God.  
Those would go with their master to eternal pain: these would be 
rewarded by their master with eternal joy.

He did not say that Dives was bad or that Lazarus was good, but merely 
that Dives had received his good things on earth and Lazarus his evil 
things on earth, that afterwards Lazarus was rewarded and Dives 
tormented.  Dives might have been as virtuous as the Archbishop of 
Canterbury, who is also clothed in fine linen and who fares sumptuously 
every day; Lazarus might have been as vicious as the Lambeth pauper 
who prowls round the palace gates, and whose mind, like his body, is full 
of sores.  Not only the inoffensive rich were doomed by Jesus to hell-fire, 
but also all those who did anything to merit the esteem of their fellow-
men.  Even those that were happy and enjoyed life--unless it was in his 
own company—were lost souls.  “Woe unto you that are rich,” said he, 
“for ye have received your consolation.  Woe unto you that are full, for ye 
shall hunger.  Woe unto you that laugh now, for ye shall mourn and 
weep.  Woe unto you when all men shall speak well of you, for so did 
their fathers of the false prophets.”  He also pronounced eternal 
punishment on all those who refused to join him.  “He that believeth and 
is baptised,” said he “shall be saved. He that believeth not shall be 
damned.”

He supposed that when the kingdom of God was established on earth he 
would reign over it as viceroy.  Those who wished to live under him in 
that kingdom must renounce all the pleasures of Satan´s world.  They 
must sell their property and give the proceeds to the poor, discard all 
domestic ties, cultivate self-abasement, and do nothing which could 
possibly raise them in the esteem of other people.  For they could not 
serve two masters: they could not be rewarded in the kingdom of this 
world, which was ruled by Satan, and also in the new kingdom, which 
would be ruled by God.  If they gave a dinner they were not to ask their 
rich friends lest they should be asked back to dinner, and thus lose their 
reward.  They must ask only the poor, and for that benevolent action they 
would be recompensed thereafter.  They were not to give alms in public 
or to pray in public, and when they fasted, they were to pretend to feast; 
for if it was perceived that they were devout men and were praised for 
their devotion, they would lose their reward.  Robbery and violence they 
were not to resist.  If a man smote them on one cheek they were to offer 
him the other also; if he took their coat they were to give him their shirt; 
if he forced them to go with him one mile they were to go with him two.  
They were to love their enemies, to do good to them that did them evil.  
And why?  Not because it was good so to do, but that they might be paid 
for the same with compound interest in a future state.

It might be supposed that as in the philosophy of Jesus poverty was 
equivalent to virtue and misery a passport to eternal bliss, sickness would 
be also a beatific state.  But Jesus, like the other Jews, believed that 
disease proceeded from sin.  In Palestine it was always held that a priest 
or a prophet was the best physician, and prayer, with the laying on of 
hands, the most efficacious of all medicines.  Among the sins of Asa it is 
mentioned that, having sore feet, he went to a doctor instead of to the 
Lord.  Jesus informed those on whom he laid his hands that their sins 
were forgiven them, and warned those he healed to sin no more lest a 
worse thing should come upon them.  Such theological practitioners have 
always existed in the East, and exist there at the present day.  A text from 
the Koran written on a board and washed off into a cup of water is 
considered God´s own physic; and as the patient believes in it, and as the 
mind can sometimes influence the body, the disease is occasionally 
healed upon the spot.  The exploits of the miracle doctor are exaggerated 
in his lifetime, and after his death it is declared that he restored sight to 
men that were born blind, cleansed the lepers, made the lame to walk, 
cured the incurable, and raised the dead to life.

In Jerusalem the scribe had succeeded to the seer.  The Jews had already 
a proverb, “A scholar is greater than a prophet.”  The supernatural gift 
was regarded with suspicion, and if successful with the vulgar excited 
envy and indignation.  In the East at the present day there is a permanent 
hostility between the Mullah, or doctor of the law, and the dervish, or 
illiterate “man of God.”  Jesus was, in point of fact, a dervish, and the 
learned Pharisees were not inclined to admit the authority of one who 
spoke a rustic patois and misplaced the aspirate, and who was no doubt, 
like other prophets, uncouth in his appearance and uncleanly in his garb.  
At Jerusalem Jesus completely failed, and this failure appears to have 
stung him into bitter abuse of his successful rivals the missionary 
Pharisees, and into the wildest extravagance of speech.  He called the 
learned doctors a generation of vipers, whited sepulchres, and serpents; 
he declared that they should not escape the damnation of hell.  Because 
they had made the washing of hands before dinner a religious ablution, 
Jesus, with equal bigotry, would not wash his hands at all, though people 
eat with the hand in the East, and dip their hands in the same dish.  He 
told his disciples that if a man called another a fool he would be in danger 
of hell-fire; and whoever spoke against the Holy Ghost, it would not be 
forgiven him “neither in this world nor in the world to come.”  He said 
that if a man had done anything wrong with his hand or his eye, it were 
better for him to cut off his guilty hand, or to pluck out his guilty eye, 
rather than to go with this whole body into hell.  He cursed a fig tree 
because it bore no fruit, although it was not the season of fruit—an action 
as rational as that of Xerxes, who flogged the sea.  He retorted to those 
who accused him of breaking the Sabbath that he was above the Sabbath.

It is evident that a man who talked in such a manner—who believed that 
it was in his power to abrogate the laws of the land, to forgive sins, to 
bestow eternal happiness upon his friends, and to send all those who 
differed from him to everlasting flames—would lay himself open to a 
charge of blasphemy, and it is also evident that the “generation of vipers” 
would not hesitate to take advantage of the circumstance.  But whatever 
share personal enmity might have had in the charges that were made 
against him, he was lawfully condemned according to Bible law.  He 
declared in open court that they would see him descending in the clouds 
at the right hand of the power of God.  The High Priest tore his robes in 
horror; false prophecy and blasphemy had been uttered to his face.

After the execution of Jesus his disciples did not return to Galilee: they 
waited at Jerusalem for his second coming.  They believed that he had 
died as a human sacrifice for the sins of the people, and that he would 
speedily return with an army of angels to establish the kingdom of God 
on earth.  Already in his lifetime these simple creatures had begun to 
dispute about the dignities which they should hold at court, and Jesus, 
who was not less simple than themselves, had promised that they should 
sit on twelve thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel.  He had assured 
them again and again, in the most positive language, that this event would 
take place in their own lifetime.  “Verily, verily,” he said, “there are some 
standing here who shall not taste of death till they see the Son of Man 
coming in his kingdom.”  They therefore remained at Jerusalem and 
scrupulously followed his commands.  They established a community of 
goods, or at least gave away their superfluities to the poorer members of 
the Church, and had charitable arrangements for relieving the sick.  They 
admitted proselytes with the ceremony of baptism.  At the evening repast 
which they held together they broke bread and drank wine in a certain 
solemn manner, as Jesus had been wont to do, and as they especially 
remembered he did at the Last Supper.  But in all respects they were 
Jews, just as Jesus himself had been a Jew.  They attended divine service 
in the temple; they offered up the customary sacrifices; they kept the 
Sabbath; they abstained from forbidden meats.  They held merely the one 
dogma that Jesus was the Messiah, and that he would return in power and 
glory to judge the earth.

Jerusalem was frequented at the time of the pilgrimage by thousands of 
Jews from the great cities of Europe, North Africa, and Asia Minor.  
These pilgrims were of a very different class from the fishermen of 
Galilee.  They were Jews in religion but they were scarcely Jews in 
nationality.  They were members of great and flourishing municipalities; 
they enjoyed political liberty and civil rights.  They prayed in Greek and 
read the Bible in a Greek translation.  Their doctrine was tolerant and 
latitudinarian.  At Alexandria there was a school of Jews who had 
mingled the metaphysics of Plato with their own theology.  Many of these 
Greek Jews became converted, and it is to them that Jesus owes his 
reputation, Christianity its existence.  The Palestine Jews desired to 
reserve the Gospel to the Jews.  They had no taste or sympathy for the 
Gentiles, from whom they lived entirely apart, and who were associated 
in their minds with the abominations of idolatry, the payment of taxes, 
and the persecution of Antiochus.  But these same Gentiles, these poor 
benighted Greeks and Romans, were the compatriots and fellow-citizens 
of the Hellenic Jews, who therefore entertained more liberal ideas upon 
the subject.  Two parties accordingly arose—the conservative or Jewish 
party, who would receive no converts except according to the custom of 
the orthodox Jews in such cases, and the Greek party, who agitated for 
complete freedom from the law of Moses.  The latter were headed by 
Paul, an enthusiastic and ambitious man who refused to place himself 
under the rule of the twelve apostles, but claimed a special revelation.  A 
conference was held at Jerusalem, and a compromise was arranged to the 
effect that pagan converts should not be subjected to the rite of 
circumcision, but that they should abstain from pork and oysters and 
should eat no animals which had not been killed by the knife.

But the compromise did not last.  The Church diverged in discipline and 
dogma more and more widely from its ancient form, till in the second 
century the Christians of Judea, who had faithfully followed the customs 
and tenets of the twelve apostles, were informed that they were heretics.  
During that interval a new religion had arisen.  Christianity had 
conquered paganism, and paganism had corrupted Christianity.  The 
legends which belonged to Osiris and Apollo had been applied to the life 
of Jesus.  The single Deity of the Jews had been exchanged for the 
Trinity, which the Egyptians had invented and which Plato had idealised 
into a philosophic system.  The man who had said "Why callest thou me 
good? There is none good but one, that is God,” had now himself been 
made a god—or the third part of one.  The Hebrew element, however, had 
not been entirely cast off.  With some little inconsistency, the Jewish 
sacred books were said to be inspired, and nearly all the injunctions 
contained in them were disobeyed.  It was heresy to deny that the Jews 
were the chosen people, and it was heresy to assert that the Jews would 
be saved.

The Christian religion was at first spread by Jews who, either as 
missionaries or in the course of their ordinary avocations, made the 
circuit of the Mediterranean world.  In all large towns there was a Ghetto 
or Jews´ quarter, in which the traveller was received by the people of his 
own race.  There was no regular clergy among the Jews, and it was their 
custom to allow, and even to invite, the stranger to preach in their 
synagogue.  Doctrines were not strictly defined, and they listened without 
anger, and perhaps with some hope, to the statement that Jesus of 
Nazareth was the Messiah, and that he would shortly return to establish 
his kingdom upon earth.  But when these Christians began to preach that 
the eating of pork was not a deadly sin, and that God was better pleased 
with a sprinkle than a slash, they were speedily stigmatised as heretics, 
and all the Jewries in the world were closed against them.

Those strange religious and commercial communities, those landless 
colonies which an Oriental people had established all over the world, 
from the Rhone and the Rhine to the Oxus and Jaxartes—which 
corresponded regularly among themselves, and whose members 
recognised each other, wherever they might be and in whatever garb, by 
the solemn phrase, “Hear, Israel, there is one God!”—afforded a model 
for the Christian churches of the early days.  The primitive Christians did 
not indeed live together in one quarter like the Jews, but they gathered 
together for purposes of worship and administration in set places at 
appointed times.  They did not establish commercial relations with the 
Christians in other towns, but they kept up an active social 
correspondence, and hospitably entertained the foreign brother who 
brought letters of introduction as credentials of his creed.  Travelling, 
though not always free from danger, was unobstructed in those days: 
coasters sailed frequently from port to port, and the large towns were 
connected by paved roads with a posting-house at every six-mile stage.  
All inn-keepers spoke Greek: it was not necessary to learn Latin even in 
order to reside at Rome. 

And now we return to that magnificent city which was adorned with the 
spoils of a hundred lands, into which streamed all the wealth, the energy, 
and the ambition of East and West.  Ostia-on-the-Sea, where the ancient 
citizens had boiled their salt.was now a great port in which the grain from 
Egypt and Carthage was stored up in huge buildings, and to which in the 
summer and autumn came ships from all parts of the world.  The road to 
Rome was fifteen miles in length, and was lined with villas and with lofty 
tombs.  Outside the city, on the neighbouring hills, were gardens open to 
the public; and from these hills were conducted streams, by subterranean 
pipes, into the town, where they were trained to run like rivulets, making 
everywhere a pleasant murmur, here and there reposing in artificial 
grottoes or dancing as fountains in the air.  The streets were narrow, and 
the tall houses buried them in deep shade.  They were lined with statues; 
there was a population of marble men.  Flowers glittered on roofs and 
balconies.  Vast palaces of green and white and golden tinted marble 
were surrounded by venerable trees.  The Via Sacra was the Regent Street 
of Rome, and was bordered with stalls where the silks and spices of the 
East, the wool of Spain, the glass wares of Alexandria, the smoked fish of 
the Black Sea, the wines of the Greek isles, Cretan apples, Alpine cheese, 
the oysters of Britain, and the veined wood of the Atlas were exposed for 
sale.  In that splendid thoroughfare a hundred languages might be heard at 
once, and as many costumes were displayed as if the universe had been 
invited to a fancy-dress ball.  Sometimes a squadron of the Imperial 
Guard would ride by—flaxen-haired, blue-eyed Germans covered with 
shining steel.  Then a procession of pale-faces, shaven Egyptian priests, 
bearing a statue of Isis and singing melancholy hymns.  A Greek 
philosopher would next pass along with abstracted eyes and ragged cloak, 
followed by a boy with a pile of books.  Men from the East might be seen 
with white turbans and flowing robes, or in sheep-skin mantles with high 
black caps; and perhaps beside them a tattooed Briton gaping at the 
shops.  Then would come a palanquin with curtains half drawn, carried 
along at a swinging pace by sturdy Cappadocian slaves, and within it the 
fashionable lady with supercilious, half-closed eyes, holding a crystal ball 
between her hands to keep them cool.  Next a senator in white and purple 
robe, receiving as he walked along the greetings and kisses of his friends 
and clients, not always of the cleanest kind.

So crowded were the streets that carriages were not allowed to pass 
through them in the day-time.  The only vehicles that appeared were the 
carts employed in the public works; and as they came rolling and grinding 
along, bearing huge beams and blocks of stone, the driver cracked his 
whip and pushed people against the wall, and there was much squeezing 
and confusion, during which pickpockets, elegantly dressed, their hands 
covered with rings, were busy at their work, pretending to assist the ladies 
in the crowd.  People from the country passed towards the market, their 
mules or asses laden with panniers in which purple grapes and golden 
fruits were piled up in profusion, and refreshed the eye, which was 
dazzled by the stony glare.  Hawkers went about offering matches in 
exchange for broken glass, and the keepers of the cook-shops called out 
in cheerful tones, “Smoking sausages!”  “Sweet boiled peas!”  “ Honey 
wine, O honey wine!”  And then there was the crowd itself—the bright-
eyed, dark-browed Roman people, who played in the shade at dice or 
mora like the old Egyptians; who lounged through the temples, which 
were also the museums, to look at the curiosities; or who stood in groups 
reading the advertisements on the walls, and the programmes which 
announced that on such and such a day there would be a grand 
performance in the circus and that all would be done in the best style.  A 
blue awning, with white stars in imitation of the sky, would shade them 
from the sun; trees would be transplanted, and a forest would appear upon 
the stage; giraffes, zebras, elephants, lions, ostriches, stags, and wild 
boars would be hunted down and killed; armies of gladiators would 
contend; and by way of after-piece the arena would be filled with water, 
and a naval battle would be performed—ships, soldiers, wounds, agony, 
and death being admirably real.

So passed the Roman street-life day, and with the first hours of darkness 
the noise and the turmoil did not cease; for then the travelling carriages 
rattled towards the gates, and carts filled with dung—the only export of 
the city.  The music of serenades rose softly in the air, and sounds of 
laughter from the tavern.  The night watch made their rounds, their 
armour rattling as they passed.  Lights were extinguished, householders 
put up their shutters, to which bells were fastened—for burglaries 
frequently occurred.  And then for a time the city would be almost still.  
Dogs, hated by the Romans, prowled about sniffing for their food.  Men 
or prey from the Pontine Marshes crept stealthily along the black side of 
the street signalling to one another with sharp whistles or hissing sounds.  
Sometimes torches would flash against the walls as a knot of young 
gallants reeled home from a debauch, breaking the noses of the street 
statues on their way.  And at such an hour there were men and women 
who stole forth from their various houses, and with mantles covering their 
faces hastened to a lonely spot in the suburbs, and entered the mouth of a 
dark cave.  They passed through long galleries, moist with damp and 
odorous of death—for coffins were ranged on either side in tiers one 
above the other.  But soon sweet music sounded from the depths of the 
abyss; an open chamber came to view, and a tomb covered with flowers, 
laid out with a repast, encircled by men and women who were apparelled 
in white robes, and who sang a psalm of joy.  It was in the catacombs of 
Rome, where the dead had been buried in the ancient times, that the 
Christians met to discourse on the progress of the faith; to recount the 
trials which they suffered in their homes; to confess to one another their 
sins and doubts, their carnal presumption, or their lack of faith; and also 
to relate their sweet visions of the night, the answers to their earnest 
prayers.  They listened to the exhortations of their elders, and perhaps to a 
letter from one of the apostles.  They then supped together as Jesus had 
supped with his disciples, and kissed one another when the love feast was 
concluded.  At these meetings there was no distinction of rank; the high-
born lady embraced the slave whom she had once scarcely regarded as a 
man.  Humility and submission were the cardinal virtues of the early 
Christians; slavery had not been forbidden by the apostles because it was 
the doctrine of Jesus that those who were lowest in this world would be 
highest in the next, his theory of heaven being earth turned upside down.  
Slavery therefore was esteemed a state of grace, and some Christians 
appear to have rejected the freeman´s cap on religious grounds, for Paul 
exhorts such persons to become free if they can—advice which slaves do 
not usually require.

As time passed on, the belief of the first Christians that the end of the 
world was near at hand became fainter and gradually died away. It was 
then declared that God had favoured the earth with a respite of one 
thousand years.  In the meantime the gospel or good tidings which the 
Christians announced was this.  There was one God, the Creator of the 
world.  He had long been angry with men because they were what he had 
made them.  But he sent his only begotten son into a corner of Syria, and 
because his son had been murdered his wrath had been partly appeased.  
He would not torture to eternity all the souls that he had made; he would 
spare at least one in every million that were born.  Peace unto earth and 
goodwill unto men if they would act in a certain manner; if not, fire and 
brimstone and the noisome pit. He was the emperor of heaven, the tyrant 
of the skies; the pagan gods were rebels, with whom he  was at war, 
although he was all-powerful, and whom he allowed to seduce the souls 
of men although he was all-merciful.  Those who joined the army of the 
cross might entertain some hopes of being saved; those who followed the 
faith of their fathers would follow their fathers to hell-fire.  This creed 
with the early Christians was not a matter of half-belief and metaphysical 
debate, as it is at the present day, when Catholics and Protestants discuss 
hell-fire with courtesy and comfort over filberts and port wine.  To those 
credulous and imaginative minds God was a live king, hell a place in 
which real bodies were burnt with real flames, which was filled with the 
sickening stench of roasted flesh, which resounded with agonising 
shrieks.  They saw their fathers and mothers, their sisters and their dearest 
friends, hurrying onward to that fearful pit unconscious of danger, 
laughing and singing, lured on by the fiends whom they called the gods. 
They felt as we should feel were we to see a blind man walking towards a 
river bank.  Who would have the heart to turn aside and say it was the 
business of the police to interfere?  But what was death, a mere 
momentary pain, compared with tortures that would have no end?  Who 
that could hope to save a soul by tears and supplications would remain 
quiescent as men do now, shrugging their shoulders and saying that it is 
not good taste to argue on religion, and that conversion is the office of the 
clergy?  The Christians of that period felt more and did more than those 
of the present day, not because they were better men but because they 
believed more; and they believed more because they knew less.  Doubt is 
the offspring of knowledge: the savage never doubts at all.

In that age the Christians believed much, and their lives were rendered 
beautiful by sympathy and love.  The dark, deep river did not exist—it 
was only a fancy of the brain: yet the impulse was not less real.  The 
heart-throb, the imploring cry, the swift leap, the trembling hand out-
reached to save; the transport of delight, the ecstasy of tears, the sweet, 
calm joy that a man had been wrested from the jaws of death—are these 
less beautiful, are these less real, because it afterwards appeared that the 
man had been in no danger after all?

In that age every Christian was a missionary.  The soldiers sought to win 
recruits for the heavenly host; the prisoner of war discoursed to his 
Persian jailer; the slave girl whispered the gospel in the ears of her 
mistress as she built up the mass of towered hair; there stood men in 
cloak and beard at street corners who, when the people, according to the 
manners of the day, invited them to speak, preached not the doctrines of 
the Painted Porch but the words of a new and strange philosophy; the 
young wife threw her arms round her husband´s neck and made him agree 
to be baptised, that their souls might not be parted after death. How awful 
were the threats of the heavenly despot; how sweet were the promises of 
a life beyond the grave!  The man who strove to obey the law which was 
written on his heart, yet often fell for want of support, was now promised 
a rich reward if he would persevere.  The disconsolate woman whose age 
of beauty and triumph had passed away was taught that if she became a 
Christian her body in all the splendour of its youth would rise again.  The 
poor slave who sickened from weariness of a life in which there was for 
him no hope, received the assurance of another life in which he would 
find luxury and pleasure when death released him from his woe.  

Ah, sweet fallacious hopes of a barbarous and poetic age!  Illusion still 
cherished, for mankind is yet in its romantic youth!  How easy it would 
be to endure without repining the toils and troubles of this miserable life 
if indeed we could believe that when its brief period was past we should 
be united to those whom we have loved, to those whom death has 
snatched away; or whom fate has parted from us by barriers cold and 
deep and hopeless as the grave.  If we could believe this the shortness of 
life would comfort us—how quickly the time flies by!—and we should 
welcome death.  But we do not believe it, and so we cling to our tortured 
lives, dreading the dark nothingness, dreading the dispersal of our 
elements into cold, unconscious space.  As drops in the ocean of water, as 
atoms in the ocean of air, as sparks in the ocean of fire within the earth, 
our minds do their appointed work and serve to build up the strength and 
beauty of the one great human mind which grows from century to century 
and from age to age, and is perhaps itself a mere molecule within some 
higher mind.

Soon it was whispered that there was in Rome a secret society which 
worshipped an unknown god.  Its members wore no garlands on their 
brows; they never entered the temples; they were governed by laws which 
strange and fearful oaths bound them ever to obey; their speech was not 
as the speech of ordinary men; they buried instead of burning the bodies 
of the dead; they married, they educated their children after a manner of 
their own.  The politicians who regarded the established Church as 
essential to the safety of the state became alarmed.  Secret societies were 
forbidden by law, and here was a society in which the tutelary gods of 
Rome were denounced as rebels and usurpers.  The Christians, it is true, 
preached passive obedience and the divine right of kings, but they 
proclaimed that all men were equal before God—a dangerous doctrine in 
a community where more than half the men were slaves.  The idle and 
superstitious lazzaroni did not love the gods, but they believed in them, 
and they feared lest the “atheists,” as they called the Christians, would 
provoke the vengeance of the whole divine federation against the city, 
and that all would be involved in the common ruin.   Soon there came a 
time when every public calamity—an epidemic, a fire, a famine, or a 
flood—was ascribed to the anger of the offended gods.  And then arose 
imperial edicts, popular commotions, and the terrible street-cry of 
Christiani ad leones!

But the persecutions thus provoked were fitful and brief, and served only 
to fan the flame.  For to those who believed in heaven—not as men now 
believe, with a slight tincture of perhaps unconscious doubt, but as men 
believe in things which they see and hear and feel and know—death was 
merely a surgical operation with the absolute certainty of consequent 
release from pain and of entrance into unutterable bliss.  The Christians 
therefore encountered it with joy, and the sight of their cheerful 
countenances as they were being led to execution induced many to 
inquire what this belief might be which could thus rob death of its 
dreadfulness and its despair.

But the great moralists and thinkers of the empire looked coldly down 
upon this new religion.  In their pure and noble writings they either allude 
to Christianity with scorn or do not allude to it at all.  This circumstance 
has occasioned much surprise: it can, however, be easily explained.  The 
success of Christianity among the people, and its want of success among 
the philosophers, were due to the same cause—the superstition of the 
Christian teachers.

Among the missionaries of the present day there are many men who in 
earnestness and self-devotion are not inferior to those of the apostolic 
times.  Yet they almost invariably fail—they are too enlightened for their 
congregations.  With respect to their own religion, indeed, that charge 
cannot be justly brought against them.  Set them talking on the forbidden 
apple, Noah´s ark, the sun standing still to facilitate murder, the donkey 
preaching to its master, the whale swallowing and ejecting Jonah, the 
miraculous conception, the water turned to wine, the fig-tree withered by 
a curse, and they will reason like children, or in other words they will not 
reason at all; they will merely repeat what they have been taught by their 
mammas.  But when they discourse to the savage concerning his belief 
they use the logic of Voltaire, and deride witches and men possessed in a 
style which Jesus and the twelve apostles, the fathers of the Church, the 
popes of the Middle Ages, and Martin Luther himself would have 
accounted blasphemous and contrary to Scripture.  Now it is impossible 
to persuade an adult savage that his gods do not exist, and he considers 
those who deny their existence to be ignorant foreigners unacquainted 
with the divine constitution of his country.  Hence he laughs in his sleeve 
at all that the missionaries say.  But the primitive Christians believed in 
gods and goddesses, satyrs and nymphs, as implicitly as the pagans 
themselves.  They did not deny and they did not disbelieve the miracles 
performed in pagan temples.  They allowed that the gods had great power 
upon earth, but asserted that they would have it only for a time; that it 
ceased beyond the grave; that they were rebels, and that God was the 
rightful king.  Here then were two classes of men whose intellects were 
precisely on the same level.  Each had a theory, and the Christian theory 
was the better of the two.  It had definite promises and threats, and 
without being too high for the vulgar comprehension, it reduced the 
scheme of the universe to order and harmony, resembling that of the great 
empire under which they lived.

But to the philosophers of that period it was merely a new and noisy form 
of superstition.  Experience has amply proved that minds of the highest 
order are sometimes unable to shake off the ideas which they imbibed 
when they were children; but to those of whom we speak Christianity was 
offered when their powers of reflection were matured, and it was 
naturally rejected with contempt.  They knew that the pagan gods did not 
exist.  Was it likely that they would sit at the feet of those who still 
believed in them?  They had long ago abandoned the religious legends of 
their own country; they had shaken off the spell which Homer with his 
splendid poetry had laid upon their minds.  Was it likely that they would 
believe in the old Arab traditions, or in these tales of a god who took 
upon him the semblance of a Jew, and suffered death upon the gallows 
for the redemption of mankind?  They had obtained by means of 
intellectual research a partial perception of the great truth that events 
result from secondary laws.  Was it likely that they would join a crew of 
devotees who prayed to God to make the wind blow this way or that way, 
to give them a dinner, or to cure them of a pain?  When the Tiber 
overflowed its banks the pagans declared that it was owing to the wrath 
of the gods against the Christians: the Christians retorted that it was 
owing to the wrath of God against the idolaters.  To a man like Pliny, 
who studied the phenomena with his notebook in his hand, where was the 
difference between the two?

In the Greek world Christianity became a system of metaphysics as 
abstract and abstruse as any son of Hellas could desire.  But in the Latin 
world it was never the religion of a scholar and a gentleman.  It was the 
creed of the uneducated people, who flung themselves into it with 
passion.  It was something which belonged to them and to them alone.  
They were not acquainted with Cicero or Seneca: they had never tasted 
intellectual delights, for the philosophers scorned to instruct the vulgar 
crowd.  And now the vulgar crowd found teachers who interpreted to 
them the Jewish books, who composed for them a magnificent literature 
of sermons and epistles and controversial treatises, a literature of 
enthusiasts and martyrs written in blood and fire.  The people had no 
share in the politics of the empire, but now they had politics of their own.  
The lower orders were enfranchised; women and slaves were not 
excluded.  The barbers gossiped theologically.  Children played at church 
in the streets.  The Christians were no longer citizens of Rome.  God was 
their emperor, heaven was their fatherland.  They despised the pleasures 
of this life; they were as emigrants gathered on the shore waiting for a 
wind to waft them to another world.  They rendered unto Caesar the 
things that were Caesar´s, for so it was written they should do.  They 
honoured the king, for such had been the teaching of St. Paul.  They 
regarded the emperor as God´s vice-regent upon earth, and disobeyed him 
only when his commands were contrary to those of God.  But this 
limitation, which it was the business of the bishops to define, made the 
Christians a dangerous party in the state.  The Emperor Constantine, 
whose title was unsound, entered into alliance with this powerful 
corporation.  He made Christianity the religion of the state and the 
bishops peers of the realm.

In the days of tribulation it had often been predicted that when the empire 
became Christian war would cease, and men would dwell in brotherhood 
together.  The Christian religion united the slave and his master at the 
same table and in the same embrace.  On the pavement of the basilica 
men of all races and of all ranks knelt side by side.  If any one were in 
sickness and affliction it was sufficient for him to declare himself a 
Christian: money was at once pressed into his hands: compassionate 
matrons hastened to his bedside.  Even at the time when the pagans 
regarded the new sect with most abhorrence they were forced to exclaim, 
“See how these Christians love one another!”  It was reasonable to 
suppose that the victory of this religion would be the victory of love and 
peace.  But what was the actual result?  Shortly after the establishment of 
Christianity as a state religion there was uproar and dissension in every 
city of the Empire; then savage persecutions and bloody wars, until a 
pagan historian could observe to the polished and intellectual coterie for 
whom alone he wrote that now the hatred of the Christians against one 
another surpassed the fury of savage beasts against man.

It is evident that the virtues exhibited by those who gallantly fight against 
desperate odds for an idea will not be invariably displayed by those who 
when the idea is realised enjoy the spoil.  It is evident that bishops who 
possess large incomes and great authority will not always possess the 
same qualities of mind as those spiritual peers who had no distinction to 
expect except that of being burnt alive.  In all great movements of the 
mind there can be but one heroic age, and the heroic age of Christianity 
was past.  The Church became the state concubine; Christianity lost its 
democratic character.  The bishops who should have been the tribunes of 
the people became the creatures of the Crown.  Their lives were not 
always of the most creditable kind, but their virtues were perhaps more 
injurious to society than their vices.  The mischief was done not so much 
by those who intrigued for places and rioted on tithes at Constantinople as 
by those who, often with the best intentions, endeavoured to make all 
men think alike “according to the law.”

It was the Christian theory that God was a king, and that he enacted laws 
for the government of men on earth.  Those laws were contained in the 
Jewish books, but some of them had been repealed and some of them 
were exceedingly obscure.  Some  were to be understood in a literal 
sense, others were only metaphorical.  Many cases might arise to which 
no text or precept could be with any degree of certainty applied.  What 
then was to be done?  How was God´s will to be ascertained?  The early 
Christians were taught that by means of prayer and faith their questions 
would be answered, their difficulties would be solved.  They must pray 
earnestly to God for help: and the ideas which came into their heads after 
prayer would be emanations from the Holy Ghost.

In the first age of Christianity the Church was a republic.  There was no 
distinction between clergymen and laymen.  Each member of the 
congregation had a right to preach, and each consulted God on his own 
account.  The spiritus privatus everywhere prevailed.  A committee of 
presbyters or elders, with a bishop or chairman, administered the affairs 
of the community.

The second period was marked by an important change.  The bishop and 
presbyters, though still elected by the congregation, had begun to 
monopolise the pulpit; the distinction of clergy and laity was already 
made.  The bishops of various churches met together at councils or 
synods to discuss questions of discipline and dogma, and to pass laws, 
but they went as representatives of their respective congregations.

In the third period the change was more important still.  The congregation 
might now be appropriately termed a flock; the spiritus privatus was 
extinct; the priests were possessed of traditions which they did not impart 
to the laymen; the Water of Life was kept in a sealed vessel; there was no 
salvation outside the Church: no man could have God for a father unless 
he had also the Church for a mother, as even Bossuet long afterwards 
declared; ex-communication was a sentence of eternal death.  Henceforth 
disputes were only between bishops and bishops, the laymen following 
their spiritual leaders and often using material weapons on their behalf.  
In the synods the bishops now met as princes of their congregations, and 
under the influence of the Holy Ghost (spiritu sancto suggerente) issued 
imperial decrees.  The penalties inflicted were of the most terrible nature 
to those who believed that hell-fire and purgatory were at the disposal of 
the priesthood, while those who entertained doubts upon the subject 
allowed themselves to be cursed and damned with equanimity.  But when 
the Church became united with the state the secular arm was at its 
disposal, and was vigorously used.

The bishops were all of them ignorant and superstitious men, but they 
could not all of them think alike.  And as if to ensure dissent they 
proceeded to define that which had never existed, and which if it had 
existed could never be defined.  They described the topography of 
heaven.  They dissected the godhead and expounded the miraculous 
conception, giving lectures on celestial impregnations and miraculous 
obstetrics.  They not only said that 3 was 1, and that 1 was 3: they 
professed to explain how that curious arithmetical combination had been 
brought about.  The indivisible had been divided and yet was not divided: 
it was divisible and yet it was indivisible; black was white and white was 
black, and yet there were not two colours, but one colour; and whoever 
did not believe it would be damned.  In the midst of all this subtle stuff, 
the dregs and rinsings of the Platonic school, Arius thundered out the 
common-sense but heretical assertion that the Father had existed before 
the Son.  Two great parties were at once formed.  A council of bishops 
was convened at Nicaea to consult the Holy Ghost.  The chair was taken 
by a man who wore a wig of many colours and a silken robe embroidered 
with golden thread.  This was Constantine the great, patron of 
Christianity, Nero of the Bosphorus, murderer of his wife and son.  The 
discussion was noisy and abusive, and the Arians lost the day.  Yet the 
matter did not end there.  Constantius took up the Arian side.  Arian 
missionaries converted the Vandals and the Goths.  Other emperors took 
up the Catholics, and they converted the Franks.  The court was divided 
by spiritual eunuchs and theological intrigues: the provinces were laid 
waste by theological wars which lasted three hundred years.  What a 
world of woe and desolation, what a deluge of blood, because the Greeks 
had a taste for metaphysics!

The Arian difference did not stand alone; every province had its own 
schism.  Caste sympathy induced the emperors to protect the pagan 
aristocracy from the fury of the bishops, but the heretics belonged chiefly 
to the subject nationalities.  The Nestorians were men of the Semitic race, 
the Jacobites were Egyptians, the Donatists were Berbers.  Of such a 
nature was the treatment which these people received that they were 
ready at any time to join the enemies of the empire, whoever they might 
be.  Difference of nationality occasioned difference in mode of thought.  
Difference in mode of thought occasioned difference in religious creed.  
Difference in religious creed occasioned controversy, riots and 
persecution.  Persecution intensified distinctions of nationality.  Such 
then was the state of religion in the Grecian world.  In the West the 
Church, overwhelmed by the barbarians, was displaying virtues in 
adversity, and was laying the foundations of a majestic kingdom.  But as 
for the East, Christianity had lived in vain.  In Constantinople and in 
Greece it had done no good.  In Asia, Barbary, and Egypt it had done 
harm.  Its peace was apathy: its activity was war.  Instead of healing the 
old wounds of conquest it opened them afresh.  It was not enough that the 
peasants of the ancient race, once masters of the soil, should be crushed 
with taxes; a new instrument of torture was invented; their priests were 
taken from them; their altars were overthrown.  But the day of vengeance 
was at hand.  Soon they would enjoy, under rulers of a different religion 
but of the same race, that freedom of conscience which a Christian 
government refused.

The Byzantine empire in the seventh century included Greece and the 
islands, with a part of Italy.  In Asia and Africa its possessions were those 
of the Turkish Empire before the cession of Algiers.  There was a Greek 
viceroy of Egypt: there were Greek governors in Egypt and Asia Minor, 
Carthage, and Cyrene.  The capital was fed with Egyptian corn and 
enriched by silken manufactures—for two Nestorian monks had brought 
the eggs of the silkworm from China in hollow canes.  These eggs had 
been hatched under lukewarm dung, and the culture of the cocoon had 
been established for the first time on European soil.  The eastern 
boundary of the empire was sometimes the Tigris, sometimes the 
Euphrates; the land of Mesopotamia, which lay between the rivers, was 
the subject of continual war between the Byzantines and the Persians.

Alexander the Great had not been long dead before the Parthians, a race 
of hardy mountaineers, occupied the lands to the east of the Euphrates, 
made themselves famous in their wars with Rome, and established a wide 
empire.  In the third century it was broken up into petty principalities, and 
a private citizen who claimed to be heir-at-law of the old Persian kings 
headed a party, seized the crown, restored the Zoroastrian religion, and 
raised the empire to a state of power and magnificence scarcely inferior to 
that of the Great Kings.  But the Greeks were still in Asia Minor and 
Egypt, and it became the hereditary ambition of the Persians to drive 
them back into their own country.  In the seventh century Chosroes the 
Second accomplished this idea, and restored the frontiers of Cambyses 
and the first Darius.  He conquered Asia Minor, Syria, and Egypt.  He 
carried his arms to Cryene, and extinguished the last glimmer of culture 
in that ancient colony.  Heraclius, the Byzantine emperor, was in despair.  
While the Persians overran his provinces in Asia a horde or Cossacks 
threatened him in Europe.  Constantinople, he feared, would soon be 
surrounded, and it already suffered famine from the loss of Egypt, as 
Rome had formerly suffered when the Vandals plundered it of Africa.  He 
determined to migrate to Carthage, and had already prepared to depart 
when the Patriarch persuaded him to change his mind.  He obtained peace 
from Persia by sending earth and water in the old style, and by promising 
to pay as tribute a thousand talents of gold, a thousand talents of silver, a 
thousand silk robes, a thousand horses, and a thousand virgins.  But 
instead of collecting these commodities he collected an army, and 
suddenly dashed into the heart of Persia.  Chosroes recalled his troops 
from the newly conquered lands, but was defeated by the Greeks, and was 
in his turn compelled to sue for ignominious peace.  In the midst of the 
triumphs which Heraclius celebrated at Constantinople and Jerusalem, an 
obscure town on the confines of Syria was pillaged by a band of Arab 
horsemen, who cut in pieces some troops which advanced to its relief.  
This appeared a trifling event, but it was the beginning of a mighty 
revolution.  In the last eight years of his reign Heraclius lost to the 
Saracens the provinces which he had recovered from the Persians.

The peninsula of Arabia is almost as large as Hindustan, but does not 
contain a single navigable river.  It is for the most part a sterile tableland 
furrowed by channels which in winter roar with violent and muddy 
streams, and which in summer are completely dry.  In these stream-beds 
at a little depth below the surface there is sometimes a stratum of water 
which, breaking out here and there into springs, creates a habitable island 
in the waste.  Such a fruitful wadi or oasis is sometimes extensive enough 
to form a town, and each town is in itself a kingdom.  This stony, green-
spotted land was divided into Arabia Petraea on the north and Arabia 
Deserta on the south.  The north supplied Constantinople, and the south 
supplied Persia, with mercenary troops; the leaders, on receiving their 
pay, established courts at home, and rendered homage to their imperial 
masters.  The princes of Arabia Deserta ruled in the name of the 
Chosroes.  The princes of Arabia Petraea were proud to be called the 
lieutenants of the Caesars.

In the south-west corner of the peninsula there is a range of hills 
sufficiently high to intercept the passing clouds and rain them down as 
streams to the Indian Ocean and the Red Sea.  This was the land of 
Yemen or Sabaea, renowned for its groves of frankincense and for the 
wealth of its merchant kings.  Its forests in ancient times were inhabited 
by squalid negro tribes who lived on platforms in the trees, and whose 
savage stupor was ascribed to the drowsy influence of the scented air.  
The country was afterwards colonised by men of the Arab race who built 
ships and established factories on the east coast of Africa, on the coast of 
Malabar, and in the island of Ceylon.  They did not navigate the Red Sea, 
but dispatched the Indian goods, the African ivory and gold dust, and 
their own fragrant produce by camel caravan to Egypt or to Petra, a great 
market city in the north.

The Pharaohs and the Persian kings did not interfere with the merchant 
princes of Yemen.  In the days of the Ptolemies a few Greek ships made 
the Indian voyage, but could not compete with the Arabs who had so long 
been established in the trade.  But the Roman occupation of Alexandria 
ruined them completely.  The just and moderate government of Augustus, 
and the demand for Oriental luxuries at Rome, excited the enterprise of 
the Alexandrine traders, and a Greek named Hippalus made a remarkable 
discovery.  He observed that the winds or monsoons of the Indian Ocean 
regularly blew during six months from east to west and during six months 
from west to east.  He was bold enough to do what the Phoenicians 
themselves had never done.  He left the land and sailed right across the 
ocean to the Indian shore with one monsoon, returning with the next to 
the mouth of the Red Sea.  By means of this ocean route the India voyage 
could be made in half the time.  The goods were thereby cheapened, the 
demand was thereby increased, the Indian Ocean was covered with Greek 
vessels, a commercial revolution was created, the coasting and caravan 
trade of the Arabs came to an end, the Romans destroyed Aden, and 
Yemen withered up and remained independent only because it was 
obscure.

Arabia had always been a land of refuge, for in its terrible deserts security 
might always be found.  To Arabia had fled the Priests of the Sun after 
the victories of Alexander and the restoration of Babylonian idolatry.  To 
Arabia had fled thousands of Jews after the second destruction of 
Jerusalem.  To Arabia had fled thousands of Christians who had been 
persecuted by pagan and still more by Christian emperors.  The land was 
divided among independent princes-—many of them were Christians and 
many of them were Jews.  There is nothing more conducive to an 
enlightened scepticism, and its attendant spirit toleration, than the 
spectacle of various religious creeds each maintained by intelligent and 
pious men.  A king of Arabia Felix in the fourth century received an 
embassy from the Byzantine emperor, with a request that Christians 
might be allowed to settle in his kingdom, and also that he would make 
Christianity the religion of the state.  He assented to the first proposition.  
With reference to the second he replied “I reign over men´s bodies, not 
over their opinions.  I exact from my subjects obedience to the 
government; as to their religious doctrine, the judge of that is the great 
Creator.”

But it came to pass that a king of the Jewish persuasion succeeded to the 
throne: he persecuted his Christian subjects and made war on Christian 
kings, burning houses, men, and gospels wherever he could find them.  A 
Christian Arab made his escape, travelled to Constantinople, and, holding 
up a charred Testament before the throne, demanded help in the name of 
the Redeemer.  The emperor at once prepared for war, and dispatched an 
envoy to his faithful ally the Negus of Abyssinia.

The old kingdom of Ethiopia had escaped Cambyses and Alexander, and 
had lost its independence to the Ptolemies only for a time.  The Romans 
made an Abyssinian expedition with complete success, but withdrew 
from the savage country in disdain.  Ethiopia was left to its own devices, 
which soon became of an Africanising nature.  The priests kept the king 
shut up in his palace and when it suited their convenience sent him word, 
in the African style, that he must be tired and that it would be good for 
him to sleep; upon which he migrated to the lower world with his 
favourite wives and slaves.  But there was once a king named Ergamenes 
who had improved his mind by the study of Greek philosophy, and who, 
when he received the message of the priests, soon gave them a proof that 
they were quite mistaken, and that so far from being sleepy he was wide 
awake.  He ordered them to collect in the Golden Chapel, and then, 
marching in with his guards, he put them all to death.  From that time 
Abyssinia became a military kingdom.  As the princes of Numidia had 
used elephants after the destruction of the Carthaginian republic, so the 
Abyssinians used them in pageantry and war long after the days of the 
Ptolemies, who had first shown them how the huge beasts might be 
entrapped.  Hindus were probably employed by the Ptolemies, as they 
were by the Carthaginians, for the management of the elephantine stud.  
In the fourth century two shipwrecked Christians converted the king and 
his people to the new religion—a beneficial event, for thus they were 
brought into connection with the Roman Empire.  The Patriarch of 
Alexandria was the Abyssinian pope, as he is at the present day, and 
during all these years he has never ceased to send them their aboona or 
archbishop.  This ecclesiastic is regarded with much reverence; he costs 
six thousand dollars; he is never allowed to smoke; and by way of 
blessing he spits upon his congregation, who believe that the episcopal 
virtue resides in the saliva, and not, as we think, in the fingers´ends.

Abyssinia had still its ancient sea-port in Annesley Bay, and sent trading 
vessels to the India coast.  The Byzantine emperor, having made his 
proposals through the Patriarch of Alexandria, and having received from 
the Negus a favourable reply, dispatched a fleet of transports down the 
Red Sea; the king filled them with his brigand troops; Yemen was 
invaded and subdued, and now it was the Christians who began to 
persecute.  Another Arab prince ran off for help, and he went to the 
Persian king, who at first refused to take the country as a gift, saying it 
was too distant and too poor.  However, at last he ordered the prisons to 
be opened, and placed all the able-bodied convicts they contained at the 
disposal of the prince.  The Abyssinians were driven out, but they 
returned and re-conquered the land.  Chosroes then sent a regular army 
with orders to kill all the men with black skins and curly hair.  Thus 
Yemen became a Persian province, and no less than three great 
religions—that of Zoroaster, that of Moses, and that of Jesus—were 
represented in Arabia.

Midway between Yemen and Egypt is a sandy valley two miles in length, 
surrounded on all sides by naked hills.  No gardens or fields are to be 
seen; no trees except some low brushwood and the acacia of the desert.  
On all sides are barren and sunburnt rocks.  But in the midst of this valley 
is a wonderful well.  It is not that the water is unusually cool and sweet—
connoisseurs pronounce it “heavy” to the taste—but it affords an 
inexhaustible supply.  No matter what quantity may be drawn up, the 
water in the well remains always at the same height.  It is probably fed by 
a perennial stream below.

This valley, on account of its well, was made the halting-place of the 
India caravans, and there the goods changed carriers—the south delivered 
them over to the north.  As the north and south were frequently at war, 
the valley was hallowed with solemn oaths for the protection of the trade.  
A sanctuary was established; the well Zemzem became sacred; its fame 
spread, and it was visited from all parts of the land by the diseased and 
the devout.  The tents of the valley tribe became a city of importance, 
enriched by the customs receipts and dues of protection, and by the 
carrier hire of the caravans.  When the navigation of the Red Sea put an 
end to the carrying trade by land the city was deserted; its inhabitants 
returned to the wandering Bedouin life.  In the fifth century, however, it 
was restored by an enterprising man, and the shrine was rebuilt.  Mecca 
was no longer a wealthy town; it was no longer situated on one of the 
highways of the world; but it manufactured a celebrated leather, and sent 
out two caravans a year—one to Syria and one to Abyssinia.  Some of the 
Meccans were rich men; Byzantine gold pieces and Persian copper coins 
circulated in abundance; the ladies dressed themselves in silk, had 
Chinese looking-glasses, wore shoes of perfumed leather, and made 
themselves odorous of musk.  It was the fame of Mecca as a holy place 
which brought this wealth into the town.  The citizens lived upon the 
pilgrims.  However, they esteemed it a pious duty to give hospitality if it 
was required to the “guests of God, who came from distant cities on their 
lean and jaded camels, fatigued and harassed with the dirt and squalor of 
the way.”  The poor pilgrims were provided during six days with pottage 
of meat and bread and dates; leather cisterns filled with water were also 
placed at their disposal.

During four months of the year there was a Truce of God, and the Arab 
tribes, suspending their hostilities, journeyed towards Mecca.  As soon as 
they entered the Sacred Valley they put on their palmers´weeds, 
proceeded at once to the Caaba or house of God, walked round it naked 
seven times, kissed the black stone and drank of the waters of the famous 
well.  Then a kind of Eisteddfod was held.  The young men combated in 
martial games; poems were recited, and those which gained the prize 
were copied with illuminated characters and hung up on the Caaba before 
the golden-plated door.

There was no regular government in the holy city, no laws that could be 
enforced, no compulsory courts of justice, and no public treasury.  The 
city was composed of several families or clans belonging to the tribe of 
the Corayshites, by whom New Mecca had been founded.  Each family 
inhabited a cluster of houses surrounding a courtyard and well, the whole 
enclosed by solid walls.  Each family was able to go to war and to sustain 
a siege.  If a murder was committed the injured family took the law into 
its own hands; sometimes it would accept a pecuniary compensation—
there was a regular tariff—but more frequently the money was refused.  
They had a belief that if blood was not avenged by blood a small winged 
insect issued from the skull of the murdered person and fled screeching 
through the sky.  It was also a point of honour on the part of the guilty 
clan to protect the murderer and to adopt his cause.  Thus blood feuds 
rose easily and died hard. 

The head of the family was a despot, and enjoyed the power of life and 
death over the members of his own house.  But he had also severe 
responsibilities.  It was his duty to protect those who dwelt within the 
circle of his yard; all its inmates called him father; to all of them he owed 
the duties of a parent.  If his son was little better than a slave, on the other 
hand his slave was almost equal to a son.  It sometimes happened that 
masterless men, travellers, or outcasts required his protection.  If it was 
granted, the stranger entered the family, and the father was accountable 
for his debts, delicts, and torts.  The body of the delinquent might be 
tendered in lieu of fine or feud, but this practice was condemned by 
public opinion, and in all semi-savage communities public opinion has 
considerable power.

There was a town-hall in which councils were held to discuss questions 
relating to the common welfare of the federated families, but the minority 
were not bound by the voice of the majority.  If, for instance, it was 
decided to make war, a single family could hold aloof.  In this town-hall 
marriages were celebrated, circumcisions were performed, and young 
girls were invested with the dress of womanhood.  It was the starting 
place of the militia and the caravans.  It was near the Caaba and opened 
towards it: in Mecca the Church was closely united to the state.

Throughout all time Mecca had preserved its independence and its 
religion; the ancient idolatry had there a sacred home.  The Meccans 
recognised a single creator, Allah Taala, the Most High God, who 
Abraham, and others before Abraham, had adored.  But they believed that 
the stars were live beings, daughters of the Deity, who acted as 
intercessors on behalf of men; and to propitiate their favour idols were 
made to represent them.  Within the Caaba or around it were also images 
of foreign deities and of celebrated men; a picture of Mary with the child 
Jesus in her lap was painted on a column, and a portrait of Abraham with 
a bundle of divining arrows in his hands upon the wall.

Among the Meccans there were many who regarded that idolatry with 
abhorrence and contempt; yet to that idolatry their town owed all that it 
possessed, its wealth and its glory, which extended round a crescent of a 
thousand miles.  They were therefore obliged as good citizens to content 
themselves with seeking a simpler religion for themselves, and those who 
did protest against the Caaba gods were persuaded to silence by their 
families, or, if they would not be silent, were banished from the town 
under penalty of death if they returned.

But there rose up a man whose convictions were too strong to be hushed 
by the love of family or to be quelled by the fear of death.  Partly owing 
to his age and dignified position and unblemished name, partly owing to 
the chivalrous nature of his patriarch or patron, he was protected against 
his enemies, his life was saved.  Had there been a government at Mecca, 
he would unquestionably have been put to death, and as it was he 
narrowly escaped.

Mohammed was a poor lad subject to a nervous disease which made him 
at first unfit for anything except the despised occupation of the shepherd.

When he grew up he became a commercial traveller, acted as agent for a 
rich widow twenty-five years older than himself, and obtained her hand.  
They lived happily together for many years.  They were both of them 
exceedingly religious people, and in the Ramadan, a month held sacred 
by the ancient Arabs, they used to live in a cave outside the town, passing 
the time in prayer and meditation.

The disease of his childhood returned upon him in his middle age; it 
affected his mind in a strange manner, and produced illusions of his 
senses.  He thought that he was haunted, that his body was the house of 
an evil spirit.  “I see a light,” he said to his wife, “and I hear a sound.  I 
fear that I am one of the possessed.”  This idea was most distressing to a 
pious man.  He became pale and haggard; he wandered about on the hill 
near Mecca, crying out to God for help.  More than once he drew near the 
edge of a cliff, and was tempted to hurl himself down and so put an end 
to his misery at once.

And then a new idea possessed his mind.  He lived much in the open air, 
gazing on the stars, watching the dry ground grown green beneath the 
gentle rain, surveying the firmly rooted mountains and the broad 
expanded plain.  He pondered also on the religious legends of the Jews 
which he had heard related on his journeys, at noonday beneath the palm-
tree by the well mouth, at night by the camp fire; and as he looked and 
thought, the darkness was dispelled, the clouds dispersed, and the vision 
of God in solitary grandeur rose up within his mind.  And there came 
upon him an impulse to speak of God; there came upon him a belief that 
he was a messenger of God sent on earth to restore the religion of 
Abraham which the pagan Arabs had polluted with their idolatry, the 
Christians in making Jesus a divinity, the Jews in corrupting their holy 
books.

In the brain of a poet stanzas will sometimes arise fully formed without a 
conscious effort of the will, as once happened to Coleridge in a dream; 
and so into Mohammed´s half-dreaming mind there flew golden-winged 
verses echoing to one another in harmonious sound.  At the same time he 
heard a Voice; and sometimes he saw a human figure; and sometimes he 
felt a noise in his ears like the tinkling of bells, or a low, deep hum as if 
bees were swarming round his head.  At this period of his life every 
chapter of the Koran was delivered in throes of pain.  The paroxysm was 
preceded by depression of spirits; his face became clouded; his 
extremities turned cold; he shook like a man in an ague and called for a 
covering.  His face assumed an expression horrible to see; the vein 
between his eyebrows became distended; his eyes were fixed; his head 
moved to and fro, as if he was conversing; and then he gave forth the 
oracle or sudra.  Sometimes he would fall like a man intoxicated to the 
ground, but the ordinary conclusion of the fit was a profuse perspiration, 
by which he appeared to be relieved.  His sufferings were at times 
unusually severe—he used often to speak of the three terrific sudras 
which had given him grey hairs.

His friends were alarmed at his state of mind.  Some ascribed it to the 
eccentricities of poetical genius; others declared that he was possessed of 
an evil spirit; others said he was insane.  When he began to preach against 
the idols of the Caaba, the practice of female infanticide, and other evil 
customs of the town; when he declared that there was no divine being but 
God, and that he was the messenger of God; when he related the ancient 
legends of the prophets which he said had been told him by the angel 
Gabriel, there was a general outburst of merriment and scorn.  They said 
he had picked it all up from a Christian who kept a jeweller´s shop in the 
town.  They requested him to perform miracles; the poets composed 
comic ballads which the people sang when he began to preach; the 
women pointed at him with the finger; it became an amusement of the 
children to pelt Mohammed.  This was perhaps the hardest season of his 
life—ridicule is the most terrible of all weapons.  But his wife 
encouraged him to persevere, and so did the Voice, which came to him 
and sang: “By the brightness of the morn that rises, and by the darkness 
of the night that descends, thy God hath not forsaken thee, Mohammed.  
For know that there is a life beyond the grave, and it will be better for 
thee than thy present life; and thy Lord will give thee a rich reward.  Did 
he not find thee an orphan, and did he not care for thee?  Did he not find 
thee wandering in error, and hath he not guided thee to truth?  Did he not 
find thee needy, and hath he not enriched thee?  Wherefore oppress not 
the orphan, neither repulse the beggar, but declare the goodness of the 
Lord.”

This Voice was the echo of Mohammed’s conscience and the expression 
of his ideas.  Owing to his peculiar constitution his thoughts became 
audible as soon as they became intense.  So long as his mind remained 
pure, the Voice was that of a good angel; when afterwards guilty wishes 
entered his heart, the voice became that of Mephistopheles.

Mohammed’s family did not accept his mission: his converts were at first 
chiefly made among the slaves.  But soon these converts became so 
numerous among all classes that the Meccans ceased to ridicule 
Mohammed and began to hate him.  Nor did he attempt to ingratiate 
himself in their affections.  “He called the living fools, the dead denizens 
of hell-fire.”  The heads of families took counsel together.  They went to 
Abu Talib, the patriarch of the house to which Mohammed belonged, and 
offered the price of blood, and then double the price of blood, and then a 
stalwart young man for Mohammed’s life, and then, being always 
refused, went off declaring that there would be war.  Abu Talib adjured 
Mohammed not to ruin the family.  The prophet’s lip quivered: he burst 
into tears, but he said he must go on.  Abu Talib hinted that his protection 
might be withdrawn.  Then Mohammed declared that if the sun came 
down on his right hand and the moon on his left he would not swerve 
from the work which God had given him to do.  Abu Talib, finding him 
inflexible, assured him that his protection should never be withdrawn.  In 
the meantime the patriarchs returned and said, “What is it that you want, 
Mohammed?  Do you wish for riches?  We will make you rich.  Do you 
wish for honour?  We will make you the mayor of the town.”  
Mohammed replied with a chapter of the Koran.  They then assembled in 
the town hall and entered into a solemn league and covenant to keep apart 
from the family of Abu Talib.  It was sent to Coventry.  None would buy 
with them nor sell with them, eat with them nor drink with them.  This 
lasted for three years, but when as people passed by the house they heard 
the cries of the starving children from behind the walls, they relented and 
sold them grain.  There was one member of the family, Abu Laheb, who 
withdrew from it at that juncture and became Mohammed’s most 
inveterate foe.

Each family agreed also to punish its own Mohammedans.  Many were 
exposed to the glow of the midday sun on the scorching gravel outside 
the town, and to the torments of thirst.  A mulatto slave was tortured by a 
great stone being placed on his chest, the while he cried out continually, 
“There is only one God!  There is only one God!”  Mohammed 
recommended his disciples to escape to Abyssinia, “a land of 
righteousness, a land where none was wronged.”  They were kindly 
received by the Negus, who refused to give them up in spite of the envoys 
with presents of red leather who were sent to him from Mecca with that 
request.

During the period of the sacred months Mohammed used often to visit the 
encampments of the pilgrims outside the town.  He announced to them 
his mission; he preached on the unity of God and on the terrors of the 
judgment-day.  “God has no daughters,” said he, “for how can he have 
daughters when he has no spouse?  He begetteth not, neither is he 
begotten.  There is none but he.  O beware, ye idolators, of the time that is 
to come, when the sun shall be folded up, when the stars shall fall, when 
the mountains shall be made to pass away, when the children’s hair shall 
grow white with anguish, when souls like locust swarms shall rise from 
their graves, when the girl who hath been buried alive shall be asked for 
what crime she was put to death, when the books shall be laid open, when 
every soul shall know what it hath wrought!  O the striking, the striking, 
when men shall be scattered as moths in the wind!  And then Allah shall 
cry to Hell, Art thou filled full?  And Hell shall cry to Allah, More, give 
me more!”

But there followed him everywhere a squint eyed man, fat, with flowing 
locks on both sides of his head, and clothed in raiment of fine Aden stuff.  
When Mohammed had finished his sermon he would say, “This fellow’s 
object is to draw you away from the gods to his fanciful ideas; wherefore 
follow him not, O my brothers, neither listen to him.”  And who should 
this be but his uncle, Abu Laheb!  Whereupon the strangers would reply, 
“Your own kinsmen ought to know you best.  Why do they not believe 
you if what you say is true?”  In return for these kind offices Mohammed 
promised his uncle that he should go down to be burned in flaming fire, 
and that his wife should go too, bearing a load of wood, with a cord of 
twisted palm fibres round her neck.

And now two great sorrows fell upon Mohammed.  He lost almost at the 
same time his beloved wife and the noble-hearted parent of his clan.  The 
successor of Abu Talib continued the protection, yet Mohammed felt 
insecure.  His religion also made but small progress.  The fact is that he 
failed at Mecca as Jesus had failed at Jerusalem.  He had made a few 
ardent disciples who spent the day at his feet, or in reading snatches of 
the Koran scrawled on date leaves, shoulder-blades of sheep, camel 
bones, scraps of parchment, or tablets of smooth white stone.  But he had 
not so much as shaken the ruling idolatry, which was firmly based on 
custom and self-interest.  No doubt his disciples would in course of time 
have diffused his religion throughout Arabia.  Islam was formed; Islam 
was alive; but Mohammed himself would never have  witnessed its 
triumph had it not been for a curious accident which now occurred.  The 
Arabs belonging to that city which was afterwards called Medina had 
conquered a tribe of Jews.  These had consoled themselves for the 
bitterness of their defeat by declaring that a great prophet, the Messiah, 
would soon appear, and would avenge them upon all their foes.  The 
Arabs believed them and trembled, for they stood in great dread of the 
book which the Jews possessed, and which they supposed to be a magical 
composition.  So, when certain pilgrims from Medina heard Mohammed 
announce that he was a messenger from God, they took it for granted that 
he was the man, and determined to steal a march upon the Jews by 
securing him for themselves.  At their request he sent a missionary to 
Medina; the townsmen were converted, and invited him to come and live 
among them.  In a dark ravine near Mecca, at the midnight hour, his 
patriarch or father delivered him solemnly into their hands.  Mohammed 
was now no longer a citizen of Mecca; he was no longer “protected”; he 
had changed his nationality, and he was hunted like a deer before he 
arrived safely in his new home.

Had Mohammed been killed in that celebrated flight he would have been 
classed by historians among the glorious martyrs and the gentle saints.  
His character before the Hegira resembled the character of Jesus.  In both 
of them we find the same sublime insanity, compounded of loyalty to 
God, love for man, and inordinate self-conceit; both were subject to 
savage fits of wrath, and having no weapons but their tongues, consigned 
souls by wholesale to hell-fire.  Both also humbled themselves before 
God, preaching the religion of the heart, led pure, unblemished lives, 
devoted themselves to a noble cause, and uttered maxims of charity and 
love at strange variance with their occasional invectives.  Of the life of 
Jesus it is needless to speak; if he had any vices they have not been 
recorded.  But the conduct of Mohammed at Mecca was apparently not 
less pure.  He was married to an old woman; polygamy was a custom of 
the land; his passions were strong, as was afterwards too plainly shown; 
yet he did not take a second wife as long as his dear Khadijah was alive.  
He never frequented the wine-shop or looked at the dancing girls or 
talked abroad in the bazaars.  He was more modest than a virgin behind 
the curtain.  When he met children he would stop and pat their cheeks; he 
followed the bier that passed him in the street; he visited the sick; he was 
kind to his inferiors; he would accept the invitation of a slave to dinner; 
he was never the first to withdraw his hand when he shook hands; he was 
humble, gentle, and kind; he waited always on himself, mending his own 
clothes, milking his own goats; he never struck any one in his life.  When 
once asked to curse someone he said, “I have not been sent to curse but to 
be a mercy to mankind.”  He reproached himself in the Koran for having 
behaved unkindly to a beggar, and so immortalised his own offence.  He 
issued a text, “Use no violence in religion.”

But this text, with many others, he afterwards expunged.  When he 
arrived at Medina he found himself at the head of a small army, and he 
began to publish his gospel of the sword.  Henceforth we may admire the 
statesman or the general; the prophet is no more.  It will hence be inferred 
that Mohammed was hypocritical, or at least inconstant.  But he was 
constant throughout his life to the one object which he had in view—the 
spread of his religion.  At Mecca it could best be spread by means of the 
gentle virtues; he therefore ordered his disciples to abstain from violence 
which would only do them harm.  At Medina he saw that the Caaba 
idolatry could not be destroyed except by force; he therefore felt it his 
duty to make use of force.  He obeyed his conscience both at Mecca and 
Medina, for the conscience is merely an organ of the intellect, and is 
altered, improved, or vitiated according to the education which it receives 
and the incidents which act upon it.

And now Mohammed’s glory expanded, and at the same time his virtue 
declined.  He broke the Truce of God: he was not always true to his 
plighted word.  As Moses forbade the Israelites to marry with the pagans 
and then took unto himself an Ethiopian wife, so Mohammed, broke his 
own marriage laws, beginning the career of a voluptuary at fifty years of 
age.  His Koran sudras were now official manifestoes, legal regulations, 
delivered in an extravagant and stilted style differing much from that of 
his fervid oracles at Mecca.  But whatever may have been his private 
defects, when we regard him as a ruler and lawgiver we can only wonder 
and admire.  He established for the first time in history a united Arabia.  
In the moral life of his countrymen he effected a remarkable reform.  He 
abolished drunkenness and gambling—vices to which the Arabs had been 
specially addicted.  He abolished the practice of infanticide, and also 
succeeded in rendering its memory detestable.  It is said that Omar, the 
fierce apostle of Islam, shed but one tear in his life, and that was when he 
remembered how in the days of darkness his child had beat the dust off 
his beard with her little hand as he was laying her in the grave.  Polygamy 
and slavery he did not prohibit, but whatever laws he made respecting 
women and slaves were made with the view of improving their condition.  
He removed that facility of divorce by means of which an Arab could at 
any time repudiate his wife: he enacted that no Moslem should be made a 
slave, that the children of a slave girl by her master should be free.  
Instead of repining that Mohammed did no more, we have reason to be 
astonished that he did so much.  His career is the best example that can be 
given of the influence of the individual in human history.  That single 
man created the glory of his nation and spread his language over half the 
earth.  The words which he preached to jeering crowds twelve hundred 
years ago are now being studied by scholars or by devotees in London 
and Paris and Berlin; in Mecca, where he laboured, in Medina, where he 
died; in Constantinople, in Cairo, in Fez, in Timbuktu, in Jerusalem, in 
Damascus, in Basra, in Baghdad, in Bokhara, in Kabul, in Calcutta, in 
Pekin; on the steppes of Central Asia, in the islands of the Indian 
Archipelago, in lands which are as yet unmarked upon our maps, in the 
oases of thirsty deserts, in obscure villages situated by unknown streams.  
It was Mohammed who did all this, for he uttered the book which carried 
the language, and he prepared the army which carried the book.  His 
disciples and successors were not mad fanatics but resolute and sagacious 
men, who made shrewd friendship with the malcontent Christians among 
the Greeks and with the persecuted Jews in Spain, and who in a few years 
created an empire which extended from the Pyrenees to the Hindu Kush. 

This empire, it is true, was soon divided, and soon became weak in all its 
parts.  The Arabs could conquer, but they could not govern.  Separate 
sovereignties or caliphates were established in Babylonia, Egypt, and 
Spain, while provinces such as Morocco or Bokhara frequently obtained 
independence by rebellion.  It is needless to describe at length the history 
of the Caliphs and their successors—it is only the twice-told tale of the 
Euphrates and the Nile.  The caliphs were at first Commanders of the 
Faithful in reality, but they were soon degraded both in Cairo and 
Baghdad to the position of the Roman Pope at the present time.  The 
government was seized by the Praetorian Guards, who in Baghdad were 
descended from Turkish prisoners or negroes imported from Zanzibar, 
and in Egypt from Mamelukes or European slaves, brought in their 
boyhood from the wild countries surrounding the Black Sea, and trained 
up from tender years to the practice of arms—the sons of Christian 
parents, but branded with a cross on the soles of their feet that they might 
never cease to tread upon the emblem of their native creed.

However, by means of the Arab conquest the East was united as it had 
never been before.  The Euphrates was no longer a line of partition 
between two worlds.  Arab traders established their factories on both 
sides of the Indian Ocean and along the Asiatic shores of the Pacific.  
Men from all countries met at Mecca once a year.  The religion of the 
Arabs conquered nations whom the Arabs themselves had never seen.  
When the Mohammedan Turks of Central Asia took Constantinople and 
reduced the caliphates to provinces, although the people of Mohammed 
were driven back to their wilderness the strength and glory of his religion 
was increased.  In the same manner the conquest of Hindustan was an 
achievement of Islam in which the Arabs bore no part, and in Africa also 
we shall find that the Koran reigns over extensive regions which the 
Arabs visit only as travellers and merchants.

Once upon a time Morocco and Spain were one country, and Europe 
extended to the Atlas mountains, which stood upon the shores of a great 
salt sea.  Beyond that ocean, to the south, lay the Dark Continent, 
surrounded on all sides by water except on the north-east, where it was 
joined to Asia near Aden by an isthmus.  A geological revolution 
converted the African ocean into a sandy plain, and the straits of Bab-el-
Mandeb and Gibraltar were torn open by the retreating waves.  But the 
Sahara, though no longer under water, is still in reality a sea; the true 
Africa begins on its southern coast, and is entirely distinct from the 
European-like countries between the Mediterranean and the Atlas, and 
from the strip of garden land which is cast down every year in the desert 
by the Nile.  The Black Africa or Sudan is a gigantic tableland; its sides 
are built of granite mountains which surround it with a parapet or brim, 
and which send down rivers on the outside towards the sea, on the inside 
into the plateau.  The outside rivers are brief and swift: the inside rivers 
are long and sluggish in their course, winding in all directions, collecting 
into enormous lakes, and sometimes flowing forth through gaps in the 
parapet to the Sahara or the sea.

A tableland is seldom so uniform and smooth as the word denotes.  The 
African plateau is intersected by mountain ranges and ravines, juts into 
volcanic isolated cones, and varies much in its climate, its aspect, its 
productions, and its altitude above the sea.  It may be divided into 
platforms or river basins which are true geographical provinces, and each 
of which should be labelled with the names of its explorers.  There is the 
platform of Abyssinai, which belongs to Bruce; the platform of the White 
Nile, including the Lakes of Burton (Tanganyika), of Speke (Victoria 
Nyanza), and of Baker (Albert Nyanza); the platform of the Zambezi, 
with its lakes Nyasa and Ngami, discovered by Livingstone, the greatest 
of African explorers; the platform of the Congo, including the regions of 
Western Equatorial Africa, hitherto unexplored; the platform of South 
Africa (below 20º S.), which enjoys an Australian climate, and also 
Australian wealth in its treasure-filled mountains and its wool-abounding 
plains; and lastly the platform of the Niger, which deserves a place, as 
will be shown, in universal history.  The discoverers of the Niger in its 
upper are Park (who first saw the Niger), Caillie, and myself: in its 
central and eastern parts Laing, who first reached Timbuktu; Caillie, who 
first returned from it; Denham, Clapperton, Lander, and Barth.

The original inhabitants of Africa were the Hottentots or Bushmen, a 
dwarfish race who have restless, rambling, ape-like eyes, a click in their 
speech, and bodies which are the wonder of anatomists.  They are now 
found only on the South African platform, or perhaps here and there on 
the platform of the Congo.  They have been driven southward by the 
negroes, as the Eskimos in America were driven north by the Red Indians 
and the Finns in Europe by the Celtic tribes, while the negroes themselves 
have yielded in some parts of Africa to Asiatic tribes, as the Celts in Gaul 
and Britain yielded to the Germans.

These negroes are sometimes of so deep a brown that the skin appears to 
be quite black; sometimes their skin is as light as a mulatto’s.  The 
average tint is a rich deep bronze.  Their eyes are dark, though blue eyes 
are occasionally seen; their hair is black, though sometimes of rusty red, 
and is always of a woolly texture.  To this rule there are no exceptions—it 
is the one constant character, the one infallible sign by which the race 
may be detected.  Their lips are not invariably thick; their noses are 
frequently well formed.  In physical appearance they differ widely from 
one another.  The inhabitants of the swamps, the dark forests and the 
mountains are flat-nosed, long armed, and thin-calved, with mouths like 
mussles, broad splay feet, and projecting heels.  It was for the most part 
from this class that the American slave markets were supplied; the 
negroes of the States and the West Indies represent the African in the 
same manner as the people of the Pontine Marshes represent the 
inhabitants of Italy.  The negroes of South Africa stand at the opposite 
extreme.  Enjoying an excellent climate and a wholesome supply of food, 
they are superior to most other people of their race.  Yet it is certain that 
they are negroes, for they have woolly hair, and they do not differ in 
language or manners from the inhabitants of the other platforms.  When 
the Portuguese first traded on the African coasts they gave the name 
Caffres (or pagans) to the negroes of Guinea, as well as to those of the 
Cape and Mozambique.  It is quite an accident that the name has been 
retained for the latter tribes alone, yet such is the power of a name that the 
Caffres and negroes are universally supposed to be distinct.  It is 
impossible, however, to draw any line between the two.  Pure negroes are 
born on the coast of Guinea and in the interior with complexions as light, 
with limbs as symmetrical, and with features as near to the European 
standard as can be found in all Caffraria.  Between the hideous being of 
the Nile and Niger deltas and the robust shepherds of the south, or the 
aristocratic chieftains of the west, there is a wide difference, no doubt but 
intermediate gradations exist.

There is also much variety among the negroes in respect to manners, 
mental condition, political government, and mode of life.  Some tribes 
live only on the fruit of net and spear, eked out with insects and berries 
and shells.  Property is ill defined among them; if a man makes a canoe 
the others use it when they please; if he builds a better house than his 
neighbours they pull it down.  Others, though still in the hunting 
condition, have gardens of plantains and cassada.  In this condition the 
headman of the village has little power, but property is secured by law.  
Other tribes are pastoral, and resemble the Arabs in their laws and 
customs; the patriarchal system prevails among them.  There are regions 
in which the federal system prevails; many villages are leagued together; 
and the headmen, acting as deputies of their respective boroughs, meet in 
congress to debate questions of foreign policy and to enact laws.  Large 
empires exist in the Sudan.  In some of these the king is a despot who 
possesses a powerful bodyguard equivalent to a standing army, a court 
with its regulations of etiquette, and a well-ordered system of patronage 
and surveillance.  In others he is merely an instrument in the hands of 
priests or military nobles, and is kept concealed, giving audience from 
behind a curtain to excite the veneration of the vulgar.  There are also 
thousands of large walled cities resembling those of Europe in the Middle 
Ages, or of ancient Greece, or of Italy before the supremacy of Rome, 
encircled by pastures and by arable estates, and by farming villages to 
which the citizens repair at harvest-time to superintend the labour of their 
slaves.  But such cities, with their villeggiatura, their municipal 
government, their agora or forum, their fortified houses, their feuds and 
street frays of Capulet and Montague, are not indigenous in Africa; their 
existence is comparatively modern and is due to the influence of religion.

An African village (old style) is usually a street of huts, with walls like 
hurdles, and the thatch projecting so that its owner may sit beneath it in 
sun or rain.  The door is low—one has to crawl in order to go in.  There 
are no windows. The house is a single room.  In its midst burns a fire 
which is never suffered to go out, for it is a light in darkness, a servant, a 
companion, and a guardian angel; it purifies the miasmatic air.  The roof 
and walls are smoke-dried but clean; in one corner is a pile of wood 
neatly cut up into billets, and in another is a large earthen jar filled with 
water on which floats a gourd or calabash, a vegetable bowl.  Spears, 
bows, quivers, and nets hang from pegs upon the walls.  Let us suppose 
that it is night; four or five black forms are lying in a circle with their feet 
toward the fire, and two dogs with pricked-up ears creep close to the 
ashes which are becoming grey and cold.

The day dawns; a dim light appears through the crevices and crannies of 
the walls.  The sleepers rise and roll up their mats, which are their beds, 
and place on one side the round logs of wood which are their pillows.  
The man takes down his bow and arrows from the wall, fastens wooden 
rattles round his dogs’ necks, and goes out into the bush. The women 
replenish the fire, and lift up an inverted basket whence sally forth a hen 
and her chickens which make at once for the open door to find their daily 
bread for themselves outside.  The women take hoes and go to the 
plantation, or they take pitchers to fill at the brook.  They wear round the 
waist, before and behind, two little aprons made from a certain bark, 
soaked and beaten until it is as flexible as leather.  Every man has a 
plantation of these cloth-trees round his hut.  The unmarried girls wear no 
clothes at all, but they are allowed to decorate themselves with bracelets 
and anklets of iron, flowers in their ears, necklaces of red berries like 
coral, girdles of white shells, hair oiled and padded out with the chignon, 
and sometimes white ashes along the parting.

The ladies fill their pitchers and take their morning bath, discussing the 
merits or demerits of their husbands.  The air is damp and cold, and the 
trees and grass are heavy with dew; but presently the sun begins to shine, 
the dewdrops fall heavy and large as drops of rain; the birds chirp; the 
flowers expand their drowsy leaves and receive the morning calls of 
butterflies and bees.  The forest begins to buzz and hum like a great 
factory awaking to its work.

When the sun is high, boys come from the bush with vegetable bottles 
frothing over with palm wine.  The cellar of the African, and his glass and 
china shop, and his clothing warehouse, are in the trees. In the midst of 
the village is a kind of shed, a roof supported on bare poles.  It is the 
palaver house, in which at this hour the old men sit and debate the affairs 
of state or decide law suits, each orator holding a spear when he is 
speaking, and planting it in the ground before him as he resumes his seat.  
Oratory is the African’s one fine art.  His delivery is fluent; his 
harangues, though diffuse, are adorned with phrases of wild poetry.  That 
building is also the club house of the elders, and there, when business is 
over, they pass the heat of the day, seated on logs which are smooth and 
shiny from use.  At the hour of noon their wives or children bring them 
palm wine, and present it on their knees, clapping their hands in a token 
of respect.  And then all is still; it is the hour of silence and tranquillity, 
the hour which the Portuguese call “ the calm.”  The sun sits enthroned 
on the summit of the sky; its white light is poured upon the earth; the 
straw thatch shines like snow.  The forest is silent; all nature sleeps.

Then down, down, down sinks the sun, and its rays shoot slantwise 
through the trees.  The hunters return, and their friends run out and greet 
them as if they had been gone for years, murmuring to them in a kind of 
baby language, calling them by their names of love, shaking their right 
hands, caressing their faces, patting them upon their breasts, embracing 
them in all ways except with the lips—for the kiss is unknown among the 
Africans.  And so they toy and babble and laugh with one another till the 
sun turns red, and the air turns dusky, and the giant trees cast deep 
shadows across the street.  Strange perfumes arise from the earth; fireflies 
sparkle; grey parrots come forth from the forest, and fly screaming round 
intending to roost in the neighbourhood of man.  The women bring their 
husbands the gourd-dish of boiled plantains or bush-yams, made hot with 
red pepper, seasoned with fish or venison sauce.  And when this simple 
meal is ended, boom! boom! Goes the big drum; the sweet reed flute 
pipes forth; the girls and lads begin to sing.  In a broad, clean swept place 
they gather together, jumping up and down with glee; the young men 
form in one row, the women in another, and dance in two long lines, 
retreating and advancing with graceful undulations of their bodies and 
arms waving in the air.   And now there is a squealing, wailing, unearthly 
sound, and out of the wood, with a hop, skip, and jump, comes Mumbo 
Jumbo, a hideous mask on his face and a scourge in his hand.  Woe to the 
wife who would not cook her husband’s dinner, or who gave him saucy 
words, for Mumbo Jumbo is the censor of female morals.  Well the guilty 
ones know him as they run screaming to their huts.  Then again the dance 
goes on, and if there is a moon it does not cease throughout the night.

Such is the picturesque part of savage life.  But it is not savage life—it 
merely lies upon the surface as paint lies upon the skin.  Let us take a 
walk through that same village on another day.  Here in a hut is a young 
man with one leg in the stocks, and with his right hand bound to his neck 
by a cord.  The palm wine, and the midnight dance, and the furtive 
caresses of Asua overpowered his discretion; he was detected, and now 
he is “put in log.”  If his relations do not pay the fine he will be sold as a 
slave; or if there is no demand for slaves in that country he will be killed.  
His friends reprove him for trying to steal what the husband was willing 
to sell; and might he not have guessed that Asua was a decoy?

Another day the palaver-house has the aspect of a Crockford’s.  An old 
man who is one of the village grandees is spinning nuts for high stakes, 
and has drunk too much to see that he is overmatched.  He loses his mats, 
his weapons, his goats, his fowls, his plantation, his house, his slaves 
whom he took prisoners in his young and warlike days, his wives, his 
children, and his aged mother who fed him at her breast—all are lost, all 
are gone.  And then, with flushed eyes and trembling hand, he begins to 
gamble for himself.  He stakes his right leg and loses it.  He may not 
move it until he has won it back or until it is redeemed.  He loses both 
legs; he stakes his body and loses that also, and becomes a bond-servant, 
or is sold as a slave.

Let us give another scene.  A young man of family has died; the whole 
village is convulsed with grief and fear.  It does not appear natural to 
them that a man should die before he has grown old.  Some malignant 
power is at work among them.  Is it an evil spirit whom they have 
unwittingly offended and who is taking its revenge, or is it a witch?  The 
great fetish-man has been sent for, and soon he arrives, followed by his 
disciples.  He wears a cap waving with feathers and a parti-coloured 
garment covered with charms—horns of gazelles, shells of snails, and a 
piece of leopards’s liver wrapped up in the leaves of a poison-giving tree.  
His face is stained with the white juice from a dead man’s brain.  He rings 
an iron bell as he enters the town, and at the same time the drum begins to 
beat.  The drum has its language, so that those who are distant from the 
village understand what it is saying.  With short, lively sounds it 
summons to the dance; it thunders forth the alarm of fire or war, loudly 
and quickly with no interval between the beats; and now it tolls the hour 
of judgment and the day of death.  The fetish-man examines the dead man 
and says it is the work of a witch.  He casts lots with knotted cords; he 
mutters incantations; he passes round the villagers and points out the 
guilty person, who is usually some old woman whom popular opinion has 
previously suspected and is ready to condemn.  She is, however, allowed 
the benefit of an ordeal: a gourd filled with the “red water” is given her to 
drink.  If she is innocent it acts as an emetic; if she is guilty it makes her 
fall senseless to the ground.  She is then put to death with a variety of 
tortures—burnt alive or torn limb from limb; tied on the beach at low 
water to be drowned by the rising tide; rubbed with honey and laid out in 
the sun; or buried in an ant-hill, the most horrible death of all.

These examples are sufficient to show that the life of the savage is not a 
happy one, and the existence of each clan or tribe is precarious in the 
extreme.  They are like the wild animals, engaged from day to night in 
seeking food, and ever watchful against the foes by whom they are 
surrounded.  The men who go out hunting, the girls who go with their 
pitchers to the village brook, are never sure that they will return, for there 
is always war with some neighbouring village, and their method of 
making war is by ambuscade.  But besides these real and ordinary 
dangers, the savage believes himself to be encompassed by evil spirits 
who may at any moment spring upon him in the guise of a leopard, or 
cast down upon him the dead branch of a tree.  In order to propitiate these 
invisible beings, his life is entangled with intricate rites; it is turned this 
way and that way as oracles are delivered or as omens appear.  It is 
impossible to describe, or even to imagine, the tremulous condition of the 
savage mind, yet the traveller can see from their aspect and manners that 
they dwell in a state of never-ceasing dread.

Let us now suppose that a hundred years have passed, and let us visit the 
village again.  The place itself and the whole country around have been 
transformed.  The forest has disappeared, and in its stead are fields 
covered with the glossy blades of the young rice, with the tall red tufted 
maize, with the millet and the Guinea corn, with the yellow flowers of the 
tobacco plant growing in wide fields, and with large shrubberies of 
cotton, the snowy wool peeping forth from the expanding leaves.  Before 
us stands a great town surrounded by walls of red clay flanked by towers, 
and with heavy wooden gates.  Day dawns, and the women come forth to 
the brook decorously dressed in blue cotton robes passed over the hair as 
a hood.  Men ride forth on horseback, wearing white turbans and swords 
suspended on their right shoulders by a crimson sash.  They are the 
unmixed descendants of the forest savage; their faces are those of pure 
negroes, but the expression is not the same.  Their manners are grave and 
composed; they salute one another, saying in the Arabic “Peace be with 
you.”  The palaver-house or town-hall is also the mosque; the 
parliamentary debates and the law trials which are there held have all the 
dignity of a religious service; they are opened with prayer, and the name 
of the creator is often solemnly invoked by the orator or advocate, while 
all the elders touch their foreheads with their hands and murmur in 
response, Amina! Amina! (Amen! Amen!).  The town is pervaded by a 
bovine smell, sweet to the nostrils of those who have travelled long in the 
beefless lands of the people of the forest.  Sounds of industry may also be 
heard—not only the clinking of the blacksmith’s hammer, but also the 
rattling of the loom, the thumping of the cloth-maker, and the song of the 
cordwainer as he sits cross-legged making saddles or shoes.  The women, 
with bow and distaff and spindle, are turning the soft tree-wool into 
thread; the work in the fields is done by slaves.  The elders smoke or take 
snuff in their verandahs, and sometimes study a page of the Koran.  When 
the evening draws on there is no sound of flute and drum.  A bonfire of 
brushwood is lighted in the market-place, and the boys of the town collect 
around it with wooden boards in their hands, and bawl their lessons, 
swaying their bodies to and fro, by which movement they imagine the 
memory is assisted.  Then rises a long, loud, harmonious cry, “Come to 
prayers, come to prayers! Come to security! God is great! He liveth and 
he dieth not! Come to prayers! O thou Bountiful!”

	La ilah illa Allah: Mohammed Rasul Allah.
	Allahu Akbaru.  Allahu Akbar.

Such towns as these may be less interesting to the traveller than the pagan 
villages—he finds them merely a second-hand copy of Eastern life.  But 
though they are not so picturesque, their inhabitants are happier and better 
men.  Violent and dishonest deeds are no longer arranged by pecuniary 
compensation.  Husbands can no longer set wife-traps for their friends; 
adultery is treated as a criminal offence.  Men can no longer squander 
away their relations at the gaming table, and stake their own bodies on a 
throw.  Men can no longer be tempted to vice and crime under the 
influence of palm wine.  Women can no longer be married by a great 
chief in herds, and treated like beasts of burden and like slaves. Each wife 
has an equal part of her husband’s love by law; it is not permitted to 
forsake and degrade the old wife for the sake of the young.  Each wife has 
her own house, and the husband may not enter until he has knocked at the 
door and received the answer, Bismillah!  (In the name of God!)  Every 
boy is taught to read and write in Arabic, which is the religious and 
official language in the Sudan, as Latin was in Europe in the Middle 
Ages; he also writes his own language with the Arabic character, as we 
write ours with the Roman letter.  In such countries the policy of isolation 
is at an end; they are open to all the Moslems in the world, and are thus 
connected with the lands of the East.  Here there is a remarkable change, 
and one that deserves a place in history.  It is a movement the more 
interesting since it is still actively going on.  The Mohammedan religion 
has already overspread a region of Negroland as large as Europe.  It is 
firmly established not only in the Africa of the Mediterranean and the 
Nile and in the oases of the Sahara, but also throughout that part of the 
continent which we have termed the platform of the Niger.

In 1797 Mungo Park discovered the Niger in the heart of Africa, at a 
point where it is as broad as the Thames at Westminster; in 1817 Rene 
Caillie crossed it at a point considerably higher up; in 1822 Major Laing 
attempted to reach it by striking inland from Sierra Leone, but was forced 
by the natives to return when he was only fifty miles distant from the 
river; and in 1869 I made the same attempt, was turned back at the same 
place, but made a fresh expedition, and reached the river at a higher point 
than Caillie and Park.  But my success also was incomplete, for native 
wars made it impossible for me to reach the source, though it was near at 
hand; and that still remains a splendid prize for one who will walk in my 
footsteps as I walked in those of Laing.  The source of the Niger, as given 
in the maps; was fixed by Laing from native information which I 
ascertained to be correct.  There is no doubt that this river rises in the 
backwoods of Sierra Leone, at a distance of only two hundred miles from 
the coast.  It runs for some time as a foaming hill-torrent bearing obscure 
and barbarous names, and at the point where I found it glides into the 
broad, calm breast of the plateau, and receives its illustrious name of the 
Joliba,or Great River.

It flows north-east, and enters the Sahara as if intending, like the Nile, to 
pour its waters into the Mediterranean Sea.  But suddenly it turns towards 
the east, so that Herodotus, who heard of it when he was at Memphis, 
supposed that it joined the Nile; and such was the prevailing opinion not 
only among the Greeks but also among the Arabs in the Middle Ages.  
They did not know that the eccentric river again wheels round, flows 
towards the sea near which it rose, passes through the latitude of its birth, 
and, having thus described three quarters of a circle, debouches by many 
mouths into the Bight of Benin.  So singular a course might well baffle 
the speculations of geographers and the investigations of explorers.  The 
people who dwell on the banks of the river do not know where it ends.  I 
was told by some that it went to Mecca, by others that it went to 
Jerusalem.  Mungo Park’s own theory was ludicrously incorrect—he 
believed that the Congo was its mouth. Others declared that it never 
reached the sea at all.  It was Lander who discovered the mouth of the 
Niger, at one time as mysterious as the sources of the Nile, and so 
established the hypothesis which Reichard had advanced and which 
Mannert had declared to be “contrary to nature.”

The Niger platform or basin is flat, with here and there a line of rolling 
hills containing gold. The vegetation consists of high, coarse grass and 
trees of small stature, except on the banks of streams, where they grow to 
a larger size.  The palm-oil tree is not found on this plateau, but the shea-
butter or tallow tree abounds in natural plantations which will some day 
prove a source of enormous wealth.  As the river flows on, these trees 
disappear; the plains widen and are smoothed out, and the country 
assumes the character of the Sahara.

The negroes who inhabited the platform of the Niger lived chiefly on the 
banks of the river, subsisting on lotus root and fish.  Like all savages, 
they were jealous and distrustful; their intercourse was that of war.  But 
nature, by means of a curious contrivance, has rendered it impossible for 
men to remain eternally apart.  Common salt is one of the mineral 
constituents of the human body, and savages, who live chiefly on 
vegetable food, are dependent upon it for their life.  In Africa children 
may be seen sucking it like sugar.  “Come and eat with us today,” says 
the hospitable African; “we are going to have salt for dinner.”  It is not in 
all countries that this mineral food is to be found, but the saltless lands in 
the Sudan contain gold dust, ivory, and slaves, and so a system of barter 
is arranged, and isolated tribes are brought into contact with one another.

The two great magazines are the desert and the ocean.  At the present day 
the white, powdery English salt is carried on donkeys and slaves to the 
upper waters of the Niger, and is driving back the crystalline salt of the 
Sahara.  In the ancient days the salt of the plateau came entirely from the 
mines of Bilma and Toudeyni, in the desert, which were occupied and 
worked by negro tribes.  But at a period far remote, before the 
foundations of Carthage were laid, a Berber nation, now called the 
Tuaricks, overspread the desert and conquered the oases and the mines.  
This terrible people are yet the scourge of the peaceful farmer and the 
passing caravan.  They camp in leather tents; they are armed with lance 
and sword, and with shields on which is painted the image of a cross.  
The Arabs call them “the muffled ones,” for their mouths and noses are 
covered with a bandage, sometimes black, sometimes white, above which 
sit in deep sockets, like ant-lions in their pits, a pair of dark, cruel, 
sinister 
looking eyes.  They levy tolls on all travellers, and murder those who 
have the reputation of unusual wealth—as they did Miss Tinne, whose 
iron water-tanks they imagined to be filled with gold.  When they poured 
down on the Sahara they were soon attracted by the rich pastures and 
alluvial plains of the black country.  In course of time their raids were 
converted into conquests, and they established a line of kingdoms from 
the Niger to the Nile, in the borderland between the Sahara and the 
parallel 10º N. Timbuktu, Haoussa, Bornu, Bagirmi, Waday, Darfur, and 
Kordofan were the names of these kingdoms; in all of them Islam is now 
the religion of the state; all of them belong to the Asiatic world.

The Tuaricks of the Sudan were merely the ruling casts, and were much 
darkened by harem blood, but they communicated freely with their 
brethren of the desert, who had dealings with the Berbers beyond the 
Atlas.  When the Andalusia of the Arabs became a polite civilised land 
crowds of ingenious artisans, descended from the old Roman craftsmen 
or from the Greek emigrants, or from their Arab apprentices, took 
architecture over to North Africa.  The city of Morocco was filled with 
magnificent palaces and mosques; it became the metropolis of an 
independent kingdom; it was called the Baghdad of the west; its doctors 
were as learned as the doctors of Cordova, its musicians as skilful as the 
musicians of Seville.  A wealthy and powerful Morocco could not exist 
without its influence being felt across the desert; the position of Timbuktu 
in reference to Morocco was precisely that of Meroe to Memphis or to 
Thebes.  The Sahara, it is true, is much wider across from Morocco to 
Timbuktu than from Egypt to Ethiopia, but the introduction of camels 
brought the Atlas and the Niger near to one another.  The Tuaricks, who 
had previously lived on horses, under whose bellies they tied water-
bottles of leather when they went on a long journey, had been able to 
cross the desert only at certain seasons of the year; but now, with the aid 
of the camel, which they at once adopted and from which they bred the 
famous Mehara strain, they could cross the Sahara at its widest part in a 
few days.  A regular trade was established between the two countries, and 
was conducted by the Berbers.  Arab merchants, desirous of seeing with 
their own eyes the wondrous land of ivory and gold, took passage in the 
caravans, crossed the yellow seas, sprang from their camels upon the 
green shores of the Sudan, and kneeling on the banks of the Niger with 
their faces turned towards Mecca, dipped their hands in its waters and 
praised the name of the Lord.  They journeyed from city to city and from 
court to court, and composed works of travel which were read with eager 
delight all over the Moslem world, from Spain to Hindustan.

The Arabs thronged to this newly discovered world.  They built factories; 
they established schools; they converted dynasties.  They covered the 
river with masted vessel; they built majestic temples with graceful 
minaret and swelling dome.  Theological colleges and public libraries 
were founded; camels came across the desert laden with books; the 
negroes swarmed to the lectures of the mullahs; Plato and Aristotle were 
studied by the banks of the Niger, and the glories of Granada were 
reflected at Timbuktu.  That city became the refuge of political fugitives 
and criminals from Morocco.  In the sixteenth century the Emperor 
dispatched across the desert a company of harquebusiers who, with their 
strange, terrible weapons, everywhere triumphed like the soldiers of 
Cortes and Pizarro in Mexico and Peru.  These musketeers made 
enormous conquests not for their master but for themselves.  They 
established an oligarchy of their own; it was afterwards dethroned by the 
natives, but there yet exist men who, as Barth informs us, are called the 
descendants of the musketeers and who wear a distinctive dress.  But that 
imperial expedition was the last exploit of the Moors.  After the conquest 
of Granada by the Christians and of Algeria by the Turks, Morocco, 
encompassed by enemies, became a savage and isolated land; Timbuktu, 
its commercial dependent, fell into decay, and is now chiefly celebrated 
as a cathedral town.

The Arabs carried cotton and the art of its manufacture into the Sudan, 
which is one of the largest cotton-growing areas in the world.  Its 
Manchester is Kano, which manufactures blue cloth and coloured plaids, 
clothes a vast negro population, and even exports its goods to the lands of 
the Mediterranean Sea.  Denham and Clapperton, who first reached the 
lands of Haoussa and Bornu, were astonished to find among the negroes 
magnificent courts; regiments of cavalry, the horses caparisoned in silk 
for gala days and clad in coats of mail for war; long trains of camels 
laden with salt and natron and corn and cloth and cowrie shells—which 
form the currency--and kola nuts, which the Arabs call “the coffee of the 
negroes.”  They attended with wonder the gigantic fairs at which the 
cotton goods of Manchester, the red cloth of Saxony, double-barrelled 
guns, razors, tea and sugar, Nuremberg ware and writing-paper were 
exhibited for sale.  They also found merchants who offered to cash their 
bills upon houses at Tripoli, and scholars acquainted with Avicenna, 
Averroes, and the Greek philosophers.

The Mohammedan religion was spread in Central Africa to a great extent 
by the travelling Arab merchants, who were welcomed everywhere at the 
negro or semi-negro courts, and who frequently converted the pagan 
kings by working miracles—that is to say, by means of events which 
accidentally followed their solemn prayers, such as the healing of a 
disease, rain in the midst of drought, or a victory in war.  But the chief 
instrument of conversion was the school.  It is much to the credit of the 
negroes that they keenly appreciate the advantages of education; they 
appear to possess an instinctive veneration and affection for the book.  
Wherever Mohammedans settled the sons of chiefs were placed under 
their tuition.  A Mohammedan quarter was established; it was governed 
by its own laws; its sheikh rivalled in power and finally surpassed the 
native kings.  The machinery of the old pagan court might still go on; the 
negro chief might receive the magnificent title of sultan; he might be 
surrounded by albinos and dwarfs and big-headed men and buffoons; he 
might sit in a cage, or behind a curtain in a palace with seven gates, and 
receive the ceremonial visits of his nobles, who stripped off a garment at 
each gate and came into his presence naked, and cowered on the ground, 
and clapped their hands, and sprinkled their heads with dust, and then 
turned round and sat with their backs presented in reverence towards him, 
as if they were unable to bear the sight of his countenance shining like a 
well-blacked boot.  But the Arab or Moorish sheikh would be in reality 
the king, deciding all questions of foreign policy, of peace and war, of 
laws and taxes and commercial regulations, holding a position resembling 
that of the Gothic generals who placed Libius Severus and Augustulus 
upon the throne—of the mayors of the palace beside the Merovingian 
princes, of the Company’s servants at the court of the great Mogul.  And 
when the Mohammedans had become numerous, and a fitting season had 
arrived, the sheikh would point out a well known Koran text and would 
proclaim war against the surrounding pagan kings.  And so the movement 
which had been begun by the school would be continued by the sword.

It may, however, be doubted whether the Arab merchants alone would 
have spread Islam over the Niger plateau.  On the east coast of Africa 
they have possessed settlements from time immemorial.  Before the 
Greeks of Alexandria sailed into the Indian Ocean, before the Tyrian 
vessels, with Jewish supercargoes, passed through the straits of Bab-el-
Mandeb, the Arabs of Yemen had established factories in Mozambique 
and on the opposite coast of Malabar, and had carried on a trade between 
the two lands, selling to the Indians ivory, ebony, slaves, bees-wax, and 
gold-dust brought down in quills from the interior by the negroes, to 
whom they sold in return the sugar beads, and blue cotton goods of 
Hindustan.  In the period of the caliphs these settlements were 
strengthened and increased, in consequence of civil war, by fugitive tribes 
from Oman and other parts of the Arabian peninsula.  The emigrants 
made Africa their home; they built large towns which they surrounded 
with orchards of the orange-tree and plantations of the date; they 
introduced the culture of tobacco, sugar-cane and cotton.  They were 
loved and revered by the negroes; they made long journeys into the 
interior for the purposes of trade.  Yet their religion has made no 
progress, and they do not attempt to convert the blacks.  Their towns 
resemble those of the Europeans; they dwell apart from the natives, and 
above them.

The Mohammedans who entered the Niger regions were not only the 
Arab merchants but also the Berbers of the desert, who, driven by war or 
instigated by ambition, poured into the Sudan by tribes, seized lands and 
women, and formed mulatto nationalities.  Of these the Fulahs are the 
most famous.  They were originally natives of Northern Africa; having 
intermarried during many generations with the natives, they have often 
the appearance of pure Negroes, but they always call themselves white 
men, however black their skins may seem to be.  In the last century they 
were dispersed in small and puny tribes.  Some wandered as gipsies 
selling wooden bowls; others were roaming shepherd clans, paying 
tribute to the native kings and suffering much ill-treatment.  In other parts 
they lived a bandit life.  Sometimes, but rarely, they resided in towns 
which they had conquered, pursued commerce, and tilled the soil.  Yet in 
war they were far superior to the Negroes: if only they could be united the 
most powerful kingdoms would be unable to withstand them.  And finally 
their day arrived.  A man of their own race returned from Mecca, a 
pilgrim and a prophet, gathered them like wolves beneath his standard, 
and poured them forth on the Sudan.

The pilgrimage to Mecca is incumbent only on those who can afford it, 
but hundreds of devout Negroes every year put on their shrouds and beg 
their way across the continent to Massowah.  There, taking out a few 
grains of gold-dust cunningly concealed between the leaves of their 
Korans, they pay their passage across the Red Sea and tramp it from Jidda 
to Mecca, feeding as they go on the bodies of the camels that have been 
left to die, and whose meat is lawful if the throat is cut before the animal 
expires.  As soon as the Negroes—or Takrouri, as they are called—arrive 
in the Holy City they at once set to work, some as porters and some as 
carriers of water in leather skins; others manufacture baskets and mats of 
date leaves; others establish a market for firewood, which they collect in 
the neighbouring hills.  They inhabit miserable huts or ruined houses in 
the quarter of the lower classes, where the sellers of charcoal dwell and 
where locusts are sold by the measure.  Some of these poor and 
industrious creatures spread their mats in the cloisters of the great 
Mosque, and stay all the time beneath that sacred and hospitable roof.  
They are subject to the exclamatory fits and pious convulsions so 
common among the Negroes of the Southern States.  Often they may be 
seen prostrate on the pavement, beating their foreheads against the stones, 
weeping bitterly, and pouring forth the wildest ejaculations.

The Great Mosque at Mecca is a spacious square surrounded by a 
colonnade.  In the midst of the quadrangle is the small building called the 
Caaba.  It has no windows; its door, which is seldom opened, is coated 
with silver; its padlock, once of pure gold, is now of silver gilt.  On its 
threshold are placed every night various small wax candles and 
perfuming pans filled with aloeswood and musk.  The walls of the 
building are covered with a veil of black silk, tucked up on one side, so as 
to leave exposed the famous Black Stone which is niched in the wall 
outside.  The veil is not fastened close to the building, so that the least 
breath of air causes it to wave in slow, undulating movements, hailed 
with prayer by the kneeling crowd around.  They believe that it is caused 
by the wings of guardian angels who will transport the Caaba to paradise 
when the last trumpet sounds.

At a little distance from this building is the Zemzem well, and while some 
of the pilgrims are standing by its mouth waiting to be served, or walking 
round the Caaba, or stooping to kiss the stone, other scenes may be 
observed in the cloisters and the square; and, as in the Temple at 
Jerusalem, these are not all of the most edifying nature.  Children are 
playing at games, or feeding the wild pigeons whom long immunity has 
rendered tame.  Numerous schools are going on, the boys chanting in a 
loud voice, and the master’s baton sometimes falling on their backs.  In 
another corner a religious lecture is being delivered.  Men of all nations 
are clustered in separate groups—the Persian heretics, with their caps 
mounting to heaven and their beards descending to the earth; the Tartar, 
with oblique eyes and rounded limbs and light silk handkerchief tied 
round his brow; Turks with shaven faces and in red caps; the lean Indian 
pauper, begging with a miserable whine; and one or two wealthy Hindu 
merchants not guiltless of dinners given to infidels, and of iced 
champagne.  At the same time an active business is being done in sacred 
keepsakes—rosaries made of camel bone, bottles of Zemzem water, dust 
collected from behind the veil, tooth-sticks made of a fibrous root such as 
that which Mohammed himself was wont to use, and coarsely executed 
pictures of the Caaba.  Mecca itself, like most cities frequented by 
strangers, whether pilgrims or mariners, is not an abode of righteousness 
and virtue.  As the Tartars say of it, “The Torch is dark at its foot,” and 
many a pilgrim might exclaim with the Arabian Ovid;

	“I set out in the hopes of lightening my sins,
	 And returned, bringing home with me a fresh load of transgressions.”

But the very wickedness of a holy city deepens real enthusiasm into 
severity and wrath.  When Abd-ul-Wahhab saw taverns opened in Mecca 
itself, and the inhabitants alluring the pilgrims to every kind of vice; 
when he found that the sacred places were made a show, that the mosque 
was inhabited by guides and officials who were as greedy as beasts of 
prey, that wealth, not piety, was the chief object of consideration in a 
pilgrim, he felt as Luther felt at Rome.  The disgust which was excited in 
his mind by the manners of the day was extended also to the doctrines 
that were in vogue.  The prayers that were offered up to Mohammed and 
the saints resembled the prayers that were once offered up to the 
Daughters of Heaven, the intercessors of the ancient Arabs.  The 
pilgrimages that were made to the tombs of holy men were the old 
journeys to the ancestral graves.  The worship of one God, which 
Mohammed had been sent to restore, had again become obscured; the 
days of darkness had returned.  He preached a Unitarian revival; he held 
up as his standard and his guide the Koran, and nothing but the Koran; he 
founded a puritan sect which is now a hundred years of age, and still 
remains an element of power and disturbance in the East.

Othman Dan Fodio, the Black Prophet, also went out of Mecca, his soul 
burning with zeal.  He determined to reform the Sudan.  He forbade, like 
Abd-ul-Wahhab, the smoking of tobacco, the wearing of ornaments and 
finery.  But he had to contend with more gross abuses still.  In many 
negro lands which professed Islam, palm wine and millet beer were 
largely consumed; the women did not veil their faces nor even their 
bosoms; immodest dances were performed to the profane music of the 
drum; learned men gained a livelihood by writing charms, the code of the 
Koran was often supplanted by the old customary laws.  Dan Fodio sent 
letters to the great kings of Timbuktu, Haoussa, and Bornu, commanding 
them to reform their own lives and those of their subjects, or he would 
chastise them in the name of God.  They received these instructions from 
an unknown man, as the King of Kings received the letter of Mohammed, 
and their fate resembled his.  Dan Fodio united the Fulah tribes into an 
army which he inspired with his own spirit.  Thirsting for plunder and 
paradise, the Fulahs swept over the Sudan; they marched into battle with 
shouts of frenzied joy, singing hymns and waving their green flags on 
which texts of the Koran were embroidered in letters of gold.  The empire 
which they established at the beginning of this century is now crumbling 
away, but the fire is still burning on the frontiers.  Wherever the Fulahs 
are settled in the neighbourhood of pagan tribes they are extending their 
power, and although the immediate effects are disastrous—villages being 
laid in ashes, men slaughtered by thousands, women and children sold as 
slaves—yet in the end these crusades are productive of good.  The 
villages are converted into towns; a new land is brought within the sphere 
of commercial and religious intercourse, and is added to the Asiatic 
world.

The phenomenon of a religious Tamerlane has been repeated more than 
once in Central Africa.  The last example was that of Oumar the Pilgrim, 
whose capital was Segou, and whose conquests extended from Timbuktu 
to Senegal, where he came into contact with French artillery and for ever 
lost his prestige as a prophet.  But we are taught by the science of history 
that these military empires can never long endure.  It is probable that 
Mohammedan Sudan will in time become a province of the Turks.  
Central Africa, as we have shown, received its civilisation not from Egypt 
but from the grand Morocco of the Middle Ages.  Egypt has always lived 
with its back to Africa, its eyes and often its hands on Syria and Arabia.  
Abyssinia was not subdued by the caliphs because it was not coveted by 
them, and there was little communication between Egypt and the Sudan.  
Mohammed Ali was the first to re-establish the kingdom of the Pharaohs 
in Ethiopia, and to organise negro regiments.  Since his time the Turkish 
power has been gradually spreading towards the interior, and the 
expedition of Baker Pasha, whatever may be its immediate result, is the 
harbinger of great events to come.  Should the Turks be driven out of 
Europe, they would probably become the emperors of Africa, which in 
the interests of civilisation would be a fortunate occurrence.  The Turkish 
government is undoubtedly defective in comparison with the 
governments of Europe, but it is perfection itself in comparison with the 
governments of Africa.  If the Egyptians had been allowed to conquer 
Abyssinia there would have been no need of an Abyssinian expedition, 
and nothing but Egyptian occupation will put an end to the wars which 
are always being waged and always have been waged in that country 
between bandit chiefs.  Those who are anxious that Abyssinian 
Christianity should be preserved need surely not be alarmed, for the Pope 
of Abyssinia is the Patriarch of Cairo, a Turkish subject, and the aboona 
or archbishop has always been an Egyptian.  But the Turks no longer 
have it in their power to commit actions which Europeans would 
condemn. They now belong to the civilised system; they are subject to the 
law of opinion.  Already they have been compelled by that mysterious 
power to suppress the slave-making wars which were formerly waged 
every year from Kordofan and Sennaar, and which are still being waged 
from the independent kingdoms of Darfur, Waday, Bagirmi, and Bornu.  
Wherever the Turks reign a European is allowed to travel; wherever a 
European travels a word is spoken on behalf of the oppressed.  That word 
enters the newspapers, passes into a diplomatic remonstrance, becomes a 
firman, and a governor or commandant in some sequestered province of 
an Oriental empire suffers the penalty of his misdeeds.  It should be the 
policy of European Powers to aid the destruction of all savage kingdoms, 
or at least never to interfere on their behalf.

It has now been shown that a vast region within the Dark Continent, the 
world beyond the sandy ocean, is governed by Asiatic laws and has 
attained an Asiatic civilisation.  We must next pass to the Atlantic side, 
and study the effects which have been produced among the negroes by 
the intercourse of Europeans.  It will be found that the transactions on the 
coast of Guinea belong not only to the biography of Africa but also to 
universal history, and that the domestication of the negro has indirectly 
assisted the material progress of Europe and the development of its 
morality.  The programme of the next chapter will be as follows: The rise 
of Europe out of darkness; the discovery of Western Africa by the 
Portuguese; the institution of the slave-trade, and the history of that great 
republican and philanthropic movement which won its first victory in the 
abolition of the slave-trade in 1807, its last in the taking of Richmond in 
1865.








CHAPTER III



LIBERTY





THE history of Europe in ancient times is the history of those
lands which adjoin the Mediterranean Sea. Beyond the Alps lay a
vast expanse of marsh and forest, through which flowed the
swift and gloomy Rhine. On the right side of that river dwelt
the Germans; on its left, the Celtic Gauls. Both people, in
manners and customs, resembled the Red Indians. They lived in
round wigwams, with a hole at the top to let out the smoke.
They hunted the white maned bison and the brown bear, and
trapped the beaver, which then built its lodges by the side of
every stream. They passed their spare time in gambling,
drunkenness, and torpor; while their squaws cut the firewood,
cultivated their garden-plots of grain, tended the shaggy-
headed cattle, and the hogs feeding on acorns and beech-mast,
obedient to the horn of the mistress, but savage to strangers
as a pack of wolves. At an early period, however, the Gauls
came into contact with the Phoenicians and the Greeks; they
served in the Carthaginian armies, and acquired a taste for
trade; they learnt the cultivation of the vine, and some of the
metallic arts; their priests, or learned men, employed the
Greek characters in writing. But the Gauls had a mania for
martial glory, and often attacked the peaceful Greek merchants
of Marseilles. The Greeks at last called in the assistance of
the Romans, who not only made war on the hostile tribes, but on
the peaceful tribes as well. Thus began the conquest of
Gaul. It was completed by Caesar, who used that country as an
exercise-ground for his soldiers, and prepared them, by a
hundred battles, for the mighty combat in which Pompey was over-
thrown.

Military roads were made across the Alps, Roman colonies were
dispatched into the newly conquered land, Italian farmers took
up their abode in the native towns, and the chiefs were
required to send their sons to school. Thus the Romans obtained
hostages, and the Celts were pleased to see their boys neatly
dressed in white garments edged with purple, displaying their
proficiency on the waxen tablets and the counting board. In a
few generations the Celts had disappeared. On the banks of the
Rhone and the Seine magnificent cities arose, watered by
aqueducts, surrounded by gardens, adorned with libraries,
temples, and public schools. The inhabitants called themselves
Romans, and spoke with patriotic fervour of the glorious days
of the Republic.

Meanwhile the barbarians beyond the Rhine remained in the
savage state. They often crossed the river to invade the land
which had ripened into wealth before their eyes: but the
frontier was guarded by a chain of camps; and the Germans,
armed only with clumsy spears and wooden shields, could not
break the line of Roman soldiers, who were dressed in steel,
who were splendidly disciplined, and who had military engines.
The Gauls had once been a warlike people; they now abandoned
the use of arms. The empire insured them against invasion in
return for the taxes which they paid.

But there came a time when the tribute of the provinces no
longer returned to the provinces to be expended on the public
buildings and the frontier garrisons and the military roads.
The rivers of gold which had so long flowed into Rome at last
dried up: the empire became poor, and yet its expenses remained
the same. The Praetorian Guards had still to be paid; the mob
of the capital had still to be rationed with bread, and bacon,
and wine, and oil, and costly shows. Accordingly the provinces
were made to suffer. Exorbitant taxes were imposed: the
aldermen and civil councillors of towns were compelled to pay
enormous fees in virtue of their office, and were forbidden to
evade such expensive honours by enlisting in the army, or by
taking holy orders. The rich were accused of crimes that their
property might be seized: the crops in the fields were gathered
by the police. A blight fell upon the land. Men would no longer
labour, since the fruits of their toil might at any time be
taken from them. Cornfield and meadow were again covered with
brambles and weeds; the cities were deserted; grass grew in all
the streets. The province of Gaul was taxed to death, and then
abandoned by the Romans. The government could no longer afford
to garrison the Rhine frontier: the legions were withdrawn, and
the Germans entered.

The invading armies were composed of free men, who, under their
respective captains or heads of clans, had joined the standard
of some noted warrior chief. The spoil of the army belonged to
the army, and was divided according to stipulated rules. The
king's share was large, but more than his share he might not
have. When the Germans, instead of returning with their booty,
remained upon the foreign soil, they partitioned the land in
the same manner as they partitioned the cattle and the slaves,
the gold crosses, the silver chalices; the vases, the tapestry,
the fine linen, and the purple robes. An immense region was
allotted to the king; other tracts of various sizes to the
generals and captains (or chiefs and chieftains) according to
the number of men whom they had brought into the field; and
each private soldier received a piece of ground. But the army,
although disbanded, was not extinct; its members remained under
martial law the barons or generals were bound to obey the king
when he summoned them to war; the soldiers to obey their
ancient chiefs. Sometimes the king and the great barons gave
lands to favourites and friends on similar conditions, and at a
later period money was paid instead of military service, thus
originating rent.

The nobles of Roman Gaul lived within the city except during
the villeggiatura in the autumn. The German lords preferred the
country, and either fortified the Roman villas or built new
castles of their own. They surrounded themselves with a
bodyguard of personal retainers; their prisoners of war were
made to till the ground as serfs. And soon they reduced to much
the same condition the German soldiers, and seized their humble
lands. In that troubled age none could hold property except by
means of the strong arm. Men found it difficult to preserve
their lives, and often presented their bodies to some powerful
lord in return for protection, in return for daily bread. The
power of the king was nominal: sovereignty was broken and
dispersed: Europe was divided among castles: and in each castle
was a prince who owned no authority above his own, who held a
high court of justice in his hall, issued laws to his estates,
lived by the court fees, by taxes levied on passing caravans,
and by ransoms for prisoners, sometimes obtained in fair war,
sometimes by falling upon peaceful travellers. Dark deeds were
done within those ivy-covered towers which now exist for the
pleasure of poets and pilgrims of the picturesque. Often from
turret chambers and grated windows arose the shrieks of
violated maidens and the yells of tortured Jews. Yet castle-
life had also its brighter side. To cheer the solitude of the
isolated house minstrels and poets and scholars were courted by
the barons, and were offered a peaceful chamber and a place of
honour at the board. In the towns of ancient Italy and Greece
there was no family: the home did not exist. The women and
children dwelt together in secluded chambers: the men lived a
club life in the baths, the porticoes, and the gymnasiums. But
the castle lord had no companions of his own rank except the
members of his own family. On stormy days, when he could not
hunt, he found a pleasure in dancing his little ones upon his
knee, and in telling them tales of the wood and weald. Their
tender fondlings, and their merry laughs, their half formed
voices, which attempted to pronounce his name -- all these were
sweet to him. And by the love of those in whom he saw his own
image mirrored, in whom his own childhood appeared to live
again, he was drawn closer and closer to his wife. She became
his counsellor and friend; she softened his rugged manners; she
soothed his fierce wrath; she pleaded for the prisoners and
captives, and the men condemned to die. And when he was absent,
she became the sovereign lady of the house, ruled the vassals,
sat in the judgment-seat, and often defended the castle in time of 
siege. A charge so august could not but elevate the female
mind. Women became queens. The Lady was created. Within the
castle was formed that grand manner of gentleness, mingled with
hauteur, which art can never stimulate, and which ages of
dignity can alone confer.

The barons dwelt apart from one another, and were often engaged
in private war. Yet they had sons to educate and daughters to
marry; and so a singular kind of society arose. The king's
house or court, and the houses of the great barons, became
academies to which the inferior barons sent their boys and
girls to school. The young lady became the attendant of the
Dame, and was instructed in the arts of playing on the
virginals, of preparing simples, and of healing wounds; of
spinning, sewing, and embroidery. The young gentleman was at
first a Page. He was taught to manage a horse with grace and
skill, to use bow and sword, to sound the notes of venerie upon
the horn, to carve at table, to ride full tilt against the
quintaine with his lance in rest, to brittle a deer, to find
his way through the forest by the stars in the sky and by the
moss upon the trees. It was also his duty to wait upon the
ladies who tutored his youthful mind in other ways. He was
trained to deport himself with elegance; he was nurtured in all
the accomplishments of courtesy and love. He was encouraged to
select a mistress among the dames or demoiselles; to adore her
in his heart, to serve her with patience and fidelity, obeying
her least commands; to be modest in her presence; to be silent
and discreet. The reward of all this devotion was of no
ethereal kind, but it was not quickly or easily bestowed; and
vice almost ceases to be vice when it can only be gratified by
means of long discipline in virtue. When the page had arrived
at a certain age, he was clad in a brown frock; a sword was
fastened to his side, and he obtained the title of Esquire. He
attended his patron knight on military expeditions, until he
was old enough to be admitted to the order. Among the ancient
Germans of the forest, when a young man came of age, he was
solemnly invested with shield and spear. The ceremony of
knighthood at first was nothing more than this. Every man of gentle 
birth became a knight, and then took an oath to be true to God and to

the ladies and to his plighted word; to be honourable in all

his actions, to succour the oppressed. Thus, within those
castle-colleges arose the sentiment of Honour, the institution
of Chivalry, which, as an old poet wrote, made women chaste and
men brave. The women were worshipped as goddesses, the men were
revered as heroes. Each sex aspired to possess those qualities
which the other sex approved. Women admire, above all things,
courage and truth; and so the men became courageous and true.
Men admire modesty, virtue, and refinement; and so the women
became virtuous, and modest, and refined. A higher standard of
propriety was required as time went on: the manners and customs
of the Dark Ages became the vices of a later period;
unchastity, which had once been regarded as the private wrong
of the husband, was stigmatised as a sin against society; and
society found a means of taking its revenge. At first the
notorious woman was insulted to her face at tournament and
banquet; or knights chalked an epithet upon her castle gates,
and then rode on. In the next age she was shunned by her own
sex: the discipline of social life was established as it exists
at the present day. Though it might sometimes be relaxed in a
vicious court, at least the ideal of right was preserved. But
in the period of the Troubadours the fair sinners resembled the
pirates of the Homeric age. Their pursuits were of a dangerous,
but not of a dishonourable nature: they might sometimes lose
their lives; they never lost their reputation.

We must now descend from ladies and gentlemen to the people in
the field, who are sometimes forgotten by historians. The
castle was built on the summit of a hill, and a village of
serfs was clustered round its foot. These poor peasants were
often hardly treated by their lords. Often they raised their
brown and horny hands and cursed the cruel castle which scowled
upon them from above. Humbly they made obeisance, and bitterly
they gnawed their lips as the baron rode down the narrow street
on his great war-horse, which would always have its fill of
corn, when they would starve, followed by his beef-fed varlets
with faces red from beer, who gave them jeering looks, who
called them by nicknames, who contemptuously caressed their
daughters before their eyes. Yet it was not always thus: the
lord was often a true nobleman, the parent of their village,
the god-father of their children, the guardian of their
happiness, the arbiter of their disputes. When there was
sickness among them, the ladies of the castle often came down,
bringing them soups and spiced morsels with their own white
hands; and the castle was the home of the good chaplain, who
told them of the happier world beyond the grave. It was there
also that they enjoyed such pleasures as they had. Sometimes
they were called up to the castle to feast on beef and beer in
commemoration of a happy anniversary or a Christian feast.
Sometimes their lord brought home a caravan of merchants whom
he had captured on the road and while the strange guests were
quaking for the safety of their bales, the people were being
amused with the songs of the minstrels, and the tricks of the
jugglers, and the antics of the dancing-bear. And sometimes a
tournament was held: the lords and ladies of the neighbourhood
rode over to the castle; turf banks were set for the serfs and
a gallery was erected for the ladies, above whom sat enthroned
the one who was chosen as the Queen of Beauty and of Love. Then
the heralds shouted, "Love of ladies, splintering of lances!
stand forth, gallant knights; fair eyes look upon your deeds!"
And the knights took up their position in two lines fronting
one another, and sat motionless upon their horses like pillars
of iron, with nothing to be seen but their flaming eyes. The
trumpets flourished: “Laissez aller!,” cried a voice; and the
knights, with their long spears in rest, dashed furiously
against each other, and then plied battle-axe and sword, to the
great delight and contentment of the populace.

In times of war the castle was also the refuge of the poor, and
the villagers fled behind its walls when the enemy drew near.
They did not then reflect that it was the castle which had
provoked the war; they viewed it only as a hospitable fortress
which had saved their lives. It was therefore, in many cases,
regarded by the people not only with awe and veneration, but
also with a sentiment of filial love. It was associated with
their pleasures and their security. But in course of time a
rival arose to alienate the affections, or to strengthen the
resentment of the castle serfs. It was the Town.

In the days of the Republic and in the first days of the
Empire, all kinds of skilled labour were in the hands of
slaves: in every palace, whatever was required for the
household was manufactured on the premises. But before the
occupation of the Germans, a free class of artisans had sprung
up, in what manner is not precisely known; they were probably
the descendants of emancipated slaves. This class, divided into
guilds and corporations, continued to inhabit the towns: they
manufactured armour and clothes they travelled as pedlars about
the country, and thus acquired wealth, which they cautiously
concealed, for they were in complete subservience to the castle
lord. They could not leave their property by will, dispose of
their daughters in marriage, or perform a single business
transaction without the permission of their liege. But little
by little their power increased. When war was being waged, it
became needful to fortify the town; for the town was the
baron's estate, and he did not wish his property to be
destroyed. When once the burghers were armed and their town
walled they were able to defy their lord. They obtained
charters, sometimes by revolt, sometimes by purchase, which
gave them the town to do with it as they pleased; to elect
their own magistrates, to make their own laws, and to pay their
liege-lord a fixed rent by the year instead of being subjected
to loans and benevolences, and loving contributions. The Roman
Law, which had never quite died out, was now revived; the old
municipal institutions of the Empire were restored. Unhappily
the citizens often fought among themselves, and towns joined
barons in destroying towns. Yet their influence rapidly
increased, and the power of the castle was diminished. Whenever
a town received privileges from its lord, other towns demanded
that the same rights should be embodied in their charters, and
rebelled if their request was refused. Trade and industry
expanded; the products of burgher enterprise and skill were
offered in the castle halls for sale. The lady was tempted with
silk and velvet; the lord, with chains of gold, and Damascus
blades, and suits of Milan steel; the children clamoured for
the sweet white powder which was brought from the countries of
the East. These new tastes and fancies impoverished the nobles.
They reduced their establishments; and the discarded retainers,
in no sweet temper, went over to the Town.

And there were others who went to the Town as well. In
classical times the slaves were unable to rebel with any
prospect of success. In the cities of Greece every citizen was
a soldier: in Rome an enormous army served as the slave police.
But in the scattered castle states of Europe, the serfs could
rise against their lords, and often did so with effect. And
then the Town was always a place of refuge: the runaway slave
was there welcomed; his pursuers were duped or defied; the file
was applied to his collar; his blue blouse was taken off; his
hair was suffered to grow; he was made a burgher and a free
man. Thus the serfs had often the power to rebel, and always
the power to escape; in consequence of which they ceased to be
serfs and became tenants. In our own times we have seen
emancipation presented to slaves by a victorious party in the
House of Commons, and by a victorious army in the United
States. It has, therefore, been inferred that slavery in Europe
was abolished in the same manner, and the honour of the
movement has been bestowed upon the Church. But this is reading
history upside down. The extinction of villeinage was not a
donation but a conquest: it did not descend from the court and
the castle; it ascended from the village and the town. The
Church, however, may claim the merit of having mitigated
slavery in its worst days, when its horrors were increased by
the pride of conquest and the hostility of race. The clergy
belonged to the conquered people, whom they protected from
harsh usage to the best of their ability. They taught as the
Moslem doctors also teach, and as even the pagan Africans
believe, that it is a pious action to emancipate a slave. But
there is no reason to suppose that they ever thought of
abolishing slavery, and they could not have done so had they
wished. Negro slavery was established by subjects of the Church
in defiance of the Church. Religion has little power when it
works against the stream, but it can give to streams a power
which they otherwise would not possess, and it can unite their
scattered waters into one majestic flood.

Rome was taken and sacked but never occupied by the barbarians.
It still belonged to the Romans: it still preserved the
traditions and the genius of empire. Whatever may have been the
origin of British or Celtic Christianity, it is certain that
the English were converted by the Papists; the first Archbishop
of Canterbury was an Italian; his converts became missionaries,
entered the vast forests of pagan Germany, and brought nations
to the feet of Rome. The alliance of Pepin and the Roman See
placed also the French clergy under the dominion of the Pope,
who was acknowledged by Alcuin, the adherent of Charlemagne, to
be the "Pontiff of God, vicar of the apostles, heir of the
fathers, prince of the Church, guardian of the only dove
without stain."

The ordinance of clerical celibacy increased the efficacy of
the priesthood and the power of the Pope. The ranks of the
clergy were recruited, generation after generation, from the
most intelligent of the lay men in the lower classes, and from
those among the upper classes who were more inclined to
intellectual pursuits than to military life. These men, divided
as they were from family connections, ceased to be Germans,
Englishmen, or Frenchmen, and became catholic or universal
hearted men, patriots of religion, children of the Church. And
those enthusiastic laymen who had adopted an ascetic isolated
life, or had gathered together in voluntary associations; those
hermits and monks, who might have been so dangerous to the
Established Church, were welcomed as allies. No mean jealousy
in the Roman Church divided the priest and the prophet, as
among the ancient Jews; the mullah and the dervish, as in the
East at the present time. The monks were allowed to preach, and
to elect their own monastery priests; they were gradually
formed into regular orders, and brought within the discipline
of ecclesiastic law. The monks of the East, who could live on a
handful of beans, passed their lives in weaving baskets, in
prayer and meditation. But the monks of the West, who lived in
a colder climate, required a different kind of food; and as at
first they had no money, they could obtain it only by means of
work. They laboured in the fields in order to live and that
which had arisen from necessity was continued as a part of the
monastic discipline. There were also begging friars, who
journeyed from land to land. These were the first travellers in
Europe. Their sacred character preserved their lives from all
robbers, whether noble or plebeian, and the same exemption was
accorded to those who put on the pilgrim's garb. The smaller
pilgrimage was that to Rome the greater that to the Holy Land,
by which the palmers obtained remission of their sins, and also
were shown by the monks of Egypt, Sinai, and Palestine, many
interesting relics and vestiges of supernatural events. They
were shown the barns which Joseph had built, vulgarly called
the Pyramids; the bush which had burnt before Moses and was not
consumed, and the cleft out of which he peeped at the "back
parts" of Jehovah; the pillar of salt which was once Lot's
wife, and which, though the sheep continually licked it out of
shape, was continually restored to its pristine form; the ruins
of the temple which Samson overthrew; the well where Jesus used
to draw water for his mother when he was a little boy, and
where she used to wash his clothes; the manger in which he was
born, and the table on which he was circumcised; the caves in
which his disciples concealed themselves during the
crucifixion, and the cracks in the ground produced by the
earthquake, which followed that event; the tree on which Judas
hanged himself, and the house in which he resided, which was
surrounded by the Jews with a wall that it might not be injured
by the Christians.

It was not only the rich who undertook this pilgrimage; many a
poor man begged his way to the Holy Land. When such a person
was ready to depart, the village pastor clad him in a cloak of
coarse black serge, with a broad hat upon his head, put a long
staff in his hand, and hung round him a scarf and script. He was
conducted to the borders of the parish in solemn procession,
with cross and holy water the neighbours parted from him there
with tears and benedictions. He returned with cockle-shells
stitched in his hat, as a sign that he had been across the
seas, and with a branch of palm tied on to his staff, as a sign
that he had been to Jerusalem itself. He often brought also
relics and beads; a bag of dust to hang at the bedside of the
sick; a phial of oil from the lamp which hung over the Holy
Sepulchre, and perhaps a splinter of the true cross.

When the Saracens conquered Palestine and Egypt, they did not
destroy the memorials of Jesus, for they reverenced him as a
prophet. Pious Moslems made also the pilgrimage to Jerusalem;
and the Christians were surprised and edified to see the
turbaned infidels removing their sandals like Moses on Mount
Sinai, and prostrating themselves upon the pavement before the
tomb. The caliphs were sufficiently enlightened to encourage
and protect the foreign enthusiasts who filled the land with
gold; and although the palmers were exempt from "passage" and
"pontage" and other kinds of black-mail levied by the barons on
lay travellers, they found it more easy and more safe to travel
in Asia than in Europe. The passion for the pilgrimage to
Palestine, which had gradually increased since the days of
Helena and Jerome, burst forth as an epidemic at the close of
the tenth century. The thousand years assigned in Revelation as
the lifetime of the earth were about to expire. It was believed
that Jesus would appear in Jerusalem, and there hold a grand
assize: thousands bestowed their property upon the Church, and
crowded to the Holy Land.

While they thus lived at Jerusalem and waited for the second
coming, continually looking up at the sky and expecting it to
open, there came instead a host of men with yellow faces and
oblique slit-shaped eyes, who took the Holy City by assault,
drove the Arabs out of Syria, killed many pilgrims, stripped
them of all their money, and if they found none outside their
bodies, probed them with daggers, or administered emetics in
the hope of finding some within. When the pilgrims returned,
they related their sufferings, and showed their scars. The
anger of Christendom was aroused. A crusade was preached, and
the enthusiasm which everywhere prevailed enabled the Church to
exercise unusual powers. The Pope decreed that the men of the
cross should be hindered by none. Creditor might not arrest;
master might not detain. To those who joined the army of the
Church, absolution was given; and paradise was promised in the
Moslem style to those who died in the campaign. The tidings
flew from castle to castle, and from town to town; there was
not a land, however remote, which escaped the infection of the
time. In the homely language of the monk of Malmesbury, "the
Welshman left his hunting, the Scotch his fellowship with
vermin, the Dane his drinking party, the Norwegian his raw
fish." Europe was torn up from its foundations and hurled upon
Asia. Society was dissolved. Monks, not waiting for the
permission of their superiors, cast off their black gowns and
put on the buff jerkin, the boots and the sword. The serf left
his plough in the furrow, the shepherd left his flock in the
field. Men servants and maid servants ran from the castle.
Wives insisted upon going with their husbands, and if their
husbands refused to take them, went with some one else.
Murderers, robbers, and pirates declared that they would wash
out their sins in pagan blood. In some cases, the poor rustic
shod his oxen like horses, and placed his whole family in a
cart, and whenever he came to a castle or a town, inquired
whether that was Jerusalem. The barons sold or mortgaged their
estates, indifferent about the future, hoping to win the wealth
of Eastern princes with the sword. During two hundred years,
the natives of Europe appeared to have no other object than to
conquer or to keep possession of the Holy Land.

The Christian knights were at length driven out of Asia; in the
meantime, Europe was transformed. The kings had taken no part
in the first crusades; the estates of the barons had been
purchased partly by them, and partly by the burghers. An
alliance was made between Crown and Town. The sovereignty of
the castle was destroyed. Judges appointed by the king
travelled on circuit through the land; the Roman law, from being
municipal became national; the barons became a nobility
residing chiefly at the court; the middle class came into life.
The burghers acknowledged no sovereign but the king: they
officered their own trainbands; they collected their own taxes;
they were represented in a national assembly at the capital.
New tastes came into vogue; both mind and body were indulged
with dainty foods. The man of talent, whatever his station,
might hope to be ennobled; the honour of knighthood was
reserved by the king, and bestowed upon civilians. The spices
of the East, the sugar of Egypt and Spain, the silk of Greece
and the islands were no longer occasional luxuries, but
requirements of daily life. And since it was considered
unworthy of a gentleman to trade, the profits of commerce were
monopolised by the third estate. Education was required for
mercantile pursuits; it was at first given by the priests who
had previously taught laymen only to repeat the paternoster
and the credo, and to pay tithes. Schools were opened in the
towns, and universities became secular. The rich merchants took
a pride in giving their sons the best education that money
could obtain, and these young men were not always disposed to
follow commercial pursuits. They adopted the study of the law,
cultivated the fine arts, made experiments in natural
philosophy, and were often sent by their parents to study in
the land beyond the Alps, where they saw something which was in
itself an education for the burgher mind -- merchants dwelling
in palaces, seated upon thrones, governing great cities,
commanding fleets and armies, negotiating on equal terms with
the proudest and most powerful monarchs of the North.

Italy, protected by its mountain barrier, had not been so
frequently flooded by barbarians as the provinces of Gaul and
Spain. The feudal system was there established in a milder
form, and the cities retained more strength. Soon they were
able to attack the castle lords, to make them pull down their
towers, and to live like peaceable citizens within the walls.
The Emperor had little power; Florence, Genoa, and Pisa grew
into powerful city states resembling those of Italy before the
rise of ancient Rome, but possessing manufactures which, in the
time of ancient Italy, had been confined to Egypt, China, and
Hindustan.

The origin of Venice was different from that of its sister
states. In the darkest days of Italy, when a horde of savage
Huns, with scalps dangling from the trappings of their horses,
poured over the land, some citizens of Padua and other
adjoining towns took refuge in a cluster of islands in the
lagoons which were formed at the mouths of the Adige and the
Po. From Rialto, the chief of these islands, it was three miles
to the mainland; a mile and a half to the sandy breakwater
which divided the lagoons from the Adriatic. At high water the
islands appeared to be at sea; but when the tide declined, they
rose up from the midst of a dark green plain in which blue
gashes were opened by the oar. But even at high water the
lagoons were too shallow to be entered by ships -- except
through certain tortuous and secret channels; and even at low
water they were too deep to be passed on foot. Here, then, the
Venetians were secure from their foes, like the lake-dwellers
of ancient times.

At first they were merely salt-boilers and fishermen, and were
dependent on the mainland for the materials of life. There was
no seaport in the neighbourhood to send its vessels for the
salt which they prepared: they were forced to fetch everything
that they required for themselves. They became seamen by
necessity: they almost lived upon the water. As their means
improved, and as their wants expanded, they bought fields and
pastures on the mainland; they extended their commerce, and made
long voyages. They learnt in the dock-yards of Constantinople
the art of building tall ships; they conquered the pirates of
the Adriatic Sea. The princes of Syria, Egypt, Barbary, and
Spain were all of them merchants, for commerce is an
aristocratic occupation in the East. With them the Venetians
opened up a trade. At first they had only timber and slaves to
offer in exchange for the wondrous fabrics and rare spices of
the East. In raw produce Europe is no match for Asia. The
Venetians, therefore, were driven to invent; they manufactured
furniture and woollen cloth, armour, and glass. It is evident,
from the old names of the streets, that Venice formerly was one
great workshop; it was also a great market city. The crowds of
pilgrims resorting to Rome to visit the tombs of the martyrs,
and to kiss the Pope's toe, had suggested to the Government the
idea of Fairs which were held within the city at stated times.
The Venetians established a rival fair in honour of St. Mark,
whose remains, revered even by the Moslems, had been smuggled
out of Alexandria in a basket of pork. They took their
materials, like Molière, wherever they could find them--stole
the corpse of a patriarch from Constantinople, and the bones of
a saint from Milan. They made religion subservient to commerce:
they declined to make commerce subservient to religion. The
Pope forbade them to trade with infidels: but the infidel,
trade was their life. Siamo Veneziani poi Cristiani, they
replied. The Papal nuncios arrived in Venice, and
excommunicated two hundred of the leading men. In return they
were ordered to leave the town. The fleets of the Venetians,
like the Phoenicians of old, sailed in all the European waters,
from the wheat fields of the Crimea to the ice-creeks of the
Baltic. In that sea the pirates were at length extinct; a
number of cities along its shores were united in a league.
Bruges in Flanders was the emporium of the Northern trade, and
was supplied by Venetian vessels with the commodities of the
South. The Venetians also travelled over Europe, and
established their financial colonies in all great towns. The
cash of Europe was in their hands; and the sign of three golden
balls declared that Lombards lent money within.

During the period of the Crusades, their trade with the East
was interrupted but it was exchanged for a commerce more
profitable still. The Venetians in their galleys conveyed the
armies to the Holy Land, and also supplied them with
provisions. Besides the heavy sums which they exacted for such
services, they made other stipulations. Whenever a town was
taken by the Crusaders, a suburb or street was assigned to the
Venetians; and when the Christians were expelled, the Moslems
consented to continue the arrangement. In all the great Eastern
cities, there was a Venetian quarter containing a chapel, a
bath-house, and a factory ruled over by a magistrate or consul.

Constantinople, during the Crusades, had been taken by the
Latins, with the assistance of the Venetians, and had been
recovered by the Greeks, with the assistance of the Genoese. 
The Venetians were expelled from the Black Sea, but obtained 
the Alexandria trade. In the fifteenth century the Black Sea 
was ruined, for its caravan routes were stopped by the Turkish 
wars. Egypt, which was supplied by sea, monopolised the 
India trade, and the Venetians monopolised the trade of Egypt. 
Venice became the nutmeg and pepper shop of Europe: not a 
single dish could be seasoned, not a tankard of ale could be 
spiced, without adding to its gains. The wealth of that city 
soon became enormous; its power, south of the Alps, supreme.

Times had changed since those poor fugitives first crept in
darkness and sorrow on the islands of the wild lagoon, and
drove stakes into the sand, and spread the reeds of the ocean
for their bed. Around them the dark lone waters, sighing,
soughing, and the sea-bird's melancholy cry. Around them the
dismal field of slime, the salt and sombre plain. On that
cluster of islands had arisen a city of surpassing loveliness
and splendour. Great ships lay at anchor in its marble streets;
their yards brushed sculptured balconies, and the walls of
palaces as they swept along. Branching off from the great
thoroughfares, bustling with commerce, magnificent with pomp,
were sweet and silent lanes of water, lined with summer palaces
and with myrtle gardens, sloping downwards to the shore. In the
fashionable quarter was a lake-like space -- the Park of Venice
-- which every evening was covered with gondolas; and the
gondoliers in those days were slaves from the East, Saracens or
Negroes, who sang sadly as they rowed, the music of their homes
-- the camel-song of the Sahara, or the soft minor airs of the
Sudan.

The government of Venice was a rigid aristocracy. Venice
therefore has no Santa Croce; it can boast of few illustrious
names. However, its Aldine Press and its poems in colour were
not unworthy contributions to the revival of ancient learning
and the creation of modern art. The famous wanderings of Marco
Polo had also excited among learned Venetians a peculiar taste
for the science of exploration. All over Europe they
corresponded with scholars of congenial tastes, and urged those
princes who had ships at their disposal to undertake voyages of
enterprise and discovery. Among their correspondents there was
one who carried out their ideas too well. Venice was not so
much injured by the potentates who assembled at Cambrai as by a
single man who lived in a lonely spot on the south-west coast
of the Spanish peninsula.

That country had been taken from the natives by the
Carthaginians, from the Carthaginians by the Romans, from the
Romans by the Goths, from the Goths by the Arabs and the Moors.
It was the first province of the Holy Empire of the Caliphs to
shake itself free, and to crown a monarch of its own. The Arabs
raised Spain to a height of prosperity which it has never since
attained; they covered the land with palaces, mosques,
hospitals, and bridges; and with enormous aqueducts which,
penetrating the sides of mountains, or sweeping on lofty arches
across valleys, rivalled the monuments of ancient Rome. The
Arabs imported various tropical fruits and vegetables, the
culture of which has departed with them. They grew, prepared,
and exported sugar. They discovered new mines of gold and
silver, quicksilver and lead. They extensively manufactured
silks, cottons, and merino woollen goods, which they despatched
to Constantinople by sea, and which were thence diffused
through the valley of the Danube over savage Christendom. When
Italians began to navigate the Mediterranean, a line of ports
was opened to them from Tarragona to Cadiz. The metropolis of
this noble country was Cordova. It stood in the midst of a
fertile plain washed by the waters of the Guadalquivir. It was
encircled by suburban towns; there were ten miles of lighted
streets. The great mosque was one of the wonders of the
mediaeval world; its gates embossed with bronze; its myriads of
lamps made out of Christian bells; and its thousand columns of
variegated marble supporting a roof of richly carved and
aromatic wood. At a time when books were so rare in Europe that
the man who possessed one often gave it to a church, and placed
it on the altar pro remedio animae suae, to obtain remission of
his sins; at a time when three or four hundred parchment
scrolls were considered a magnificent endowment for the richest
monastery: when scarcely a priest in England could translate
Latin into his mother tongue; and when even in Italy a monk who
had picked up a smattering of mathematics was looked upon as a
magician, here was a country in which every child was taught to
read and write; in which every town possessed a public library;
in which book collecting was a mania; in which cotton and
afterwards linen-paper was manufactured in enormous quantities;
in which ladies earned distinction as poets and grammarians,
and in which even the blind were often scholars; in which men
of science were making chemical experiments, using astrolabes
in the observatory, inventing flying machines, studying the
astronomy and algebra of Hindustan.

When the Goths conquered Spain they were reconquered by the
clergy, who established or revived the Roman Law. But to that
excellent code they added some special enactments relating to
pagans, heretics, and Jews. With nations as with individuals,
the child is often the father of the man; intolerance, which
ruined the Spain of Philip, was also its vice, in the Gothic
days. On the other hand, the prosperity of Spain beneath the
Arabs was owing to the tolerant spirit of that people. Never
was a conquered nation so mercifully treated. The Christians
were allowed by the Arab laws free exercise of their religion.
They were employed at court; they held office; they served in
the army. The caliph had a bodyguard of twelve thousand men;
picked troops, splendidly equipped; and a third of these were
Christians. But there were some ecclesiastics who taught their
congregations that it was sinful to be tolerated. There were
fanatics who, when they heard the cry of the muezzin, "There is
no God but God, and Mohammed is the messenger of God," would
sign the cross upon their foreheads and exclaim in a loud
voice, "Keep not thou silence, O God, for lo! thine enemies make
a tumult, and they that hate thee have lifted up the head"; and
so they would rush into the mosque, and disturb the public
worship, and announce that Mohammed was one of the false
prophets whom Christ had foretold. And when such blasphemers
were put to death, which often happened on the spot, there was
an epidemic of martyr-suicide such as that which excited the
wonder and disgust of the younger Pliny. And soon both the
contumacy of the Christians and the evil passions of the
Moslems, which that contumacy excited, were increased by causes
from without. When Spain had first been conquered, a number of
Gothic nobles, too proud to submit on any terms, retreated to
the Asturias, taking with them the sacred relics from Toledo.
They found a home in mountain ravines clothed with chestnut
woods, and divided by savage torrents foaming and gnashing on
the stones. Here the Christians established a kingdom,
discovered the bones of a saint which attracted pilgrims from
all parts of Europe, and were joined from time to time by
foreign volunteers, and by the disaffected from the Moorish
towns.

The Caliph of Cordova was a Commander of the Faithful: he
united the spiritual and temporal powers in his own person: he
was not the slave of Mamelukes or Turkish guards. But he had
the right of naming his successor from a numerous progeny, and
this custom gave rise, as usual, to seraglio intrigue and civil
war. The empire broke up into petty states, which were engaged
in continual feuds with one another. Thus the Christians were
enabled to invade the Moslem territory with success. At first
they made only plundering forays; next they took castles by
surprise or by storm and garrisoned them strongly; and then
they began slowly to advance upon the land. By the middle of
the ninth century they had reached the Douro and the Ebro. By
the close of the eleventh they had reached the Tagus under the
banner of the Cid. In the thirteenth century the kingdom of
Granada alone was left. But that kingdom lasted two hundred
years. Its existence was preserved by causes similar to those
which had given the Christians their success. Portugal,
Arragon, Leon, and Castile were more jealous of one another
than of the Moorish kingdom. Granada was unaggressive; and at
the same time it belonged to the European family. There was a
difference in language, religion, and domestic institutions
between Moslem and Christian Spain; yet the manners and mode of
thought in both countries were the same. The cavaliers of
Granada were acknowledged by the Spaniards to be "gentlemen,
though Moors." The Moslem knight cultivated the sciences of
courtesy and music, fought only with the foe on equal terms,
esteemed it a duty to side with the weak and to succour the
distressed, mingled the name of his mistress with his Allah
Akbar! as the Christians cried, Ma Dame et mon Dieu! wore in
her remembrance an embroidered scarf or some other gage of
love, mingled with her in the graceful dance of the Zambra,
serenaded her by moonlight as she looked down from the balcony.
Granada was defended by a cavalry of gallant knights, and by an
infantry of sturdy mountaineers. But it came to its end at
last. The marriage of Ferdinand and Isabella united all the
crowns of Spain. After eight centuries of almost incessant war,
after three thousand seven hundred battles, the long crusade
was ended; Spain became once more a Christian land; and
Boabdil, pausing on the Hill of Tears, looked down for the last
time on the beautiful Alhambra, on the city nestling among rose
gardens, and the dark cypress waving over Moslem tombs. His
mother reproached him for weeping as a woman for the kingdom he
had not defended as a man. He rode down to the sea and crossed
over into Africa. But that country also was soon to be invaded
by the Christians.

That part of the Peninsula which is called Portugal preserved
its independence and its dialect from the encroachments of
Castile. While the kingdom of Granada was yet alive, the
Portuguese monarch, having driven the Moors from the banks of
the Tagus, resolved to pursue them into Africa. He possessed an
excellent crusade machinery, and naturally desired to apply it
to some purpose. In Portugal were troops of military monks, who
had sworn to fight with none but unbelievers. In Portugal were
large revenues granted or bequeathed for that purpose alone. In
Portugal the passion of chivalry was at its height; the throne
was surrounded by knights panting for adventure. It is related
that some ladies of the English court had been grossly insulted
by certain cavaliers, and had been unable to find champions to
redress their wrongs. An equal number of Portuguese knights at
once took ship, sailed to London, flung down their gauntlets,
overthrew their opponents in the lists, and returned to Lisbon
having received from the injured ladies the tenderest proof of
their gratitude and esteem.

It seems that already there had risen between Portugal and
England that diplomatic friendship which has lasted to the pre
sent day. A commerce of wine for wool was established between
the ports of the Tagus and the Thames; and with this commerce
the pirates of Ceuta continually interfered. Ceuta was one of
the pillars of Hercules: it sat opposite Gibraltar, and
commanded the straits. The King of Portugal prepared a fleet;
great war-galleys were built having batteries of mangonels or
huge crossbows, with winding gear, stationed in the bow; great
beams, like battering rams; swung aloft; and jars of quicklime
and soft soap to fling in the faces of the enemy. The fleet
sailed forth, rustling with flags, beating drums, and, blowing
Saracen horns; the passage to Ceuta was happily made; the
troops were landed, and the pirate city taken by assault.

Among those who distinguished themselves in this exploit was
the Prince Henry, a younger son of the king. He was not only a
brave knight, but also a distinguished scholar; his mind had
been enriched by a study of the works of Cicero, Seneca, and
Pliny, and by the Latin translations of the Greek geographers.
He now stepped on that mysterious continent which had been
closed to Christians for several hundred years. He questioned
the prisoners respecting the interior. They described the rich
and learned cities of Morocco: the Atlas mountains, shining
with snow and the sandy desert on their southern side. It was
there the ancients had supposed all life came to an end. But
now the Prince received the astounding intelligence that beyond
the Sahara was a land inhabited entirely by negroes; covered
with fields of corn and cotton watered by majestic rivers, on
the banks of which rose cities as large as Morocco, or Lisbon,
or Seville. In that country were gold mines of prodigious
wealth; it was also a granary of slaves. By land it could be
reached in a week from Morocco by a courier mounted on the
swift dromedary of the desert, which halted not by day or
night. There were regular caravans or camel-fleets, which
passed to and fro at certain seasons of the year. The Black
Country, as they called it, could also be reached by sea. If
ships sailed along the desert shore towards the south, they
would arrive at the mouths of wide rivers, which flowed down
from the gold-bearing hills.

This conversation decided Prince Henry's career. To discover
this new world beyond the desert became the object of his life.
He was Grand Master of the Order of Christ, and had ample
revenues at his disposal and he considered himself justified in
expending them on this enterprise which would result in the
conversion of many thousand pagans to the Christian faith. He
retired to a castle near Cape St. Vincent, where the sight of
the ocean continually inflamed his thoughts. It was a cold,
bleak headland, with a few juniper trees scattered here and
there: all other vegetation had been withered by the spray. But
Prince Henry was not alone. He invited learned men from all
countries to reside with him. He established a court, in which
weather-beaten pilots might discourse with German
mathematicians and Italian cosmographers. He built an
observatory, and founded a naval school. He collected a
library, in which might be read the manuscript of Marco Polo,
which his elder brother had brought from Venice; copies on
vellum of the great work of Ptolemy; and copies also of
Herodotus, Strabo, and other Greek writers, which were being
rapidly translated into Latin under the auspices of the Pope at
Rome. He had also a collection of maps and sea-charts engraved
on marble or on metal tables, and painted upon parchment. At a
little distance from the castle were the harbour and town of
Sagres, from which the vessels of the Prince went forth with
the cross of the order painted on their sails.

They sailed down the coast of the Sahara; on their right was a
sea of darkness, on their left a land of fire. The gentlemen of
the household who commanded the ships did not believe in the
country of green trees beyond the ocean of sand. Instead of
pushing rapidly along, they landed as soon as they detected any
signs of the natives -- the old people of Masinissa and
Jugurtha -- attacked them crying, Portugal! Portugal! and
having taken a few prisoners returned home. In every expedition
the commander made it a point of honour to go a little further
than the preceding expedition. Several years thus passed, and
the Black Country had not been found. The Canary Islands were
already known to the Spaniards: but the Portuguese discovered
Porto Santo and Madeira. A ship-load of emigrants was
despatched to the former island, and among the passengers was a
female rabbit in an interesting situation. She was turned down
with her young ones on the island, and, there being no checks
to rabbit-population, they increased with such rapidity that
they devoured every green thing, and drove the colonists across
into Madeira. In that island the colonists were more fortunate;
instead of importing rabbits they introduced the vine from
Cyprus, and the sugar-cane from Sicily; and soon Madeira wine
and sugar were articles of export from Lisbon to London and to
other ports. In the meantime the expeditions to Africa became
exceedingly unpopular. The priests declared that the holy money
was being scandalously wasted on the dreams of a lonely madman.
That castle on the Atlantic shore, which will ever be revered
as a sacred place in the annals of mankind, was then regarded
with abhorrence and contempt. The common people believed it to
be the den of a magician, and crossed themselves in terror when
they met in their walks a swarthy strong-featured man, with a
round barret cap on his head, wrapped in a large mantle, and
wearing black buskins with gilt spurs. Often they saw him
standing on the brink of the cliff, gazing earnestly towards
the sea, his eyes shaded by his hand. It was said that on fair
nights he might be seen for hours and hours on the tower of
Babel which he had built, holding a strange weapon in his
hands, and turning it towards the different quarters of the
sky. 

There was an orthodox geography at that period founded
upon statements in the Jewish writings, and in the Fathers of
the Church. The earth was in the centre of the universe; the
sun and the moon and the stars humbly revolving round it.
Jerusalem was in the precise centre of the earth. In Eastern
India was the Terrestrial Paradise, situated on high ground,
and surrounded by a wall of fire, reaching to the sky. St.
Augustine, Lactantius, and Cosmas Indicopleustes opposed the
Antipodes as being contrary to Scripture; and there could not
be people on the other side of the earth, for how would they be
able to see the Son of God descending in his glory? It was also
generally believed that there was a torrid zone, an impassable
belt on both sides of the equator, which Providence had created
for the lower animals, and in which no man could live. It was
to this fiery land that the Prince kept sending vessel after
vessel. The Portuguese did not see what would come of these
expeditions except to make widows and orphans. "The Prince
seems to think," said they, "that because he has discovered two
desert islands he has conferred a great blessing upon us but we
have enough uncultivated land without going across the seas for
more. His own father, only a little while ago, gave land to a
nobleman of Germany, on condition that he should people it with
emigrants. But Dom Henry sends men out of Portugal instead of
asking them in. Let us keep to the country that God has given
us. It may be seen how much better suited those lands are for
beasts than men by what happened with the rabbits. And even if
there are in that unfound land as many people as the Prince
pretends, we do not know what sort of people they are; and if
they are like those in the Canaries who jump from rock to rock,
and throw stones at Christian heads, of what use is it to
conquer a land so barren, and a people so contemptible?

However, an incident occurred which produced a revolution in
popular and ecclesiastic feeling. The prisoners captured on the
desert coast offered a ransom for their release and this ransom
consisted of negro slaves and gold. The place where this metal
first made its appearance was called the Golden River. It was
not in reality a river but an arm of the sea, and the gold had
been brought from the mines of Bambouk in the country of the
negroes. Its discovery created an intense excitement: the
priests acknowledged that it could not have been placed there
for the use of the wild animals. Companies were formed and were
licensed by the Crown, which assigned to the Prince a fifth
part of the cargoes returned. He himself cared little for the
gold but the discovery of this precious metal, of which India
was proverbially the native land, suggested the idea that by
following the coast of Africa the Indies might be reached by
sea. Letters and maps which he received from his Venetian
correspondents encouraged him in this belief, and he obtained
without delay a Bull from the Pope granting to the Crown of
Portugal all lands that its subjects might discover as far as
India inclusive, with license to trade with infidels, and
absolution for the souls of those that perished in these semi-
commercial, semi-crusading expeditions.

The practice of piracy was now partly given up: the Portuguese,
like the Phoenicians of old, traded in one place and kidnapped
in another. The commodities which they brought home were gold
dust, seal skins, and negroes. Yet still they did not reach the
negro land, till at last a merchant of Lagos, one time an
equerry in the Prince's service, knowing his old master had
exploration at heart more than trade, determined to push on,
without loitering on the desert coast. He was rewarded with the
sight of trees growing on the banks of a great river, which
Prince Henry and his cosmographers supposed to be the Nile. On
one side were the brown men of the desert with long tangled
hair, lean, and fierce in expression, living on milk, wandering
with their camels from place to place. On the other side were
large, stout, comely men with hair like wool, skins black as
soot, living in villages and cultivating fields of corn.

The Portuguese had now discovered the coast of Guinea, and they
were obliged to give up their predatory practices. Instead of
an open plain in which knights habited in armour and men
dressed in quilted cotton jackets could fight almost with
impunity against naked Moors, they entered rivers the banks of
which were lined with impenetrable jungles. The negroes,
perched in trees, shot down upon them from above, or attacked
the ships' boats in mid-channel with their swift and light
canoes. The Portuguese had no firelocks, and the crossbow bolt
was a poor missile compared with the arrows which the negroes
dipped in a poison so subtle that as soon as the wounded man
drank he died, the blood bursting from his nose and ears. A
system of barter was therefore established, and the negroes
showed themselves disposed to trade. The Gold Coast was
discovered: a fort and a chapel were built at Elmina, where a
commandant was appointed to reside. This ancient settlement has
just been ceded to the English by the Dutch.  The ships carried
out copper bracelets, brass basins, knives, rattles, looking-
glasses, coloured silks, and woollen goods, green Rouen cloth,
coral, figured velvet, and dainty napkins of Flanders
embroidered with gold brocade, receiving chiefly gold dust in
exchange. This trade was farmed out to a company for five
years, on condition that the company should each year explore
to a certain distance along the coast.

The excitement which followed the discovery of gold dust, and
the institution of the House of Mines, gradually died away. The
noble Prince Henry was no more. The men who went out to the
coast were not of the class who devote their lives to the
chivalry of enterprise. An official who had just returned from
Elmina being presented to the king, His Majesty asked him how
it was that although he had lived in Africa his face and hands
were so white. The gentleman replied that he had worn a mask
and gloves during the whole period of his absence in that
sultry land; upon which the king told him what he thought he
was fit for in words too vigorous to be translated. This same
king, John the second, was a vigorous-minded man, and in him
the ambition of Prince Henry was revived. He found in a chest
belonging to the late king a series of letters from a Venetian
gentleman giving much information about the India trade, and
earnestly advising him to prosecute his explorations along the
coast. The librarians of St. Mark had also sent maps in which
the termination of the continent was marked. The king sent out
new expeditions and fostered the science of nautical astronomy.
A Jew named Zacuto and the celebrated Martin Behem improved the
mariner's compass and modified the old Alexandrian astrolabe,
so that it might be used at sea. Wandering knights from distant
lands volunteered for these expeditions desiring to witness the
tropical storms and the strange manners of the New World, as it
was called. 

Many skilful mariners and pilots visited Lisbon, were 
encouraged to remain, and became naturalised Portuguese.
Among these was the glorious Christopher Columbus, who made
more than one voyage to the Gold Coast, married a Portuguese
lady, and lived for some time in the Azores. It was his
conviction that the eastern coast of Asia could be reached by
sailing due west across the ocean. It was his object not to
discover a new land, but to reach by sea the country which
Marco Polo had visited by land. He eventually sailed with
letters to the Emperor of China in his pockets and came back
from the West India Islands thinking that he had been to Japan.
He made his proposals in the first place to the king, who
referred it to a council of learned men. There were now two
plans for sailing to India before the court: the one by
following the African coast, the other by sailing west across
the ocean. But expeditions of all kinds were at that time
unpopular in Lisbon. The Guinea trade did not pay, and it was
strenuously urged at the council that the West African
Settlements should be abandoned. The friends of exploration
were obliged to stand on the defensive. They could not carry
the proposal of Columbus; it was all that they could do to save
the African expeditions. But when Columbus had won for Castile
the east coast of Asia (as was then supposed) the king
perceived that if he wished to have an Indian empire he must
set to work at once. He accordingly conducted the naval
expeditions with such vigour that the Cape of Storms was
discovered, was then called the Cape of Good Hope, and, was
then doubled, though without immediate result, the sailors
forcing their captain to return. The king also sent a
gentleman, named Covilham, to visit the countries of the East
by land. His instructions were to trace the Venetian trade in
drugs and spices to its source, and to find out Prester John.

Covilham went to Alexandria in the pilgrim's garb, but instead
of proceeding to the Holy Land, he passed on to Aden, and
sailed round the Indian Ocean or the Green Sea, that Lake of
Wonder with the precious ambergris floating on its waters and
pearls strewed upon its bed, whitened with the cotton sails of
the Arab vessels, of the Gujrat Indians, and even of the
Chinese, whose four-masted junks were sometimes to be seen
lying in the Indian harbours with great wooden anchors dangling
from their bows. The east coast of Africa, as low down as
Madagascar, or the Island of the Moon, was lined with large
towns in which the Arabs resided as honoured strangers, or 
in which they ruled as kings. On this coast Covilham obtained in 
formation respecting the Cape. He then crossed over to the India 
shore; he sailed down the coast of Malabar from city to city, and 
from port to port. He was astounded and bewildered by what he 
saw: the activity and grandeur of the commerce; the magnificence 
of the courts; the half-naked kings blazing with jewels, saying their
prayers on rosaries of precious stones, and using golden
goblets as spittoons; the elephants with pictures drawn in
bright colours on their ears, and with jugglers in towers on
their backs; the enormous temples filled with lovely girls; the
idols of gold with ruby eyes; the houses of red sandal wood;
the scribes who wrote on palm leaves with iron pens; the pilots
who took observations with instruments unknown to Europeans;
the huge bundles of cinnamon or cassia in the warehouses of the
Arab merchants; the pepper vines trailing over trees; and
drugs, which were priceless in Europe, growing in the fields
like corn.

He returned to Cairo, and there found two Jews, Rabbi Abraham
and Joseph the Shoemaker, whom the king had sent to look after
him. To them he gave a letter for the king, in which he wrote
that the ships which sailed down the coast of Guinea might be
sure of reaching the termination of the continent by keeping on
to the south; and that when they arrived in the Eastern ocean,
they must ask for Sofala and the Island of the Moon."

Covilham himself did not return. He had accomplished one part
of his mission; he had traced the Venetian commerce to its
source; but he had now to find out Prester John.

A fable had arisen, in the Dark Ages, of a great Christian king
in Central Asia; and when it was clearly ascertained that the
Grand Khan was not a Christian, and that none of the Tartar
princes could possibly be Christians, as they could not keep
Lent, having no fish or vegetables in their country, it was
hoped that Prester John, as the myth was called, might be found
elsewhere. Certain pilgrims were met with at Jerusalem who were
almost negroes in appearance. Their baptism was of three kinds-
of fire, of water, and of blood: they were sprinkled, they were
circumcised, they were seared on the forehead with a red-hot
iron in the form of a cross. Their king, they said, was a good
Christian and a hater of the Moslems, and was descended from
the Queen of Sheba. This swarthy king, the ancestor of
Theodore, could be no other than Prester John; and Covilham
felt it his duty to bear him the greetings of his master before
he went home to enjoy that reputation which he had so
gloriously earned, and to take a part in the great discoveries
that were soon to be made.

But the king of Abyssinia wanted a tame white man. He gave his
visitor wife and lands; he treated him with honour; but he
would not let him go. This kind of complimentary captivity is a
danger to which African travellers are always exposed. It is
the glory and pride of a savage king to have a white man at his
court. And so Covilham was detained, and he died in Abyssinia.
But he lived to hear that Portugal had risen in a few years to
be one of the great European powers, and that the flag he loved
was waving above those castles and cities which he had been the
first of his nation to behold. His letter arrived at the same
time as the ship of Dias, who had doubled the Cape. The king
determined that a final expedition should be sent, and that
India should be reached by sea.

It was a fête day in Lisbon. The flags were flying on every
tower; the fronts of the houses were clothed in gorgeous
drapery, which swelled and floated in the wind; stages were
erected on which mysteries were performed; bells were ringing,
artillery boomed. Marble balconies were crowded with ladies and
cavaliers, and out of upper windows peeped forth the faces of
girls, who were kept in semi-Oriental seclusion. Presently the
sound of trumpets could be heard; and then came in view a
thousand friars, who chanted a litany, while behind them an
immense crowd chanted back in response. At the head of this
procession rode a gentleman richly dressed; he was followed by
a hundred and forty-eight men in sailors' clothes, but bare-
footed, and carrying tapers in their hands. On they went till
they reached the quay where the boats, fastened to the shore,
swayed to and fro with the movement of the tide, and strained
at the rope as if striving to depart. The sailors knelt. A
priest of venerable appearance stood before them, and made a
general confession, and absolved them in the form of the Bull
which Prince Henry had obtained. Then the wives and mothers
embraced their loved ones whom they bewailed as men about to
die. And all the people wept. And the children wept also,
though they knew not why.

Thirty-two months passed, and again the water-side was crowded,
and the guns fired, and the bells rang. Again Vasco da Gama
marched in procession through the streets; and behind him
walked, with feeble steps, but with triumph gleaming in their
eyes, fifty-five men -- the rest were gone. But in that
procession were not only Portuguese, but also men with white
turbans and brown faces; and sturdy blacks, who bore a chest
which was shown by their straining muscles to be of enormous
weight; and in his hand the Captain General held a letter which
was written with a pen of iron on a golden leaf, and which
addressed the king of Portugal and Guinea in these words:
"Vasco da Gama, a gentleman of thy house, came to my country,
of whose coming I was glad. In my country there is plenty of
cinnamon, cloves, pepper, and precious stones. The things which
I am desirous to have out of thy country are silver, gold,
coral, and scarlet."

That night all the houses in Lisbon were illuminated; the
gutters ran with wine; the skies, for miles round, were
reddened with the light of bonfires. The king's men brought ten
pounds of spices to each sailor's wife, to give away to her
gossips. The sailors themselves were surrounded by crowds, who
sat silent and open-mouthed, listening to the tales of the
great waters, and the marvellous lands where they had been.

They told of the wonders of the Guinea coast, and of the men
near the Cape, who rode on oxen and played sweet music on the
flute; and of the birds which looked like geese, and brayed
like donkeys, and did not know how to fly, but put up their
wings like sails, and scudded along before the wind. They told
how as they sailed on towards the south, the north star sank
and sank, and grew fainter and fainter, until at last it
disappeared; and they entered a new world, and sailed beneath
strange skies; and how, when they had doubled the Cape, they
again saw sails on the horizon, and the north star again rose
to view. They told of the cities on the Eastern shore, and of
their voyage across the Indian Ocean, and of that joyful
morning when, through the grey mists of early dawn, they
discerned the hills of Calicut.

And then they sank their voices, and their eyes grew grave and
sad as they told of the horrors of the voyage; of the long,
long nights off the stormy Cape when the wind roared, and the
spray lashed through the rigging, and the waves foamed over the
bulwarks, and the stones that were their cannon-shot crashed
from side to side, and the ships like live creatures groaned
and creaked, and hour after hour the sailors were forced to
labour at the pumps till their bones ached, and their hands
were numbed by cold. They told of treacherous pilots in the
Mozambique, who plotted to run their ships ashore; and of the
Indian pirates, the gipsies of the sea, who sent their spies on
board. They told of that new and horrible disease which, when
they had been long at sea, made their bodies turn putrid and
the teeth drop from their jaws. And as they told of those
things, and named the souls who had died at sea, there rose a
cry of lamentation, and widows in new garments fled weeping
from the crowd.

That night, the Venetian ambassador sat down and wrote to his
masters that he had seen vessels enter Lisbon harbour laden
with spices and with India drugs. His next letter informed them
that a strong fleet was being prepared, and that Vasco da Gama
intended to conquer India. The Venetians saw that they were
ruined. They wrote to their ally, the Sultan of Egypt, and
implored him to bestir himself. They gave him artillery to send
to the India princes. They offered to open the Suez canal at
their own expense, that their ships might arrive in the Indian
Ocean before the Portuguese. On the other hand, came the
terrible Albuquerque, who told the Sultan to beware, or he
would destroy Mecca and Medina, and turn the Nile into the Red
Sea. The Indian Ocean became a Portuguese lake. There was
scarcely a town upon its shores which had not been saluted by
the Portuguese bombardiers. Not a vessel could cross its waters
without a Portuguese passport. As a last resource, the
Venetians offered to take the India produce off the king's
hands, and to give him a fair price. This offer was declined,
and Lisbon, instead of Venice, became the market-place of the
India trade. The great cities on the Euphrates, the Tigris, and
the Nile fell into decay; the caravan trade of Central Asia
declined; the throne of commerce was transferred from the basin
of the Mediterranean to the basin of the Atlantic; and the
oceanic powers, though rigidly excluded from the commerce
itself, were greatly benefited by the change. They had no
longer to sail through the straits of Gibraltar; Lisbon was
almost at their doors.

The achievements of the Portuguese were stupendous -- for a
time. They established a chain of forts all down the western
coast of Africa, and up the east coast to the Red Sea; then
round the Persian Gulf, down the coast of Malabar, up the coast
of Coromandel, among the islands of the Archipelago, along the
shores of Siam and Burma to Canton and Shanghai. With handfuls
of men they defeated gigantic armies; with petty forts they
governed empires. But from first to last they were murderers
and robbers, without foresight, without compassion. Our eyes
are at first blinded to their vices by the glory of their
deeds; but as the light fades, their nakedness and horror are
revealed. We read of Arabs who had received safe conducts, and
who made no resistance, being sewed up in sails and cast into
the sea, or being tortured in body and mind by hot bacon being
dropped upon their flesh; of crocodiles being fed with live
captives for the amusement of the soldiers, and being so well
accustomed to be fed that whenever a whistle was given they
raised their heads above the water. We read of the wretched
natives taking refuge with the tiger of the jungle and the
panther of the hills; of mothers being forced to pound their
children to death in the rice mortars, and of other children
being danced on the point of spears, which it was said was
teaching the young cocks to crow. The generation of heroes
passed away; the generation of favourites began. Courtiers
accepted offices in the Indies with the view of extorting a
fortune from the natives as rapidly as could be done. It was
remarked that humanity and justice were virtues which were
always left behind at the Cape of Good Hope by passengers for
India. It was remarked that the money which they brought home
was like excommunicated money, so quickly did it disappear. And
as for those who were content to love their country and to
serve their king, they made enemies of the others, and were
ruined for their pains. Old soldiers might be seen in Lisbon
wandering through the streets in rags, dying in the hospitals,
and crouched before the palace which they had filled with gold.
Men whose names are now worshipped by their countrymen were
then despised. Minds which have won for themselves immortality
were darkened by sorrow and disgrace. In the island of Macao,
on the Chinese coast, there is a grove paved with soft green
velvet paths, and roofed with a dome of leaves which even the
rays of a tropical sun cannot pierce through. In the midst is a
grotto of rocks, round which the roots of gigantic trees
clamber and coil; and in that silent hermitage a poor exile sat
and sang the glory of the land which had cast him forth. That
exile was Camoens; that song was the Lusiad.

The vast possessions of the Spaniards and Portuguese were
united under Philip the Second, who closed the port of Lisbon
against the heretical and rebellious natives of the
Netherlands. The Dutch were not a people to undertake long
voyages out of curiosity, but when it became necessary for them
in the way of business to explore unknown seas they did so with
effect. Since they could not get cinnamon and ginger, nutmegs
and cloves at Lisbon, they determined to seek them in the lands
where they were grown. The English followed their example, and
so did the French. There was for a long period incessant war
within the tropics. At last things settled down. In the West
and East Indies the Spaniards and Portuguese still possessed an
extensive empire; but they no longer ruled alone. The Dutch,
the English, and the French obtained settlements in North
America and the West India Islands, in the peninsula of
Hindustan, and the Indian Archipelago; and also on the coast of
Guinea.

West Africa is divided by nature into pastoral regions,
agricultural regions, and dense forest, mountains, or dismal
swamps, where the natives remain in a savage and degraded
state. The hills and fens are the slave preserves of Africa,
and are hunted every year by the pastoral tribes, with whom war
is a profession. The captives are bought by the agricultural
tribes, and are made to labour in the fields. This indigenous
slave-trade exists at the present time, and has existed during
hundreds of years.

The Tuaricks or Tawny Moors inhabiting the Sahara on the
borders of the Sudan, made frequent forays into that country
for the purpose of obtaining slaves, exacted them as tribute
from conquered chiefs, or sometimes bought them fairly with
horses, salt, and woollen clothes. When Barbary was inhabited
by rich and luxurious people, such as the Carthaginians, who on
one occasion bought no less than five thousand negroes for
their galleys, these slaves must have been obtained in
prodigious numbers, for many die in the middle passage across
the desert, a journey which kills even a great number of the
camels that are employed. The negroes have at all times been
highly prized as domestic and ornamental slaves, on account of
their docility and their singular appearance. They were much
used in ancient Egypt, as the monumental pictures show: they
were articles of fashion both in Greece and Rome. Throughout
the Middle Ages they were exported from the east coast to India
and Persia, and were formed into regiments by the Caliphs of
Baghdad. The Venetians bought them in Tripoli and Tunis, and
sold them to the Moors of Spain. When the Moors were expelled,
the trade still went on; negroes might still be seen in the
markets of Seville. The Portuguese discovered the slave-land
itself, and imported ten thousand negroes a year before the
discovery of the New World. The Spaniards, who had often negro
slaves in their possession, set some of them to dig in the
mines at St. Domingo: it was found that a negro's work was as
much as four Indians', and arrangements were made for importing
them from Africa. When the Dutch, the English, and the French
obtained plantations in America, they also required negro
labour, and made settlements in Guinea in order to obtain it.
Angola fed the Portuguese Brazil; Elmina fed the Dutch
Manhattan; Cape Coast Castle fed Barbados, Jamaica, and
Virginia; Senegal fed Louisiana and the French Antilles;
even Denmark had an island or two in the West Indies, and a
fort or two upon the Gold Coast. The Spaniards alone having no
settlements in Guinea, were supplied by a contract or assiento;
which at one time was enjoyed by the British Crown. We shall
now enter into a more particular description of this trade, and
of the coast on which it was carried on.

Sailing through the Straits of Gibraltar, on the left hand for
some distance is the fertile country of Morocco watered by
streams descending from the Atlas range. Then comes a sandy
shore, on which breaks a savage surf; and when that is passed,
a new scene comes to view. The ocean is discoloured; a peculiar
smell is detected in the air; trees appear as if standing in
the water; and small black specks, the canoes of fishermen, are
observed passing to and fro.

The first region, Senegambia, still partakes of the desert
character. With the exception of the palm and the gigantic
Adansonia, the trees are for the most part stunted in
appearance. The country is open, and is clothed with grass,
where antelopes start up from their forms like hares. Here and
there are clumps of trees, and long avenues mark the water
courses, which are often dry, for there are only three months'
rain. The interior abounds with gum-trees, especially on the
borders of the desert. The people are Mohammedans, fight on
horseback, and dwell in towns fortified with walls and hedges
of the cactus. In this country the French are masters, and have
laid the foundations of a military empire; an Algeria on a
smaller scale.

But as we pass towards the south, the true character of the
coast appears. A mountain wall runs parallel with the sea, and
numberless rivers leap down the hill slopes, and flow towards
the Atlantic through forest covered and alluvial lands, which
they themselves have formed. These rivers are tidal, and as
soon as the salt water begins to mingle with the fresh, their
banks are lined with mangrove shrubberies, forming an intricate
bower-work of stems, which may be seen at low water encrusted
with oysters, thus said by sailors to grow on trees. The
mountain range is sometimes visible as a blue outline in the
distance; or the hills, which are shaped like an elephant's
back, draw near the shore: or rugged spurs jut down with their
rocks of torn and tilted granite to the sea. The shore is
sculptured into curves; and all along the coast runs a narrow
line of beach, sometimes dazzling white, sometimes orange
yellow, and sometimes a deep cinnamon red.

This character of coast extends from Sierra Leone to the Volta,
and includes the Ivory Coast, the Pepper Coast, and the Gold
Coast. Then the country again flattens; the mountain range
retires and gives place to a gigantic swamp, through which the
Niger debouches by many mouths into the Bight of Benin, where,
according to the old sailor adage, "few come out, though many
go in." It is indeed the unhealthiest region of an unhealthy
coast. A network of creeks and lagoons unite the various
branches of the Niger, and the marshes are filled with groves
of palm-oil trees, whose yellow bunches are as good as gold.
But in the old day the famous red oil was only used as food,
and the sinister name of the Slave Coast indicates the
commodity which it then produced.

Again the hills approach the coast, and now they tower up as
mountains. The Peak of Cameroons is situated on the Line; it is
nearly as high as the Peak of Teneriffe; the flowers of
Abyssinia adorn its upper sides, and on its lofty summit the
smoke of the volcano steals mist-like across a sheet of snow.

A little lower down, the primeval forest of the Gorilla Country
resembles that of the opposite Brazil; but is less gorgeous in
its vegetation, less abundant in its life.

Farther yet to the south, and a brighter land appears. We now
enter the Portuguese province of Angola. The land, far into the
interior, is covered with farm-houses and coffee plantations,
and smiling fields of maize. San Paolo de Loanda is still a
great city, though the colony has decayed; though the convents
have fallen into ruin, though oxen are stalled in the college
of the Jesuits. Below Angola, to the Cape of Good Hope, is a
waterless beach of sand. The west coast of Africa begins with a
desert inhabited by Moors; it ends with a desert inhabited by
Hottentots.



In the eighteenth century, a trifling trade was done in ivory and
gold; but these were only accessories; the Guinea trade
signified the trade in slaves. At first the Europeans kidnapped
the negroes whom they met on the beach, or who came off to the
ships in their canoes; but the "treacherous natives" made
reprisals; the practice was, therefore, given up, and the trade
was conducted upon equitable principles. It was found that
honesty was the best policy, and that it was cheaper to buy men
than to steal them. Besides the settlements which were made by
Europeans, there were many native ports upon the Slave Coast,
and of these Whydah, the seaport of Dahomey, was the most
important. When a slave vessel entered the roads, it fired a
gun, the people crowded down to the beach, the ship's boat
landed through an ugly surf, and the skipper made his way to a
large tree in the vicinity of the landing-place, where the
governor of the town received him in state, and regaled him
with trade-gin, by no means the most agreeable of all
compounds. The capital was situated at a distance of sixty
miles, and the captain would be carried there in a hammock,
taking with him some handsome silks and other presents for the
king. This monarch lived by hunting his neighbours and by
selling them to Europeans. There was a regular war-season, and
he went out once a year, sometimes in one direction, sometimes
in another. Kings in Africa have frequently a bodyguard of
women. 

A certain king of Dahomey had developed this institution
into female regiments. These women are nominally the king's
wives; they are in reality old maids -- the only specimens of
the class upon the continent of Africa; they are excellent
soldiers -- hardy, savage, and courageous. In the siege of
Abbeokuta, the other day, an Amazon climbed up the wall; her
right arm was cut clean off, and as she fell back she pistolled
a man with her left. When the king returned from his annual
campaign, he sent to all the white men at Whydah, who received
the special title of the "king's friends," and invited them up
to witness his "customs" and to purchase his slaves, In the
first place, the king murdered a number of his captives to send
to his father as tokens of regard; and the traders were
mortified to see good flesh and blood being wasted on religion.
However, slaves were always in abundance. They were also
obtained from the settlements upon the coast. The Portuguese
Angola could alone be dignified with the name of colony. The
Dutch, English, and French settlements were merely fortified
factories, half castle, half shop, in which the agents lived,
and in which the dry goods, rum, tobacco, trade powder and
muskets, were stored. There were native traders, who received a
quantity of such goods on trust, and travelled into the
interior till they came to a War-town. They then ordered so
many slaves; and laid down the goods. The chief ordered out the
militia, made a night march, attacked a village just before the
dawn, killed those who resisted, carried off the rest in irons
manufactured at Birmingham, and handed them over to the trader;
who drove them down to the coast. They were then warehoused in
the fort dungeons, or in buildings called "barracoons" prepared
for their reception; and as soon as a vessel was ready they
were marked and shipped. On board they were packed on the lower 
deck like herrings in a cask. The cargo supposed that it also resembled 
herrings, in being exported as an article of food.


The slaves believed that all white men were cannibals; that the
red caps of the trade were dyed in negro blood, and that the
white soap was made of negro brains. So they often refused to
eat; upon which their mouths were forced open with an
instrument known in surgery as speculum oris, and used in cases
of lock-jaw; and by means of this ingenious contrivance they
breakfasted and dined against their will. Exercise also being
conducive to health, they were ordered to jump up and down in
their fetters; and if they declined to do so, the application
of the cat had the desired effect, and made them exercise not
only their limbs, but also their lungs, and so promoted the
circulation of the blood and the digestion of the horse-beans
on which they were fed. Yet such was the obstinacy of these
savage creatures, that many of them sulked themselves to death;
and sometimes, when indulged with an airing on deck, the
ungrateful wretches would jump overboard, and, as they sank,
waved their hands in triumph at having made their escape. On
reaching the West Indies they were put into regular schools of
labour, and gradually broken in; and they then enjoyed the
advantage of dwelling in a Christian land. But their temporal
happiness was not increased. If a lady put her cook into the
oven because the pie was overdone; if a planter soused a slave
in the boiling sugar; if the runaway was hunted with
bloodhounds, and then flogged to pieces and hung alive in
chains; if the poor old worn-out slave was turned adrift to
die, the West Indian laws did not interfere. The slave of a
planter was "his money" it was only when a man killed another
person's slave that he was punished; and then only by a fine.
It may be said, without exaggeration, that dogs and horses now
receive more protection in the British dominions than negroes
received in the last century.

In order to understand how so great a moral revolution has been
wrought we must return for a moment to the Middle Ages. We left
the burgher class in alliance with the kings, possessing
liberal charters, making their own laws, levying their own
taxes, commanding their own troops. Their sons were not always
merchants like themselves: they invaded the intellectual
dominions of the priests: they became lawyers, artists, and
physicians.

Then another change took place. Standing armies were invented,
and the middle class were re-enslaved. Their municipal rights
were taken from them; troops were stationed in their towns; the
nobles collected round the king, who could now reward their
loyalty with lucrative and honourable posts, the command of a
regiment, or the administration of a province. Heavy taxes were
imposed on the burghers and the peasants, and these supported
the nobles and clergy who were exempt. Aristocracy and monarchy
became fast friends, and the Crown was protected by the
thunders of the Church.

The rebellion of the German monk established an idol of ink and
paper, instead of an idol of painted wood or stone; the
Protestant believed that it was his duty to study the Bible for
himself, and so education was spread throughout the countries
of the Reformed Religion. A desire for knowledge became
general, and the academies of the Jesuits were founded in self-
defence. The enlargement of the reading class gave the Book
that power which the pulpit once enjoyed, and in the hands of
Voltaire the Book began to preach. The fallacies of the Syrian
religion were exposed: and with that religion fell the doctrine
of passive obedience and divine right: the doctrine that
unbelievers are the enemies of God: the doctrine that men who
adopt a particular profession are invested with magical powers
which stream into them from other men's finger ends: the
doctrine that a barbarous legal code was issued vivâ voce by
the Creator of the world. Such notions as these are still held
by thousands in private life, but they no longer enter into the
policy of states or dictate statutes of the realm.

Voltaire destroyed the authority of the Church and Rousseau
prepared the way for the destruction of the Crown. He believed
in a dream-land of the past which had never existed: he
appealed to imaginary laws of Nature. Yet these errors were
beneficial in their day. He taught men to yearn for an ideal
state, which they with their own efforts might attain; he
inspired them with the sentiment of Liberty, and with a
reverence for the Law of Right. Virtuous principles, abstract
ideas, the future Deities of men were now for the first time
lifted up to be adored. A thousand hearts palpitated with
excitement; a thousand pens were drawn; the people that
slumbered in sorrow and captivity heard a voice bidding them
arise; they strained, they struggled, and they burst their
bonds. Jacques Bonhomme, who had hitherto gone on all fours,
discovered to his surprise that he also was a biped; the world
became more light; the horizon widened; a new epoch opened for
the human race.

The anti-slavery movement, which we shall now briefly sketch,
is merely an episode in that great rebellion against authority
which began in the night of the Middle Ages; which sometimes
assumed the form of religious heresy, sometimes of serf revolt;
which gradually established the municipal cities, and raised
the slave to the position of the tenant; which gained great
victories in the Protestant Reformation, the two English
Revolutions, the American Revolution, and the French
Revolution; which has destroyed the tyranny of governments in
Europe, and which will in time destroy the tyranny of religious
creeds.

In the middle of the eighteenth century negro slavery, although
it had frequently been denounced in books, had not attracted
the attention of the English people. To them it was something
in the abstract, something which was done beyond the seas. But
there rose an agitation which brought up its distant horrors in
vivid pictures before the mind, and produced an outcry of anger
and disgust.

It had been the custom of the Virginian or West Indian planter,
when he left his tobacco or sugar estate for a holiday in
England, to wear very broad hats and very wide trousers and to
be accompanied by those slaves who used to bring him his coffee
in the early morning, to brush away the blue-tailed fly from
his siesta, and to mix him rum and water when required. The
existence of such attendants was some what anomalous in this
island, and friends would often observe with a knowing air it
was lucky for him that Sambo was not up to English law. That
law, indeed, was undefined. Slavery had existed in England and
had died out of itself, in what manner and at what time no one
could precisely say. It was, however, a popular impression that
no man could be kept as a slave if he were once baptised. The
planters enjoyed the same kind of reputation which the nabobs
afterwards obtained: a yellow skin and a bad heart were at one
time always associated with each other. The negroes were often
encouraged to abscond, and to offer themselves before the font.
They obtained as sponsors respectable well-to-do men, who
declared that they would stand by their god-sons if it came to
a case at law. The planters were in much distress, and in order
to know the worst went to Messrs. York and Talbot, the Attorney
and Solicitor General for the time being, and requested an
opinion. The opinion of York and Talbot was this: that slaves
breathing English air did not become free; that slaves on being
baptised did not become free; and that their masters could
force them back to the plantations when they pleased.

The planters, finding that the law was on their side, at once
acted on their opinion. Advertisements appeared in the newspapers
offering rewards for runaway slaves. Negroes might be seen
being dragged along the streets in open day: they were bought
and sold at the Poultry Compter, an old city jail. Free men of
colour were no longer safe; kidnapping became a regular
pursuit.

There was a young man named Granville Sharp, whose benevolent
heart was touched to the quick by the abominable scenes which
he had witnessed more than once. He could not believe that such
was really English law. He examined the question for himself,
and, after long search, discovered precedents which overthrew
the opinion of the two great lawyers. He published a pamphlet
in which he stated his case; and not content with writing, he
also acted in the cause, aiding and abetting negroes to escape.
On one occasion a Virginian had disposed of an unruly slave to
a skipper bound for the West Indies. The vessel was lying in
the river; the unfortunate negro was chained to the mast; when
Granville Sharp climbed over the side with a writ of Habeas
Corpus in his hand. James Somerset's body was given up, and
with its panting, shuddering, hopeful, fearful soul inside, was
produced before a Court of Justice that Lord Mansfield might
decide to whom it belonged. The case was argued at three
sittings, and excited much interest throughout the land. It
ended in the liberation of the slave.

Several hundred negroes were at once bowed out by their masters
into the street, and wandered about, sleeping in glass-houses;
seated on the door-steps of their former homes, weeping, and
cursing Granville Sharp. It was resolved to do something for
them, and a grant of land was obtained from the native chiefs
at the mouth of the Sierra Leone River: a company was formed;
four hundred destitute negroes were sent out; and, as if there
were no women in Africa, fifty "unfortunates" were sent out
with them. The society of these ladies was not conducive to the
moral or physical well-being of the emigrants, eighty-four of
whom died before they sighted land, and eighty-six in the first
four months after landing. The philanthropists thus produced a
middle passage at which a slave trader would have been aghast.
In a short time the white women were dead, and the Granvilles,
as they are traditionally called upon the coast, adopted savage
life. But the settlement was re-peopled from another source. In
the American Revolutionary War, large numbers of negroes had
flocked to the royal standard, attracted by the proclamations
of the British generals. These runaway slaves were sent to Nova
Scotia, where they soon began to complain; the climate was not
to their taste, and they had not received the lands which had
been promised them. They were then shipped off to Sierra Leone.
They landed singing hymns, and pitched their tents on the site
of the present town. The settlement was afterwards recruited
with negroes in thousands out of slave ships; but the American
element may yet be detected in the architecture of the native
houses and in the speech of the inhabitants.

In the meantime the slave-trade was being actively discussed.
Among those who felt most deeply on the question was Dr.
Peckard, of St. John's College, Cambridge, who, being in 1785
Vice-Chancellor, gave as a subject for the Latin essay, "Anne
liceat invitos in servitutem dare?" -- Is it right to make men
slaves against their will?

Among the candidates was a certain bachelor of arts, Mr. Thomas
Clarkson, who had gained the prize for the best Latin essay the
year before, and was desirous of keeping up his reputation. He
therefore took unusual pains to collect materials respecting
the African slave-trade, to which he knew Dr. Peckard's
question referred. He borrowed the papers of a deceased friend
who had been in the trade, and conversed with officers who had
been stationed in the West Indies. He read Benezet's Historical
Account of Guinea, and was thence guided to the original
authorities, which are contained in the large folios of Hakluyt
and Purchas. These old voyages, written by men who were
themselves slavers, contain admirable descriptions of native
customs, and also detailed accounts of the way in which the
man-trade was carried on. Clarkson possessed a vivid
imagination and a tender heart: these narratives filled him
with horror and alarm. The pleasure of research was swallowed
up in the pain that was excited by the facts before him. It was
one gloomy subject from morning to night. In the day-time he
was uneasy; at night he had little rest. Sometimes he never
closed his eyes from grief. It became not so much a trial for
academical reputation as for the production of a work which
might be useful to injured Africa. He always slept with a
candle in the room that he might get up and put down thoughts
which suddenly occurred to him. At last he finished his painful
task, and obtained the prize. He went to Cambridge, and read
his essay in the Senate House. On his journey back to Lon don
the subject continually engrossed his thoughts. "I became," he
says, "very seriously affected upon the road. I stopped my
horse occasionally, and dismounted and walked. I frequently
tried to persuade myself, in these intervals, that the contents
of my essay could not be true. Coming in sight of Wades Mill,
in Hertfordshire, I sat down disconsolate on the turf by the
road-side and held my horse. Here a thought came into my mind,
that if the contents of the essay were true, it was time that
some person should see these calamities to their end."

On arriving in London he heard for the first time of the
labours of Granville Sharp and others. He determined to give up
his intention of entering the Church, and to devote himself
entirely to the destruction of the slave-trade. At this time a
Committee was formed for the purpose of preparing the public
mind for abolition. Granville Sharp, to whom more than to any
other individual the abolition of the slave-trade is due,
became the president, and Clarkson was deputed to collect
evidence. He called on the leading men of the day and
endeavoured to engage their sympathies in the cause. His
modest, subdued demeanour, the sad, almost tearful expression
of his face, which the painter of his portrait has fortunately
seized, the earnestness and passion with which he depicted the
atrocities of the slave-hunt in Africa and the miseries of the
slave hold at sea, secured him attention and respect from all;
and among those with whom he spoke was one whose fame is the
purest and the best that parliamentary history records.

William Wilberforce was the son of a rich merchant at Hull, and
inherited a large fortune. He went to Cambridge, and was
afterwards elected member for his native city, an honour which
cost him £8,OOO. He became a member of the fashionable clubs,
and chiefly frequented Brooks', where he became a votary of
faro till his winnings cured him of his taste for play. He soon
obtained a reputation in the House and the salon. He had an
easy flow of language, and a voice which  was melody itself.
He was a clever mimic and an accomplished musician.  He 
possessed the rare arts of polished raillery and courteous repartee. 
Madame de Stael declared that he was the wittiest man in England. 
But presently he withdrew from her society and that of her friends,
because it was brilliant and agreeable. He also took his name
off all his clubs. He was travelling on the Continent with
Pitt, who was his bosom friend, when a change came over him. In
the days of his childhood he had been sent to reside with an
aunt who was a great admirer of Whitfield's preaching, and kept
up a friendly connection with the early Methodists. He was soon
infected with her ideas, and "there was remarked in him a rare
and pleasing character of piety in his twelfth year." This
excited much consternation among the other members of his
family. His mother at once came up to London and fetched him
home. "If Billy turns Methodist," said his grandfather, "he
shall not have a sixpence of mine." We are informed that
theatrical diversions, card parties, and sumptuous suppers (at
the fashionable hour of six in the evening) obliterated these
impressions for a time. They were not, however, dead, for the
perusal of Doddridge's "Rise and Progress" was sufficient to
revive them. This amiable and excellent young man became the
prey of a morbid superstition. Often in the midst of enjoyment
his conscience told him he was not in the true sense of the
word a Christian. "I laughed, I sang, I was apparently gay and
happy, but the thought would steal across me, What madness is
all this: to continue easy in a state in which a sudden call
out of the world would consign me to everlasting misery, and
that when eternal happiness is within my grasp?" The sinful
worldling accordingly reformed. He declined Sunday visits; he
got up earlier in the morning; he wrestled continually in
prayer; he began to keep a common place book, serious and
profane, and a Christian duty paper. He opened himself
completely to Pitt, and said he believed the Spirit was in him.
Mr. Pitt was apparently of a different opinion, for he tried to
reason him out of his convictions. "The fact is," says Mr.
Wilberforce, "he was so absorbed in politics that he had never
given himself time for due reflection in religion. But amongst
other things he declared to me that Bishop Butler's work raised
in his mind more doubts than it had answered." Now if that was
the character of Pitt's intellect we must venture to think that
the more he reflected on religion the less he would have
believed in it.

Superstition intensifies a man. It makes him more of what he
was before. An evil-natured person who takes fright at hell-
fire becomes the most malevolent of human beings. Nothing can
more clearly prove the natural beauty of Wilberforce's
character than the fact that he preserved it unimpaired in
spite of his Methodistic principles. It would be unjust to deny
that after he became a Methodist he became a wiser and a better
man. His intellect was strengthened, his affections were
sweetened, by a faith the usual tendency of which is to harden
the heart and to soften the head. He endeavoured to control a
human, and therefore sometimes irritable, temper; he laid down
for himself the rule to manifest rather humility in himself
than dissatisfaction at others; and so  well did he succeed
that a female friend observed, "If this is madness I hope that
he will bite us all."

Yet there was a flaw in Wilberforce's brain, or he could never
have supposed that a man might be sent to hell for playing the
piano. He soon showed that in another age he might have been an
excellent inquisitor; and inquisitors there were not less pure-
hearted, not less benevolent in private life than Wilberforce
himself. He desired to do something in public for the glory of
God, and he believed it was his mission to reform the manners
of the age. When a man of fashion was always a gambler, and
when all the clubs in St. James' Street were hells; when
speeches were often incoherent in the House after dinner; when
comic songs were composed against Mr. Pitt, not because he had
a mistress, but because he had none; when ladies called
adultery " a little affair "; when the Prince of Wales was a
young man about town, grazing on the middle classes, it cannot
be questioned that, from the royal family downwards, there was
room for improvement. The reader will perhaps feel curious to
learn in what manner Mr. Wilberforce commenced his laudable but
difficult crusade. He obtained a royal proclamation for the
discouragement of vice and immorality; and letters from the
secretaries of state to the lords-lieutenant, expressing his
Majesty's pleasure, that they recommend it to the justices
throughout their several counties to be active in the execution
of the laws against immoralities. He also started a society, to
assist in the enforcement of the proclamation, as a kind of
amateur detective corps, to hunt up indecent and blasphemous
publications. And that was what he called reforming the manners
of the age!

Happily, the slave-trade question began to be discussed, and
Mr. Wilberforce obtained a cause which was worthy of his noble
nature. The miseries of Africa had long attracted his
attention: even in his boyhood he had written on the subject
for the daily journals. Lady Middleton, who had heard from an
eye-witness of the horrors of slavery, had begged him to bring
it before parliament. Mr. Pitt had also advised him to take up
the question, and he had agreed to do so whenever an
opportunity should occur. This happened before his acquaintance
with Clarkson, to whom he said at their first interview that
abolition was a question near his heart. A short time after,
there was a dinner at Mr. Bennet Langton's, at which Sir Joshua
Reynolds, Boswell, Windham, and himself were present. The
conversation turned upon the African slave-trade, and Clarkson
exhibited some specimens of cotton cloth manufactured by the
natives in their own looms, the plant being grown in their own
fields. All the guests expressed themselves on the side of
abolition, and Mr. Wilberforce was asked if he would bring it
forward in the House. He said that he would have no objection
to do so when he was better prepared for it, providing no more
proper person could be found.

The Committee now went to work in earnest, and held weekly
meetings at Mr. Wilberforce's house. Clarkson was sent to
Bristol and Liverpool, where he collected much information,
though not without difficulty, and even, as he thought, danger
of his life. A commission was appointed by the Lords of the
Privy Council to collect evidence. It was stated by the
Liverpool and planter party that not only the colonial
prosperity, but the commercial existence of the nation was at
stake; that the Guinea trade was a nursery for British seamen;
that the slaves offered for sale were criminals and captives
who would be eaten if they were not bought; that the middle
passage was the happiest period of a negro's life; that the
sleeping apartments on board were perfumed with frankincense;
and that the slaves were encouraged to disport themselves on
deck with the music and dances of their native land. On the
other hand, the Committee proved from the muster rolls which
Clarkson had examined that the Guinea trade was not the nursery
of British seamen, but its grave; and they published a picture
of an African slaver, copied from a vessel which was lying in
the Mersey, and certain measurements were made, which, being
put into feet and inches, justified the statement of a member
in the House, that never was so much human suffering condensed
into so small a space.

Lord Chancellor Thurlow and two other members of the Cabinet
were opposed to abolition, and therefore Mr. Pitt could not
make it a government measure; and so although it was called the
battle between the giants and the pigmies; although Pitt, Fox,
Burke, Sheridan, Windham, and Wilberforce, the greatest orators
and statesmen of the day, were on one side, and the two members
for Liverpool on the other, the brute votes went with the
pigmies, and the bill was lost.

But now the nation was beginning to be moved. The Committee
distributed books, and hired columns in the newspapers. They
sealed their letters with a negro in chains kneeling, and the
motto, "Am I not a man and a brother?" Wedgwood made cameos
with the same design; ladies wore them in their bracelets or
their hair-pins; gentlemen had them inlaid in gold on the lids
of their snuff boxes. Cowper sent to the Committee the well-
known poem, "Fleecy locks and black complexion"; the Committee
printed it on the finest hot-pressed paper, folded it up in a
small and neat form, gave it the appropriate title of "A
subject for conversation at the tea-table," and cast it forth
by thousands upon the land. It was set to music, and sung as a
street ballad. People crowded at shop windows to see the
picture of the ship in which the poor negroes were packed like
herrings in a cask. A murmur arose, and grew louder and louder;
three hundred thousand persons gave up drinking sugar in their
tea; indignation meetings were held; and petitions were sent
into Parliament by the ton. Everything seemed to show that the
nation had begun to loathe the trade in flesh and blood, and
would not be appeased till it was done away. And then came
events which made the sweet words Liberty, Humanity, Equality,
sound harsh and ungrateful to the ear: which caused those who
spoke much of philanthropy, and eternal justice, to be avoided
by their friends, and perhaps supervised by the police; which
rendered negroes and emancipation a subject to be discussed
only with sneers and shakings of the head.
When the slave-trade question had first come up, Mr. Pitt
proposed to the French Government that the two nations should
unite in the cause of abolition. Now in France the peasantry
themselves were slaves; and the negro trade had been bitterly
attacked in books which had been burnt by the public
executioner, and the authors of which had been excommunicated
by the Pope. Mr. Pitt's proposal was at once declined by the
coterie of the OEil de Boeuf. In the meantime it was discovered
that the French nation was heavily in debt; there was a loss of
nearly five million sterling every year; a fact by no means
surprising, for the nobles and clergy paid no taxes; each
branch of trade was an indolent monopoly; and poor Jacques
Bonhomme bore the weight of the court and army on his back.
Chancellors of the Exchequer one after, the other were
appointed, and attempted in vain to grapple with the
difficulty. As a last resource, the House of Commons was
revived, that the debt of bankrupt despotism might be accepted
by the nation. A Parliament was opened at Versailles; lawyers
and merchants dressed in black walked in the same procession,
and sat beneath the same roof with the haughty nobles, rustling
with feathers, shining with gold, and wearing swords upon their
thighs. But the commoners soon perceived that they had only
been summoned to vote away the money of the nation; they were
not to interfere with the laws. Their debates becoming
offensive to the king, the hall in which they met was closed
against them. They then gathered in a tennis court, called
themselves the National Assembly, and took an oath that they
would not dissolve until they had regenerated France. Troops
were marched into Versailles; a coup d'etat was evidently in
the wind. And then the Parisians arose; the army refused to
fight against them; the Bastille was destroyed; the National
Assembly took the place of the OEil de Boeuf: democracy became
the Mayor of the Palace. A constitution was drawn up, and was
accepted by the king. The nobility were deprived of their
feudal rights; church property was resumed by the nation; taxes
were imposed on the rich as well as on the poor; the peasantry
went out shooting every Sunday; the country gentlemen fled from
their chateaux to foreign courts, where wars began to brew.

Such was the state of affairs in France when Wilberforce
suggested that Clarkson should be sent over to Paris to
negotiate with the leading members of the National Assembly.
There was in Paris a Society called the Friends of the Blacks;
Condorcet and Brissot were among its conductors. Clarkson,
therefore, was sanguine of success; but it was long before he
could obtain a hearing. At last he was invited to dinner at the
house of the Bishop of Chartres, that he might there meet
Mirabeau and Seiyes, the Duc de Rochefoucauld, Pétion de
Villeneuve, and Bergasse, and talk the matter over. But when
the guests met, a much more interesting topic was in
everybody's mouth. The king at that time lived at Versailles, a
little town inhabited entirely by his servants and his body-
guards. The Parisians for some time had been uneasy; they
feared that he would escape to Metz; and that civil war would
then break out. There was a rumour of a bond signed by
thousands of the aristocrats to fight on the king's side. The
Guards had certainly been doubled at Versailles; and a Flanders
regiment had marched into the town with two pieces of cannon.
Officers appeared in the streets in strange uniforms, green
faced with red; and they did not wear the tricolour cockade
which had already been adopted by the French nation. And while
thus uneasy looks were turned towards Versailles, an incident
took place which heightened the alarm. On October 1st a banquet
had been given by the Guards to the officers of the Flanders
Regiment. The tables were spread in the court theatre: the
boxes were filled with spectators. After the champagne was
served, and the health of the royal family had been drunk, the
wine and the shouting turned all heads; swords were drawn and
waved naked in the air: the tricolour cockades were trampled
under foot; the band struck up the tender and beautiful ballad,
“O Richard! O my King! the world is all forsaking thee!”; the
queen came in and walked round the tables, bowing, and
bestowing her sweetest smiles; the bugles sounded the charge;
the men from different regiments were brought in; all swore
aloud they would protect the king, as if he was just then in
danger of his life; and some young ensigns carried by assault
certain boxes which expressed dissent at these proceedings.
This was the subject of conversation at the dinner to which
Clarkson was invited; and the next day the women of Paris
marched upon Versailles; the king was taken to the Tuileries
and the National Assembly became supreme -- under favour of the
mob.

After several weeks Clarkson at last received a definite reply.
The Revolution, he was told, was of more importance than the
abolition of the slave-trade. In Bordeaux, Marseilles, Rouen,
Nantes, and Havre, there were many persons in favour of that
trade. It would be said that abolition would be making a
sacrifice to England. The British parliament had as yet done
nothing, and people doubted the sincerity of Pitt. Mr. Clarkson
asked whether, if the question were postponed to the next
legislature, it would be more difficult to carry it then than
now. "The question produced much conversation, but the answer
was unanimous -- that people would daily more and more admire
their constitution, and that by the constitution certain solid
and fixed principles would be established, which would
inevitably lead to the abolition of the slave-trade; and if the
constitution were once fairly established, they would not
regard the murmurs of any town or province."

Clarkson was not the only envoy who was defeated by the planter
interest on French soil. In the flourishing colony of St.
Domingo there were many mulatto planters, free and wealthy men,
but subject to degrading disabilities. When they heard of the
Revolution, they sent Ogé to Paris with a large sum of money as
a present to the National Assembly, and a petition for equal
rights. The president received him and his companions with
cordiality: he bid them take courage; the Assembly knew no
distinction between black and white; all men were created free
and equal. But soon the planters began to intrigue, the
politicians to prevaricate, and to postpone. Ogé's patience was
at last worn out; he declared to Clarkson that he did not care
whether their petition was granted them or not. "We can
produce," he said, "as good soldiers on our estates as those in
France. If we are once forced to desperate measures, it will be
in vain to send thousands across the Atlantic to bring us back
to our former state." He finally returned to St. Domingo, armed
his slaves, was defeated and broken on the wheel. Then the
slaves rose and massacred the whites, and the cause of
abolition was tarnished by their crimes. In England the tide of
feeling turned; a panic fell upon the land. The practical
disciples of Rousseau had formed a club in Paris, the members
of which met in a Jacobin church, whence they took their name.
This club became a kind of caucus for the arrangement of
elections, to decide the measures which should be brought
forward in the National Assembly, and to preach unto all men
the gospel of liberty, equality, and fraternity. It had four
hundred daughter societies in France; it corresponded with
thousands of secret societies abroad; it had missionaries in
the army, spies in foreign lands. It desired to create a
universal republic; it grew in power, in ambition, and in
bravado; it cast at the feet of the kings of Europe the head of
a king; it offered the friendship and aid of France to all
people who would rise against their tyrants. Thomas Paine, who
used to boast that he had created the American Revolution with
his pamphlet, "Common Sense," now tried to create an English
Revolution with his "Rights of Man." In the loyal towns his
effigy, with a rope round its neck, was flogged with a cart
whip, while the market-bell tolled, and the crowd sang the
national anthem, with three cheers after each verse. In other
towns, “No King! Liberty! Equality!” were scribbled on the
walls. The soldiers were everywhere tampered with, and the king
was mobbed. Pitt, the projector of Reform Bills, became a
tyrant. Burke, the champion of the American Revolution, became
a Tory.

It was not a time to speak of abolition, which was regarded as
a revolutionary measure. And such in reality it was, though
accidentally associated in England with religion and
philanthropy, on account of the character of its leaders. 
It was pointed out that the atheist philosophers had all of them 
begun by sympathising with the negroes; one of Thomas Paine's first 
productions was an article against slavery. The Committee was declared 
to be a nest of Jacobins, their publications were denounced as poisonous. 
There was a time when the king had whispered at a levee, "How go on
your black clients, Mr. Wilberforce?”

But now the philanthropist was in disgrace at court. At this
time poor Clarkson's health gave way, and he was carried off
the field. And then from Paris there came terrible news; the
people were at last avenged. The long black night was followed
by a blood-red dawn. The nobles who had fled to foreign courts
had returned with foreign troops; the kings of Europe had
fallen on the new republic, the common enemy of all. The people
feared that the old tyranny was about to be replaced, and by a
foreign hand; they had now tasted liberty; they knew how sweet
it was; they had learnt the joy of eating all the corn that
they had sown; they had known what it was to have their own
firelocks and their own swords, and to feel that they, the poor
and hungry serfs, were the guardians of their native land. They
had learnt to kiss the tricolour; to say Vive la nation! to
look forward to a day when their boys, now growing up, might
harangue from the Tribune, or sit upon the Bench, or grasp the
field-marshal's baton. And should all this be undone? Should
they be made to return to their boiled grass and their stinging
nettle soup? Should the days of privilege and oppression be
restored? 

The nation arose and drove out the invaders. But
there had been a panic, and it bore its fruits. What the
Jacobins were to Pitt, the aristocrats were to Danton and
Robespierre. Hundreds of royalists were guillotined, but then,
thousands had plotted the overthrow of the Republic, thousands
had intrigued that France might be a conquered land. Such at
least was the popular belief; The massacres of September, the
execution of the king and queen, were the result of fear. After
which, it must be owned, there came a period when suspicion and
slaughter had become a habit; when blood was shed to the sound
of laughter; when heads, greeted with roars of recognition,
were popped out of the little national sash-window, and tumbled
into the sawdust, and then were displayed to the gallery in the
windows, and to the pit upon the square. The mere brute energy
which lay at the bottom of the social mass rose more and more
towards the top; and at length the leaders of the people were
hideous beings in red woollen caps, with scarcely an idea in
their heads or a feeling in their hearts; ardent lovers of
liberty, it is true, and zealots for the fatherland, scarcely
taking enough from the treasury to fill their bellies and to
clothe their backs (Marat, when killed, had elevenpence
halfpenny in his possession), but mere senseless fanatics, who
crushed that liberty which they tried to nurse; who governed
only by the guillotine, which they considered a sovereign
remedy for all political disorders; who killed all the great
men whom the Republic had produced, and were finally
guillotined themselves. 

The death of Robespierre closed the Revolution; the last 
mob-rising was extinguished by the artillery of Bonaparte. 
The Jacobins fell into disrepute; there was a cry of "Down with the 
Jacoquins!"; stones were hurled in through their windows; the orators 
were hustled and beaten as they sallied forth, and the ladies who 
knitted in the gallery were chastised in a manner scarcely suited for 
adults.  The age of revolutions for a time was past; Bonaparte became
Dictator; Thomas Paine took to drink; the English reign of terror
was dispelled; the abolitionists again raised their voices on
behalf of the negro, and in 18O7 the slave-trade was abolished.
That traffic, however, was only abolished so far as English
vessels and English markets were concerned, and Government now
commenced a long series of negotiations with foreign powers. In
course of time the other nations prohibited the slave-trade,
and conceded to Great Britain the police control of the Guinea
coast, and the right of search. A squadron of gunboats hovered
round the mouths of rivers, or sent up boating expeditions, or
cruised to and fro a little way out at sea, with a man always
at the mast-head with a spy glass in his hand, scanning the
horizon for a sail. When a sail was sighted, the gunboat got up
steam, bore down upon the vessel, ordered her to heave to, sent
men on board, and overhauled her papers. If they were not
in order, or if slaves were on board, or even if the vessel was
fitted up in such a way as to have the appearance of a slaver,
she was taken as a prize; the sailors were landed at the first
convenient spot; the slaver was sold, and the money thereby
obtained, with a bounty on each captured slave, was divided
among the officers and crew. The slaves were discharged at
Sierra Leone, where they formed themselves into various
townships according to their nationalities, spoke their own
language, elected their own chiefs, and governed themselves
privately by their own laws, opinion acting as the only method
of coercion -- a fact deserving to be noted by those who study
savage man. However, this was only for a time. All these
imported negroes were educated by the missionaries, and they
now support their own church; the native languages and
distinctions of nationality are gradually dying out; the
descendants of naked slaves are many of them clergymen,
artisans, shopkeepers, and merchants; they call themselves
Englishmen, and such they feel themselves to be. However
ludicrous it may seem to hear a negro boasting about Lord
Nelson and Waterloo, and declaring that he must go home to
England for his health, it shows that he possesses a kind of
emulation, which, with proper guidance, will make him a true
citizen of his adopted country, and leave him nothing of the
African except his skin.

But the slave-trade was not extinguished by the "sentimental
squadron." The slavers could make a profit if they lost four
cargoes in every five; they could easily afford to use decoys.
While the gunboat was giving chase to some old tub with fifty
diseased and used-up slaves on board, a clipper with several
hundreds in her holds would dash out from her hiding-place
among the mangroves and scud across the open sea to Cuba and
Brazil.

It was impossible to blockade a continent; but it was easy to
inspect estates. The negroes were purchased as plantation
hands; a contraband labourer was not a thing to be concealed.
There were laws in Cuba and Brazil against negro importation,
but these existed only for the benefit of the officials. The
bribery practice was put an end to in Brazil about 1852; that
great market was for ever closed. Slavers were ruined; African
chiefs became destitute of rum and this branch of commerce
began to look forlorn. Yet still Cuba cried, “More! Give me
more!”; still the profits were so large that the squadron was
defeated and the man-supply obtained. Half a million of money a
year, and no small amount of men, did that one island cost
Great Britain. Yet still it might be hoped that even Cuba would
he filled full in time; that the public opinion of Europe would
act upon Madrid; that in time it would imitate Brazil. But in
1861 there happened an event which made the Cubans turn their
back on Spain, and look with longing eyes the other way; and a
beautiful vision uprose before their minds. They dreamt of a
New Empire to which Cuba would belong, and to which slavery in
a state of medieval beauty would be restored. It was only a
dream; it was quickly dispelled; they awoke to find Liberty
standing at their doors; and there now she stands waiting for
her time to come. 

When Great Britain was teasing the colonies into resistance, it
was often predicted that they would not unite. There was little
community of feeling between the old Dutch families of New
York, the Quakers of Pennsylvania, the yeomen of New England,
who were descended from Roundheads, and the country gentlemen
of Virginia, who were descended from Cavaliers. But when the
king closed Boston Port, and the vessels mouldered in the
docks, and the shops were closed, and the children of fishermen
and sailors began to cry for bread, the colonies did unite with
one heart and one hand to feed the hunger of the noble town;
and then to besiege it for its own sake, and to drive the red
coats back into their ships. Yet when the war was over, and the
squirrel guns had again been hung upon the wall, and the fire
of the conflict had died out, the old jealousy reappeared. A
loose-jointed league was tried and came to nought. The nation
existed; the nation was in debt; union could not be dispensed
with. But each colony approached this Union as a free and
sovereign state. If one colony had chosen to remain apart, the
others would not have interfered; if one colony after entering
the Union had chosen to withdraw, its right to do so would not
have been denied. In European countries, republican or royal,
the source of authority is the nation; all powers not formally
transferred reside with the Assembly or the Crown. In America,
however; it was precisely the reverse; all powers not delivered
to the central government were retained by the contracting
states.

At the time of the Revolution, negro slavery existed in the
colonies without exception. But it did not enter the economy of
Northern life. Slavery will only pay when labour can be
employed in gangs beneath an overseer, and where work can be
found for a large number of men without cessation throughout
the year. In the culture of rice, sugar, cotton, and tobacco,
these conditions exist; but in corn-growing lands labour is
scanty and dispersed, except at certain seasons of the year.
Slaves in the North were not employed as field hands, but only
as domestic servants in the houses of the rich. They could
therefore be easily dispensed with; and it was proposed by the
Northern delegates, when the Constitution was being prepared,
that the African slave-trade should at once be abolished, and
that certain measures should be taken, with a view to the
gradual emancipation of the negro. Upon this question Virginia
appears to have been divided. But Georgia and the Carolinas at
once declared that they would not have the slave-trade
abolished: they wanted more slaves; and unless this species of
property were guaranteed, they would not enter the Union at
all. They demanded that slavery should be recognised and
protected by the Constitution. The Northerners at once gave in;
they only requested that the words “slave” and “slavery” might not
appear. To this the Southerners agreed, and the contract was
delicately worded; but it was none the less stringent all the
same. It was made a clause of the Constitution that the slave-
trade should not be suppressed before the year 18O8. It might
then be made the subject of debate and legislation -- not
before. It was made a clause of the Constitution that, if the
slaves of any state rebelled, the national troops should be
employed against them. It was made a clause of the Constitution
that, if a slave escaped to a free state, the authorities of
that state should be obliged to give him up. And lastly, slave-
owners were allowed to have votes in proportion to the number
of their slaves. Such was the price which the Northerners paid
for nationality -- a price which their descendants found a hard
and heavy one to pay. The fathers of the country ate sour
grapes, and the children's teeth were set on edge.

But the Southerners had not finished yet. The colonies
possessed, according to their charters, certain regions in the
wilderness out west, and these they delivered to the nation. A
special proviso was made, however, by South Carolina and by
Georgia, that at no future time should slavery be forbidden in
the territories which they gave up of their own free will and
these territories in time became slave states. It is therefore
evident that the South intended from the first to preserve, and
also to extend slavery. It must be confessed that their policy
was candid and consistent, and of a piece throughout. They
refused to enter the Union unless their property was
guaranteed; they threatened to withdraw from the Union whenever
they thought that the guarantee was about to be evaded or
withdrawn. The clauses contained in the Constitution were
binding on the nation; but they might be revoked by means of a
constitutional amendment, which could be passed by the consent
of three-fourths of the states. Emigrants continually poured
into the north; and these again streamed out towards the west.
It was evident that in time new states would be formed, and
that the original slave states would be left in a minority.
These states were purely agricultural; they had no commerce;
they had no manufactures. Indigo, rice, and tobacco were the
products on which they lived; and the markets for these were in
an ugly state. The East Indies had begun to compete with them
in rice and indigo; the demand for tobacco did not increase.
There was a general languor in the South; the young men did not
know what to do. Slavery is a wasteful and costly institution,
and requires large profits to keep it alive; it seemed on the
point of dying in the South, when there came a voice across the
Atlantic crying for cotton in loud and hungry tones; and the
fortune of the South was made.

In the seventeenth century the town of Manchester was already
known to fame. It was a seat of the woollen manufacture, which
was first introduced from Flanders into England in the reign of
Edward the Third. It bought yarn from the Irish, and sent it
back to them as linen. It imported cotton from Cyprus and
Smyrna, and worked it into fustians, vermilions, and dimities.
In the middle of the eighteenth century the cotton industry had
become important. In thousands of cottages surrounding
Manchester might be heard the rattle of the loom and the
humming of the one-thread wheel, which is now to he seen only
in the opera of Marta. Invention, as usual, arose from
necessity; the weavers could not get sufficient thread, and
were entirely at the mercy of the spinners. Spinning machines
were accordingly invented: the water frame, the spinning jenny,
and the mule. And now the weavers had more thread than they
could use, and the power loom was invented to preserve the
equilibrium of supply and demand. Then steam was applied to
machinery; the factory system was established; hundred-handed
engines worked all the day: and yet more labourers were
employed than had ever been employed before; the soft white
wool was carded, spun, and woven in a trice; the cargoes from
the East were speedily devoured; and now raw material was
chiefly in demand. The American cotton was the best in the
market; but the quantity received had hitherto been small. The
picking out of the small black seeds was a long and tedious
operation. A single person could not clean more than a pound a
day. Here, then, was an opening for Yankee ingenuity; and
Whitney invented his famous saw-gin, which tore out the seeds
as quick as lightning with its iron teeth.  Land and slaves
abounded in the South; the demand from Manchester became more
and more hungry --it has never yet been completely satisfied --
and, under King Cotton, the South entered upon a new era of
wealth, vigour, and prosperity as a slave plantation. The small
holdings were unable to compete with the large estates on which
the slaves were marshalled and drilled like convicts to their
work; society in the South soon became composed of the
planters, the slaves, and the mean whites who were too proud to
work like niggers, and who led a kind of gipsy life. 

While the intellect of the North was inventing machinery, 
opening new lands, and laying the foundations of a literature, the
Southerners were devoted entirely to politics; and by means of
their superior ability they ruled at Washington for many
years, and almost monopolised the offices of state. When
America commenced its national career there were two great
sects of politicians; those who were in favour of the central
power, and those who were in favour of state rights. In the
course of time the national sentiment increased, and with it
the authority of the President and Congress; but this
centralising movement was resisted by a certain party of the
North whose patriotism could not pass beyond the state house
and the city hall. The Southerners were invariably provincial
in their feelings; they did not consider themselves as
belonging to a nation, but a league; they inherited the
sentiments of aversion and distrust with which their fathers
had entered the Union; threats and provisos were always on
their lips. The executive, it was true, was in their hands, but
the House of Representatives belonged to the North. In the
Senate the states had equal powers, irrespective of size and
population. In the Lower House the states were merely sections
of the country; population was the standard of the voting
power. The South had a smaller population than the North; the
Southerners were therefore a natural minority, and only
preserved their influence by allying themselves with the
states' rights party in the North. The free states were
divided: the slave states voted as one man. 

In the North politics was a question of sentiment, and sentiments 
naturally differ. In the South politics was a matter of life and death;
their bread depended on cotton; their cotton depended on
slaves; their slaves depended on the balance of power. The
history of the South within the Union is that of a people
struggling for existence by means of political devices against
the spirit of the nation and the spirit of the age. By
annexation, purchase, and extension they kept pace with the
North in its rush towards the West. Free states and slave
states ran neck and neck towards the shores of the Pacific. The
North obtained Vermont, Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Maine,
Michigan, Iowa, Wisconsin, and California. The South obtained
Tennessee, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, Missouri,
Arkansas, Florida, and Texas. Whenever a territory became a
state, the nation possessed the power of rejecting and
therefore of modifying its constitution. The Northern
politicians made an effort to prohibit slavery in all new
states; the South as usual threatened to secede, and the Union
which had been manufactured by a compromise was preserved by a
compromise. It was agreed that a line should be drawn to the
Pacific along the parallel 36° 3O'; that all the states which
should afterwards be made below the line should be slave-
holding; and all that were made above it should be free. But
this compromise was not, like the compromise of the
constitution, binding on the nation, and only to be set aside
by a constitutional amendment. It was simply a parliamentary
measure, and as such could be repealed at any future session.
However, it satisfied the South; the North had many things to
think of; and all remained quiet for a time. But only for a
time. 

The mysterious principle which constitutes the law of
progress produces similar phenomena in various countries at the
same time, and it was such an active period of the human mind
which produced about forty years ago a Parisian Revolution, the
great Reform Bill, and the American agitation against slavery.
There was a man in a Boston garret. He possessed some paper,
pens and ink, and little else besides; and even these he could
only use in a fashion of his own. He had not what is called a
style; nor had he that rude power which can cast a glow on
jagged sentences and uncouth words. This poor garretteer, a
printer in his working hours, relied chiefly on his type for
light and shade, and had much recourse to capital letters,
italics and notes of exclamation, to sharpen his wit, and to
strengthen his tirades. But he had a cause, and his heart was
in that cause. When W. L. Garrison commenced his Liberator the
government of Georgia set a price upon his head, he was mobbed
in his native city, and slavery was defended in Faneuil Hall
itself, sacred to the memory of men who cared not to live
unless they could be free. The truth was, that the Northerners
disliked slavery, but nationality was dear to them and they
believed that an attack upon the “domestic institution” of the
South endangered the safety of the Union. But the abolitionists
became a sect; they increased in numbers and in talent; they
would admit of no compromise; they cared little for the country
itself so long as it was stained. They denounced the
constitution as a covenant with death, and an agreement with
hell. No union with slave-holders! they cried. No union with
midnight robbers and assassins! Hitherto the war between the
two great sections of the country had been confined to
politicians. The Southerners had sent their boys to Northern
colleges and schools. Attended by a retinue of slaves they had
passed the summer at Saratoga or Newport, and some times the
winter at New York. But now their sons were insulted, their
slaves decoyed from them by these new fanatics; and the South
went North no more. 

Abolition societies were everywhere formed, and envoys 
were sent into the slave states to distribute abolition tracts 
and to publish abolition journals, and to excite, if they could, 
a St. Domingo insurrection. The Northerners were shocked at 
these proceedings and protested angrily against them. But 
soon there was a revulsion of feeling in their minds, The wild 
beast temper arose in the South, and went forth lynching all it met. 
Northerners were flogged and even killed. Negroes were burnt alive. 
And so the meetings of abolitionists were no longer interrupted at the 
North; mayors and select-men no longer refused them the use of public 
halls. The sentiment of abolition was however not yet widely spread.
There were few Northerners who preferred to give up the Union
rather than live under a piebald constitution, or who
considered it just to break a solemn compact in obedience to an
abstract law. But there now arose a strong and resolute party
who declared that slavery might stay where it was, but that it
must go no farther. The South must be content with what it had.
Not another yard of slave soil should be added to the Union. On
the other hand, the South could not accept such terms. Slavery
extension was necessary for their lives. More land they must
have or they could not exist. There was waste land in abundance
in the South; but it was dead. Their style of agriculture was
precisely that which is pursued in Central Africa. They took a
tract from the wilderness and planted it again and again with
cotton and tobacco till it gave up the ghost, and would yield
no more. They then moved on and took in another piece. Obliged
to spend all their cash in buying prime slaves at two hundred
pounds a piece, they could not afford to use manure or to
rotate their crops; they could not afford to employ so costly a
species of labour on anything less lucrative than sugar,
cotton, and tobacco. Besides, if slavery were not to be
extended they would be surrounded and hemmed in by free states;
the old contract would be annulled. Already the South were in a
minority. The free states and slave states might be equal in
number; but they were not equal in population and prosperity.
The Northerner who travelled down South was astonished to find
that the cities of the maps were villages, and the villages
clusters of log huts. Fields covered with weeds, and moss-grown
ruins showed where farms once flourishing had been. He rode
through vast forests and cypress swamps, where hundreds of mean
whites lived like Red Indians, hunting and fishing for their
daily bread, eating clay to keep themselves alive, prowling
round plantations to obtain stolen food from the slaves. He saw
plantations in which the labour was conducted with the terrible
discipline of the prison and the hulks; and where as he
galloped past the line of hoeing slaves, so close that he
splashed them with mud, they hoed on, they toiled on, not
daring to raise their eyes from the ground. From early dawn to
dusky eve it was so with these poor wretches: no sound broke
the silence of those fearful fields but the voice of the
overseer and the cracking of the whip. And out far away in the
lone western lands, by the side of dark rivers, among trees
from which drooped down the dull grey Spanish moss, the
planters went forth to hunt; there were well-known coverts
where they were sure to find; and as the traveller rode through
the dismal swamp he might perhaps have the fortune to see the
game; a black animal on two legs running madly for its life,
and behind it the sounding of a horn, and the voices of hounds
in full cry -- a chase more infernal than that of the Wild
Huntsman who sweeps through the forest with his spectral crew.

But the end of all this was at hand. Kansas, a tract of rich
prairie land, was about to become a territory, and would soon
become a state. It was situated above the 36° 3O' line, and
therefore belonged to the North. But the Southerners coveted
this Naboth's vineyard; their power at Washington was great
just then; they determined to strike out the line which had
been in the first place demanded by themselves. With much show
of justice and reason they alleged that it was not fair to
establish the domestic institutions of a country without
consulting the inhabitants themselves. They proposed that, for
the future, the question of slavery or free soil should be
decided by a majority of votes among the settlers on the spot.
This proposal became law, and then commenced a race for the
soil. In Boston a political society was formed for the
exportation to Kansas of Northern men. In the slave state.
Missouri, blue lodges were formed for a similar purpose, and
hundreds of squatters, dressed in flannel shirts, and huge
boots up to their knees, and skin caps on their heads,
bristling with revolvers and bowie knives, stepped across the
Border. For the first time the people of the North and South
met face to face. A guerrilla warfare soon broke out; the New
Englanders were robbed and driven back; they were murdered, and
their scalps paraded by Border ruffians upon poles. The whole
country fell into a distracted state. The Southerners pursued
their slaves into Boston itself, and dragged them back,
according to the law. A mad abolitionist invaded Virginia with
a handful of men, shot a few peaceful citizens, and was hanged.
A time of terror fell upon the South; there was neither liberty
of print nor liberty of speech; the majority reigned; and the
man who spoke against it was lynched upon the spot. A
Southerner assaulted and battered a Northerner on the floor of
the Senate. 

The North at last was thoroughly aroused. The people 
itself began to stir; a calm, patient, law-abiding race,
slow to be moved, but when once moved, swerving never till the
thing was done. A presidential election was at hand, and a
Northerner was placed upon the throne. The South understood
that this was not a casual reverse, which might be redeemed
when the four years had passed away. It was to them a sign that
the days of their power had for ever passed. The temper of the
North was not to be mistaken. It had at last rebelled; it would
suffer tyranny no more. Mr. Lincoln's terms were conciliatory
in the extreme. Had the South been moderate in its demands, he
would have been classed with those statesmen who added
compromise to compromise, and so postponed the evil but
inevitable day. He was not an abolitionist. He offered to give
them any guarantee they pleased -- a constitutional amendment
if they desired it -- that slavery as it stood should not be
interfered with. He offered to bring in a more stringent law,
by which their fugitive slaves should be restored. But on the
matter of extension he was firm. The Southerners demanded that
a line should again be drawn to the Pacific; that all south of
that line should be made slave soil, and that slavery should be
more clearly recognised by the central government, and more
firmly guaranteed. These terms were not more extravagant than
those which their fathers had obtained. But times had changed:
the sentiment of nationality was now more fully formed; "Uncle
Tom’s Cabin" had been written; the American people were heartily
ashamed of slavery; they refused to give it another lease. The
ultimatum was declined; the South seceded, and the North flew
to arms, not to emancipate the negro, but to preserve the
existence of the nation. They would not indeed submit to
slavery extension; they preferred disunion to such a disgrace.
But they had no intention when they went to war of destroying
slavery in the states where it existed; they even took pains to
prove to the South that the war was not an anti-slavery
crusade. The negroes were treated by the Northern generals not
as men, but as contraband of war; even Butler in New Orleans
did not emancipate the slaves; a general who issued a
proclamation of that nature was reprimanded by the government,
although he only followed the example of British generals in
the Revolutionary war. But as the contest became more severe
and more prolonged, and all hopes of reconciliation were at an
end, slavery became identified with the South in the Northern
mind, and was itself regarded as a foe. The astute and cautious
statesman at the head of affairs perceived that the time had
come; the constitution was suspended during the war; and so, in
all legality and with due form, he set free in one day four
million slaves.

It is impossible to view without compassion the misfortunes of
men who merely followed in the footsteps of their fathers, and
were in no sense more guilty than Washington and Jefferson, who
remained slaveholders to their dying day. It was easy for Great
Britain to pay twenty millions; it was easy for the Northern
states to emancipate their slaves, who were few in number, and
not necessary to their life. But it was impossible for the
South to abandon slavery. The money of a planter was sunk in
flesh and blood. Yet the Southern politicians must be blamed
for their crazy ambition, and their blind ignorance of the
world. Instead of preparing as the Cuban planters are preparing
now for those changes which had been rendered inevitable by the
progress of mankind, they supposed that it was in their power
to defy the spirit of the age, and to establish an empire on
the pattern of ancient Rome. They firmly believed that, because
they could not exist without selling cotton, Great Britain
could not exist without buying it from them; which is like a
shopkeeper supposing he could ruin his customers by putting up
his shutters. 

It may console those who yet lament the lost cause if 
we picture for their benefit what the Southern empire
would have been. There would have been an aristocracy of
planters, herds of slaves, a servile press, a servile pulpit,
and a rabble of mean whites formed into an army. Abolition
societies would have been established in the North, to
instigate slaves to rebel or run away; a cordon of posts with a
system of passports would have been established in the South.
Border raids would have been made by fanatics on the one side,
and by desperadoes on the other. Sooner or later there must
have been a war. Filibustering expeditions on Mexico and Cuba
would have brought about a war with Spain, and perhaps with
France. It was the avowed intention of the planters, when once
their empire was established, to import labour from Africa; to
re-open the trade as in the good old times. But this, Great
Britain would certainly have not allowed; and thus, again,
there would have been war. Even if the planters would have
displayed a little common sense, which is exceedingly
improbable, and so escaped extirpation from without, their
system of culture would have eaten up their lands. But happily
such hypotheses need no longer be discussed; a future of
another kind is in reserve for the Southern states. America can
now pursue with untarnished reputation her glorious career, and
time will soften the memories of a conflict, the original guilt
of which must be ascribed to the founders of the nation, or
rather to the conditions by which those great men were mastered
and controlled.



I have now accomplished the task which I set myself to do. I
have shown to the best of my ability what kind of place in
universal history Africa deserves to hold. I have shown that
not only Egypt has assisted the development of man by educating
Greece, Carthage by leading forth Rome to conquest, but that
even the obscure Sudan, or land of the negroes, has also
played its part in the drama of European life.

The slave-trade must be estimated as a war; though cruel and
atrocious in itself, it has, like most wars, been of service to
mankind. I shall leave it to others to trace cut in detail the
influence of the negro in the human progress. It will be
sufficient to observe that the grandeur of West Indian commerce
in the last generation, and of the cotton manufacture at the
present time, could not have been obtained without the
assistance of the negro: and that the agitation on his behalf,
which was commenced by Granville Sharp, has assisted much to
expand the sympathies, and to educate the heart of the Anglo-
Saxon people, who are somewhat inclined to pride of colour and
prejudice of race. Respecting the prospects of the negro, it is
difficult for me to form an opinion; but what I have seen of
the Africans in their native and semi-civilised condition
inclines me to take a hopeful view. The negroes are imitative
in an extraordinary degree, and imitation is the first
principle of progress. They are vain and ostentatious, ardent
for praise, keenly sensitive of blame. Their natural wants,
indeed, are few; they inherit the sober appetites of their
fathers who lived on a few handfuls of rice a day; but it will,
I believe, be found that when they enjoy the same inducements
to work as other men, when they can hope to distinguish
themselves in the Parliament, the pulpit, or in social life,
they will become as we are, the slaves of an idea, and will
work day and night to obtain something which they desire, but
do not positively need. Whether the negroes are equal in
average capacity to the white man, whether they will ever
produce a man of genius, is an idle and unimportant question;
they can at least gain their livelihood as labourers and
artisans; they are therefore of service to their country; let
them have fair play, and they will find their right place
whatever it may be: As regards the social question, they will
no doubt, like the Jews, intermarry always with their own race,
and will thus remain apart. But it need not be feared that they
will become hostile to those with whom they reside. Experience
has shown that, whenever aliens are treated as citizens, they
become citizens, whatever may be their religion or their race,
It is a mistake to suppose that the civilised negro calls
himself an African, and pines to return to his ancestral land.
If he is born in the States, he calls himself an American he
speaks with an American accent; he loves and he hates with an
American heart.

It is a question frequently asked of African travellers, What
is the future of that great continent? In the first place, with
respect to the West Coast, there is little prospect of great
changes taking place for many years to come. The commerce in
palm oil is important, and will increase. Cotton will be
received in large quantities from the Sudan. The East Coast
of Africa, when its resources have been developed, will be a
copy of the West Coast. It is not probable that European
colonies will ever flourish in these golden but unwholesome
lands. The educated negroes will in time monopolise the trade,
for they can live at less expense than Europeans, and do not
suffer from the climate. They may perhaps at some future day
possess both coasts, and thence spread with Bible and musket
into the interior. This prospect, however, is uncertain, and in
any case exceedingly remote.

That part of Africa which lies above the parallel 1O° North
belongs to the Eastern Question. What ever may be the ultimate
destiny of Egypt, Algeria, and Morocco, will be shared by the
regions of the central Niger, from Haussa to Timbuctoo.

That part of the continent which lies below the parallel 2O°
South, already belongs in part, and will in time entirely belong to
settlers of the Anglo-Saxon race. It resembles Australia, not
only in its position with respect to the Equator, but also in
its natural productions. It is a land of wool and mines,
without great navigable rivers, interspersed with sandy
deserts, and enjoying a wholesome though sultry air. Whatever
may be the future of Australia will also be the future of
Southern Africa.

Between these two lines intervenes a region inhabited for the
most part by pagan savages, thinly scattered over swamp and
forest. This concealed continent, this unknown world, will at
some far-off day, if my surmises prove correct, be invaded by
three civilising streams; by the British negroes from the
coasts by the Mohammedan negroes in robe and turban from the
great empires of the Niger region; and by the farmers and
graziers and miners of South Africa.

When, therefore, we speculate on the future of Africa, we can
do no more than bring certain regions of that continent within
the scope of two general questions; the future of our colonies,
and the future of the East; and these lead us up to a greater
question still, the future of the European race.

Upon this subject I shall offer a few remarks; and it is
obvious that in order to form some conception of the future it
is necessary to understand the present and the past. I shall
therefore endeavour to ascertain what we have been and what we
are. The monograph of Africa is ended. I shall make my sketch
of history complete, adding new features, passing quickly over
the parts that have been already drawn. I shall search out the
origin of man, determine his actual condition, speculate upon
his future destiny, and discuss the nature of his relations
towards that unknown Power of whom he is the offspring and the
slave. I shall examine this planet and its contents with the
calm curiosity of one whose sentiments and passions, whose
predilections and antipathies, whose hopes and fears, are not
interested in the question. I shall investigate without
prejudice; I shall state the results without reserve.

What are the materials of human history? What are the earliest
records which throw light upon the origin of man? All written
documents are things of yesterday, whether penned on prepared
skins, papyrus rolls, or the soft inner bark of trees; whether
stamped on terra-cotta tablets, carved on granite obelisks, or
engraved on the smooth surface of upright rocks. Writing, even
in its simplest picture form, is an art which can be invented
only when a people have become mature.

The oldest books are therefore comparatively modern, and the
traditions which they contain are either false or but little
older than the books themselves. All travellers who have
collected traditions among a wild people know how little that
kind of evidence is worth. The savage exaggerates whenever he
repeats, and in a few generations the legend is transformed.

The evidence of language is of more value. It enables us to
trace back remotely divided nations to their common birth-
place, and reveals the amount of culture, the domestic
institutions, and the religious ideas which they possessed
before they parted from one another. Yet languages soon die, or
rather become metamorphosed in structure as well as in
vocabulary; the oldest existing language can throw no light on
the condition of primeval man.

The archives of the earth also offer us their testimony: the
graves give up their dead, and teach us that man existed many
thousand years ago, in company with monstrous animals that have
long since passed away; and that those men were savages, using
weapons and implements of stone, yet possessing even then a
taste for ornament and art, wearing shell bracelets, and
drawing rude figures upon horns and stones. The manners and
ideas of such early tribes can best be inferred by a study of
existing savages. The missionary who resides among such races
as the Bushmen of Africa or the Botocudos of Brazil may be said
to live in pre-historic times.

But as regards the origin of man, we have only one document to
which we can refer; and that is the body of man himself. There,
in unmistakable characters, are inscribed the annals of his
early life. These hieroglyphics are not to be fully deciphered
without a special preparation for the task: the alphabet of
anatomy must first be mastered, and the student must be expert
in the language of all living and fossil forms. One fact,
however, can be submitted to the uninitiated eye, and it will
be sufficient for the purpose. Look at a skeleton and you will
see a little bone curled downwards between the legs, as if
trying to hide itself away. That bone is a relic of pre-human
days, and announces plainly whence our bodies come. We are all
of us naked under our clothes, and we are of all us tailed
under our skins. But when we descend to the man-like apes, we
find that, with them as with us, the tail is effete and in
disuse; and so we follow it downwards and downwards until we
discover it in all its glory in the body of the fish; being
there present, not as a relic or rudimentary organ, as in man
and the apes; not a mere appendage, as in the fox; not a
secondary instrument, a spare hand, as in certain monkeys, or a
fly-flapper, as in the giraffe; but as a primary organ of the
very first importance, endowing the fish with its locomotive
powers. Again, we examine the body of the fish, and we find in
it also rudimentary organs as useless and incongruous as the
tail in man; and thus we descend step by step, until we arrive
at the very bottom of the scale.

The method of development is still being actively discussed,
but the fact is placed beyond a doubt. Since The Origin of
Species appeared, philosophical naturalists no longer deny
that the ancestors of man must he sought for in the lower
kingdom. And, apart from the evidence which we carry with us in
our own persons, which we read in the tail-bone of the
skeleton, in the hair which was once the clothing of our
bodies, in the nails which were once our weapons of defence,
and in a hundred other facts which the scalpel and the
microscope disclose; apart from the evidence of our own voices,
our incoherent groans and cries, analogy alone would lead us
to, believe that mankind had been developed from the lowest
forms of life. For what is the history of the individual man?
He begins life as an ambiguous speck of matter which can in no
way be distinguished from the original form of the lowest
animal or plant. He next becomes a cell; his life is precisely
that of the animalcule. Cells cluster round this primordial
cell, and the man is so far advanced that he might be mistaken
for an undeveloped oyster; he grows still more, and it is clear
that he might even be a fish; he then passes into a stage which
is common to all quadrupeds, and next assumes a form which can
only belong to quadrupeds of the higher type. At last the hour
of birth approaches; coiled within, the dark womb he sits, the
image of an ape; a caricature and, a prophecy of the man that
is to be. He is born, and for some time he walks only on all-
fours; he utters only inarticulate sounds; and even in his
boyhood his fondness for climbing trees would seem to be a
relic of the old arboreal life. Since, therefore, every man has
been himself in such a state that the most experienced observer
could not with the aid of the best microscopes have declared
whether he was going to be man or plant, man or animalcule, man
or mollusc, man or lobster, man or fish, man or reptile, man or
bird, man or quadruped, man or monkey; why should it appear
strange that the whole race has also had its animalcule and its
reptile days? But whether it appears strange or not, the public
must endeavour to accustom its mind to the fact which is now
firmly, established, and will never be overthrown.

Not only are the bodies, but also the minds of man constructed
on the same pattern as those of the lower animals. To procure
food; to obtain a mate; and to rear offspring; such is the real
business of life with us as it is with them. If we look into
ourselves we discover propensities which declare that our
intellects have arisen from a lower form; could our minds be
made visible we should find them tailed. And if we examine the
minds of the lower animals, we find in them the rudiments of
our talents and our virtues. As the beautiful yet imperfect
human body has been slowly developed from the base and hideous
creatures of the water and the earth, so the beautiful yet
imperfect human mind has been slowly developed from the
instincts of the lower animals. All that is elevated, all that
is lovely in human nature has its origin in the lower kingdom.
The philosophic spirit of inquiry may be traced to brute
curiosity, and that to the habit of examining all things in
search of food. Artistic genius is an expansion of monkey
imitativeness. Loyalty and piety, the reverential virtues, are
developed from filial love. Benevolence and magnanimity, the
generous virtues, from parental love. The sense of decorum
proceeds from the sense of cleanliness; and that from the
instinct of sexual display. The delicate and ardent love which
can become a religion of the heart, which can sanctify and
soften a man's whole life; the affection which is so noble, and
so pure, and so free from all sensual stain, is yet derived
from that desire which impels the male animal to seek a mate;
and the sexual timidity which makes the female flee from the
male is finally transformed into that maiden modesty which not
only preserves from vice, but which conceals beneath a chaste
and honourable reticence the fiery love that burns within;
which compels the true woman to pine in sorrow, and perhaps to
languish into death, rather than betray a passion that is not
returned.

There is a certain class of people who prefer to say that their
fathers came down in the world through their own follies rather than
to boast that they rose in the world through their own industry
and talents. It is the same shabby-genteel sentiment, the same
vanity of birth which makes men prefer to believe that they are
degenerated angels, rather than elevated apes. In scientific
investigations such whims and fancies must be set aside. It is
the duty of the inquirer to ascertain the truth, and then to
state it as decisively and as clearly as he can. People's
prejudices must not be respected but destroyed. It may,
however, be worth while to observe, for the comfort of weak
souls, that in these new revelations of science human nature is
not in any way degraded. A woman's body is not less lovely
because it was once a hideous mass of flesh. A woman's modesty
is not less noble because we discover that it was once a mere
propensity, dictated, perhaps, by the fear of pain. The beauty
of the mind is not less real than the beauty of the body, and
we need not be discouraged because we ascertain that it has
also passed through its embryonic stage. It is Nature's method
to take something which is in itself paltry, repulsive, and
grotesque, and thence to construct a masterpiece by means of
general and gradual laws; those laws themselves being often
vile and cruel. This method is applied not only to single
individuals, but also to the whole animated world; not only to
physical but also to mental forms. And when it is fully
realised and understood that the genius of man has been
developed along a line of unbroken descent from the simple
tendencies which inhabited the primeval cell, and that in its
later stages this development has been assisted by the efforts
of man himself, what a glorious futurity will open to the human
race! It may well be that our minds have not done growing, and
that we may rise as high above our present state as that state is
removed from the condition of the insect and the worm. For when
we examine the human mind we do not find it perfect and mature;
but in a transitional and amphibious condition. We live between
two worlds; we soar in the atmosphere; we creep upon the soil;
we have the aspirations of creators and the propensities of
quadrupeds. There can be but one explanation of this fact. We
are passing from the animal into a higher form; and the drama
of this planet is in its second act. We shall now endeavour to
place the first upon the stage, and, then passing through the
second, shall proceed to speculate upon the third. The scene
opens with the Solar System. Time uncertain; say, a thousand
million years ago.

































CHAPTER IV

INTELLECT


THAT region of the universe which is visible to mortal eyes has
been named the solar system: it is composed of innumerable
stars, and each star is a white hot sun, the centre and
sovereign of a world. Our own sun is attended by a company of
cold, dark globes, revolving round it in accordance with the
law of gravitation; they also rotate like joints before the
fire, turning first one side, and then the other, to the
central light. The path that is traced by the outermost planet
is the limit of the sun's domain, which is too extensive to be
measured into miles. If a jockey mounted on a winner of the
Derby had started when Moses was born, and had galloped ever
since at full speed, he would be by this time about half the
way across, Yet this world seems large to us, only because we
are so small. It is merely a drop in the ocean of space. The
stars which we see on a fine night are also suns as important
as our own; and so vast is the distance which separates their
worlds from ours, that a flash of lightning would be years upon
the road. These various solar systems are not independent of
one another they are members of the same community. They are
sailing in order round a point to us unknown. Our own sun,
drawing with it the planets in its course, is spinning
furiously upon its axis, and dashing through space at four
miles a second. And not only is the solar system an organ of
one gigantic form; it has also grown to what it is, and may
still be considered in its youth. As the body of a plant or
animal arises from a fluid alike in all its parts, so this
world of ours was once a floating fiery cloud, a nebula or
mist, the molecules of which were kept asunder by excessive
heat. But the universe is pervaded by movement and by change;
there came a period when the heat declined, and when the atoms
obeying their innate desires rushed to one another, and,
concentrating, formed the sun, which at first almost filled the
solar world. But as it cooled, and as it contracted, and as it
rotated, and as it revolved, it became a sphere in the centre
of the world; and it cast off pieces which became planets,
satellites, attendant stars, and they also cast off pieces
which became satellites to them. Thus the earth is the child,
and the moon the grandchild of the sun. When our planet first
came out into the world it was merely a solar fragment, a chip
of the old star, and the other planets were in a similar
condition. But these sunballs were separated from one another,
and from their parent form, by oceans of ether, a kind of
attenuated air, so cold that frost itself is fire in
comparison. The sun burning always in this icy air is gradually
cooling down; but it parts slowly with its heat on account of
its enormous size. Our little earth cooled quickly, shrank in
size -- it had once extended to the moon -- and finally went
out. From a globe of glowing gas it became a ball of liquid
fire, enveloped in a smoky cloud. When first we are able to
restore its image and examine its construction, we find it
composed of zones or layers in a molten state, arranged
according to their weight; and above it we find an atmosphere
also divided into layers. Close over the surface vapour of salt
was suspended in the air; next, a layer of dark, smoky, carbonic
acid gas; next, oxygen and nitrogen, and vapour of water or
common steam. Within the sphere, as it cooled and changed,
chemical bodies sprang from one another, rushed to and fro,
combined with terrible explosions; while in the variegated
atmosphere above, gas-hurricanes arose and flung the elements
into disorder. So sped the earth, roaring and flaming through
the sky, leaving behind it a fiery track, sweeping round the
sun in its oval course. 

Year followed year, century followed century, epoch 
followed epoch. Then the globe began to cool
upon its surface. Flakes of solid matter floated on the molten
sea, which rose and fell in flaming tides towards a hidden and
benighted moon. The flakes caked together, and covered the ball
with a solid sheet, which was upraised and cracked by the tidal
waves beneath, like thin ice upon the Arctic seas. In time it
thickened and became firm, but subterranean storms often ripped
it open in vast chasms, from which masses of liquid lava
spouted in the air, and fell back upon the hissing crust.
Everywhere heaps of ashes were thus formed, and the earth was
seamed with scars and gaping wounds. When the burning heat of
the air had abated, the salt was condensed, and fell like snow
upon the earth, and covered it ten feet thick. The Atlantic and
Pacific Oceans, lying overhead in the form of steam, descended
in one great shower, and so the primeval sea was formed. It was
dark, warm, and intensely salt; at first it overspread the
surface of the globe; then volcanic islands were cast up; and
as the earth cooled downwards to its core, it shrivelled into
folds as an apple in the winter when its pulp dries up. These
folds and wrinkles were mountain ranges, and continents
appearing above the level of the sea. Our planet was then
divided into land and water in the same proportions as exist at
the present time. For though land is always changing into
water, and water is always changing into land, their relative
quantities remain the same. The air was black, night was
eternal, illumined only by lightning and volcanoes; the earth
was unconscious of the sun's existence; its heat was derived
from the fire within, and was uniform from pole to pole. But
the crust thickened; the inner heat could no longer be felt
upon the surface; the atmosphere brightened a little, and the
sun's rays penetrated to the earth. From the shape, the
altitude, and the revolutions of our planet, resulted an
unequal distribution of solar heat, and to this inequality the
earth is indebted for the varied nature of its aspects and
productions. Climate was created: winds arose in the air;
currents in the deep; the sun sucked up the waters of the sea,
leaving the salt behind; rain-clouds were formed, and fresh
water bestowed upon the land. The underground fires assisted
the planet's growth by transforming the soils into crystalline
structures, and by raising the rocks thus altered to the
surface; by producing volcanic eruptions, hot springs, and
other fiery phenomena. But the chief architect and decorator of
this planet was the sun. When the black veil of the earth was
lifted, when the sunlight entered the turbid waters of the
primeval sea, "an interesting event" took place. The earth
became with young.

In water there are always floating about a multitude of specks
which are usually minute fragments of the soil. But now
appeared certain specks which, though they resembled the
others, possessed certain properties of a very peculiar kind.
First, they brought forth little specks, precise copies of
themselves: they issued their own duplicates. And secondly,
they performed in their own persons an elaborate chemical
operation. Imbibing water and air, they manufactured those
elements with the assistance of the solar rays, into the
compounds of which their own bodies were composed, giving back
to the water those components which they did not require. And
then appeared other little specks which swallowed up the first,
and manufactured them into the compounds more complex still, of
which they, the second comers, were composed. The first were
embryonic plants; the second were embryonic animals. They were
both alike in appearance; both repeated themselves, or
reproduced, in the same manner. The difference between them was
this, that the plants could live on raw air and water, the
animals could live only on those elements when prepared by sun
light in the body of the plant. The office of vegetation upon
the earth is therefore of a culinary nature, and the plant,
when devoured, gives the animal that heat which is its life,
just as coal (a cake of fossil vegetation) gives heat to the
apartment in which it is consumed. But this heat, whether it
lies hidden in the green and growing plant, or in its black and
stony corpse, was at first acquired from the sun. Glorious
Apollo is the parent of us all. Animal heat is solar heat; a
blush is a stray sunbeam; Life is bottled sunshine, and Death
the silent-footed butler who draws out the cork.

Those dots of animated jelly, without definite form or figure,
swimming unconsciously in the primeval sea, were the ancestors
of man. The history of our race begins with them, and continues
without an interruption to the present day; a splendid
narrative, the materials of which it is for science to
discover, the glories of which it is for poets to portray.

Owing to the action of surrounding forces, the outer parts of
the original jelly-dot became harder and more solid than the
parts within, and so it assumed the shape of the cell or
sphere. Its food consisted of microscopic fragments of
vegetable matter imbibed through its surface or outer rind,
such portions as were not "made up" being expelled or excreted
in the same manner as they were taken in. There was no
difference of parts, except that the outside was solid and the
inside soft. The creature's body was its hand, its stomach, and
its mouth. When it had lived a certain time it burst and died,
liberating, as it did so, a brood of cells which had slowly
ripened within. But sometimes these new cells, instead of being
detached when they were born, remained cohering to the parent
cell, thus making the animal consist of several cells instead
of only one. In the first case the process is termed
reproduction; in the second case it is termed growth. But the
two operations are in reality the same. Growth is coherent
reproduction; reproduction is detached growth.

Time goes on. Our animal is now a cell-republic enclosed by a
wrapper of solidified and altered cells. Next, in this wrapper
a further change takes place. It protrudes into limbs; a gaping
month appears. The limbs or tentacles grasp the food and put it
within the mouth; other limbs sprout forth and carry their
owner from place to place. In the meantime the cells within are
also changed; their partitions are removed; the many-walled
apartments are converted into galleries or tubes, along which
the food is conveyed from one part of the body to another.
These tubes are filled with blood, pumped backwards and
forwards by the heart. The muscles which move the outer limbs
are equipped with nerves, the movements of which are directed
from centres in the spine and brain. The functions of life are
thus divided, and each department has an organ of its own. The
reproductive function is divided farther still. Two separate
elements are formed; one prepares and ejects the sperm-cell
which the other receives, and unites to the germ-cell. At a
later period in the history of life this arrangement is
supplanted by another, more complicated still. The two elements
no longer co-exist in the same form, and thus reproduction can
only be effected by means of co-operation between two distinct
and independent individuals. How important a fact is this will
presently appear.

These various inventions of Nature, so far as we have gone; the
limbs of locomotion and prehension; the heart with its vessels;
the brain with its nerves; and the separation of the sexes, all
occurred in the marine period of the earth's life: in the dark
deep sea womb.

Similar changes, but inferior in degree, occurred in the
vegetable world. The shapeless specks became one-celled: they
were next strung together like a chain of beads; they then grew
into sea-weed and aqueous plants, which floated about, and
finally obtained a footing on the land. But they dwelt long
ages on the earth before their sex appeared. There were no
flowers in that primeval world, for the flower is a sign of
love. Gigantic mosses and tree ferns clothed the earth, and
reproduced themselves by scattering cells around.

Animals followed their prey, the plants, from the water to the
land and became adapted for terrestrial life. At that period
the atmosphere was thickened with carbonic acid gas, and was
more pestilential than the Black Hole of Calcutta. Only
reptiles, with sluggish and imperfect respiratory organs, could
breathe in such an air. But that fatal gas was bread to the
vegetable world, which took the carbon into its body, and thus
the atmosphere was purified in time. The vast masses of carbon
which the plants took out of the air in order to allow a higher
class of animal to appear upon the stage, were buried in the
earth, hardened into coal, and were brought in by the Author in
the second act -- now on.

The coal-matter being thus removed, the air was bright and
pure; the sun glowed with radiance and force; the reptiles were
converted into birds and quadrupeds of many kinds; insects
rising from the land and from the water hummed and sparkled in
the air; the forests were adorned with flowers, and cheered
with song. And as the periods rolled on, the inhabitants of the
earth became more complex in their structure, more symmetrical
in form, and more advanced in mental power, till at last the
future lord of the planet himself appeared upon the stage. The
first act of the drama is here concluded: but the division is
merely artificial; in Nature there is no entr'acte; no curtain
falls. Her scenes resemble dissolving views; the lower animals
pass into man by soft, slow, insensible gradations.

We must now consider the question, How and why have these
marvellous changes taken place? How and why did the primeval
jelly-dots assume the form of the cell or sphere?

It has been already shown that continual changes occurred in
the primeval atmosphere and in the primeval sea. These changes
acting upon animal life produced changes in its composition.
For as animals are the result and expression of the conditions
under which they are born, it is natural to suppose that when
these conditions are changed, the animals should also change.
When the conditions of life are abruptly altered and
instantaneously transformed, the animals are of course
destroyed; but when, as is usually the case, the changes are
gradual, the animals are slowly modified into harmony with the
neighbouring conditions. The primeval speck of life being acted
upon by a variety of forces, became varied in its structure and
as these forces varied from period to period, the organisms
also varied. Complexity of parts results from complexity of
environment. Multiformity of circumstance produces multiformity
of species. The development of animal life from the homogeneous
to the heterogeneous, from the simple to the complex, from
uniformity to multiformity, is caused by the development of the
earth itself from a monotonous water-covered globe with one
aspect, one constitution, and one temperature to this varied
earth on which we dwell, where each foot of land differs in
some respect from the one beside it. The modifications on
modifications of the animal are due to the modifications on
modifications of the medium in which and on which it lived. And
this operation of Nature is hastened and facilitated by a law
which in itself is murderous and cruel. The earth is over-
populated upon principle. Of the animals that are born, a few
only can survive. There is not enough food for all; Nature
scrambles what there is among the crowd. If any animal
possesses an advantage, however slight, over those with whom he
competes in this food-scramble or struggle for existence, he
will certainly survive; and if he survives, then some one else,
so gentle Nature orders it, must die. This law of competition
becomes itself a force by developing slight variations along
lines of utility into widely different and specific forms.

But how is it that animals of the higher type prevail? Why
should species, with a tendency towards a complicated
structure, generally triumph over simple forms? The reason
appears to be this, that whenever a change takes place, it is
almost invariably a change towards complexity. Now it is an
ascertained law that animals are invigorated by a slight
change; they are therefore improved by an approach towards
complexity. Let us take the most mysterious of all progressive
operations -- the division of the sexes. The hermaphrodite can
fertilise itself, but its organs are so arranged that it can be
fertilised by another individual, the wind or the water acting
as the go-between. The  offspring of such separate unions are
always more vigorous than the home-born progeny of the
hermaphrodite. The latter are therefore killed off by means of
the struggle for existence, and sexual union, at first the
exception, becomes the rule. Just as a body of artisans can do
more work and better work when each man devotes his whole life
to a single department of the craft, so it is good for the
animal that division of labour should be established in its
structure; that instead of the creature being its own mouth,
its own stomach, its own organ of excretion, reproduction, and
locomotion, it should be divided into separate parts, one of
which moves it, another part takes the food, another part
chews, another part digests, another part prepares the blood,
another part pumps the blood to and fro, another part
reproduces the species, another part nourishes the young, while
over all presides the brain.

But how is it that some animals have progressed while others
have remained at the bottom of the scale, and others again have
advanced only to a certain point? If all have grown out of such
specks of animated jelly as are still to be found within the
sea, how is it that some have remained throughout infinite
periods of time unchanged; that others have remained in the
form of the sponge, rooted upon rocks; that others, like the
lobster, have never exchanged their jointed bodies for the more
perfect skeleton of the fish; that some fish have taken to the
land, and have been converted into reptiles, and then into
birds or quadrupeds, while others have remained in the aqueous
condition; and lastly, that one animal, namely Man, has
contrived to distance all the others when, as it is
acknowledged, they all started fair?

In reply, let me ask those who admit the development of all
civilised people from the savage state -- and that no geologist
will now deny; --let me ask them how it is that Europeans have
advanced (this involving a change in the structure of the
brain), while others have remained in the savage state, others
in the pastoral condition, others fixed at a certain point of
culture, as the Hindus and the Chinese? The analogy is
perfect, and the answer is in either case the same. Those forms
remain stationary which are able to preserve their conditions
of life unchanged. The savages of the primeval forest, when the
game is exhausted in one region, migrate to another region
where game exists. They remain therefore in the hunting state.
The shepherds of the boundless plains, when one pasture is
devoured by their flocks, migrate to another pasture where they
find grass and water in abundance. But when, in a land like
Egypt, the inhabitants are confined to a certain tract of land
they are unable to evade the famine of food produced by the
vicissitudes of nature and the law of population; they are
compelled to invent in order to subsist; new modes of life, new
powers, new desires, new sentiments arise; and the human animal
is changed. Then a second period of immobility arrives; by
means of despotism, caste, slavery, and infanticide, the status
quo is preserved.

In the primeval sea the conditions of life were constantly
changing, but its inmates could usually keep them constant by
migration. For instance, let us imagine a species accustomed to
dwell at the bottom of the sea, feeding on the vegetable matter
and oxygen gas which come down by liquid diffusion from the
waters of the surface. By elevation of the sea-bed, or by the
deposit of sediment from rivers, that part of the sea which
this species inhabits becomes gradually shallow and light. The
animal would migrate into deep dark water, and would therefore
undergo no change. But let us suppose that it is prevented from
migrating by a wall of rocks. It would then be exposed to
light, and to other novel forces, and it would either change or
die.

Here progress is the result of absolute necessity, and such
must always be the case. Animals which inhabit the waters have
no innate desire to make acquaintance with the land; but it
sometimes happens that they live in shallow places, where
they are left uncovered at low water for a certain time, and so
in the course of geological periods the species becomes
amphibious in habit; and then the hard struggle for life in the
water, with the abundance of food upon the land, leads them to
adopt terrestrial life. There are creatures now existing of
whom it is not easy to say whether they belong to the water or
the land: there are fishes which walk about on shore, and climb
trees: It is not difficult to imagine such animals as these
deserting the water, and entirely living upon land.

But the development of life, in its varied aspects, must always
remain incomprehensible to those who have not studied the noble
science of geology, or who at least have not made themselves
acquainted with its chief results. Unless the student
understands what extraordinary transformation scenes have taken
place upon the globe, all that is now land, having formerly
been sea, and all that is now sea having formerly been land,
not only once, but again, and again, and again; unless he
understands that these changes have been produced by the same
gradual, and apparently insignificant, causes as those which
are now at work before our eyes; the sea gnawing away the cliff
upon the shore; the river carrying soil to the sea; the glacier
gliding down the mountain slope; the iceberg bearing huge
boulders to mid ocean; the coralline insects building
archipelagoes; the internal fires suddenly spouting forth
stones and ashes, or slowly upheaving continents; unless he
fully understands how deliberate is Nature's method, how
prodigal she is of time, how irregular and capricious she is in
all her operations -- he will never cease to wonder that allied
forms should be distributed in apparent disorder and confusion,
instead of being arranged on a regular ascending scale. And,
moreover, unless he understands how Nature, like the Sibyl,
destroys her own books, he will never cease to wonder at 
missing links. 

For it is not one missing link, but millions, that we require. 
It would however be just as reasonable to expect to find every 
book that ever was written; every clay-tablet that ever was 
baked in the printing ovens of Chaldaea; every rock that 
was ever inscribed; every obelisk that was ever engraved, 
every temple wall that was ever painted with 
hieroglyphics, as to expect to find every fossil of
importance. Where are the missing links in literature, and
where are the primeval forms? Where are the ancient Sanskrit
hymns that were written without ink on palm leaves with an iron
pen? Where are the thousands of Hebrew bibles that were written
before the tenth century A.D.? Where are the lost books of the
Romans and the Greeks? We know that many manuscripts have been
consumed in great fires; the fire of Alexandria in the time of
Julius Caesar, which no doubt destroyed papyri that could never
be replaced; the fire in the time of Omar; the fires lighted
by Popes and reverend Fathers of the Church; and the fire of
Constantinople during the Crusades, which robbed us for ever of
Arian's history of the successors of Alexander; Ctesias'
history of Persia, and his description of India; several books
of Diodorus, Agatharcides, and Polybius; twenty orations of
Demosthenes, and the Odes of Sappho. But the material of books,
whether paper or parchment, bark, clay, or stone, is always of
a perishable nature, and, under ordinary circumstances, is
destroyed sooner or later by the action of the atmosphere. Were
it not that books can be copied, what would remain to us of the
literature of the past? 

In a rainless country such as Egypt, which is a museum 
of Nature, a monumental land, not only painted 
and engraven records, but even paper scrolls of an
immense antiquity, have been preserved. But if we add to these
the rock inscriptions, the printed bricks, and inscribed
cylinders of Western Asia, how scanty and fortuitous are the
remains! Let us now remember that fossils cannot be copied;
once destroyed, they are for ever lost. Is it wonderful,
therefore, that so few should be left? Fires greater than those
of Alexandria and Constantinople are ever burning beneath our
feet; at this very moment a precious library may be in flames.
Yet that is not the worst. The action of air and water is fatal
to the archives of Nature, which it is not part of Nature's
plan to preserve for our instruction. Those animals which have
neither bones nor shells are at once destroyed; and those which
possess a solid framework are only preserved under special and
exceptional conditions. The marvel is not that we find so
little, but that we find so much. The development of man from
the lower animals is now an authenticated fact. We believe,
therefore, that connecting links between man and some ape-like
animal existed for the same reason that we believe the Second
Decade of Livy existed. It is not impossible that the missing
books of Livy may be, discovered at some future day beneath the
Italian soil. It is not impossible that forms intermediate
between man and his ape-like ancestors may be discovered in the
unexplored strata of equatorial Africa, or the Indian
Archipelago. But either event is improbable in the extreme; and
the existence of such intermediate forms will be admitted by
the historians of the next generation, whether they are found
or not.

We shall now proceed to describe the rise and progress of the
mental principle. The origin of mind is an inscrutable mystery,
but so is the origin of matter. If we go back to the beginning
we find a world of gas, the atoms of which were kept asunder by
excessive heat. Where did those atoms come from? How were they
made? What were they made for? In reply to these questions
theology is garrulous, but science is dumb.

Mind is a property of matter. Matter is inhabited by mind.
There can be no mind without matter; there can be no matter
without mind. When the matter is simple in its composition, its
mental tendencies are also simple; the atoms merely tend to
approach one another and to cohere; and as matter under the
influence of varied forces (evolved by the cooling o the world)
becomes more varied in its composition, its mental tendencies
become more and more numerous, more and more complex, more and
more elevated, till at last they are developed into the desires
and propensities of the animal, into the aspirations and
emotions of the man. But the various tendencies which inhabit
the human mind, and which devote it to ambition, to religion,
or to love, are not in reality more wonderful than the tendency
which impels two ships to approach each other in a calm. For
what can be more wonderful than that which can never be
explained? The difference between the mind of the ship and the
mind of man is the difference between the acorn and the oak.

The simplest atoms are attracted to one another merely
according to distance and weight. That is the law of
gravitation. But the compound atoms, which are called elements,
display a power of selection. A will unite itself to C in
preference to B; and if D passes by, will divorce itself from
C, and unite itself to D. Such compounds of a compound are
still more complex in their forms, and more varied in their
minds. Water, which is composed of two gases -- oxygen and
hydrogen -- when hot, becomes a vapour; when cold, becomes a
crystal. In the latter case it displays a structural capacity.
Crystals assume particular forms according to the substances of
which they are composed; they may be classed into species, and
if their forms are injured by accident, they have the power of
repairing their structure by imbibing matter from without. A
live form is the result of matter subjected to certain complex
forces, the chief of which is the chemical power of the sun. It
is continually being injured by the wear and tear of its own
activity; it is continually darning and stitching its own life.
After a certain period of time it loses its self-mending power,
and consequently dies. The crystal grows from without by simple
accretions or putting on of coats. The plant or animal grows
and re-grows from within by means of a chemical operation.
Moreover, the crystal is merely an individual; the plant or
animal is the member of a vast community; before it dies, and
usually as it dies, it produces a repetition of itself. The
mental forces which inhabit the primeval jelly-dot are more
complex than those which inhabit the crystal; but those of the
crystal are more complex than those of a gas, and those of a
gas than those of the true elementary atoms which know only two
forces -- attraction and repulsion -- the primeval “Pull and
Push”, which lie at the basis of all Nature's operations.

The absorption of food and the repetition of form in the animal
are not at first to he distinguished from that chemical process
which is termed growth. Then from this principle of growth, the
root of the human flower, two separated instincts like twin
seed-leaves arise. The first is the propensity to preserve
self-life by seeking food; from this instinct of self-
preservation our intellectual faculties have been derived. The
second is the propensity to preserve the life of the species;
and from this instinct of reproduction our moral faculties have
been derived.

The animal at first absorbs its food and unites with its mate
as blindly and as helplessly as the crystal shapes itself into
its proper form, as oxygen combines with hydrogen, or as ships
roll towards each other in a calm. How then can a line be drawn
between the inorganic and the organic, the lifeless and the
alive? The cell that vibrates in the water, and the crystal
that forms in the frost, are each the result of certain forces
over which they have no control. But as the body of the animal
is developed in complexity, by the action of complex forces,
certain grey lumps of matter make their appearance within its
structure, and out of these rises a spirit which introduces the
animal to himself, which makes him conscious of his own
existence. He becomes aware that he is alive; that he has an
appetite; and that other animals have an appetite for him. His
mind, though feeble and contracted, is improved by experience.
He devises stratagems to avoid his enemies, or to seize his
prey. At certain seasons he becomes conscious of his desire for
a mate and that which, with his ancestors, was a blind
tendency, an inherited part of growth, becomes with him a
passion brightened by intelligence.

It is usually supposed that the transition of an ape-like
animal into man is the most remarkable event in the history of
animated forms. But this idea arises from human vanity and
ignorance. The most remarkable event, after the origin of
life, is certainly that to which we now allude; the first
glimmering of consciousness and reason. Yet even here we can
draw no dividing line. The animal becomes conscious that he
desires food, and at certain periods, a mate; but the desires
themselves are not new; they existed and they ruled him long
before. When developed to a certain point, he begins to "take
notice," as the nurses say; but his nature remains the same,
However, this intelligence becomes in time itself a force, and
gradually obtains to some extent the faculty of directing the
forces by which the animal was once despotically ruled. By an
effort of the human brain, for example, the reproductive force,
or tendency, or instinct, can be obliterated and suppressed.

What we have to say, then, respecting the origin of our early
ancestors is this: That when matter was subjected to a
complicated play of forces, chief among which was solar
influence, plants and animals came into life; and that when
animals were subjected to an ever-increasing variety of forces,
they became varied in their structure; and that when their
structure had attained a certain measure of variety they became
conscious of their own existence; and that then Nature endowed
them with the faculty of preserving their lives and that of
their species by means of their own conscious efforts. Next, it
will be shown that the successful competitors in the struggle
for existence not only obtained the food and females for which
they strove, but also, by means of the efforts which they made
in order to obtain them, raised themselves unconsciously in the
animated scale. And lastly, we shall find that men who, in the
savage state, are little better than the brutes, their lives
being absorbed in the business of self-preservation and
reproduction, are now in the civilised condition becoming
conscious of the scheme of Nature, and are beginning to assist
her by the methodical improvement of their mental powers.

The lower animals have a hard matter to earn their daily bread,
and to preserve their children from starvation; and with them
the course of true love does not by any means run smooth. Since
only a few can succeed in the scramble for food, and not all
can obtain mates, for polygamy frequently prevails, it follows
as a matter of necessity that those animals which are the
strongest, the swiftest, and the most intelligent will survive
and leave offspring, and by the continued survival of the
fittest the animated world improves from generation to
generation, and rises in the scale. So far as strength and
swiftness are concerned, limits are placed upon improvement.
But there are no limits to the improvement of intelligence. We
find in the lower kingdom muscular power in its perfection; but
the brain is always imperfect, always young, always growing,
always capable of being developed. In writing the history of
animal progress we must therefore concentrate our attention
upon the brain, and we shall find that the development of that
organ is in great measure due to the influence of the
affections.

Whether Nature has placed pain at the portals of love
throughout the animal kingdom as she has at the portals of
maternity, or whatever may be the cause, it is certain that the
female flees from the male at the courting season, and that he
captures her by means of his strength, swiftness, dexterity, or
cunning, in the same manner as he obtains his prey. He is also
obliged to fight duels in order to possess or to retain her,
and thus his courage is developed. But at a later period in
animal life a more peaceable kind of courtship comes into
vogue. The females become queens. They select their husbands
from a crowd of admirers, who strive to please them with their
colours, their perfumes, or their music. The cavaliers, adorned
in their bright wedding suits, which they wear only at the
love-making season, display themselves before the dames. Others
serenade them with vocal song, or by means of an apparatus
fitted to the limbs, which corresponds to instrumental music.
Rival troubadours will sing before their lady, as she sits in
her leafy bower till one of them is compelled to yield from
sheer exhaustion, and a feathered hero has been known to sing
till be dropped down dead. At this period sexual timidity
becomes a delicious coyness which arouses the ardour of the
male. Thus love is born: it is brought forth by the association
of ideas. The desire of an animal to satisfy a want grows into
an affection beyond and independent of the want. 

In the same manner the love of the young for its parents grows 
out of its liking for the food which the parents supply; and the love 
of parents for the young, though more obscure, may perhaps also 
be explained by association. The mother no doubt believes the
offspring to be part of herself, as it was in fact but a short
time before, and thus feels for it a kind of self-love. The
affection of the offspring for the parents, and of parents for
the offspring, and of spouses for each other, at first endures
only for a season. But when the intelligence of the animals has
risen to a certain point, their powers of memory are improved,
they recognise their parents, their spouses, their young, long
after the business of the nest is over, and consort together to
renew their caresses and endearments. In this manner the flock
is formed; it is based upon domestic love. And soon experience
teaches them the advantages of union. They are the better able
when in flocks to obtain food, and to defend themselves against
their foes. They accordingly dwell together, and by means of
their social habits their intelligence is quickened, their
affections are enlarged. The members of animal societies
possess in a marvellous degree the power of co-operation, the
sentiment of fidelity to the herd. By briefly describing what
the lower animals do, and what they feel, we shall show that
they possess in a dispersed and elementary condition all the
materials of which human nature is composed.

In their communities there is sometimes a regular form of
government and a division into castes. They have their monarch,
their labourers, and soldiers, who are sterile females like the
Amazons of Dahomey. They have slaves which they capture by
means of military expeditions, attacking the villages of their
victims and carrying off the prisoners in their mouths. They
afterwards make the slaves carry them. They have domestic
animals which they milk. They form alliances with animals of a
foreign species or nationality and admit them into the
community when it can be profited thereby. They build houses or
towns which are ingeniously constructed, and which, in
proportion to the size of the architects, are greater than the
Pyramids. They have club-houses or salons which they decorate
with flowers and bright shells. They march in regular order;
when they feed they post sentries which utter alert cries from
time to time, just as our sentries cry “All's well”. They combine
to execute punishment, expelling or killing an ill-conducted
member of the tribe. As among savages, the sick and the weakly
are usually killed: though some times they are kept alive by
alms; even the blind being fed by charitable persons. They
labour incessantly for the welfare of the community; they bear
one another's burdens; they fight with indomitable courage for
the fatherland, and endeavour to rescue a comrade even against
overwhelming odds. The domestic virtues are strong among them.
Their conjugal love is often intense and pure; spouses have
been known to pine to death when parted from each other. But if
they have human virtues, they have also human vices; conjugal
infidelity is known among them; and some animals appear to be
profligate by nature. They are exceedingly jealous. They sport,
and gamble, and frisk, and caress, and kiss each other, putting
mouth to mouth. They shed tears. They utter musical sounds in
tune. They are cleanly in their persons. They are ostentatious
and vain, proud of their personal appearance, bestowing much
time upon their toilet. They meditate and execute revenge,
keeping in memory those who have offended them. They dream.
They are capable of reflection and selection; they deliberate
between two opposite desires. They are inquisitive and often
fall victims to their passion for investigating every object
which they have not seen before. They profit by experience;
they die wiser than they were born, and though their stock of
knowledge in great measure dies with them, their young ones
acquire some of it by means of inheritance and imitation.

These remarkable mental powers were acquired by the lower
animals partly through the struggle to obtain food, which
sharpened their intelligence; and partly through the struggle
to obtain the favours of the females, which developed their
affections.  In all cases, progress resulted from necessity.
Races change only that they may not die; they are developed, so
to speak, in self-defence. They have no inherent tendency to
rise in the organic scale as plants grow to their flower, as
animals grow to their prime. They have, however, a capacity for
progress, and that is called forth by circumstances acting upon
them from without. The law of growth in the lower kingdom is
this, that all progress is preceded by calamity, that all
improvement is based upon defect. This law affords us the clue
to a phenomenon which at first is difficult to understand. That
animal which has triumphed over all the rest was exceedingly
defective in its physique. The race has not been to the swift,
nor the battle to the strong. But the very defects of that
animal's body made it exclusively rely upon its mind; and when
the struggle for life became severe, the mind was improved by
natural selection, and the animal was slowly developed into
man.

Our ape-like ancestors were not unlike the existing gorilla,
chimpanzee, and orang-utang. They lived in large herds and
were prolific; polygamy was in vogue, and at the courting
season love-duels were fought among the males. They chiefly
inhabited the ground, but ascended the trees in search of
fruit, and also built platforms of sticks and leaves, on which
the females were confined, and which were occasionally used as
sleeping-places, just as birds sometimes roost in old nests.
These animals went on all fours, rising to the upright posture
now and then, in order to see some object at a distance, but
supporting that posture with difficulty, holding on to a branch
with one hand. They were slow in their movements; their body
was almost naked, so scantily was it clothed with hair; the
males had but poorly developed tusks, or canine-teeth; the ears
were flattened from disuse, and had no longer the power of
being raised; the tail as in all great apes had disappeared
beneath the skin. This defenceless structure resulted from the
favourable conditions under which, during many ages, these
animals had lived. They inhabited a warm tropical land; they
had few enemies, and abundant food; their physical powers had
been enfeebled by disuse, But nothing is ever lost in nature.
What had become of the force which had once been expended on
agility and strength? It had passed into the brain.

The chimpanzee is not so large a creature or so strong as the
gorilla; but, as I was informed by the natives in that country
where the two species exist together, the chimpanzee is the
more intelligent of the two. In the same manner our ape-like
ancestors were inferior to the chimpanzee in strength and
activity, and its superior in mental powers.

All gregarious animals have a language, by means of which they
communicate with one another, Some times their language is that
of touch: cut off the antennae of the ant, and it is dumb. With
most animals the language is that of vocal sound, and its
varied intonations of anger, joy, or grief may be distinguished
even by the human ear. Animals have also their alarm-cries,
their love-calls, and sweet murmuring plaintive sounds, which
are uttered only by mothers as they fondle and nurse their
young. The language of our progenitors consisted of vocal
sounds, and also movements of the hands. The activity of mind
and social affection developed in these animals through the Law
of Compensation, made them fond of babbling and gesturing to
one another, and thus their language was already of a
complicated nature, when events occurred which developed it
still more. Owing to causes remotely dependent on geological
revolutions, dark days fell upon these creatures. Food became
scanty; enemies surrounded them. The continual presence of
danger, the habit of incessant combat, drew them more closely
together. Their defects of activity and strength made them rely
on one another for protection. Nothing now but their unexampled
power of combination could save their lives. This power of
combination was entirely dependent upon their language, which
was developed and improved until at length it passed into a new
stage. The first stage of language is that of intonation, in
which the ideas are arranged on a chromatic scale. We still use
this language in conversing with our dogs, who perfectly
understand the difference between the curses, not loud but
deep, which are vented on their heads, and the caressing
sounds, which are usually uttered in falsetto; while we
understand the growl, the whine, and the excited yelp of joy.

The new stage of language was that of imitation. Impelled
partly by necessity, partly by social love, combined with
mental activity, these animals began to notify events to one
another by imitative sounds, gestures, and grimaces. For
instance, when they wished to indicate the neighbourhood of a
wild beast, they gave a low growl; they pointed in a certain
direction; they shaped their features to resemble his; they
crawled stealthily along with their belly crouched to the
ground. To imitate water, they bubbled with their mouths; they
grubbed with their hands and pretended to eat, to show that
they had discovered roots. The pleasure and profit obtained
from thus communicating their ideas to one another led them to
invent conversation. Language passed into its third stage --
the conventional or artificial. Certain objects were pointed
out, and certain sounds were uttered, and it was agreed that
those sounds should always signify the objects named. At first
this conventional language consisted only of substantives; each
word signified an object, and was a sentence in itself.
Afterwards adjectives and verbs were introduced; and lastly
words, which had at first been used for physical objects, were
applied to the nomenclature of ideas.

Combination is a method of resistance; language is the
instrument of combination. Language, therefore, may be
considered the first weapon of our species, and was improved,
as all weapons would be, by that long, never-ceasing war, the
battle of existence. Our second weapon was the hand. With
monkeys the hand is used as a foot, and the foot is used as a
hand. But when the hand began to be used for throwing missiles,
it was specialised more and more, and feet were required to do
all the work of locomotion. This separation of the foot and
hand is the last instance of the physiological division of
labour; and when it was effected, the human frame became
complete. The erect posture was assumed; that it is modern and
unnatural is shown by the difficulty with which it is
maintained for any length of time. The centre of gravity being
thus shifted, certain alterations were produced in the physical
appearance of the species; since that time, however, the human
body has been but slightly changed, the distinctions which
exist between the races of men being unimportant and external.
Such as they are, they have been produced by differences of
climate and food acting indirectly upon the races throughout
geological periods; and it is also possible that these
distinctions of hair and skin were chiefly acquired at a time
when man's intelligence being imperfectly developed, his
physical organisation was more easily moulded by external
conditions than was afterwards the case. For while with the
lower animals the conditions by which they are surrounded can
produce alterations throughout their whole structure, or in any
part; with men, they can produce an alteration only in the
brain. For instance, a quadruped inhabits a region which, owing
to geological changes, is gradually assuming an Arctic
character. In the course of some hundreds or thousands of
centuries the species puts on a coat of warm fur, which is
either white in colour, or which turns white at the snowy
period of the year. But when man is exposed to similar
conditions he builds a warm house and kills certain animals,
that he may wear their skins. By these means he evades the
changed conditions so far as his general structure is
concerned. But his brain has been indirectly altered by the
climate. Courage, industry, and ingenuity have been called
forth by the struggle for existence; the brain is thereby
enlarged, and the face assumes a more intelligent expression.

Of such episodes the ancient history of man was composed. He
was ever contending with the forces of nature, with the wild
beasts of the forest, and with the members of his own species
outside his clan. In that long and varied struggle his
intelligence was developed. His first invention, as might be
supposed, was an improvement in the art of murder. The lower
animals sharpen their claws and whet their tusks. It was merely
an extension of this instinct which taught the primeval men to
give point and edge to their sticks and stones; and out of this
first invention the first great discovery was made. While men
were patiently rubbing sticks to point them into arrows, a
spark leapt forth and ignited the wood-dust which had been
scraped from the sticks. Thus fire was found. By a series of
accidents its uses were revealed. Its possessors cooked their
food, and so were improved in health and vigour both of body
and of mind. They altered the face of nature by burning down
forests. By burning the withered grass they favoured the growth
of the young crop, and thus attracted, in the prairie lands,
thousands of wild animals to their fresh green pastures. With
the assistance of fire they felled trees and hollowed logs into
canoes. They hardened the points of stakes in the embers; and
with their new weapons were able to attack the Mammoth,
thrusting their spears through his colossal throat. They made
pots. They employed their new servant in agriculture and in
metallurgy. They used it also as a weapon; they shot flaming
arrows, or hurled fiery javelins against the foe. Above all,
they prepared, by means of fire, the vegetable poison which
they discovered in the woods; and this invention must have
created a revolution in the art of ancient war. There is a
custom in East Africa for the king to send fire to his vassals,
who extinguish all the fires on their hearths, and re-light
them from the brand which the envoy brings. It is possible that
this may be a relic of tribe subjection to the original fire
tribe: it is certain that the discovery of fire would give the
tribes which possessed it an immense advantage over all the
others. War was continually being waged among the primeval men,
and tribes were continually driven, by battle or hunger, to
seek new lands. As hunters they required vast areas on which to
live, and so were speedily dispersed over the whole surface of
the globe, and adopted various habits and vocations according
to the localities in which they dwelt. But they took with them,
from their common home, the elements of those pursuits. The
first period of human history may be entitled forest-life. The
forest was the womb of our species, as the ocean was that of
all our kind. In the dusky twilight of the primeval woods the
nations were obscurely born. While men were yet in the hunting
stage, while they were yet mere animals of prey, they made
those discoveries by means of which they were afterwards formed
into three great families -- the pastoral, the maritime, and
the agricultural.

When a female animal is killed, the young one, fearing to be
alone, often follows the hunter home; it is tamed for sport,
and when it is discovered that animals can be made useful,
domestication is methodically pursued. While men were yet in
the forest they tamed only the dog to assist them in hunting,
and perhaps the fowl as an article of food. But when certain
tribes, driven by enemies or by starvation from their old
haunts, entered the prairie land, clad in skins or bark-cloth,
taking with them their fire-sticks, and perhaps some
blacksmith's tools, they adopted breeding as their chief
pursuit, and subdued to their service the buffalo, the sheep,
the goat, the camel, the horse, and the ass. At first these
animals were merely used as meat; next, their milk-giving
powers were developed, and so a daily food was obtained without
killing the animal itself; then they were broken in to carry
burdens, to assist their masters in the chase and in war; and
clothes and houses were manufactured from their skins.

The forest tribes who settled on the banks of rivers learnt to
swim and to make nets, fish-traps, rafts, and canoes. When they
migrated they followed the river, and so were carried to the
sea. Then the ocean became their fish-pond. They learnt to
build large canoes, with mast and matting sails; they followed
the fish far away; lost the land at night, or in a storm;
discovered new shores, returned home, and again set out as
colonists, with their wives and families, to the lands which
they had found.  By such means the various tribes were dispersed
beyond the seas.

Thirdly, when the tribes were in the forest condition they
lived partly upon roots and berries, partly upon game. The men
hunted, and the women collected the vegetable food, upon which
they subsisted exclusively during the absence of their
husbands. When the habitations of a clan were fixed, it often
happened that the supply of edible plants in the neighbourhood
would be exhausted, and starvation suggested the idea of sowing
and transplanting. Agriculture was probably a female invention;
it was certainly at first a female occupation. The bush was
burnt down to clear a place for the crop, and the women, being
too idle to remove the ashes from the soil, cast the seed upon
them. The ashes acting as manure, garden varieties of the
eating plants appeared. Among the pastoral people, the seed-
bearing grasses were also cultivated into large-grained corn.
But as long as the tribes could migrate from one region to
another, agriculture was merely a secondary occupation, and was
left, for the most part, in female hands. It was when a tribe
was imprisoned in a valley with mountains or deserts all around
that agriculture be came their main pursuit, as breeding was
that of the shepherd wanderers, and fishing that of the people
on the shore.

The pastoral tribes had a surplus supply of meat, milk, wool,
and the rude products of the ancient loom. The marine tribes
had salt and smoked fish. The agricultural tribes had garden-
roots and grain. Here, then, a division of labour had arisen
among the tribes; and if only they could be blended together, a
complete nation would be formed. But the butcher tribes, the
fishmonger tribes, and the baker tribes lived apart from one
another; they were timid, ferocious, and distrustful; their
languages were entirely distinct. They did not dare to
communicate with one another, except to carry on dumb barter,
as it is called. A certain tribe, for example, who desired salt
approached the frontier of the sea-coast people, lighted a fire
as a signal, and laid down some meat or flour. They then
retired; the coast tribe came up, laid down salt, and also
retired. The meat or flour tribe again went to the spot; and if
the salt was sufficient, they took it away; if not, they left
it untouched, to indicate that they required more; and so they
chaffered a considerable time, each bid consisting of a
promenade.

It is evident that such a system of trade might go on for ages
without the respective tribes becoming better acquainted with
each other. It is only by means of war and of religion that the
tribes can be compressed into the nation. The shepherd tribes
had a natural aptitude for war. They lived almost entirely on
horseback; they attacked wild beasts in hand-to-hand conflict
on the open plain, and they often fought with one another for a
pasture or a well. They were attracted by the crops of the
agricultural people, whom they conquered with facility. Usually
they preferred their roaming life, and merely exacted a tribute
of corn. But sometimes a people worsted in war, exiled from
their pastures, wandering homeless through the sandy deserts,
discovered a fruitful river plain, in which they settled down,
giving up their nomad habits, but keeping their flocks and
herds. They reduced the aborigines to slavery; made some of
them labourers in the fields; others were appointed to tend the
flocks; others were sent to the river or the coast to fish;
others were taught the arts of the distaff and the loom; others
were made to work as carpenters and smiths. The wives of the
shepherd conquerors were no longer obliged to milk the cows and
camels, and to weave clothes and tents; they became ladies, and
were attended by domestic slaves. Their husbands became either
military nobles or learned priests; the commander-in-chief or
patriarch became the king. Foreign wars led to foreign
commerce, and the priest developed the resources of the
country. The simple fabrics of the old tent life were refined
in texture and beautified with dyes; the potter's clay was
converted into fine porcelain and glass, the blacksmith's shop
became a manufactory of ornamented arms; ingenious machines
were devised for the irrigation of the soil the arts and
sciences were adopted by the government, and employed in the
service of the state.

Here then we have a nation manufactured by means of war.
Religion is afterwards useful as a means of keeping the
conquered people in subjection; but in this case it plays only
a secondary part. In another class of nationalities, however,
religion operates as the prime agent.

When the human herd first wandered through the gloomy and
gigantic forest, sleeping on reed platforms in the trees, or
burrowing in holes, there was no government but that of force.
The strongest man was the leader, and ceased to be the leader
when he ceased to he the strongest. But as the minds of men
became developed, the ruler was elected by the members of the
clan, who combined to depose him if he exceeded his rightful
powers; and chiefs were chosen not only for their strength, but
also sometimes for their beauty, and sometimes on account of
their intelligence. These chiefs possessed but little power;
they merely expressed and executed the voice of the majority.
But when it was believed that the soul was immortal, or, in
other words, that there were ghosts; when it was believed that
the bodies of men were merely garments, and that the true
inmates were spirits, whom death stripped bare of flesh and
blood, but whom death was powerless to kill; when it was
believed that these souls or ghosts dwelt among the graves,
haunted their old homes, hovered round the scenes in which they
had passed their lives, and even took a part in human affairs,
a theory arose that the ghost of the departed chief was still
the ruler of the clan, and that in his spiritual state he could
inflict terrible punishments on those by whom he was offended,
and could also bestow upon them good fortune in hunting, in
harvests, and in war. So then homage and gifts were rendered to
him at his grave. A child of his house became the master of the
clan, and professed to receive the commands of the deceased.
For the first time the chiefs were able to exercise power
without employing force; but this power had also its limits. 

In the first place the chief feared he would be punished by the
ghost if he injured the people over whom he ruled, and there
were always prophets or seers who could see visions and dream
dreams when the mind of the people was excited against the
chief. By means therefore of religion, which at first consisted
only in the fear of ghosts, the government of the clan was
improved; savage liberty or licence was restrained; the young
trembled before the old, whom previously they had eaten as soon
as they were useless. Religion was also of service in uniting
separated clans. In the forest, food was scanty; as soon as a
clan expanded it was forced to divide, and the separated part
pursued an orbit of its own. Savage dialects change almost day
by day; the old people can always speak a language which their
grandchildren do not understand, and so, in the course of a
single generation, the two clans become foreigners and foes to
one another. But when ghost-worship had been established, the
members of the divided clans resorted to the holy graves at
certain seasons of the year to unite with the members of the
parent clan in sacrificing to the ancestral shades; the season
of the pilgrimage was made a Truce of God; a fair was held, at
which trade and competitive amusements were carried on. Yet
still the clans or tribes had little connection with one
another, excepting at that single period of the year. It was
for war to continue the work which religion had begun. Some
times the tribes uniting invaded a foreign country, and founded
an empire of the kind which has already been described; then
the army became a nation, and the camp a town. In other cases
the tribes, being weaker than their neighbours, were compelled
for their mutual protection to draw together into towns, and to
fortify themselves with walls.

In its original condition the town was a federation. Each
family was a little kingdom in itself, inhabiting a fortified
cluster of dwellings, having its own domestic religion,
governed by its own laws. The paterfamilias was king and
priest; he could put to death any member of his family. There
was little distinction between the wives, the sons, and the
daughters, on the one hand, and the slaves, the oxen, and the
sheep on the other. These family fathers assembled in council,
and passed laws for their mutual convenience and protection.
Yet these laws were not national; they resembled treaties
between foreign states; and two houses would frequently go to
war and fight pitched battles in the streets without any
interference from the commonwealth at large. If the town
progressed in power and intelligence, the advantages of
centralisation were perceived by all; the fathers were induced
to emancipate their children, and to delegate their royal power
to a senate or a king; each man was responsible for his own
actions, and for them alone; individualism was established.
This important revolution, which, as we have elsewhere shown,
tends to produce the religious theory of rewards and
punishments in a future state, was itself in part produced by
the influence and teaching of the priests.

Besides the worship of the ancestral shades the ancient people
adored the great deities of nature who governed the woods and
the waters, the earth and the sky. When men died, it was
supposed that they had been killed by the gods; it was
therefore believed that those who lived to a good old age were
special favourites of the divine beings. Many people asked them
by what means they had obtained the good graces of the gods.
With savages nothing is done gratis; the old men were paid for
their advice; and in course of time the oracle system was
established. The old men consulted the gods they at first
advised, they next commanded what gifts should be offered on
the altar. They collected taxes, they issued orders on the
divine behalf. In the city of federated families the priests
formed a section entirely apart; they belonged not to this house,
or to that house, but to all; it was to their interest that the
families should be at peace; that a national religion should be
established; that the household gods or ancestral ghosts should
be degraded, that the despotism of the hearth should be
destroyed. They acted as peacemakers and arbitrators of
disputes. They united the tribes in the national sacrifice and
the solemn dance. They preached the power and grandeur of the
gods. They became the tutors of the people; they rendered
splendid service to mankind. We are accustomed to look only at
the dark side of those ancient faiths; their frivolous and
sanguinary laws, their abominable offerings, their grotesque
rites. Yet even the pure and lofty religions of Confucius and
Zoroaster; of Moses, and Jesus, and Mohammed; of the Brahmins
and the Buddhists, have not done so much for man as those
barbarous religions of the early days. They established a
tyranny, and tyranny was useful in the childhood of mankind.
The chiefs could only enact those laws which were indispensable
for the life of the community. But the priests were supposed to
utter the commands of invisible beings whose strange tempers
could clearly be read in the violent outbreaks and changing
aspects of the sky. The more irrational the laws of the priests
appeared, the more evident it was that they were not of man.
Terror generated piety; wild savages were tamed into obedience;
they became the slaves of the unseen; they humbled themselves
before the priests, and implicitly followed their commands that
they might escape sickness, calamity, and sudden death; their
minds were subjected to a useful discipline; they acquired the
habit of self-denial, which like all habits can become a
pleasure to the mind, and can be transmitted as a tendency or
instinct from generation to generation. They were ordered to
abstain from certain kinds of food; to abstain from fishing and
working in the fields on days sacred to the gods of the waters
and the earth; they were taught to give with generosity not
only in fear, but also in thanksgiving. Even the human
sacrifices which they made were sometimes acts of filial piety
and of tender love. They gave up the slaves whom they valued
most to attend their fathers in the Underworld; or sent their
souls as presents to the gods. 

But the chief benefit which religionconferred upon mankind, 
whether in ancient or in modern times, was undoubtedly the oath. 
The priests taught that if a promise was made in the name of the gods, 
and that promise was broken, the gods would kill those who took their 
name in vain. Such is the true meaning of the Third Commandment. 
Before that time treaties of peace and contracts of every kind in
which mutual confidence was required could only be effected by
the interchange of hostages. But now by means of this purely
theological device a verbal form became itself a sacred pledge:
men could at all times confide in one another; and foreign
tribes met freely together beneath the shelter of this useful
superstition which yet survives in our courts of law. In those
days, however, the oath required no law of perjury to sustain
its terrors: as Xenophon wrote, "He who breaks an oath defies
the gods"; and it was believed that the gods never failed
sooner or later to take their revenge.

The priests, in order to increase their power, studied the
properties of plants, the movements of the stars; they
cultivated music and the imitative arts; reserving their
knowledge to their own caste, they soon surpassed in mental
capacity the people whom they ruled.  And being more
intelligent, they became also more moral, for the conscience is
an organ of the mind; it is strengthened and refined by the
education of the intellect. They learnt from Nature that there
is unity in all her parts; hence they believed that one god or
man-like being had made the heavens and the earth. At first
this god was a despotic tithe-taker like themselves; but as
their own minds became more noble, and more pure; as they began
to feel towards the people a sentiment of paternity and love,
so God, the reflected image of their minds, rose into a
majestic and benignant being, and this idea reacted on their
minds, as the imagination of the artist is inspired by the
masterpiece which he himself has wrought. And, as the Venus of
Milo and the Apollo Belvedere have been endowed by man with a
beauty more exquisite than can be found on earth; a beauty that
may well be termed divine; so the God who is worshipped by
elevated minds is a mental form endowed with power, love, and
virtue in perfection. The Venus and the Apollo are ideals of
the body; God is an ideal of the mind. Both are made by men;
both are superhuman in their beauty; both are human in their
form. To worship the image made of stone is to worship the work
of the human hand. To worship the image made of ideas is to
worship the work of the human brain. God-worship, therefore, is
idolatry; but in the early ages of mankind how fruitful of good
was that error, how ennobling was that chimera of the brain!
For when the priests had sufficiently progressed in the wisdom
of morality to discover that men should act to others, as they
would have others act to them; and that they should never do in
thought what they would not do in deed; then these priests, the
shepherds of the people, desired to punish those who did evil,
and to reward those who did good to their fellow-men; and thus,
always transferring their ideas to the imaginary being whom
they had created, and whom they adored, they believed and they
taught that God punished the guilty, that God rewarded the
good; and when they perceived that men are not requited in this
world according to their deeds, they believed and they taught
that this brief life is merely a preparation for another world;
and that the souls or ghosts will be condemned to eternal
misery, or exalted to everlasting bliss, according to the lives
which they have led within the garment of the flesh. 

This belief, though not less erroneous than that on which the
terrors of the oath were based; this belief, though not less a
delusion than the faith in ghosts, of which, in fact, it is
merely an extension; this belief, though it will some day
become pernicious to intellectual and moral life, and has
already plundered mankind of thousands and thousands of
valuable minds, exiling earnest and ardent beings from the
main-stream of humanity, entombing them in hermitage or cell,
teaching them to despise the gifts of the intellect which
nature has bestowed, teaching them to waste the precious years
in barren contemplations and in selfish prayers; this belief
has yet undoubtedly assisted the progress of the human race. In
ancient life it exalted the imagination, it purified the heart,
it encouraged to virtue, it deterred from crime. At the present
day a tender sympathy for the unfortunate, a jealous care for
the principles of freedom, a severe public opinion, and a law
difficult to escape are the safeguards of society but there
have been periods in the history of man when the fear of hell
was the only restriction on the pleasure of the rulers; when
the hope of heaven was the only consolation in the misery of
the ruled.

The doctrine of rewards and punishments in a future state is
comparatively modern; the authors of the Iliad, the authors of
the Pentateuch, had no conception of a heaven or a hell; they
knew only Hades or Scheol, where men dwelt as shadows, without
pain, without joy; where the wicked ceased from troubling and
the weary were at rest. The sublime conception of a single God
was slowly and painfully attained by a few civilised people in
ancient times. The idea that God is a being of virtue and of
love has not been attained even in the present day except by a
cultivated few. Such is the frailty of the human heart that
men, even when they strive to imagine a perfect being, stain
him with their passions, and raise up an idol which is
defective as a moral form. The God of this country is called a
God of love; but it is said that he punishes the crimes and
even the errors of a short and troubled life with torture which
will have no end. It is not even a man which theologians
create; for no man is quite without pity; no man, however cruel
he might he, could bear to gaze for ever on the horrors of the
fire and the rack; no man could listen for ever to voices
shrieking with pain, and ever crying out for mercy and
forgiveness. And if such is the character of the Christian God,
if such is the idea which is worshipped by compassionate and
cultivated men, what are we to expect in a barbarous age? The
God of Job was a sultan of the skies, who, for a kind of wager,
allowed a faithful servant to be tortured, like that man who
performed vivisection on a favourite dog which licked his hand
throughout the operation. The Jehovah of the Pentateuch was a
murderer and bandit; he rejoiced in offerings of human flesh
The gods of Homer were lascivious and depraved. The gods of
savages are merely savage chiefs. 

God, therefore, is an image of the mind, and that image is ennobled 
and purified from generation to generation, as the mind becomes 
more noble and more pure. Europeans believe in eternal punishment, 
partly because it has been taught them in their childhood and because
they have never considered what it means; partly because their
imaginations are sluggish, and they are unable to realise its
cruelty; and partly also, it must be feared, because they have
still the spirit of revenge and persecution in their hearts.
The author of Job created God in the image of an Oriental king,
and in the East it is believed that all men by nature belong to
the king, and that he can do no wrong. The Bedouins of the
desert abhorred incontinence as a deadly sin; but brigandage
and murder were not by them considered crimes. In the Homeric
period, piracy was a profession, and vices were the customs of
the land. The character of a god is that of the people who have
made him. When, therefore, I expose the crimes of Jehovah, I
expose the defective morality of Israel; and when I criticise
the God of modern Europe, I criticise the defective intellects
of Europeans. The reader must endeavour to bear this in mind,
for, though he may think that his idea of the creator is
actually the Creator, that belief is not shared by me.

We shall now return to the forest and investigate the origin of
intellect; we shall first explain how the aptitude for science
and for art arose; and next how man first became gifted with
the moral sense.

The desire to obtain food induces the animal to examine
everything of novel appearance which comes within its range of
observation. The habit is inherited and becomes an instinct,
irrespective of utility. This instinct is curiosity, which in
many animals is so urgent a desire that they will encounter
danger rather than forego the examination of any object which
is new and strange. This propensity is inherited by man, and
again passes through a period of utility. When fire is first
discovered, experiments are made on all kinds of plants, with
the view of ascertaining what their qualities may be. The
remarkable knowledge of herbs which savages possess; their
skill in preparing decoctions which can act as medicines or as
poisons, which can attract or repel wild animals, is not the
result of instinct but of experience; and, as with the lower
animals, the habit of food-seeking is developed into curiosity,
so the habit of searching for edibles, medicine, and poison
becomes the experimental spirit, the passion of inquiry which
animates the lifetime of the scientific man, and which makes
him, even in his last hours, observe his own symptoms with
interest, and take notes on death as it draws near. It has been
said that genius is curiosity. That instinct is at least an
element of genius; it is the chief stimulant of labour; it
keeps the mind alive.

The artistic spirit is, in the same manner, developed from the
imitative instinct, the origin of which is more obscure than
that of the inquisitive propensity. However, its purpose is
clear enough; the young animal learns from its parent, by means
of imitation, to feed, to arrange its toilet with beak or
tongue, and to perform all the other offices of life. The hen,
for instance, when she discovers food, pecks the ground, not to
eat, but to show her chickens how to eat, and they follow her
example. The young birds do not sing entirely by instinct, they
receive lessons from their parents. The instinct of imitation,
so essential to the young, remains more or less with the adult,
and outlives its original intent. Animals imitate one another,
and with the monkeys this propensity becomes a mania. It is
inherited by men, with whom even yet it is half an instinct, as
is shown by the fact that all persons, and especially the
young, reflect, in spite of their own efforts, the accent and
the demeanour of those with whom they live. This instinct, when
adroitly managed, is a means of education; it is, in fact, the
first principle of progress. The Red Indians are not imitative,
and they have now nearly been destroyed; the negroes imitate
like monkeys, and what is the result? They are preachers,
traders, clerks, and artisans, all over the world, and there is
no reason to suppose that they will remain always in the
imitative stage. With respect to individuals it is the same.
Paradoxical as it may appear, it is only the imitative mind
which can attain originality, the artist must learn to copy
before he can create. Mozart began by imitating Bach; Beethoven
began by copying Mozart.  Molière mimicked the Greek dramatists
before he learnt to draw from the world. The many-sided
character of Goethe's mind, which has made him a marvel among
men, was based upon his imitative instincts; it has been said
that he was like a chameleon, taking the hue of the ground on
which he fed. What, in fact, is emulation but a noble form of
imitativeness? Michaelangelo saw a man modelling in clay in
the garden of Lorenzo, and was seized with the desire to become
a sculptor; and most men who have chosen their own vocation
could trace its origin in the same way to some imitative
impulse.

Among the primeval men this instinct, together with wonder and
the taste for beauty, explains the origin of art: The tendency
to reproduce with the hand whatever pleases and astonishes the
mind, undoubtedly begins at an early period in the history of
man; pictures were drawn in the period of the mammoth; I once
saw a boy from a wild bush tribe look at a ship with
astonishment and then draw it on the sand with a stick. It
frequently happens in savage life, that a man is seized with a
passion for representing objects, and such a Giotto is always
invited, and perhaps, paid, to decorate walls and doors. With
this wall-painting the fine arts began. Next the outlines were
engraved with a knife, making a figure in relief. Next came a
statue with the back adhering to the wall, and lastly the
sculptured figure was entirely detached. In the same manner
painting was also separated from the wall; and mural painting
was developed into another form of art. By means of a series of
pictures a story was told; the picture-writing was converted
into hieroglyphics, and thence into a system of alphabetical
signs. Thus the statue, the picture, and the book are all
descended from such figures as those which savages scrawl with
charcoal on their hut walls, and which seldom bear much
resemblance to the thing portrayed. The genius of art and the
genius of science are developed by means of priesthoods and
religion but when a certain point has been attained, they must
be divorced from religion, or they will cease to progress.

And now, finally, with respect to music. There is a science of
music; but music is not a science. Nor is it an imitative art.
It is a language.

Words at first were rather sung than spoken, and sentences were
rhythmical. The conversation of the primeval men was conducted
in verse and song; at a later period they invented prose; they
used a method of speech which was less pleasing to the ear, but
better suited for the communication of ideas. Poetry and music
ceased to be speech, and became an art, as pantomime, which
once was a part of speech, is now an art exhibited upon the
stage. Poetry and music at first were one; the bard was a
minstrel, the minstrel was a bard. The same man was composer,
poet, vocalist, and instrumentalist, and instrument-maker. He
wrote the music and the air; as he sang he accompanied himself
upon the harp, and he also made the harp. When writing came
into vogue the arts of the poet and the musician were divided,
and music again was divided into the vocal and the
instrumental, and finally instrument-making became a distinct
occupation, to which fact may partly he ascribed the
superiority of modern music to that of ancient times.

The human language of speech bears the same relation to the
human language of song as the varied bark of the civilised dog
to its sonorous howl. There seems little in common between the
lady who sings at the piano and the dog who chimes in with jaws
opened and nose upraised; yet each is making use of the
primitive language of its race the wild dog can only howl, the
wild woman can only sing.

Gestures with us are still used as ornaments of speech, and
some savage languages are yet in so imperfect a condition that
gestures are requisite to elucidate the words. Gestures are
relics of the primeval language, and so are musical sounds.
With the dog of the savage there is much howl in its bark: its
voice is in a transitional condition. The peasants of all
countries sing in their talk, and savages resemble the people
in the opera. Their conversation is of a "libretto" character;
it glitters with hyperbole and metaphor, and they frequently
speak in recitative, chanting or intoning, and ending every
sentence in a musically sounded O! Often also in the midst of
conversation, if a man happens to become excited, he will sing
instead of speaking what he has to say; the other also replies
in song, while the company around, as if touched by a musical
wave, murmur a chorus in perfect unison, clapping their hands,
undulating their bodies, and perhaps breaking forth into a
dance.

Just as the articulate or conventional speech has been
developed into rich and varied tongues, by means of which
abstract ideas and delicate emotions can be expressed in
appropriate terms, so the inarticulate or musical speech, the
true, the primitive language of our race, has been developed
with the aid of instruments into a rich and varied language of
sound in which poems can be composed. When we listen to the
sublime and mournful sonatas of Beethoven, when we listen to
the tender melodies of Bellini, we fall into a trance; the
brain burns and swells; its doors fly open; the mind sweeps
forth into an unknown world where all is dim, dusky,
unutterably vast; gigantic ideas pass before us; we attempt to
seize them, to make them our own, but they vanish like shadows
in our arms. And then, as the music becomes soft and low, the
mind returns and nestles to the heart; the senses are steeped
in languor; the eyes fill with tears; the memories of the past
take form; and a voluptuous sadness permeates the soul, sweet
as the sorrow of romantic youth when the real bitterness of
life was yet unknown.

What, then, is the secret of this power in music? And why
should certain sounds from wood and wire thus touch our very
heart strings to their tune? It is the voice of Nature which
the great composers combine into harmony and melody; let us
follow it downwards and downwards in her deep bosom, and there
we discover music, the speech of passion, of sentiment, of
emotion, and of love; there we discover the divine language in
its elements; the sigh, the gasp, the melancholy moan, the
plaintive note of supplication, the caressing murmur of
maternal love, the cry of challenge or of triumph, the song of
the lover as he serenades his mate.

The spirit of science arises from the habit of seeking food;
the spirit of art arises from the habit of imitation, by which
the young animal first learns to feed; the spirit of music
arises from primeval speech, by means of which males and
females are attracted to each other. But the true origin of
these instincts cannot be ascertained: it is impossible to
account for primary phenomena. There are some who appear to
suppose that this world is a stage-play, and that if we pry
into it too far, we shall discover ropes and pulleys behind the
scenes, and that so agreeable illusions will be spoiled. But
the great masters of modern science are precisely those whom
Nature inspires with most reverence and awe. For as their minds
are wafted by their wisdom into untravelled worlds, they find
new fields of knowledge expanding to the view; the firmament
ever expands, the abyss deepens, the horizon recedes. The
proximate Why may be discovered; the ultimate Why is
unrevealed. Let us take, for instance, a single law. A slight
change invigorates the animal; and so the offspring of the pair
survive the offspring of the single individual. Hence the
separation of the sexes, desire, affection, family love,
combination, gregariousness, clan-love, the Golden Rule,
nationality, patriotism, and the religion of humanity, with all
those complex sentiments and emotions which arise from the fact
that one animal is dependent on another for the completion of
its wants. But why should a slight change invigorate the
animal? And if that question could be answered; we should find
another why behind. 
Even when science shall be so far advanced that all the 
faculties and feelings of men will be traced with the 
precision of a mathematical demonstration to their latent
condition in the fiery cloud of the beginning, the luminous
haze, the nebula of the sublime Laplace: even then the origin
and purpose of creation, the How and the Why, will remain
unsolved. Give me the elementary atoms, the philosopher will
exclaim; give me the primeval gas and the law of gravitation,
and I will show you how man was evolved, body and soul, just as
easily as I can explain the egg being hatched into a chick.
But, then, where did the egg come from? Who made the atoms and
endowed them with the impulse of attraction? Why was it so
ordered that reason should be born of refrigeration, and that a
piece of white-hot star should cool into a habitable world, and
then be sunned into an intellectual salon, as the earth will
some day be? All that we are doing, and all that we can do, is
to investigate secondary laws; but from these investigations
will proceed discoveries by which human nature will be
elevated, purified, and finally transformed.

The ideas and sentiments, the faculties and the emotions,
should be divided into two classes; those which we have in
common with the lower animals, and which therefore we have
derived from them; and those which have been acquired in the
human state. Filial, parental, and conjugal affection, fellow-
feeling and devotion to the welfare of the community, are
virtues which exist in every gregarious association. These
qualities, therefore, were possessed by the progenitors of man
before the development of language, before the separation of
the foot and the hand. Reproduction was once a part of growth:
animals, therefore, desire to perpetuate their species from a
natural and innate tendency inherited from their hermaphrodite
and animalcule days. But owing to the separation of the sexes,
this instinct cannot be appeased except by means of co-
operation. In order that off spring may be produced, two
animals must enter into partnership; and in order that
offspring may be reared, this partnership must be continued for a
considerable time. All living creatures of the higher grade are
memorials of conjugal affection and parental care; they are
born with a tendency to love, for it is owing to love that they
exist. Those animals that are deficient in conjugal desire or
parental love produce or bring up no offspring, and are blotted
out of the book of Nature. That parents and children should
consort together is natural enough; and the family is
multiplied into the herd. At first the sympathy by which the
herd is united is founded only on the pleasures of the breeding
season and the duties of the nest. It is based entirely on
domestic life. But this sympathy is extended and intensified by
the struggle for existence; herd contends against herd,
community against community; that herd which best combines will
undoubtedly survive; and that herd in which sympathy is most
developed will most efficiently combine. Here, then, one herd
destroys another, not only by means of teeth and claws, but
also by means of sympathy and love. The affections, therefore,
are weapons, and are developed according to the Darwinian Law.
Love is as cruel as the shark's jaw, as terrible as the
serpent's fang. The moral sense is founded on sympathy, and
sympathy is founded on self -preservation. With all gregarious
animals, including men, self-preservation is dependent on the
preservation of the herd. And so, in order that each may
prosper, they must all combine with affection and fidelity, or
they will be exterminated by their rivals.

In the first period of the human herd, co-operation was merely
instinctive, as it is in a herd of dog-faced baboons. But when
the intelligence of man was sufficiently developed, they
realised the fact that the welfare of each individual depended
on the welfare of the clan, and that the welfare of the clan
depended on the welfare of each efficient individual. They then
endeavoured to support by laws the interests of the
association; and though, owing to their defective
understandings, they allowed, and even enjoined, many customs
injurious to their own welfare, yet, on the whole, they lived
well and wisely within the circle of their clan. It will now be
seen that the moral laws by which we are guided are all due to
the law of self-preservation. It was considered wicked and
wrong to assault, to rob, to deceive, or in any way to ill-
treat or offend an able-bodied member of the clan; for, if he
were killed or disabled, his services were lost to the clan,
and if he were made discontented he might desert to another
corporation. But these vices were wrong, merely because they
were injurious; even murder in the abstract was not regarded by
them as a sin. They killed their sickly children, and dined
upon their superannuated parents without remorse; for the
community was profited by their removal. This feeling of
fidelity to the clan, though, no doubt, often supported by
arguments addressed to the reason, was not with them a matter
of calculation. It was rooted in their hearts; it was a true
instinct inherited from animal and ancient days; it was with
them an idea of duty, obedience to which was prompted by an
impulse, neglect of which was punished by remorse. In all
fables there is some fact; and the legends of the noble savage
possess this element of truth, that savages within their own
communion do live according to the Golden Rule, and would, in
fact, be destroyed by their enemies if they did not. But they
are not in reality good men. They have no conscience outside
their clan. Their virtue after all is only a kind of honour
among thieves. They resemble those illustrious criminals who
were excellent husbands and fathers, and whose biographies
cannot be read without a shudder. Yet it is from these people
that our minds and our morals are descended. The history of
morals is the extension of the reciprocal or selfish virtues
from the clan to the tribe, from the tribe to the nation, from
the nation to all communities living under the same government,
civil or religious, then to people of the same colour, and
finally to all mankind.

In the primitive period, the males contended at the courting
season for the possession of the females; polygamy prevailed,
and thus the strongest and most courageous males were the
fathers of all the children that were born; the males of the
second class died "old maids." The weakly members of the herd
were also unable to obtain their share of food. But when the
period of brute force was succeeded by the period of law, it
was found that the men of sickly frames were often the most
intelligent, and that they could make themselves useful to the
clan by inventing weapons and traps, or at least by
manufacturing them.

In return for their sedentary labour, they were given food; and
as they were too weak to obtain wives by force, females also
were given them; the system of love-duels was abolished; the
women belonged to the community, and were divided fairly, like
the food. The existence of the clan depended on the number of
its fighting men, and therefore on the number of children that
were born. The birth of a male child was a matter of rejoicing:
the mother was honoured as a public benefactress. Then breeding
began to be studied as an art; young persons were methodically
paired. It was observed that children inherit the qualities and
inclinations of their parents, and so the brave and the
intelligent were selected to be sires.

If food was scarce and if children were difficult to rear, the
new-born infants were carefully examined, and those that did
not promise well were killed. Promiscuous intercourse on the
part of the females was found to result in sterility, and was
forbidden. Cohabitation during the suckling period, which
lasted at least three years, was supposed to injure the
mother's milk, on which the savage baby is entirely dependent;
and during that period the woman was set apart. Premature
unions among children were forbidden, and sometimes prevented
by infibulation, but savages seldom seem to be aware that for
the young to marry as soon as the age of puberty has been
attained is injurious to the womb and to the offspring. The
ancient Germans, however, had excellent laws upon this subject.

Finally the breeders made a discovery from which has resulted
one of the most universal of moral laws, and one which of all
laws has been the least frequently infringed. Clans made war on
foreign clans not only for game-preserves, and fish waters, and
root, and berry grounds, but also for the purpose of making
female prisoners. A bachelor was expected to catch a wild wife
for his own benefit, and for that of the community. He
accordingly prowled round the village of the enemy, and when an
eligible person came down to the brook to fill her pitcher, or
went into the bush to gather sticks, he burst forth from his
ambush, knocked her down with his club, and carried her off in
triumph to his own people. It was observed that the foreign
wives produced more children, and stronger children, than the
home-born wives, and, also that the nearer the blood-
relationship between husband and wife, the more weakly and the
less frequent were the offspring. On this account a law was
passed forbidding marriage between those who were closely
related to one another; sometimes even it was forbidden to
marry within the tribe at all; and all wives were obtained from
foreign tribes by means of capture or exchange. These laws
relating to marriage, enacted by the elders, and issued as
orders of the gods, were at first obeyed by the young merely
out of fear; but in the second generation they were ingrained
on the minds of children, and were taken under the protection
of the conscience.

When the clans or families first leagued together in order to
form a town, the conscience of each man was confined to his own
circle. He left it at home when he went out into the town. He
considered it laudable to cheat his fellow townsmen in a
bargain, or to tell them clever lies. If he committed a murder
or a theft, his conscience uttered no reproach. But each father
was responsible for the crimes of the members of his clan; he
might inflict what punishment he chose on the actual offender;
but he himself was the culprit in the eyes of the law, and was
condemned to pay the fine. If the municipal government was not
fully formed, the injured family took its own revenge; it did
not seek for the thief or murderer himself; the individual did
not exist; all the family to them were one. No man, therefore,
could break a law without exposing his revered father and all
the members of his family to expense, and even to danger of
their lives. No savage dares to be unpopular at home; the
weight of opprobrium is more than any man can bear. His
happiness depends on the approbation of those with whom he
lives; there is no world for him outside his clan. The town
laws were, therefore, respected by each man for the sake of his
family, and then by a well-known mental process they came to be
respected for themselves, and were brought under the moral law
which was written on the heart. Men ceased to be clansmen; they
became citizens. They next learnt to cherish and protect those
foreigners who came to trade and who thus conferred a benefit
upon the town; and at last the great discovery was made.
Offences against the Golden Rule are wrong in themselves, and
displeasing to the gods. It is wicked for a man to do that
which he would not wish a man to do to him; it is wrong for a
man to do that to a woman which he would not wish done to his
sister or his wife. Murder, theft, falsehood, and fraud, the
infliction of physical or mental pain, all these from time
immemorial had been regarded as crimes between clansmen and
clansmen; they were now regarded as crimes between man and man.
And here we come to a singular fact. The more men are sunk in
brutality the less frequently they sin against their
conscience; and as men become more virtuous, they also become
more sinful. With the primeval man the conscience is an
instinct; it is never disobeyed. With the savage the conscience
demands little; that little it demands under pain of death; it
is, therefore, seldom disobeyed. The savage seldom does that
which he feels to be wrong. But he does not feel it wrong to
commit incest, to eat “grandfather soup”, to kill a sickly child
like a kitten, to murder any one who lives outside his village.
In the next period, the matrimonial and religious laws which
have proceeded from the science of breeding and the fear of
ghosts place a frequent restraint upon his actions. He now
begins to break the moral law; he begins a career of sin;
yet he is, on the whole, a better man. 

We finally arrive at the civilised man; he has refined sentiments and a 
cultivated intellect; and now scarcely a day passes in which he 
does not offend against his conscience. His life is passed in self-
reproach. He censures himself for an hour that he has wasted;
for an unkind word that he has said; for an impure thought
which he has allowed to settle for a moment on his mind. Such
lighter sins do not indeed trouble ordinary men, and there are
few at present whose conscience reproaches them for sins
against the intellect. But the lives of all modern men are
tormented with desires which may not be satisfied; with
propensities which must be quelled. The virtues of man have
originated in necessity; but necessity developed the vices as
well. It was essential for the preservation of the clan that
its members should love one another, and live according to the
Golden Rule; men, therefore, are born with an instinct of
virtue. But it was also essential for the existence of the clan
that its members should be murderers and thieves, crafty and
ferocious; fraudulent and cruel. These qualities, therefore,
are transmitted by inheritance. But as the circle of the clan
widens, these qualities are rarely useful to their possessors,
and finally are stigmatised as criminal propensities. But
because their origin was natural and necessary, their guilt is
not lessened an iota. All men are born with these propensities;
all know that they are evil; all can suppress them if they
please. There are some, indeed, who appear to be criminals by
nature; who do not feel it wrong to prey upon mankind. These
are cases of reversion; they are savages or wild beasts; they
are the enemies of society, and deserve the prison, to which
sooner or later they are sure to come. But it is rare indeed
that these savage instincts resist a kind and judicious
education; they may all be stifled in the nursery. Life is full
of hope and consolation; we observe that crime is on the
decrease, and that men are becoming more humane. The virtues as
well as the vices are inherited; in every succeeding generation
the old ferocious impulses of our race will become fainter and
fainter, and at length they will finally die away.

There is one moral sentiment which cannot be ascribed to the
law of gregarious preservation, and which is therefore of too
much importance to be entirely passed over, though it cannot
here be treated in detail. The sense of decorum which is
outraged at the exposure of the legs in Europe is as artificial
as that which is shocked at the exhibition of the female face
in the East: if the young lady of London thinks that the
absence of underclothing in the Arab peasant girl "looks rather
odd," on the other hand no Arab lady could look at her portrait
in an evening dress without a feeling of discomfort and
surprise. Yet although the minor details of nudity are entirely
conventional; although complete nudity prevails in some parts
of Africa, where yet a petticoat grows on every tree, and where
the people are by no means indifferent to their personal
appearance, for they spend half their lives upon their
coiffure; although in most savage countries the unmarried girl
is never permitted to wear clothes; although decoration is
everywhere antecedent to dress, still the traveller does find
that a sentiment of decency, though not universal, is at least
very common among savage people.

Self-interest here affords an explanation, but not in the human
state; we must trace back the sentiment to its remote and
secret source in the animal kingdom. Propriety grows out of
cleanliness through the association of ideas. Cleanliness is a
virtue of the lower animals, and is equivalent to decoration;
it is nourished by vanity, which proceeds from the love of
sexual display, and that from the desire to obtain a mate; and
so here we do arrive at utility after all. It is a part of
animal cleanliness to deposit apart, and even to hide, whatever
is uncleanly; and men, going farther still, conceal whatever is
a cause of the uncleanly. The Tuaricks of the desert give this
as their reason for bandaging the mouth; it has, they say, the
disgusting office of chewing the food, and is therefore not
fit to be seen. The custom probably originated as a precaution
against the poisonous wind and the sandy air; yet the
explanation of the people themselves, though incorrect, is not
without its value in affording a clue to the operations of the
savage mind. But the sense of decorum must not be used by
writers on Mind to distinguish man from the lower animals, for
savages exist who are as innocent of shame and decorum as the
beasts and birds.

There is in women a peculiar timidity, which is due to nature
alone, and which has grown out of the mysterious terror
attendant on the functions of reproductive life. But the other
qualities, physical or mental, which we prize in women are the
result of matrimonial selection. At first the female was a
chattel common to all, or belonging exclusively to one, who was
by brute force the despot of the herd. When property was
divided and secured by law, the women became the slaves of
their husbands, hewing the wood, drawing the water, working in
the fields; while the men sewed and washed the clothes, looked
after the house, and idled at the toilet, oiling their hair,
and adorning it with flowers, arranging the chignon or the wig
of vegetable fibre, filing their teeth, boring their ears,
putting studs into their cheeks, staining their gums, tattooing
fanciful designs upon their skins, tying strings on their arms
to give them a rounded form, bathing their bodies in warm
water, rubbing them with lime-juice and oil, perfuming them
with the powdered bark of an aromatic tree. Decoration among
the females was not allowed. It was then considered unwomanly
to engage in any but what are now regarded as masculine 
occupations. Wives were selected only for their strength. 
They were hard, coarse, ill-favoured creatures, as inferior 
to the men in beauty as the females are to the males almost 
throughout the animal kingdom. But when prisoners of war 
were tamed and broken in, the women ceased to be drudges, 
and became the ornaments of life. Poor men select their 
domestic animals for utility: rich men select them for
appearance. In the same manner, when husbands became rich they
chose wives according to their looks. At first the hair of
women was no longer than that of men, probably not so long. But
long hair is universally admired. False hair is in use all over
the world, from the Eskimos of the Arctic circle to the
negroes of Gaboon. By the continued selection of long-haired
wives the flowing tresses of the sex have been produced. In the
same manner the elegance of the female form, its softness of
complexion, its gracefulness of curve are not less our creation
than the symmetry and speed of the racehorse, the magnificence
of garden flowers, and the flavour of orchard fruits. Even the
reserved demeanour of women, their refined sentiments, their
native modesty, their sublime unselfishness, and power of self-
control are partly due to us. 

The wife was at first a domestic animal like a dog or a horse. 
She could not be used without the consent of the proprietor; 
but he was always willing to let her out for hire. Among 
savages it is usually the duty of the host to lend a wife to his 
stranger guest, and if the loan is declined the husband considers 
himself insulted. Adultery is merely a question of debt. The 
law of debt is terribly severe: the body of the insolvent belongs to the 
creditor to sell or to kill. But no other feelings are involved in the 
question. The injured husband is merely a creditor, and is always pleased
that the debt has been incurred. Petitioner and co-respondent
may often be seen smoking a friendly pipe together after the
case has been proved and the money has been paid. However, as
the intelligence expands and the sentiments become more
refined, marriage is hallowed by religion; adultery is regarded
as a shame to the husband, and a sin against the gods; and a
new feeling -- Jealousy -- enters for the first time the heart
of man. The husband desires to monopolise his wife, body and
soul. He intercepts her glances; he attempts to penetrate into
her thoughts. He covers her with clothes; he hides even her
face from the public gaze. His jealousy, not only anxious for
the future, is extended over the, past. Thus women from their
earliest childhood are subjected by the selfishness of man to
severe but salutary laws. Chastity becomes the rule of female
life. At first it is preserved by force alone. Male slaves are
appointed to guard the women who, except sometimes from
momentary pique, never betray one another, and are allied
against the men. 

But as the minds of men are gradually elevated and refined 
through the culture of the intellect, there rises within them a 
sentiment which is unknown in savage life. They conceive 
a contempt for those pleasures which they share with
the lowest of mankind, and even with the brutes. They feel that
this instinct is degrading: they strive to resist it; they
endeavour to be pure. But that instinct is strong with the
accumulated power of innumerable generations; and the noble
desire is weak and newly born: it can seldom be sustained
except by the hopes and fears of religion, or by the nobler
teaching of philosophy. But in women this new virtue is
assisted by laws and customs which were established, long
before, by the selfishness of men. Here, then, the abhorrence
of the impure, the sense of duty, the fear of punishment, all
unite and form a moral law which women themselves enforce,
becoming the guardians of their own honour, and treating as a
traitor to her sex the woman who betrays her trust. For her the
most compassionate have no mercy: she has broken those laws of
honour on which society is founded. It is forbidden to receive
her; it is an insult to women to allude to her existence, to
pronounce her name. She is condemned without inquiry, as the
officer is condemned who has shown cowardice before the foe.
For the life of women is a battle-field: virtue is their
courage, and peace of mind is their reward. It is certainly an
extraordinary fact that women should be subjected to a severe
social discipline, from which men are almost entirely exempt.
As we have shown, it is explained by history; it is due to the
ancient subjection of woman to the man. But it is not the women
who are to he pitied: it is they who alone are free; for by
that discipline they are preserved from the tyranny of vice.  It
would be well for men if they also were ruled by a severe
opinion. The passions are always foes, but it is only when they
have been encouraged that they are able to become masters; it
is only when they have allied themselves with habit that their
terrible power becomes known. They resemble wild beasts which
men feed and cherish until they are themselves devoured by
their playmates. What miseries they cause, how many intellects
they paralyse, how many families they ruin, how many innocent
hearts they break asunder, how many lives they poison, how many
young corpses they carry to the tomb! What fate can be more
wretched than that of the man who resigns himself to them? 

As to the beautiful mind of Mendelssohn every sound, whatever it
might be -- the bubbling of a brook, the rustling of the wind
among the trees, the voice of a bird, even the grating of a
wheel -- inspired a musical idea, so -- how melancholy is the
contrast! -- so -- how deep is the descent! -- so to the mind
that is steeped in sensuality every sight, every sound, calls
up an impure association. The voluptuary dreads to be alone;
his mind is a monster that exhibits foul pictures to his eyes:
his memories are temptations: he struggles, he resists, but it
is all in vain: the habits which once might so easily have been
broken are now harder than adamant, are now stronger than
steel: his life is passed between desire and remorse: when the
desire is quenched he is tortured by his conscience: he soothes
it with a promise; and then the desire comes again. He sinks
lower and lower until indulgence gives him no pleasure: and yet
abstinence cannot be endured. To stimulate his jaded senses he
enters strange and tortuous paths which lead him to that awful
borderland where all is darkness, all is horror, where vice
lies close to crime. Yet there was a time when that man was as
guileless as a girl: he began by learning vice from the example
of his companions, just as he learnt to smoke. Had his
education been more severe: had the earliest inclinations been
checked by the fear of ruin and disgrace, he would not have
acquired the most dangerous of all habits. That men should be
subjected to the same discipline as women is therefore to be
wished for: and although the day is far distant, there can be
no doubt that it will come: and the future historian of morals
will record with surprise that in the nineteenth century
society countenanced vices in men which it punished in women
with banishment for life. 

Since men are in a transitional condition; since Nature 
ordains that the existence of the race can only be preserved 
by means of gross appetites inherited from our ancestors, 
the animals, it is obvious that men should refine them so 
far as they are able. Thus the brute business of
eating and drinking is made in civilised life the opportunity
of social intercourse; the family, divided by the duties of the
day, then assemble and converse: men of talent are drawn
together and interchange ideas. Many a poem, many an invention,
many a great enterprise, has been born at the table; loves and
friendships have originated there. In the same manner the
passions are sanctified by marriage. Blended with the pure
affections their coarseness disappears: their violence is
appeased: they become the ministers of conjugal and parental
love.

If we place exceptions aside, and look at men in the mass, we
find that, like the animals, they are actively employed from
morning to night in obtaining food for themselves and for their
families. But when they have satisfied their actual wants, they
do not, like the animals, rest at their ease: they continue
their labour. Let us take the life of an ordinary man. He
adopts an occupation at first in order to get his bread; and
then that he may marry and have children; and these also he has
to feed. But that is not all. He soon desires to rise in his
profession, or to acquire such skill in his craft that he may
he praised by his superiors and by his companions. He desires
to make money that he may improve his social position. And
lastly, he begins to love his occupation for itself, whatever
it may be: the poor labourer has this feeling as well as the
poet or the artist. When the pleasures of money and fame have
been exhausted: when nothing remains on earth that can bribe
the mind to turn from its accustomed path, it is labour itself
that is the joy; and aged men who have neither desires, nor
illusions, who are separated from the world, and who are
drawing near to the grave, who believe that with life all is
ended, and that for them there is no hereafter, yet continue to
work with indefatigable zeal. This noble condition of the mind
which thus makes for itself a heaven upon earth can be attained
by those who have courage and resolution. It is merely the
effect of habit: labour is painful to all at first; but if the
student perseveres he will find it more and more easy, until at
last he will find it necessary, to his life. The toils which
once were so hard to endure are now sought and cherished for
themselves: the mind becomes uneasy when its chains are taken
off.

The love of esteem is the second stimulant of labour; it
follows the period of necessity; it precedes the period of
habit. It is founded on that feeling of sympathy which unites
the primeval herd, and which is necessary to its life. The man
who distinguishes himself in battle; the man who brings home a
deer, or a fish, or a store of honey, or a bundle of roots is
praised by his comrades; so he is encouraged to fresh
exertions, and so the emulation of others is excited. The
actions of savages are entirely directed by the desire to
exist, and by the desire to obtain the praises of their
fellows. All African travellers have suffered from the rapacity
of chiefs, and yet those same chiefs are the most open-handed
of men. They plunder and beg from the white man his cloth, in
order to give it away; and they give it away in order to obtain
praise. A savage gentleman is always surrounded by a host of
clients, who come every morning to give him the salutation, who
chant his praises and devour him alive. The art of song had its
origin in flattery. Mendicant minstrels wander from town to
town, and from chief to chief, singing the praises of their
patrons and satirising those who have not been generous towards
them. In Africa the accusation of parsimony is a more bitter
taunt than the accusation of cowardice. Commerce first
commenced in necessity. The inland people required salt; the
coast people required vegetables to eat with their fish. But
soon the desire of esteem induced men to contrive, and labour,
and imperil their lives in order to obtain ornaments or
articles of clothing which came from abroad. In Central Africa
it is more fashionable to wear a dirty rag of Manchester cloth,
such as we use for a duster, than their own beautiful aprons of
woven grass. An African chief will often commission a trader to
buy him a handsome saddle, or some curious article of
furniture, on condition that he will not supply it to any one
else, just as connoisseurs will pay a higher price for a work
of art when the mould has been  broken. 

Both in civilised and in savage life the selfish desires of man 
are few, and are quickly satisfied. Enormous sums are lavished upon 
cookery and wines, but more from ostentation than from true 
gourmanderie. The love of display, or the more noble desire to give 
pleasure to their friends, has much to do with the enthusiasm of those
who spend fortunes on works of art and objects of virtue; and
there are few amusements which can be enjoyed alone. Nihil est
homini amicum sine homine amico. All the actions of men may
therefore be traced first to the desire of preserving life and
continuing their species; secondly to the desire of esteem; and
thirdly to the effects of habit. In the religious conduct of
man there is nothing which cannot be thus explained. First, men
sacrifice and pray in order to escape sickness and death; or if
they are a little more advanced, that they may not be punished
in a future state. Secondly, they desire to win the esteem and
affections of the gods; they are ambitious of obtaining a
heavenly reputation. And lastly, prayer and praise, discipline
and self-denial, become habits, and give pleasure to the mind.
The rough hair shirt, the hard bed, the cold cell, the meagre
food, the long vigil, the midnight prayer, are delights to the
mind that is inured to suffer; and as other men rejoice that
they have found something which can yield them pleasure, so the
ascetic rejoices that he has found something which can yield
him pain.

In the preceding sketch, which is taken from the writings of
others, I have told how a hot cloud vibrating in space, cooled
into a sun rotating on its axis, and revolving round a point,
to us unknown; and how this sun cast off a piece, which went
out like a coal that leaps from the fire, and sailed round the
sun a cinder wrapped in smoke; and how, as it cooled, strange
forces worked within it, varied phenomena appeared upon its
surface; it was covered with a salt sea; the smoke cleared off;
the sunlight played upon the water; gelatinous plants and
animals appeared at first simple in their forms, becoming more
complex as the forces which acted on them increased in
complexity; the earth wrinkled up; the mountains and continents
appeared; rain-water ascended from the sea, and descended from
the sky; lakes and rivers were created; the land was covered
with ferns, and gigantic mosses, and grasses tall as trees;
enormous reptiles crawled upon the earth, frogs as large as
elephants, which croaked like thunder; and the air, which was
still poisonous and cloudy, was cleared by the plants feeding
on the coaly gas; the sun shone brightly; sex was invented;
love was born; flowers bloomed forth, and birds sang; mammoths
and mastodons revelled upon the infinity of pastures the world
became populous; the struggle for life became severe; animals
congregated together; male struggled against male for spouses,
herd struggled against herd for subsistence; a nation of apes,
possessing peculiar intelligence and sociability, were exposed
to peculiar dangers; as a means of resistance, they combined
more closely; as they combined more closely, their language was
improved; as a means of resistance, they threw missiles with
their hands; thus using their hands, they walked chiefly with
their feet; the apes became almost man, half walking, half
crawling through the grim forests, jabbering and gesticulating
in an imitative manner, fighting furiously for their females at
the rutting season, their matted hair begrimed with dirt and
blood, fighting with all nature, even with their own kind, but
remaining true to their own herd; using the hand more and more
as a weapon and a tool, becoming more and more erect;
expressing objects by conventional sounds or words; delighting
more and more to interchange ideas; sharpening stones and
pointing sticks, heading javelins with bone and horn, inventing
snares and traps; then fire was discovered, and, by a series of
accidents, its various uses were revealed; the arts of
agriculture, domestication, and river navigation were acquired:
the tribes migrating from the forests were scattered over the
world; their canoes of hollow trees skimmed the tepid waters of
the Indian Ocean; their coracles of skin dashed through the icy
waves of the Arctic seas; in valleys between mountains, or in
fertile river plains, they nurtured seed-bearing grasses into
grain; over pastoral mountains, or sandy deserts, or broad
grassy steppes, they wandered with their flocks and herds;
these shepherd tribes poured down on the plains, subdued the
inhabitants and reduced them to serfdom; thus the nation was
established, and consisted at first of two great classes -- the
rulers and the ruled.

The period thus rapidly described, which begins with the animal
globules preying on the plant globules in the primeval sea, and
which ends with the conquest by the carnivorous shepherds of
the vegetable eaters in the river plains, may be termed the
Period of War. Throughout that period mind was developed by
necessity. The lower animals merely strive to live, to procure
females, and to rear their young. It is so ordered by Nature,
that by so striving to live they develop their physical
structure; they obtain faint glimmerings of reason; they think
and deliberate, they sympathise and love; they become Man. In
the same way the primeval men have no other object than to keep
the clan alive. It is so ordered by Nature, that, in striving
to preserve the existence of the clan, they not only acquire
the arts of agriculture, domestication, and navigation; they
not only discover fire, and its uses in cooking, in war, and in
metallurgy; they not only detect the hidden properties of
plants, and apply them to save their own lives from disease,
and to destroy their enemies in battle; they not only learn to
manipulate Nature, and to distribute water by machinery; but
they also, by means of the long life-battle, are developed into
moral beings: they live according to the Golden Rule, in order
that they may exist, or, in other words, they do exist because
they live according to the Golden Rule. They have within them
innate affections, which are as truly weapons as the tiger's
teeth and the serpent's fang; which belong, therefore, to the
Period of War. Their first laws, both social and religious, are
enacted only as war measures. The laws relating to marriage and
property are intended to increase the fertility and power of
the clan; the laws relating to religion are intended to
preserve the clan from the fury of the gods, against whom, at
an earlier period, they actually went to war. But out of this
feeling of sympathy, which arose in necessity, arises a
secondary sentiment, the love of esteem; and hence wars, which
at first were waged merely in self-defence, or to win food-
grounds and females necessary for the subsistence and
perpetuation of the clan, are now waged for superfluities,
power, and the love of glory; commerce, which was founded in
necessity, is continued for the acquisition of ornaments and
luxuries; science, which at first was a means of life, provides
wealth, and is pursued for fame; music and design, which were
originally instincts of the hand and voice, are developed into
arts. It is therefore natural for man to endeavour to better
himself in life, that he may obtain the admiration of his
comrades. He desires to increase his means or to win renown in
the professions and the arts. Thus man presses upon man, and
the whole mass rises in knowledge, in power, and in wealth. But
owing to the division of classes resulting from war, and also
from the natural inequality of man, the greater part of the
human population could not obey their instinctive aspirations;
they were condemned to remain stationary and inert. By means of
caste, slavery, the system of privileged classes, and
monopolies, the people were forbidden to raise themselves in
life; they were doomed to die as they were born. But that they
might not be altogether without hope, they were taught by their
rulers that they would be rewarded with honour and happiness in
a future state. The Egyptian fellah received the good tidings
that there was no caste after death; the Christian serf was
consoled with the text, that the poor would inherit the kingdom
of heaven. This long and gloomy period of the human race may be
entitled Religion. History is confined to the upper classes.
All the discoveries, and inventions, and exploits of ancient
times are due to the efforts of an aristocracy; not only the
Persians and Hindus, but also the Greeks and the Romans, were
merely small societies of gentlemen reigning over a multitude
of slaves. The virtues of the lower classes were loyalty,
piety, obedience. 

The third period is that of Liberty: it belongs only to Europe and to 
modern times. A middle class of intelligence and wealth arises between 
the aristocracy and the plebeians. They contend with the monopolies of 
caste and birth; they demand power for themselves; they espouse the 
cause of their poorer brethren; they will not admit that equality in
heaven is a valid reason for inequality on earth; they deny
that the aristocracy of priests know more of divine matters
than other men; they interpret the sacred books for themselves,
and translate them into the vulgar tongue; they separate
religion from temporal government, and reduce it to a system of
metaphysics and morality. It is in this period that we are at
present.  Loyalty to the king has been transformed into
patriotism; and piety, or the worship of God, will give way, to
the reverence of law and the love of mankind. Thus the mind
will be elevated, the affections deepened and enlarged;
morality, ceasing to be entangled with theology, will be
applied exclusively to virtue.

It is difficult to find a title for the fourth period, as we
have as yet no word which expresses at the same time the utmost
development of mind and the utmost development of morals. I
have chosen the word Intellect, because by the education of the
intellect the moral sense is of necessity improved. In this
last period the destiny of Man will be fulfilled. He was not
sent upon the earth to prepare himself for existence in another
world; he was sent upon earth that he might beautify it as a
dwelling, and subdue it to his use; that he might exalt his
intellectual and moral powers until he had attained perfection,
and had raised himself to that ideal which he now expresses by
the name of God, but which, however sublime it may appear to
our weak and imperfect minds, is far below the splendour and
majesty of that power by whom the universe was made.



We shall now leave the darkness of the primeval times, and
enter the theatre of history. The Old World is a huge body,
with its head buried in eternal snows; with the Atlantic on its
left, the Pacific on its right, the Indian Ocean between its
legs. The left limb is sound and whole; its foot is the Cape of
Good Hope. The right limb has been broken and scattered by the
sea; Australia and the Archipelago are detached; Asia has been
amputated at the thigh. The lower extremities of this Old World
are covered for the most part with thorny thickets and with
fiery plains. The original natives were miserable creatures,
living chiefly on insects and shells, berries and roots;
casting the boomerang and the bone-pointed dart; abject, naked,
brutish, and forlorn. We pass up the body in its ancient state;
through the marsh of Central Africa, with its woolly-haired
blacks upon the left, and through the jungles of India, with
its straight-haired blacks upon the right; through the sandy
wastes of the Sahara, and the broad Asiatic tablelands; through
the forest of Central Europe, the Russian steppes, and the
Siberian plains, until we arrive at the frozen shores of the
open Polar Sea. The land is covered with fields of snow, on
which white bears may be seen in flocks like sheep. Ice
mountains tower in the air, and, as the summer approaches,
glide into the ocean and sail towards the south, The sky is
brightened by a rosy flame, which utters a crisp and crackling
sound. All else is silent, nature is benumbed. The signs of
human habitations are rare; sometimes a tribe of Esquimaux may
be perceived, dwelling in snow huts, enveloped in furs, driving
sledges with teams of dogs, tending their herds of reindeer on
the moss-grounds, or dashing over the cold waters in their
canoes to hunt the walrus and the seal.

This gloomy region, where the year is divided into one day and
one night, lies entirely outside the stream of history. We
descend through the land of the pine to the land of the oak and
beech. Huge woods and dismal fens covered Europe in the olden
time; by the banks of dark and sullen rivers the beavers built
their villages; the bears and the wolves were the aristocracy
of Europe; men paid them tribute in flesh and blood. A people,
apparently of Tartar origin, had already streamed into this
continent from Asia; but the true aborigines were not extinct;
they inhabited huts built on piles in the lakes of Switzerland;
they herded together in mountain caves. They were armed only
with stone weapons; but they cultivated certain kinds of grain,
and had tamed the reindeer, the ox, the boar, and the dog. In
ancient history Europe has no place. Even the lands to the
south of the Alps were inhabited by savages at a time when Asia
was in a civilised condition.

It is therefore Asia that we must first survey; it is there
that the history of books and monuments begins. The Tigris and
Euphrates rise in a table-land adjoining the Black Sea, and
flow into the Persian Gulf. On the right is a desert extending
to the Nile; on the left, a chain of hills. A shepherd people
descended from the plateau, occupied the land between the
rivers, the plains between the Tigris and the hills, and the
alluvial regions at the lower course of the Euphrates. They
wandered over the Arabian desert with their flocks and herds,
settled in Canaan and Yemen, crossed over into Africa, extended
along its northern shores as far as the Atlantic, overspread
the Sahara, and made border wars upon the Sudan. In the course of
many centuries the various branches of this people diverged
from one another. In Barbary and Sahara they were called
Berbers; in the valley of the Nile, Egyptians; Arabs, in the
desert and in Yemen; Canaanites, in Palestine; Assyrians, in
Mesopotamia and the upper regions of the Tigris; Chaldeans or
Babylonians, in the lower course of the Euphrates. The
Canaanites, the Arabs of Yemen, and the Berbers of Algeria
adopted agricultural habits and lived in towns; the Berbers of
Sahara, the Bedouins of the Syro-Arabian desert and of the
waste regions in Assyria, remained a pastoral and wandering
people. But in Chaldea and in Egypt the colonists were placed
under peculiar conditions. Famines impelled the shepherds to
make war on other tribes; famines impelled the Chaldeans and
Egyptians to contend with the Euphrates and the Nile, to
domesticate the waters, to store them in reservoirs, and to
distribute them, as required, upon the fields. It is not
improbable that the Egyptians were men of Babylonia driven by
war or by exile into the African deserts; that they were
composed of two noble classes, the priests and the military
men; that they took with them some knowledge of the arts and
sciences, which they afterwards developed into the peculiar
Egyptian type; that they found the valley inhabited by a negro
race, fishing in papyrus canoes, living chiefly on the lotus
root, and perhaps growing doura corn; that they reduced those
negroes to slavery, divided them into castes, allowed them to
retain in each district the form of animal worship peculiar to
the respective tribes:, making such worship emblematical, and
blending it with their own exalted creed; and finally, that
they married the native women, which would thus account for the
dash of the “tar-brush” plainly to be read by the practised eye
in the portraits, though not in the conventional faces of the
monuments. On the other hand it may he held that Egypt was
colonised by a Berber tribe; that its civilisation was entirely
indigenous; that the distinction of classes arose from natural
selection, and was afterwards petrified by law, and that the
negro traits in the Egyptian physiognomy were due to the
importation of Ethiopian girls, who have always been favourites
in the harems of the East. But whichever of these hypotheses
may be true, the essential point is this, that civilisation
commenced in the application of mechanics to the cultivation of
the fields, and that this science could only have been invented
under pressure of necessity.

Let us now pass beyond the Tigris and climb up the hills which
bound it on the left. We find ourselves on the steppes of
Central Asia, in some parts lying waste in salt and sandy
plains, in others clothed with fields of waving grass. Over
these broad regions roamed the Turks or Tartars, living on
mares' milk, dwelling in houses upon wheels. Beyond the steppes
towards the east is another chain of hills, and beyond them
lies the Great Plain of China, watered by two majestic rivers,
the Yang-tse Kiang and the Hoang Ho. The people of the steppes
and the mountains poured down upon this country, subdued the
savage aborigines, covered the land with rice fields, irrigated
by canals, and established many kingdoms which were afterwards
blended into one harmonious and civilised empire.

To the right hand of the Tartar steppes, as you travel towards
China, is a lofty table-land, the region of the sources of the
Oxus and Jaxartes. Thence descended a people who called
themselves the Aryas, or "the noble"; they differed much in
appearance from the slit-eyed, smooth-faced, and fleshy-limbed
Mongols; and little in appearance, but widely in language, from
the people of the table-land of the Tigris and Euphrates. They
poured forth in successive streams over Persia, Asia Minor,
Greece, Italy, and the whole of Europe from the Danube and the
Rhine to the shores of the Atlantic. They also descended on the
Punjab, or country of the Indus, where they established their
first colony, and thence spread to the region of the Ganges,
and over the Deccan. They intermarried much with the native
women, but divided the men into servile castes, and kept them
in subjection partly by means of an armed aristocracy, partly
by means of religious terror.

These then are the elemental lands; China, India, Babylonia,
and Egypt. In these countries civilisation was invented;
history begins with them. The Egyptians manufactured linen
goods, and beautiful glass wares, and drew gold, ivory, and
slaves from the Sudan.  Babylonia manufactured tapestry and
carpets. These people were known to one another only by their
products; the wandering Bedouins carried the trade between the
Euphrates and the Nile. A caravan route was also opened between
Babylon and India via Bokhara or Balkh and Samarkand. India
possessed much wealth in precious stones, but the true
resources of that country were its vegetable products and the
skilful manufactures of the natives. India, to use their own
expression, sells grass for gold. From one kind of plant they
extracted a beautiful blue dye: from another they boiled a
juice, which cooled into a crystal, delicate and luscious to
the taste; from another they obtained a kind of wool, which
they spun, wove, bleached, glazed, and dyed into fabrics
transparent as the gossamer, bright as the plumage of the
jungle birds. And India was also the half-way station between
China, Ceylon, and the Spice Islands on the one hand: and of
the countries of Western Asia on the other. It was enriched not
only by its own industry and produce, but by the transit trade
as well. 

At an early epoch in history, the Chinese became a
great navigating people; they discovered America, at least so
they say; they freighted their junks with cargoes of the
shining fibre, and with musk in porcelain jars; they coasted
along the shores of the Pacific, established colonies in Burmah
and Siam, developed the spice trade of the Indian Archipelago
and the resources of Ceylon, sailed up the shores of Malabar,
entered the Persian Gulf, and even coasted as far as Aden and
the Red Sea. It was probably from them that the Banians of
Gujrat and the Arabs of Yemen acquired the arts of
shipbuilding and navigation. The Indian Ocean became a basin of
commerce; it was whitened by cotton sails. The Phoenicians
explored the desolate waters of the Mediterranean Sea; with the
bright red cloth, and the blue bugles, and the speckled beads,
they tempted the savages of Italy and Greece to trade; they
discovered the silver mines of Spain; they sailed forth through
the Straits of Gibraltar, they braved the storms of the
Atlantic, opened the tin trade of Cornwall, established the
amber diggings of the Baltic. Thus a long thread of commerce
was stretched across the Old World from England and Germany to
China and Japan. Yet, still the great countries in the central
region dwelt in haughty isolation, knowing foreign lands only
by their products until the wide conquests and the superb
administration of the Persians made them members of the same
community. China alone remained outside. Egypt, Babylonia, and
India were united by royal roads with half-way stations in
Palestine and Bokhara, and with sea-ports in Phoenicia, and on
the western coast of Asia Minor That country is a table-land
belted on all sides by mountains; but beneath the wall of hills
on the western side is a fruitful strip of coast, the estuary
land of four rivers which flow into the Mediterranean parallel
to one another. That coast is Ionia; and opposite to Ionia lies
Greece. 

The table-land was occupied by an Aryan or Arya nation,
from whom bands of emigrants went forth in two directions. The
Dorians crossed the Hellespont, and, passing through Thrace,
settled in the hill cantons of Northern Greece, and thence
spread over the lower parts of the peninsula. The Ionians
descended to the fruitful western coast, and thence migrated
into Attica, which afterwards sent back colonies to its ancient
birth-place. These two people spoke the same language, and were
of the same descent; but their characters differed as widely as
the cold and barren mountains from the soft and smiling plains.
The Dorians were rude in their manners, and laconic in their
speech, barbarous in their virtues, morose in their joys. The
Ionians lived among holidays, they could do nothing without
dance and song. The Dorians founded Sparta, a republic which
was in reality a camp, consisting of soldiers fed by slaves.
The girls were educated to be viragoes; the boys to bear
torture, like the Red Indians, with a smile. The wives were
breeding-machines, belonging to the state; a council of elders
examined the new-born children, and selected only the finer
specimens, in order to keep up the good old Spartan breed. They
had no commerce and no arts; they were as filthy in their
persons as they were narrow in their minds. But the Athenians
were the true Greeks, as they exist at the present day;
intellectual, vivacious, inquisitive, shrewd, artistic,
patriotic, and dishonest; ready to die for their country, or to
defraud it. The Greeks received the first rudiments of
knowledge from Phoenicia; the alphabet was circulated
throughout the country by means of the Olympian fairs; colonies
were sent forth all round the Mediterranean; and those of Ionia
and the Delta of the Nile obtained partial access to the arts
and sciences of Babylon and Memphis. 

The Persian wars developed the genius of the Greeks. The Persian 
conquests opened to them the University of Egypt. The immense area of 
the Greek world, extending from the Crimea to the straits of 
Gibraltar, for at one time the Greeks had cities in Morocco; the 
variety of ideas which they thus gathered, and which they interchanged at 
the great festival, where every kind of talent was honoured and
rewarded the spirit of noble rivalry, which made city contend
with city, and citizen with citizen, in order to obtain an
Olympian reputation; the complete freedom from theology in art;
the tastes and manners of the land; the adoration of beauty;
the nudity of the gymnasium: all these sufficiently explain the
unexampled progress of the nation, and the origin of that
progress, as in all other cases, is to be found in physical
geography. Greece was divided into natural cantons; each state
was a fortress; while Egypt, Assyria, India, and China were
wide and open plains, which cavalry could sweep, and which
peasants with their sickles could not defend. But the rivalry
of the Greeks among themselves, so useful to the development of
mental life, prevented them from combining into one great
nation; and Alexander, although he was a Greek by descent, for
he had the right of contending at the Olympian games, conquered
the East with an army of barbarians, his Greek troops being
merely a contingent. 

But the kingdoms of Asia and Egypt were Greek, and in Alexandria 
the foundations of science were laid. The astrolabes which had been 
invented by the Egyptians were improved by the Greeks and afterwards 
by the Arabs, were adapted to purposes of navigation by the Portuguese, 
and were developed to the sextant of the nineteenth century. The
Egyptians had invented the blow-pipe, the crucible, and the
alembic; the Alexandrines commenced or continued the pursuit of
alchemy, which the Arabs also preserved, and which has since
grown into the science of Lavoisier and Faraday. Hippocrates
separated medicine from theology; his successors dissected and
experimented at Alexandria, learning something no doubt from
th Egyptian school; the Arabs followed in a servile manner the
medicine of the Greeks, and the modern Europeans obtained from
the Canon of Avicenna the first elements of a science which has
made much progress, but which is yet in its infancy, and which
will some day transform us into new beings. The mathematical
studies of the Alexandrines were also serviceable to mankind,
and the work of one of their professors is a text-book in this
country; they discovered the Precession of the Equinoxes; and
the work which they did in Conic Sections enabled Kepler to
discover the true laws of the planetary motions. But Alexandria
did not possess that liberty which is the true source of
continued progress. With slaves below and with despots above,
the mind was starved in its roots, and stifled in its bud,
dried and ticketed in a museum. The land itself had begun to
languish and decay, when a new power arose in the West. 

The foot of Italy was lined with Greek towns, and these had 
spread culture through the peninsula, among a people of a kindred
race. They dwelt in cities, with municipal governments, public
buildings, and national schools. One Italian city, founded by
desperadoes, adopted a career of war; but the brigands were
also industrious farmers and wise politicians; they conciliated
the cities whom they conquered. Rome became a supreme republic,
ruling a number of minor republics, whose municipal
prerogatives were left undisturbed, who paid no tribute save
military service. The wild Gauls of Lombardy were subdued. The
Greeks on the coast were the only foreigners who retained their
freedom in the land. They called over Pyrrhus to protect them
from the Romans; but the legion conquered the phalanx, the
broadsword vanquished the Macedonian spear. The Asiatic
Carthaginians were masters of the sea; half Sicily belonged to
them; they were, therefore, neighbours of the Romans. They had
already menaced the cities of the southern coast; the Romans
were already jealous and distrustful; they had now a Monroe
doctrine concerning the peninsula: an opportunity occurred, and
they stepped out into the world. The first Punic war gave them
Sicily, the second Punic war gave them Spain, the third Punic
war gave them Africa. 

Rome also extended her power towards the East. She did not invade, 
she did not conquer, she did not ask for presents and taxes, she merely 
offered her friendship and protection. She made war, it is true, but only 
on behalf of her allies. And so kingdom after kingdom, province after 
province, fell into her vast and patient arms. She became at first the
arbiter and afterwards the mistress of the world. Her legions
halted only on the banks of the Euphrates, and on the shores of
the Sahara, where a wild waste of sand and a sea-horizon
appeared to proclaim that life was at an end. She entered the
unknown world beyond the Alps, established a chain of forts
along the banks of the Danube and the Rhine from the Black Sea
to the Baltic, covered France with noble cities, and made York
a Roman town. The Latin language was planted in all the
countries which this people conquered, except in those where
Alexander had preceded them. The empire was therefore divided
by language into the Greek and Latin world. Greece, Asia Minor,
Syria, and Egypt belonged to the Greek world: Italy, Africa,
Spain, and Gaul belonged to the Latin world. But the Roman law
was everywhere in force, though not to the extinction of the
native laws. In Egypt, for instance, the Romans revived some
of the wise enactments of the Pharaohs which had been abrogated
by the Ptolemies. The old courts of injustice were swept away.
Tribunals were established which resembled those of the English
in India. Men of all races, and of all religions, came before a
judge of a foreign race, who sat high above their schisms and
dissensions, who looked down upon them all with impartial
contempt, and who reverenced the law which was entrusted to his
care. But the provinces were forced to support not only a court
but a city. As London is the market of England, to which the
best of all things find their way, so Rome was the market of
the Mediterranean world; but there was this difference between
the two, that in Rome the articles were not paid for. Money,
indeed, might be given, but it was money which had not been
earned, and which therefore would come to its end at last. 

Rome lived upon its principal till ruin stared it in the face.
Industry is the only true source of wealth, and there was no
industry in Rome. By day the Ostia road was crowded with carts
and muleteers, carrying to the great city the silks and spices
of the East, the marble of Asia Minor, the timber of the Atlas,
the grain of Africa and Egypt; and the carts brought nothing
out but loads of dung. That was their return cargo. London
turns dirt into gold. Rome turned gold into dirt. And how, it
may be asked, was the money spent? The answer is not difficult
to give. Rome kept open house. It gave a dinner party every
day; the emperor and his favourites dined upon nightingales and
flamingo tongues, on oysters from Britain, and on fishes from
the Black Sea; the guards received their rations; and bacon,
wine, oil, and loaves were served out gratis to the people.
Sometimes entertainments were given in which a collection of
animals as costly as that in Regent's Park was killed for the
amusement of the people. Constantine transferred the capital to
Constantinople; and now two dinners were given every day. Egypt
found the bread for one, and Africa found it for the other. The
governors became satraps, the peasantry became serfs, the
merchants and land owners were robbed and ruined, the empire
stopped payment, the legions of the frontier marched on the
metropolis, the dikes were deserted, and then came the deluge.


The empire had been already divided. There was an empire of the
West, or the Latin world; there was an empire of the East, or
the Greek world. The first was overrun by the Germans, the
second by the Arabs. But Constantinople remained unconquered
throughout the Dark Ages; and Rome, though taken and sacked,
was never occupied by the barbarians. In these two great cities
the languages and laws of the classical times were preserved;
and from Rome religion was diffused throughout Europe; to Rome
a spiritual empire was restored.

The condition of the Roman world at one time bore a curious
resemblance to that of China. In each of these great empires,
separated by a continent, the principal feature was that of
peace. Vast populations dwelt harmoniously together, and were
governed by admirable laws. The frontiers of each were
threatened by barbarians. The Chinese built a wall along the
outskirts of the steppes; the Romans built a wall along the
Danube and the Rhine. In China, a man dressed in yellow
received divine honours; in Rome, a man dressed in purple
received divine honours; in each country the religion was the
religion of the state, and the emperor was the representative
of God. In each country, also, a religious revolution occurred.
A young Indian prince, named Sakya Muni, afflicted by the
miseries of human life which he beheld, cast aside his wealth
and his royal destiny, became a recluse, and devoted his life
to the study of religion. After long years of reading and
reflection he took the name of Buddha, or "the Awakened." He
declared that the soul after death migrates into another form,
according to its deeds and according to its thoughts. This was
the philosophy of the Brahmins. But he also proclaimed that all
existence is passion, misery, and pain, and that by subduing
the evil emotions of the heart the soul will hereafter finally
obtain the calm of non-existence, the peaceful Nirvana, the
unalloyed, the unclouded Not to Be. 

A religion so cheerless, a philosophy so sorrowful, could never have 
succeeded with the masses of mankind if presented only as a system of 
metaphysics. Buddhism owed its success to its catholic spirit and its
beautiful morality. The men who laboured in the fields had
always been taught that the Brahmins were the aristocracy of
heaven, and would be as high above them in a future state as
they were upon the earth. The holy books which God had revealed
were not for them, the poor dark-skinned labourers, to read;
burning oil poured into their ears was the punishment by law
for so impious an act. And now came a man who told them that
those books had not been revealed at all, and that God was no
respecter of persons; that the happiness of men in a future
state depended, not upon their birth, but upon their actions
and their thoughts. Buddhism triumphed for a time in Hindustan,
but its success was greatest among the stranger natives in the
north-west provinces, the Indo-Scythians and the Greeks. Then
came a period of patriotic feeling; the Brahmins preached a war
of independence; the new religion was associated with the
foreigners, and both were driven out together. But Buddhism
became the religion of Ceylon, Burmah, and Siam, and finally
entered the Chinese Empire. It suffered and survived bloody
persecutions. It became a licensed religion, and spread into
the steppes of Tartary among those barbarians by whom China was
destined to be conquered. The religion of the Buddhists was
transformed; its founder was worshipped as a god; there was a
doctrine of the incarnation; they had their own holy books,
which they declared to have been revealed; they established
convents and nunneries, splendid temples, adorned with images,
and served by priests with shaven heads, who repeated prayers
upon rosaries, and who taught that happiness in a future state
could best be obtained by long prayers and by liberal presents
to the Church. 

At the period of the importation of Buddhism into China, a 
similar event occurred in the Roman world. It was
the pagan theory that each country was governed by its own
gods. The proper religion for each man, said an oracle of
Delphi, is the religion of his fatherland. Yet these gods were
cosmopolitan; they punished or rewarded foreigners. Imilkon,
having offended the Greek gods in the Sicilian wars, made
atonement to them when he returned to Carthage: he offered
sacrifices in the Phoenician temples, but according to the
milder ceremonies of the Greeks. The Philistines sent back the
ark with a propitiatory present to Jehovah. Alexander, in Asia
Minor, offered sacrifices to the gods of the enemy. The Romans,
when they besieged a town, called upon its tutelary god by
name, and offered him bribes to give up the town. Rome waged
war against the world, but not against the gods; she did not
dethrone them in their own countries; she offered them the
freedom of the city. Men of all races came to live in Rome;
they were allowed to worship their own gods; the religions of
the empire were regularly licensed; Egyptian temples and Syrian
chapels sprang up in all directions. But though the Romans
considered it right that Egyptians should worship Isis, and
that Alexandrines should worship Serapis, they justly
considered it a kind of treason for Romans to desert their
tutelary gods. For this reason, foreign religions were
sometimes proscribed. It was also required from the subjects of
the empire that they should offer homage to the gods of Rome,
and to the genius or spirit of the emperor; not to the man, but
to the soul that dwelled within. The Jews alone were exempt
from these regulations. It was believed that they were a
peculiar people, or rather that they had a peculiar god. While
the other potentates of the celestial world lived in harmony
together, Jehovah was a sullen and solitary being, who
separated his people from the rest of mankind, forbade them to
eat or drink with those who were not of their own race, and
threatened to punish them if they worshipped any gods but him.
On this account the Roman government, partly to preserve the
lives of their subjects, and partly out of fear for themselves,
believing that Jehovah like the other gods, had always an
epidemic at his command, treated the Jews with exceptional
indulgence. 

These people were scattered over all the world; they had 
their Ghetto or Petticoat Lane in every great city of
the empire; their religion, so superior to that of the pagans,
had attracted much attention from the Gentiles. Ovid, in his
"Art of Love," counsels the dandy who seeks a mistress to
frequent the theatre, or Temple of Isis, or the synagogue on
the Sabbath day. But the Jews in Rome, like the Jews in London,
did not attempt to make proselytes, and received them with
reluctance and distrust. Their sublime faith, divested of its
Asiatic customs, was offered to the Romans some Jewish heretics
called Christians or Nazarenes.

A young man named Joshua or Jesus, a carpenter by trade,
believed that the world belonged to the devil, and that God
would shortly take it from him, and that he the Christ or
Anointed would be appointed by God to judge the souls of men,
and to reign over them on earth. In politics he was a leveller
and communist, in morals he was a monk; he believed that only
the poor and the despised would inherit the kingdom of God. All
men who had riches or reputations would follow their dethroned
master into everlasting pain. He attacked the church-going,
sabbatarian ever-praying Pharisees; he declared that piety was
worthless if it were praised on earth.  It was his belief that
earthly happiness was a gift from Satan, and should therefore
be refused. If a man was poor in this world, that was good; he
would be rich in the world to come. If he were miserable and
despised, he had reason to rejoice; he was out of favour with
the ruler of this world, namely Satan, and therefore he would
be favoured by the new dynasty. On the other hand, if a man
were happy, rich, esteemed, and applauded, he was for ever
lost. He might have acquired his riches by industry; he might
have acquired his reputation by benevolence, honesty, and
devotion; but that did not matter; he had received his reward.
So Christ taught that men should sell all that they had and
give to the poor; that they should renounce all family ties;
that they should let to-morrow take care of itself; that they
should not trouble about clothes: did, not God adorn the
flowers of the fields? He would take care of them also if they
would fold their hands together and have faith, and abstain
from the impiety of providing for the future. The principles of
Jesus were not conducive to the welfare of society; he was put
to death by the authorities; his disciples established a
commune; Greek Jews were converted by them, and carried the new
doctrines over all the world. The Christians in Rome were at
first a class of men resembling the Quakers. They called one
another brother and sister; they adopted a peculiar garb, and
peculiar forms of speech; the Church was at first composed of
women, slaves, and illiterate artisans but it soon became the
religion of the people in the towns. All were converted
excepting the rustics (pagani) and the intellectual free-
thinkers, who formed the aristocracy. Christianity was at first
a republican religion; it proclaimed the equality of souls; the
bishops were the representatives of God, and the bishops were
chosen by the people. But when the emperor adopted Christianity
and made it a religion of the state, it became a part of
imperial government, and the parable of Dives was forgotten.
The religion of the Christians was transformed; its founder was
worshipped as a god; there was a doctrine of the incarnation;
they had their own holy books, which they declared to have been
revealed; they established convents, and nunneries, and
splendid temples, adorned with images, and served by priests
with shaven heads, who repeated prayers upon rosaries, and who
taught that happiness in a future state could best be obtained
by long prayers and by liberal presents to the Church. In the
Eastern or Greek world, Christianity in no way assisted
civilisation, but in the Latin world it softened the fury of
the conquerors, it aided the amalgamation of the races. The
Christian priests were reverenced by the barbarians, and these
priests belonged to the conquered people. 

The Church, it is true, was divided by a schism; Ulphilas, the apostle of
The Goths, was an Arian; the dispute which had arisen in a lecture-
room at Alexandria, between a bishop and a presbyter, was
continued on a hundred battle-fields. But the Franks were
Catholics, and the Franks became supreme. The Arians were
worsted in the conflict of swords as they had formerly been
worsted in the conflict of words. The Empire of the West was
restored by Charlemagne, who spread Christianity among the
Saxons by the sword, and confirmed the spiritual supremacy of
Rome. He died, and his dominions were partitioned among kings
who were royal only in the name. Europe was divided into
castle-states. Savage isolation, irresponsible power: such was
the order of the age. Yet still there was a sovereign whom all
acknowledged, and whom all to a certain extent obeyed. That
sovereign was the Pope of Rome. The men who wore his livery
might travel throughout Europe in safety, welcome alike at
cottage and castle, paying for their board and lodging with
their prayers. If there is a Great Being who listens with
pleasure to the prayers of men, it must have been in the Dark
Ages that he looked down upon the earth with most satisfaction.
That period may be called The Age of the Rosary. From the
Shetland Islands to the shores of China, prayers were being
strung, and voices were being sonorously raised. The Christian
repeated his Paternosters and his credos on beads of holy clay
from Palestine; the Persian at Teheran, the negro at Timbuctoo;
the Afghan at Kabul, repeated the ninety-nine names of God on
beads made of camel bones from Mecca. The Indian prince by the
waters of the Ganges muttered his devotions on a rosary of
precious stones. The pious Buddhist in Ceylon, and in Ava, and
in Pekin, had the beads ever between his fingers, and a prayer
ever between his lips. 

By means of these great and cosmopolitan religions, all of which 
possessed their sacred books, all of which enjoined a pure morality, 
all of which united vast masses of men of different and even hostile 
nationalities beneath the same religious laws, beneath the same 
sceptre of an unseen king; all of which prescribed pilgrimage and travel 
as a pious work, the circulation of life in the human body was promoted;
men congregated together at Rome, Jerusalem, Mecca, and
Benares. Their minds and morals were expanded. Religious
enthusiasm united the scattered princes of Europe into one
great army, and poured it on the East. The dukes and counts and
barons were ruined; the castle system was extinguished: and the
castle serfs of necessity were free. The kings allied
themselves with the free and fortified cities, who lent troops
to the crown, but who officered those troops themselves; who
paid taxes to the crown, but who voted those taxes in
constitutional assemblies, and had the power to withhold them
if they pleased. Those towns now became not only abodes of
industry and commerce, but of learning and the arts. In Italy
the ancient culture had been revived. In Italy the towns of the
Western Empire had never quite lost their municipal
prerogatives. New towns had also arisen, founded in despair and
nurtured by calamity. These towns had opened a trade with
Constantinople, a great commercial city in which the Arabs had
a quarter and a mosque. The Italians were thus led forth into a
trade with the Mohammedans, which was interrupted for a time by
the Crusades only to be afterwards resumed with redoubled
vigour and success. For then new markets were opened for the
spices of the East. Pepper became a requisite of European life;
and pepper could be obtained from the Italians alone. The
Indian trade was not monopolised by a single man, as it was in
the lands of the East. It was distributed among an immense
population. Wealth produced elegance, leisure, and refinement.
There came into existence a large and active-minded class,
craving for excitement, and desirous of new things. They
hungered and thirsted after knowledge; they were not content
with the sterile science of the priests. And when it was
discovered that the world of the ancients lay buried in their
soil, they were seized with a mania resembling that of
treasure-seekers in the East, or of the gold-hunters in the New
World. 

The elements of the Renaissance were preserved partly in
Rome and the cities of the West, partly in Constantinople, and
partly in the East. The Arabs, when they conquered Alexandria,
had adopted the physical science of the Greeks, and had added
to it the algebra and arithmetic of India. Plato and Aristotle,
Galen and Hippocrates, Ptolemy and Euclid, had been translated
by the Eastern Christians into Syriac, and thence into the
Arabic. But the Arabs had not translated a single Greek
historian or poet. These were to he found at Constantinople,
where the Greek of the ancients was still spoken in its purity
at the court and in the convents though not by the people of
the streets. The Greeks also had preserved the arts of their
forefathers; though destitute of genius, they at least retained
the art of laying on colours, of modelling in clay, and of
sculpturing in stone. The great towns of Italy, desirous to
emulate the beauties of St. Sophia, employed Greeks to build
them cathedrals, and to paint frescoes on their convent walls,
and to make them statues for their streets. These Greek
strangers established academies of art; and soon the masters
were surpassed by their pupils. The Italians disdained to
reproduce the figures of the Greek school, with their meagre
hands, and sharp pointed feet, and staring eyes. Free
institutions made their influence felt even in the arts; the
empire of authority was shaken off. The fine arts spread beyond
the Alps; they were first adopted and nurtured by the Church,
afterwards by the Town. Oil-painting was invented in the North.
Masterpieces of the ancients were discovered in the South. Then
the artists ceased to paint Madonnas, and children, and saints,
and crucifixions. They were touched with the breath of
antiquity; they widened their field; their hands were inspired
by poetical ideas. It is a significant fact that a Pope should
himself conceive the project of pulling down the ancient
Basilica of St. Peter, every stone of which was consecrated by
a memory, and of erecting in its stead a church on the model of
a pagan temple. 

The Pope was also urged to set on foot a crusade; not to rescue the 
sepulchre from the hands of the infidels, but in the hope that the lost 
writings of the Greeks and Romans might be discovered in the East. For 
now had arrived the book-hunting age. In the depth of the Dark Ages 
there had always been ecclesiastics who drew the fire of their genius
from the immortal works of the pagan writers. There were also
monks who had a passion for translating the writings of the
Greeks into Latin; who went to Constantinople and returned with
chests full of books, and who, if Greek manuscripts could not
otherwise be procured, travelled into Arab Spain, settled at
Cordova, and translated the Greek from the Arabic version,
together with the works of Averroes and Avicenna. The Greeks,
frequently visiting Italy, were invited to give lectures on
their literature, and lessons in their language. The revival of
Greek was commenced by Boccacio, who copied out Homer with his
own hand; and a Greek academy was established at Florence.
Petrarch revived the literature of Rome he devoted his life to
Cicero and Virgil; he wrote the epitaph of Laura on the margin
of the Aeneid; he died with his head pillowed on a book. The
Roman law was also revived; as Greeks lectured on literature in
Italy, so Italians lectured on law beyond the Alps. 

And now began the search for the lost. Pilgrims of the antique wandered
through Europe, ransacking convents for the treasures of the
past. At this time whatever taste for learning had once existed
among the monks appears to have died away. The pilgrims were
directed to look in lofts, where rats burrowed under heaps of
parchment; or to sift heaps of rubbish lying in the cellar. In
such receptacles were found many of those works which are yet
read by thousands with delight, and which are endeared to us
all by the associations of our boyhood. It was thus that
Quintilian was discovered, and, to use the language of the
time, was delivered from his long imprisonment in the dungeons
of the barbarians. Lucretius was disinterred in Germany; a
fragment of Petronius in Britain. Cosmo de' Medici imported
books in all languages from all parts of the world. A copyist
became Pope, founded the Library of the Vatican, and ordered
the translation of the Greek historians and philosophers into
Latin. A great reading public now existed; the invention of
printing, which a hundred years before would have been useless,
spread like fire over Europe, and reduced, by four-fifths, the
price of books. The writings of the classical geographers
inspired Prince Henry and Columbus. The New World was
discovered; the sea-route to India was found. Cairo and
Baghdad, the great broker cities between India and Europe, were
ruined. As the Indian Ocean, at first the centre of the world,
had yielded to the Mediterranean, so now the basin of the
Mediterranean was deserted, and the Atlantic became supreme.
Italy decayed; Spain and Portugal succeeded to the throne. But
those countries were ruined by religious bigotry and commercial
monopolies. The trade of Portugal did not belong to the
country, but to the court. The trade of Spain was also a
monopoly shared between the Crown and certain cities of
Castile. The Dutch, the English, and the French obtained free
access to the tropical world, and bought the spices of the East
with the silver of Peru. And then the great movement for
Liberty commenced. All people of the Teutonic race; the
Germans, the Swiss, the Dutch, the English and the Scotch, the
Danes and the Swedes, cast off the yoke of the Italian
supremacy, and some of the superstitions of the Italian creed.

But now a new kind of servitude arose. The kings reduced the
burghers of Europe to subjection. The constitutional monarchies
of the Middle Ages disappeared. In England alone, owing to its
insular position, a standing army was not required for the
protection of the land. In England, therefore, the
encroachments of the Crown were resisted with success. Two
revolutions established the sovereignty of an elected
parliament, and saved England from the fate of France. For in
that land tyranny had struck its roots far down into the soil,
and could not be torn up without the whole land being rent in
twain. In Spain, despotism might rule in safety over ignorance;
but the French had eaten of the Tree of Knowledge, and they
demanded to eat of the Tree of Life. A bread riot became a
rebellion; the rebellion became a revolution. Maddened by
resistance, frenzied with fear, they made their revolution a
massacre. Yet, in spite of mummeries and murders, and
irreligious persecutions; in spite of follies perpetrated in
the name of Reason, and cruelties committed in the name of
Humanity, that revolution regenerated France, and planted
principles which spread over the continent of Europe, and which
are now bearing fruit in Italy and Spain. With the nineteenth
century, a new era of history begins.



Such then is the plain unvarnished story of the human race. We
have traced the stream of history to its source in the dark
forest; we have followed it downwards through the steppes of
the shepherds and the valleys of the great priest peoples; we
have swept swiftly along, past pyramids and pagodas, and the
brick-piles of Babylon; past the temples of Ionia, and the
amphitheatres of Rome; past castles and cathedrals lying
opposite to mosques with graceful minaret and swelling dome;
and so, onwards and onwards, till towns rise on both sides of
the stream; towns sternly walled with sentinels before the
gates; so, onwards and onwards, till the stream widens and is
covered with ships large as palaces, and towering with sail;
till the banks are lined with gardens and villas; and huge
cities, no longer walled, hum with industry, and becloud the
air; and deserts or barren hills are no longer to be seen; and
the banks recede and open out like arms, and the earth-shores
dissolve, and we faintly discern the glassy glimmering of the
boundless sea. We shall descend to the mouth of the river, we
shall explore the unknown waters which lie beyond the present,
we shall survey the course which man has yet to run. But before
we attempt to navigate the future, let us return for a moment
to the past; let us endeavour to ascertain the laws which
direct the movements of the stream, and let us visit the ruins
which are scattered on its banks.

The progress of the human race is caused by the mental efforts
which are made at first from necessity to preserve life, and
secondly from the desire to obtain distinction. In a healthy
nation, each class presses into the class which lies above it;
the blood flows upwards, and so the whole mass, by the united
movements of its single atoms, rises in the scale. The progress
of a nation is the sum-total of the progress of the individuals
composing it. If certain parts of the body politic are stifled
in their growth by means of artificial laws, it is evident that
the growth of the whole will be arrested; for the growth of
each part is dependent on the growth of all. It is usual to
speak of Greece as a free country; and so it was in comparison
with Asia. But more than half its inhabitants were slaves;
labour was degraded; whatever could be done by thought
alone, and by delicate movements of the hands, was carried to
perfection; but in physical science the Greeks did little,
because little could be done without instruments, and
instruments can seldom be invented except by free and
intelligent artisans. So the upper part of the Greek body grew;
the lower part remained in a base and brutal state, discharging
the offices of life, but without beauty and without strength.
The face was that of Hyperion; the legs were shrivelled and
hideous as those of a satyr. In Asia human laws have been still
more fatal to the human progress. In China there is no slavery,
and there is no caste; the poorest man may be exalted to the
highest station; not birth but ability is the criterion of
distinction; appointments are open to the nation, and are
awarded by means of competitive examinations.  But the Chinese
are schoolboys who never grow up; generals and statesmen who
incur the displeasure of the Crown are horsed and flagellated
in the Eton style, a bamboo being used instead of a birch. The
patriarchal system of the steppes has been transferred to the
imperial plain. Just as a Chinese town is merely a Tartar camp
encircled by earthen walls; just as a Chinese house is merely a
Tartar tent, supported by wooden posts and cased with brick, so
it is with the government, domestic and official, of that
country.  Every one is the slave of his father, as it was in the
old tent-life; every father is the slave of an official who
stands in the place of the old clan chief; and all are slaves
of the emperor, who is the viceroy of God. In China, therefore,
senility is supreme; nothing is respectable unless it has
existed at least a thousand years; foreigners are barbarians,
and property is insecure. 

In this one phrase the whole history of Asia is contained. 
In the despotic lands of the East, the peasant who grows more 
corn than he requires is at once an object of attention to the 
police; he is reported to the governor, and a charge is laid against 
him, in order that his grain may be seized. He not only loses the 
fruit of his toil, but he also receives the bastinado. In the same 
manner, if a merchant, by means of his enterprise, industry, and talents,
amasses a large fortune; he also is arrested and is put to
death, that his estate may escheat to the Crown. As the Chinese
say, "The elephant is killed for his ivory." This, then, is the
secret of Asiatic apathy, and not the heat of the climate, or
the inherent qualities of race. Civilised Asia has been always
enthralled, because standing armies have always been required
to resist the attacks of those warlike barbarians who cover the
deserts of Arabia and Tartary, the highlands of Ethiopia and
Kabul. Asia, therefore, soon takes a secondary place, and
Europe becomes the centre of the human growth. Yet it should
not be forgotten that Asia was civilised when Europe was a
forest and a swamp. Asia taught Europe its A B C; Asia taught
Europe to cipher and to draw; Asia taught Europe the language
of the skies, how to calculate eclipses, how to follow the
courses of the stars, how to measure time by means of an
instrument which recorded with its shadow the station of the
sun; how to solve mathematical problems; how to philosophise
with abstract ideas. Let us not forget the school in which we
learnt to spell, and those venerable halls in which we acquired
the rudiments of science and of art. 

The savage worships the shades of his ancestors chiefly from 
selfish fear; the Asiatic follows, from blind prejudice, the wisdom 
of the ancients, and rejects with contempt all knowledge which was 
unknown to them. Yet within these superstitions a beautiful sentiment lies
concealed. We ought, indeed, to reverence the men of the past,
who, by their labours and their inventions, have made us what
we are. This great and glorious city in which we dwell, this
mighty London, the metropolis of the earth; these streets
flowing with eager-minded life, and gleaming with prodigious
wealth; these forests of masts, these dark buildings, turning
refuse into gold, and giving bread to many thousand mouths;
these harnessed elements which whirl us along beneath the
ground, and which soon will convey us through the air; these
spacious halls, adorned with all that can exalt the imagination
or fascinate the sense; these temples of melody; these
galleries, exhibiting excavated worlds; these walls covered
with books in which dwell the souls of the immortal dead,
which, when they are opened, transport us by a magic spell to
lands which are vanished and passed away, or to spheres created
by the poet's art; which make us walk with Plato beneath the
plane trees, or descend with Dante into the dolorous abyss--
to whom do we owe all these? First, to the poor savages,
forgotten and despised, who, by rubbing sticks together,
discovered fire, who first tamed the timid fawn, and first made
the experiment of putting seeds into the ground. And, secondly,
we owe them to those enterprising warriors who established
nationality, and to those priests who devoted their life-time
to the culture of their minds. 

There is a land where the air is always tranquil, where Nature wears 
always the same bright yet lifeless smile; and there, as in a vast museum, 
are preserved the colossal achievements of the past. Let us enter the sad 
and silent river; let us wander on its dusky shores. Buried cities
are beneath our feet; the ground on which we tread is the
pavement of a tomb. See the Pyramids towering to the sky; with
men, like insects, crawling round their base; and the Sphinx,
couched in vast repose, with a ruined temple between its paws.
Since those great monuments were raised, the very heavens have
been changed. When the architects of Egypt began their work,
there was another polar star in the northern sky, and the
Southern Cross shone upon the Baltic shores. How glorious are
the memories of those ancient men, whose names are forgotten,
for they lived and laboured in the distant and unwritten past.
Too great to be known, they sit on the height of centuries and
look down on fame. The boat expands its white and pointed
wings; the sailors chaunt a plaintive song; the waters bubble
around us as we glide past the tombs and temples of the by-gone
days. The men are dead, and the gods are dead. Nought but their
memories remain. Where now is Osiris, who came down upon earth
out of love for men, who was killed by the malice of the Evil
One, who rose again from the grave, and became the Judge of the
dead? Where now is Isis the mother, with the child Horus on her
lap? They are dead; they are gone to the land of the shades.
To-morrow, Jehovah, you and your son shall be with them!

Men die, and the ideas which they call gods die too; yet death
is not destruction, but only a kind of change. Those strange
ethereal secretions of the brain, those wondrously distilled
thoughts of ours--do they ever really die? They are embodied
into words; and from these words, spoken or written, new
thoughts are born within the brains of those who listen or who
read. There was a town named Heliopolis; it had a college
garden, and a willow hanging over the Fountain of the Sun; and
there the professors lectured and discoursed on the Triune God,
and the creation of the world, and, the Serpent Evil, and the
Tree of Life; and on chaos and darkness, and the shining stars;
and there the stone quadrant was pointed to the heavens; and
there the laboratory furnace glowed. And in that college two
foreign students were received, and went forth learned in its
lore. The first created a nation in the Egyptian style; the
second created a system of ideas; and, strange to say, on
Egyptian soil the two were reunited: the philosophy of Moses
was joined in Alexandria to the philosophy of Plato, not only
by the Jews, but also by the Christians; not only in Philo
Judaeus, but also in the Gospel of St. John.

Over the bright blue waters, under the soft and tender sky,
with the purple sails outspread and roses twining round the
mast, with lute and flute resounding from the prow, and red
wine poured upon the sea, and thanksgiving to the gods, we
enter the Piraeus, and salute with our flag the temple on the
hill. Vessels sweep past us, outward bound, laden with statues
and paintings, for such are the manufactures of Athens, where
the milestones are masterpieces, and the streetwalkers poets
and philosophers. Imagine the transports of the young
provincial who went to Athens to commence a career of ambition,
to make himself a name! What raptures he must have felt as he
passed through that City of the Violet Crown with Homer in his
bosom, and hopes of another United Greece within his heart!
What a banquet of delights, what varied treasures of the mind
were spread before him there!  He listened first to a speech of
Pericles on political affairs, and then to a lecture by
Anaxagoras. He was taken to the studio of Phidias and of
Polygnotus: he went to a theatre built of Persian masts to see
a new tragedy by Sophocles or Euripides, and finished the
evening at Aspasia's establishment, with odes of Sappho, and
ballads of Anacreon, and sweet-eyed musicians, and intellectual
heterae. 

So great are the achievements of the Greeks, so deep
is the debt which we owe to them, that criticism appears
ungrateful or obtuse. It is scarcely possible to indicate the
vices and defects of this people without seeming guilty of
insensibility or affectation. It is curious to observe how
grave and sober minds accustomed to gather evidence with care,
and to utter decisions with impartiality, cease to be judicial
when Greece is brought before them. She unveils her beauty, and
they can only admire: they are unable to condemn. Those who
devote themselves to the study of the Greeks become
nationalised in their literature, and patriots of their domain,
It is indeed impossible to read their works without being
impressed by their purity, their calmness, their exquisite
symmetry and finish resembling that which is bestowed upon a
painting or a statue. But it is not only in the Greek writings
that the Greek spirit is contained: it has entered the modern
European mind it permeates the world of thought; it inspires
the ideas of those who have never read the Greek authors, and
who perhaps regard them with disdain. We do not see the
foundations of our minds: they are buried in the past. The
great books and the great discoveries of modern times are based
upon the works of Homer, Plato, Aristotle, and their disciples.
All that we owe to Rome we owe to Greece as well, for Italy was
a child of Greece. The cities on the southern coast bestowed on
the rude natives the elements of culture, and when Rome became
famous it was colonised by Grecian philosophers and artists. 

To Rome we are indebted for those laws from which our
jurisprudence is descended, and to Rome we are indebted for
something else besides. We shall not now pause on the Rome, of
the Republic, when every citizen was a soldier, and worked in
the fields with his own hands; when every temple was the
monument of a victory, and every statue the memorial of a hero;
when door-posts were adorned with the trophies of war, and
halls with the waxen images of ancestors; when the Romans were
simple, religious, and severe, and the vices of luxury were yet
unknown, and banquets were plain and sociable repasts, where
the guests in turn sang old ballads while the piper played. Nor
shall we pause on the Rome of Augustus, when East and West were
united in peace and with equal rights before the law; when the
tyranny of petty princedoms, and the chicanery of Grecian
courts of law, and the blood-feuds of families had been
destroyed; and the empire was calm and not yet becalmed, and
rested a moment between tumult and decay. We shall pass on to a
Rome more great and more sublime; a Rome which ruled Europe,
but not by arms; a Rome which had no mercenary legions, no
Praetorian Guards, and which yet received the tribute of kings,
and whose legates exercised the power of proconsuls. In this
Rome a man clad in the purple of the Caesars and crowned with
the tiara of the Pontifex sent forth his soldiers armed with
the crucifix, and they brought nations captive to his feet.
Rome became a city of God: she put on a spiritual crown. She
cried to the kings, Give! and gold was poured into her
exchequers; she condemned a man who had defied her, and he had
no longer a place among mankind; she proclaimed a Truce of God,
and the swords of robber knights were sheathed; she preached a
crusade, and Europe was hurled into Asia. She lowered the pride
of the haughty, and she exalted the heart of the poor; she
softened the rage of the mighty, she consoled the despair of
the oppressed. She fed the hungry, and she clothed the naked;
she took children to her arms and signed them with the Cross;
she administered the sacraments to dying lips, and laid the
cold body in the peaceful grave. Her first word was to welcome,
and her last word to forgive. 

In the Dark Ages the European States were almost entirely 
severed from one another; it was the Roman Church alone which gave 
them one sentiment in common, and which united them within her fold. 
In those days of violence and confusion, in those days of desolation and
despair, when a stranger was a thing which, like a leper or a
madman, any one might kill, when every gentleman was a highway
robber, when the only kind of lawsuit was a duel, hundreds of
men dressed in gowns of coarse dark stuff, with cords round
their waists and bare feet, travelled with impunity from castle
to castle, preaching a doctrine of peace and good will, holding
up an emblem of humility and sorrow, receiving confessions,
pronouncing penance or absolutions, soothing the agonies of a
wounded conscience, awakening terror in the hardened mind.
Parish churches were built: the baron and his vassals chanted
together the Kyrie Eleison, and bowed their heads together when
the bell sounded and the Host was raised. Here and there in the
sombre forest a band of those holy men encamped, and cut down
the trees and erected a building which was not only a house of
prayer, but also a kind of model farm. The monks worked in the
fields, and had their carpenters' and their blacksmiths' shops.
They copied out books in a fair hand: they painted Madonnas for
their chapel: they composed music for their choir: they
illuminated missals: they studied Arabic and Greek: they read
Cicero and Virgil: they preserved the Roman Law. 

Bright, indeed, yet scanty are these gleams. In the long night of the
Dark Ages we look upon the earth, and only the convent and the
castle appear to be alive. In the convent the sound of
honourable labour mingles with the sound of prayer and praise.
In the castle sits the baron with his children on his lap, and
his wife, leaning on his shoulder: the troubadour sings, and
the page and demoiselle exchange a glance of love. The castle
is the home of music and chivalry and family affection. The
convent is the home of religion and of art. But the people
cower in their wooden huts, half starved, half frozen, and
wolves sniff at them through the chinks in the walls. The
convent prays, and the castle sings: the cottage hungers, and
groans, and dies. Such is the dark night: here and there a star
in the heaven: here and there a torch upon the earth: all else
is cloud and bitter wind. But now, behold the light glowing in
the East: it brightens, it broadens, the day is at hand! The
sun is rising, and will set no more: the castle and the convent
disappear: the world is illumined: freedom is restored. Italy
is a garden, and its blue sea shines with sails. New worlds are
discovered, new arts are invented: the merchants enrich Europe,
and their sons set her free. In a hall at Westminster, in a
redoubt at Bunker Hill, in a tennis court at Versailles, great
victories are won, and liberty at last descends even to the
poor French peasant growing grey in his furrow, even to the
negro picking cotton in the fields. Yet after all, how little
has been done!  The sun shines as yet only on a corner of the
earth: Asia and Africa are buried in the night. And even here
in this island, where liberty was born, where wealth is
sustained by enterprise and industry, and war comes seldom, and
charity abounds, there are yet dark places where the sunlight
never enters, and where hope has never been: where day follows
day in never-changing toil, and where life leads only to the
prison, or the work house, or the grave. Yet a day will come
when the whole earth will be as civilised as Europe: a day will
come when these dark spots will pass away.

If we compare the present with the past, if we trace events at
all epochs to their causes, if we examine the elements of human
growth, we find that Nature has raised us to what we are, not
by fixed laws, but by provisional expedients, and that the
principle which in one age effected the advancement of a
nation, in the next age retarded the mental movement, or even
destroyed it altogether. War, despotism, slavery, and
superstition are now injurious to the progress of Europe, but
they were once the agents by which progress was produced. By
means of war the animated life was slowly raised upward in the
scale, and quadrupeds passed into man. By means of war the
human intelligence was brightened, and the affections were made
intense; weapons and tools were invented; foreign wives were
captured, and the marriages of blood relations were forbidden;
prisoners were tamed, and the women set free; prisoners were
exchanged, accompanied with presents; thus commerce was
established, and thus, by means of war, men were first brought
into amicable relations with one another. By war the tribes
were dispersed all over the world, and adopted various pursuits
according to the conditions by which they were surrounded. By
war the tribes were compressed into the nation. It was war
which founded the Chinese Empire. It was war which had locked
Babylonia, and Egypt, and India. It was war which developed the
genius of Greece. It was war which planted the Greek language
in Asia, and so rendered possible the spread of Christianity.
It was war which united the world in peace from the Cheviot
Hills to the Danube and the Euphrates. It was war which saved
Europe from the quietude of China. It was war which made Mecca
the centre of the East. It was war which united the barons in
the Crusades, and which destroyed the feudal system. 

Even in recent times the action of war has been useful in condensing
scattered elements of nationality, and in liberating subject
populations. United Italy was formed directly or indirectly by
the war of 1859, 1866, and 187O. The last war realised the dreams
of German poets, and united the Teutonic nations more closely
than the shrewdest statesmen could have conceived to be
possible a few years ago. That same war, so calamitous for
France, will yet regenerate that great country, and make her
more prosperous than she has ever been. The American War
emancipated four million men, and decided for ever the question
as to whether the Union was a nationality or a league. But the
Crimean War was injurious to civilisation; it retarded a useful
and inevitable event. Turkey will some day be covered with
corn-fields; Constantinople will some day be a manufacturing
town; but a generation has been lost. Statesmen and journalists
will learn in time that whatever is conquered for civilisation
is conquered for all. To preserve the Balance of Power was an
excellent policy in the Middle Ages, when war was the only
pursuit of a gentleman, and when conquest was the only ambition
of kings. It is now suited only for the highlands of Abyssinia.
The jealousy with which 'true Britons' regard the Russian
success in Central Asia is surely a very miserable feeling.
That a vast region of the earth should be opened, that robbery
and rapine and slave-making raids should be suppressed, that
waste-lands should be cultivated, that new stores of wealth
should be discovered, that new markets should be established
for the products of European industry, our own among the rest,
that Russia should adjoin England in Asia as she adjoins
Germany in Europe--what a lamentable occurrence, what an
ominous event! In Central Africa it often happens that between
two barbarous. and distrustful nations there is a wide neutral
ground, inhabited by wild beasts, which prey upon the flocks
and herds on either side. Such is the policy which maintains
the existence of barbarous kingdoms between two civilised
frontiers. 

The great Turkish and Chinese Empires, the lands of
Morocco, Abyssinia, and Tibet, will be eventually filled with
free, industrious, and educated populations. But those people
will never begin to advance until their property is rendered
secure, until they enjoy the rights of man; and these they will
never obtain except by means of European conquest. In British
India the peasant reaps the rice which he has sown; and the
merchant has no need to hide his gold beneath the ground. The
young men of the new generation are looking forward to the time
when the civil appointments of their country will he held by
them. The Indian Mutiny was a mutiny only, and not a rebellion;
the industrial and mercantile classes were on the English
side. There is a sickly school of politicians who declare that
all countries belong to their inhabitants, and that to take
them is a crime. If any country in Asia did belong to its
inhabitants, there might be some force in this objection. But
Asia is possessed by a few kings and by their soldiers; these
rulers are usually foreigners; the masses of the people are
invariably slaves. The conquest of Asia by European Powers is
therefore in reality emancipation, and is the first step
towards the establishment of Oriental nationality. It is
needless to say that Europe will never engage in crusades to
liberate servile populations; but the pride and ignorance of
military despots will provoke foreign wars, which will prove
fatal to their rule. Thus war will, for long years yet to come,
be required to prepare the way for freedom and progress in the
East; and in Europe itself, it is not probable that war will
ever absolutely cease until science discovers some destroying
force, so simple in its administration, so horrible in its
effects, that all art, all gallantry, will be at an end, and
battles will be massacres which the feelings of mankind will be
unable to endure.

A second expedient of Nature is religion. Men believe in the
existence of beings who can punish and reward them in this life
or in the next, who are the true rulers of the world, and who
have deputed certain men, called priests, to collect tribute
and to pass laws on their behalf. By means of these erroneous
ideas, a system of government is formed to which kings
themselves are subjected; the moral nature of man is improved,
the sciences and arts are developed, distinct and hostile races
are united. But error, like war, is only provisional. In
Europe, religion no longer exists as a political power, but it
will probably yet render service to civilisation in assisting
to Europeanise the barbarous nations whom events will in time
bring under our control.

A third expedient of Nature is inequality of conditions.
Sloth is the natural state of man; prolonged and monotonous
labour is hard for him to bear. The savage can follow a trail
through the forest, or can lie in ambush for days at a time;
this pertinacity and patience are native to his mind,; they
belong to the animals from whom he is descended: but the
cultivation of the soil is a new kind of labour, and it is only
followed from compulsion. It is probable that when domestic
slavery was invented, a great service was rendered to mankind,
and it has already been shown that when prisoners of war were
tamed and broken in, women were set free, and became beautiful,
long-haired, low-voiced, sweet-eyed creatures, delicate in
form, modest in demeanour, and refined in soul. It was also by
means of slavery that a system of superfluous labour was
established; for women, when slaves, are made only to labour
for the essentials of life. It was by means of slavery that
leisure was created, that the priests were enabled to make
experiments, and to cultivate the arts, that the great public
buildings of the ancient lands were raised. It was slavery
which arrested the progress of Greece; but it was also slavery
which enabled all the free men of a Greek town to be sculptors,
poets, and philosophers. Slavery is now happily extinct, and
can never be revived under the sanction of civilised authority.
But a European Government, ought perhaps to introduce
compulsory labour among the barbarous races that acknowledge
its sovereignty and occupy its land. Children are ruled and
schooled by force, and it is not an empty metaphor to say that
savages are children. If they were made to work, not for the
benefit of others, but for their own; if the rewards of their
labour were bestowed, not on their masters, but on themselves,
the habit of work would become with them a second nature, as it
is with us, and they would learn to require luxuries which
industry only could obtain. A man is not a slave in being
compelled to work against his will, but in being compelled to
work without hope and without reward. Enforced labour is
undoubtedly a hardship, but it is one which at present belongs
to the lot of man, and is indispensable to progress. 

Mankind grows because men desire to better themselves in life, and
this desire proceeds from the inequality of conditions. A time
will undoubtedly arrive when all men and women will be equal,
and when the love of money, which is now the root of all
industry, and which therefore is now the root of all good, will
cease to animate the human mind. But changes so prodigious can
only be effected in prodigious periods of time. Human nature
cannot be transformed by a coup d'etat, as the Comtists and
Communists imagine. It is a complete delusion to suppose that
wealth can be equalised and happiness impartially distributed
by any process of law, Act of Parliament, or revolutionary
measure. It is easy to compose a pathetic scene in a novel, or
a loud article in a magazine by contrasting Dives lunching on
turtle at Birch's with Lazarus feeding on garbage in a cellar.
But the poor man loses nothing , because another man is rich.
The Communist might as well denounce one man for enjoying
excellent health, while another man is a victim to consumption.
Wealth, like health, is in the air; if a man makes a fortune he
draws money from Nature and gives it to the general stock.
Every millionaire enriches the community. It is undoubtedly the
duty of the government to mitigate so far as lies within its
power, the miseries which result from overpopulation. But as
long as men continue unequal in patience, industry, talent, and
sobriety, so long there will be rich men and poor men -- men
who roll in their carriages, and men who die in the streets. If
all the property of this country were divided, things would
soon return to their actual condition, unless some scheme could
also be devised for changing human nature; and as for the
system of the Commune, which makes it impossible for a man to
rise or to fall, it is merely the old caste system revived; if
it could be put into force, all industry would be disheartened,
emulation would cease, mankind would go to sleep. 

It is not, however, strange that superficial writers should 
suppose that the evils of social life can be altered by changes in
government and law. In the lands of the East, in the Spain and
Portugal of the sixteenth century, in the France of the
eighteenth century, in the American Colonies, and in England
itself, whole classes were at one time plunged by misgovernment
into suffering of body and apathy of mind. But a government can
confer few benefits upon a people except by destroying its own
laws. The great reforms which followed the publication of "The
Wealth of Nations" may all be summed up in the word Repeal.
Commerce was regulated in former times by a number of paternal
laws, which have since been happily withdrawn. The government
still pays with our money a number of gentlemen to give us
information respecting a future state, and still requires that
in certain business transactions a document shall be drawn up
with mysterious rites in a mediaeval jargon; but, placing aside
hereditary evils which, on account of vested interests, it is
impossible at once to remove, it may fairly be asserted that
the government of this country is as nearly perfect as any
government can be. Power rests upon public opinion, and is so
beautifully poised that it can be overthrown and replaced
without the business of the state being interrupted for a day.
If the Executive is condemned by the nation, the press acts
with irresistible force upon the Commons; a vote of censure is
passed and the rulers of a great empire abdicate their thrones.
The House of Lords is also an admirable Upper Chamber; for if
it were filled with ambitious men elected by the people it
would enter into conflict with the Commons. And as for the
Royal Image it costs little and is useful as an emblem. The
government of England possesses at the same time  the freedom
which is only found in a republic, and the loyalty which is
only felt towards a monarch. 

Some writers believe that this monarchy is injurious to the public and 
argue as follows: There are no paupers in America, and America is a 
republic. There are many paupers in England, and England is a monarchy. 
Therefore England should imitate America. It may astonish these writers
to learn that America is in reality more of a monarchy than
England. Buckingham Palace is a private dwelling; but the White
House, though it has none of the pomp, has all the power of a
Court. The king of America has more to give away than any king
of Great Britain since the time of Charles the Second. He has
the power to discharge of his own good pleasure and mere motion
every ambassador, every consul, every head of department, every
government employé, down to the clerk on two hundred dollars a
year, and to fill their places with his own friends. In America
the opinion of the public can with difficulty act upon the
government. The press has no dignity, and very little power.
Practices occur in the House of Representatives which have been
unknown in England since the days of Walpole. If the prosperity
of a country depended on its government, America would be less
prosperous than England. But in point of fact America is the
happiest country in the world. There is not a man in the vast
land which lies between the oceans who, however humble his
occupation may be, does not hope to make a fortune before he
dies. The whole nation is possessed with the spirit which may
be observed in Fleet Street and Cheapside; the boys sharp-eyed
and curious, the men hastening eagerly along, even the women
walking as if they had an object in view. There are in America
no dull-eyed heavy-footed labourers, who slouch to and fro from
their cottage to their work, from their work to the beer-house,
without a higher hope in life than a sixpence from the squire
when they open a gate. There are no girls of the milliner class
who prefer being the mistresses of gentlemen to marrying men of
their own station with a Cockney accent and red hands. The
upper classes in America have not that exquisite refinement
which exists in the highest circles of society in Europe. But
if we take the whole people through and through, we find them
the most civilised nation on the earth. They, preserve in a
degree hitherto without example the dignity of human nature
unimpaired. Their nobleness of character results from
prosperity; and their prosperity is due to the nature of their
land. Those who are unable to earn a living in the east, have
only to move towards the west. 

This then is the reason that the English race in America is more happy, 
more enlightened, and more thriving, than it is in the mother-land. 
Politically speaking, the emigrant gains nothing; he is as free in England
as he is in America; but he leaves a land where labour is
depreciated, and goes to a land where labour is in demand. That
England may become as prosperous as America, it must be placed
under American conditions; that is to say, food must be cheap,
labour must be dear, emigration must be easy. It is not by
universal suffrage, it is not by any Act of Parliament that
these conditions can be created. It is Science alone which can
Americanise England; it is Science alone which can ameliorate
the condition of the human race.

When Man first wandered in the dark forest, he was Nature's
serf; he offered tribute and prayer to the winds, and the
lightning, and the rain, to the cave-lion, which seized his
burrow for its lair, to the mammoth, which devoured his scanty
crops. But as time passed on, he ventured, to rebel; he made
stone his servant; he discovered fire and vegetable poison; he
domesticated iron; he slew the wild beasts or subdued them; he
made them feed him and give him clothes. He became a chief
surrounded by his slaves; the fire lay beside him with dull red
eye and yellow tongue waiting his instructions to prepare his
dinner, or to make him poison, or to go with him to the war,
and fly on the houses of the enemy, hissing, roaring, and
consuming all. The trees of the forest were his flock, he
slaughtered them at his convenience; the earth brought forth at
his command. He struck iron upon wood or stone and hewed out
the fancies of his brain; he plucked shells, and flowers, and
the bright red berries, and twined them in his hair; he cut the
pebble to a sparkling gem, he made the dull clay a transparent
stone. The river which once he had worshipped as a god, or
which he had vainly attacked with sword and spear, he now
conquered to his will. He made the winds grind his corn and
carry him across the waters; he made the stars serve him as a
guide. He obtained from salt and wood and sulphur a destroying
force. He drew from fire, and water, the awful power which
produces the volcano, and made it do the work of human hands.
He made the sun paint his portraits, and gave the lightning a
situation in the post-office.

Thus Man has taken into his service, and modified to his use,
the animals, the plants, the earths and the stones, the waters
and the winds, and the more complex forces of heat,
electricity, sunlight, magnetism, with chemical powers of many
kinds. By means of his inventions and discoveries, by means of
the arts and trades, and by means of the industry resulting
from them, he has raised himself from the condition of a serf
to the condition of a lord. His triumph, indeed, is
incomplete; his kingdom is not yet come. The Prince of Darkness
is still triumphant in many regions of the world; epidemics
still rage, death is yet victorious. But the God of Light, the
Spirit of Knowledge, the Divine Intellect, is gradually
spreading over the planet and upwards to the skies. The
beautiful legend will yet come true; Ormuzd will vanquish
Ahriman; Satan will be overcome; Virtue will descend from
heaven, surrounded by her angels, and reign over the hearts of
men. Earth, which is now a purgatory, will be made a paradise,
not by idle prayers and supplications, but by the efforts of
man himself, and by means of mental achievements analogous to
those which have raised him to his present state. Those
inventions and discoveries which have made him, by the grace of
God, king of the animals, lord of the elements, and sovereign
of steam and electricity, were all of them founded on
experiment and observation. We can conquer Nature only by
obeying her laws, and in order to obey her laws we must first
learn what they are. When we have ascertained, by means of
Science, the method of Nature's operations, we shall be able to
take her place and to perform them for ourselves. When we
understand the laws which regulate the complex phenomena of
life, we shall be able to predict the future as we are already
able to predict comets and eclipses and the planetary
movements.

Three inventions which perhaps may be long delayed, but which
possibly are near at hand, will give to this overcrowded island
the prosperous conditions of the United States. The first is
the discovery of a motive force which will take the place of
steam, with its cumbrous fuel of oil or coal; secondly, the
invention of aerial locomotion which will transport labour at a
trifling cost of money and of time to any part of the planet,
and which, by annihilating distance, will speedily extinguish
national distinctions; and thirdly, the manufacture of flesh
and flour from the elements by a chemical process in the
laboratory, similar to that which is now performed within the
bodies of the animals and plants. Food will then be
manufactured in unlimited quantities at a trifling expense; and
our enlightened posterity will look back upon us who eat oxen
and sheep just as we look back upon cannibals. Hunger and
starvation will then be unknown, and the best part of the human
life will no longer be wasted in the tedious process of
cultivating the fields. Population will mightily increase, and
the earth will be a garden. Governments will be conducted with
the quietude and regularity of club committees. The interest
which is now felt in politics will be transferred to science;
the latest news from the laboratory of the chemist, or the
observatory of the astronomer, or the experimenting room of the
biologist will be eagerly discussed. Poetry and the fine arts
will take that place in the heart which religion now holds.
Luxuries will be cheapened and made common to all; none will be
rich, and none poor. Not only will Man subdue the forces of
evil that are without; he will also subdue those that are
within. He will repress the base instincts and propensities
which he has inherited from the animals below; he will obey the
laws that are written on his heart; he will worship the
divinity within him. As our conscience forbids us to commit
actions which the conscience of the savage allows, so the moral
sense of our successors will stigmatise as crimes those
offences against the intellect which are sanctioned by
ourselves. Idleness and stupidity will be regarded with
abhorrence. Women will become the companions of men, and the
tutors of their children. The whole world will be united by the
same sentiment which united the primeval clan, and which made
its members think, feel, and act as one. Men will look upon
this star as their fatherland; its progress will be their
ambition; the gratitude of others their reward. These bodies
which now we: wear belong to the lower animals; our minds have
already outgrown them; already we look upon them with contempt.
A time will come when Science will transform them by means
which we cannot conjecture, and which, even if explained to us,
we could not now under stand, just as the savage cannot
understand electricity, magnetism, steam. Disease will be
extirpated; the causes of decay will be removed; immortality
will be invented. And then, the earth being small, mankind will
migrate into space, and will cross the airless Saharas which
separate planet from planet, and sun from sun. The earth will
become a Holy Land which will be visited by pilgrims from all
the quarters of the universe. Finally, men will master the
forces of Nature; they will become themselves architects of
systems, manufacturers of worlds. 

Man then will be perfect; he will then be a creator; he will 
therefore  be what the vulgar worship as a god. But even then, 
he will in reality be no nearer than he is at present to the First 
Cause, the Inscrutable Mystery, the GOD. There is but a difference in
degree between the chemist who  to-day arranges forces in his
laboratory so that they produce a gas, and the creator who
arranges forces so that they produce a world; between the
gardener who plants a seed, and the creator who plants a
nebula. It is a question for us now to consider whether we have
any personal relations towards the Supreme Power; whether there
exists another world in which we shall be requited according to
our actions. Not only is this a grand problem of philosophy; it
is of all questions the most practical for us, the one in which
our interests are most vitally concerned. This life is short;
and its pleasures are poor; when we have obtained what we
desire, it is nearly time to die. If it can be shown that, by
living in a certain manner, eternal happiness may be obtained,
then clearly no one except a fool or a madman would refuse to
live in such a manner. We shall therefore examine the current
theory respecting the nature of the Creator, the design of
Creation; and the future destiny of Man. But before we proceed
to this inquiry, we must first state that we intend to separate
theology from morality. Whatever may be the nature of the
Deity, and whether there is a future life or not, the great
moral laws can be in no way changed. God is a purely scientific
question. Whether he is personal or impersonal, definable or
undefinable, our duties and responsibilities remain the same.
The existence of a heaven and a hell can affect our
calculations, but, cannot affect our moral liabilities.

The popular theory is this: -- the world was made by a Great
Being; he created man in his own image; and therefore his mind
is analogous to that of man. But while our minds are imperfect,
troubled by passions, stained with sin, and limited in power,
his mind is perfect in beauty, perfect in power, perfect in
love. He is omnipotent and omnipresent. He loves men whom he
has made, but he sorrows over their transgressions. He has
placed them on earth as a means of probation; those who have
sinned and repent, those who are contrite and humble, he will
forgive, and on them he will bestow everlasting happiness.
Those who are wicked, and stubborn, and hard of heart, those
who deny and resist his authority, he will punish according to
his justice. This reward is bestowed, this punishment is
inflicted on the soul, a spirit which dwells within the body
during life. It is something entirely distinct from the
intellect or mind. The soul of the poorest creature in the
streets and the souls of the greatest philosopher or poet are
equal before the Creator; he is no respecter of person; souls
are measured only by their sins. But the sins of the ignorant
will be forgiven; the sins of the more enlightened will be more
severely judged.

Now this appears a very reasonable theory as long as we do not
examine it closely, and as long as we do not carry out its
propositions to their full extent. But when we do so, we find
that it conducts us to absurdity, as we shall very quickly
prove.

The souls of idiots not being responsible for their sins will
go to heaven; the souls of such men as Goethe and Rousseau are
in danger of hell-fire. Therefore it is better to be born an
idiot than to be born a Goethe or a Rousseau; and that is
altogether absurd.

It is asserted that the doctrine of the immortality of the
soul, and of happiness in a future state, gives us a solution
of that distressing problem, the misery of the innocent on
earth. But in reality it does nothing of the kind, It does not
explain the origin of evil, and it does not justify the
existence of evil. A poor helpless infant is thrust into the
world by a higher force; it has done no one any harm, yet it is
tortured in the most dreadful manner; it is nourished in vice,
and crime, and disease; it is allowed to suffer a certain time
and then it is murdered. It is all very well to say that
afterwards it was taken to everlasting bliss; but why was it
not taken there direct? If a man has a child and beats that
child for no reason whatever, is it any palliation of the crime
to say that he afterwards gave it cake and wine?

This brings us to the character of the Creator. We must beg to
observe again that we describe, not the actual Creator, but the
popular idea of the Creator. It is said that the Supreme Power
has a mind; this we deny, and to show that our reasons for
denying it are good, we shall proceed to criticise this
imaginary mind.

In the first place, we shall state as an incontrovertible maxim
in morality that a god has no right to create men except for
their own good. This may appear to the reader an extraordinary
statement; but had he lived in France at the time of Louis XIV,
he would also have thought it an extraordinary statement that
kings existed for the good of the people and not people for the
good of kings. When the Duke of Burgundy first propounded that
axiom, St. Simon, by no means a servile courtier, and an
enlightened man for his age, was "delighted with the
benevolence of the saying, but startled by its novelty and
terrified by its boldness." Our proposition may appear very
strange, but it certainly cannot be refuted; for if it is said
that the Creator is so great that he is placed above our laws
of morality, then what is that but placing Might above Right?
And if the maxim be admitted as correct, then how can the
phenomena of life be justified?

It is said that the Creator is omnipotent, and also that he is
benevolent. But one proposition contradicts the other. It is
said that he is perfect in power, and that he is also perfect
in purity. We shall show that he cannot possibly be both.

The conduct of a father towards his child appears to be cruel,
but it is not cruel in reality. He beats the child, but he does
it for the child's own good; he is not omnipotent; he is
therefore obliged to choose between two evils. But the Creator
is omnipotent; he therefore chooses cruelty as a means of
education or development; he therefore has a preference for
cruelty or he would not choose it; he is therefore fond of
cruelty or he would not prefer it; he is therefore cruel, which
is absurd.

Again, either sin entered the world against the will of the
Creator, in which case he is not omnipotent, or it entered with
his permission, in which case it is his agent, in which case he
selects sin, in which case he has a preference for sin, in
which case he is fond of sin, in which case he is sinful, which
is an absurdity again.

The good in this world predominates over the bad; the good is
ever increasing, the bad is ever diminishing. But if God is
Love why is there any bad at all? Is the world like a novel in
which the villains are put in to make it more dramatic, and in
which virtue only triumphs in the third volume? It is certain
that the feelings of the created have in no way been
considered. If indeed there were a judgment-day it would be for
man to appear at the bar not as criminal but as an accuser.
What has he done that he should be subjected to a life of
torture and temptation? God might have made us all happy, and
he has made us all miserable. Is that benevolence? God might
have made us all pure, and he has made us all sinful. Is that
the perfection of morality? If I believed in the existence of
this man-created God, of this divine Nebuchadnezzar, I would
say, “You can make me live in your world, O Creator, but you
cannot make me admire it; you can load me with chains, but you
cannot make me flatter you; you can send me to hell-fire, but
you can not obtain my esteem. And if you condemn me, you
condemn yourself. If I have committed sins, you invented them,
which is worse. If the watch you have made does not go well,
whose fault is that? Is it rational to damn the wheels and the
springs?”

But it is when we open the Book of Nature, that book inscribed
in blood and tears; it is when we study the laws regulating
life, the laws productive of development, that we see plainly
how illusive is this theory that God is Love. In all things
there is cruel, profligate, and abandoned waste. Of all the
animals that are born a few only can survive; and it is owing
to this law that development takes place. The law of Murder is
the law of Growth. Life is one long tragedy; creation is one
great crime. And not only is there waste in animal and human
life, there is also waste in moral life. The instinct of love
is planted in the human breast, and that which to some is a
solace is to others a torture. How many hearts yearning for
affection are blighted in solitude and coldness! How many women
seated by their lonely firesides are musing of the days that
might have been! How many eyes when they meet these words which
remind them of their sorrows will be filled with tears! O cold,
cruel, miserable life, how long are your pains, how brief are
your delights! What are joys but pretty children that grow into
regrets? What is happiness but a passing dream in which we seem
to be asleep, and which we know only to have been when it is
past? Pain, grief, disease, and death--are these the inventions
of a loving God? That no animal shall rise to excellence except
by being fatal to the life of others--is this the law of a kind
Creator? It is useless to say that pain has its benevolence,
that massacre has its mercy. Why is it so ordained that bad
should be the raw material of good? Pain is not less pain
because it is useful; murder is not less murder because it is
conducive to development. Here is blood upon the hand still,
and all the perfumes of Arabia will not sweeten it.

To this then we are brought with the much-belauded theory of a
semi-human Providence, an anthropoid Deity, a Constructive
Mind, a Deus Paleyensis, a God created in the image of a
watchmaker. What then are we to infer? Why, simply this, that
the current theory is false; that all attempts to define the
Creator bring us only to ridiculous conclusions; that the
Supreme Power is not a Mind, but something higher than a Mind;
not a Force, but something higher than a Force; not a Being,
but something higher than a Being; something for which we have
no words, something for which we have no ideas. We are to infer
that Man is not made in the image of his Maker, and that Man
can no more understand his Maker than the beetles and the worms
can understand him. As men in the days of ignorance endeavoured
to discover perpetual motion and the philosopher's stone, so
now they endeavour to define God. But in time also they will
learn that the nature of the Deity is beyond the powers of the
human intellect to solve. The universe is anonymous; it is
published under secondary laws; these at least we are able to
investigate, and in these perhaps we may find a partial
solution of the great problem. The origin of evil cannot be
explained, for we cannot explain the origin of matter. But a
careful and unprejudiced study of Nature reveals an interesting
fact and one that will be of value to mankind.

The earth resembles a picture, of which we, like insects which
crawl upon its surface, can form but a faint and incoherent
idea. We see here and there a glorious flash of colour; we have
a dim conception that there is union in all its parts; yet to
us, because we are so near, the tints appear to be blurred and
confused. But let us expand our wings and flutter off into the
air; let us fly some distance backwards into Space until we
have reached the right point of view. And now the colours blend
and harmonise together, and we see that the picture represents
One Man.

The body of a human individual is composed of cell-like bodies
which are called "physiological units." Each cell or atom has
its own individuality; it grows, it is nurtured, it brings
forth young, and it dies. It is in fact an animalcule. It has
its own body and its own mind. As the atoms are to the human
unit, so the human units are to the human whole. There is only
One Man upon the earth; what we call men are not individuals
but components; what we call, death is merely the bursting of a
cell; wars and epidemics are merely inflammatory phenomena
incident on certain stages of growth. There is no such thing as
a ghost or soul; the intellects of men resemble those instincts
which inhabit the corpuscules, and which are dispersed when the
corpuscule dies. Yet they are not lost, they are preserved
within the body and enter other forms. Men therefore have no
connection with Nature, except through the organism to which
they belong. Nature does not recognise their individual
existence. But each atom is conscious of its life; each atom
can improve itself in beauty and in strength; each atom can
therefore, in an infinitesimal degree, assist the development
of the Human Mind. If we take the life of a single atom, that
is to say of a single man, or if we look only at a single
group, all appears to be cruelty and confusion; but when we
survey mankind as One, we find it becoming more and more noble,
more and more divine, slowly ripening towards perfection. We
belong to the minutiae of Nature, we are in her sight, as the
rain-drop in the sky; whether a man lives, or whether he dies,
is as much a matter of indifference to Nature as whether a
rain-drop falls upon the field and feeds a blade of grass, or
falls upon a stone and is dried to death. She does not
supervise these small details. This discovery is by no means
flattering, but it enlarges our idea of the scheme of creation.
That universe must indeed be great in which human beings are so
small!

The following facts result from our investigations:
Supernatural Christianity is false. God-worship is idolatry.
Prayer is useless. The soul is not immortal. There are no
rewards and there are no punishments in a future state.

It now remains to be considered whether it is right to say so.
It will doubtless be supposed that I shall make use of the plea
that a writer is always justified in publishing the truth, or
what he conscientiously believes to be the truth, and that if
it does harm he is not to blame. But I shall at once
acknowledge that truth is only a means towards an end -- the
welfare of the human race. If it can be shown that by speaking
the truth an injury is inflicted on mankind, then a stubborn
adherence to truth becomes merely a Pharisee virtue, a
spiritual pride. But in moral life Truth, though not
infallible, is our safest guide, and those who maintain that it
should be repressed must be prepared to bring forward
irrefutable arguments in favour of their cause. If so much as
the shadow of a doubt remains, their client, Falsehood, is non-
suited, and Truth remains in possession of the conscience. Let
us now hear what the special pleaders have to say. The
advocates for Christianity versus Truth will speak first, and I
shall reply; and then the advocates for Deism will state their
case. What they will endeavour to prove is this, that even
admitting the truth of my propositions, it is an immoral action
to give them to the world. On the other hand, I undertake to
show that the destruction of Christianity is essential to the
interests of civilisation; and also that man will never attain
his full powers as a moral being until he has ceased to believe
in a personal God and in the immortality of the soul.

"Christianity, we allow, is human in its origin, erroneous in
its theories, delusive in its threats and its rewards,” say 
the advocates for Christianity.  “Jesus Christ was a man 
with all the faults and imperfections of the prophetic character. 
The Bible is simply a collection of Jewish writings. The 
miracles in the Old Testament deserve no more
attention from historians than the miracles in Homer. The
miracles in the gospels are like the miracles in Plutarch's
Lives; they do not lessen the value of the biography, and the
value of the biography does not lessen the absurdity of the
miracles. So far we go with you. But we assert that this
religion with all its errors has rendered inestimable services
to civilisation, and that it is so inseparably associated in
the minds of men with purity of life, and the precepts of
morality, that it is impossible to attack Christianity without
also attacking all that is good, all that is pure, all that is
lovely in human nature. When you travelled in Africa did you
not join in the sacrifices of the pagans? Did you not always
speak with respect of their wood spirits and their water
spirits, and their gods of the water and the sky? And did you
not take off your shoes when you entered the mosque, and did
you not, when they gave you the religious blessing, return the
religious reply? And since you could be so tolerant to savages,
surely you are bound to be more tolerant still to those who
belong to your own race, to those who possess a nobler
religion, and whose minds can be made by a careless word to
suffer the most exquisite pain. Yet you attack Christianity,
and you attack it in the wrong way. You ought, in the interests
of your own cause, to write in such a manner that minds might
be gradually trained to reflection and decoyed to doubt. It is
not only heartless and inhuman, it is also unwise, it is also
unscientific, to say things which will shock and disgust those
who are beginning to inquire, and it is bad taste to jest on
subjects which if not sacred in themselves are held sacred in
the, eyes of many thoughtful and cultivated men. You ought to
adopt a tone of reluctance and to demonstrate, as it were
against your will, the errors of the popular religion.
Believers at least have a right to demand that if you discuss
these questions upon which their hopes of eternal happiness are
based, you will do so with gravity and decorum."

To this I reply that the religion of the Africans, whether
pagan or Moslem, is suited to their intellects, and is
therefore a true religion; and the same may be said of
Christianity among uneducated people. But Christianity is not
in accordance with the cultivated mind; it can only be accepted
or rather retained by suppressing doubts, and by denouncing
inquiry as sinful. It is therefore a superstition, and ought to
be destroyed. With respect to the services which it once
rendered to civilisation, I cheerfully acknowledge them, but
the same argument might once have been advanced in favour of
the oracle at Delphi, without which there would have been no
Greek culture, and therefore no Christianity. The question is
not whether Christianity assisted the civilisation of our
ancestors, but whether it is now assisting our own. I am firmly
persuaded that whatever is injurious to the intellect is also
injurious to moral life; and on this conviction I base my
conduct with respect to Christianity. That religion is
pernicious to the intellect; it demands that the reason shall
be sacrificed upon the altar; it orders civilised men to
believe in the legends of a savage race. It places a hideous
image, covered with dirt and blood, in the Holy of Holies; it
rends the sacred Veil of Truth in twain, It teaches that the
Creator of the Universe, that sublime, that inscrutable power,
exhibited his back to Moses, and ordered Hosea to commit
adultery, and Ezekiel to eat dung. There is no need to say
anything more. Such a religion is blasphemous and foul. Let
those admire it who are able. I, for my part, feel it my duty
to set free from its chains as many as I can. Upon this point
my conscience speaks clearly, and it shall be obeyed. With
respect to manner and means, I shall use the arguments and the
style best suited for my purpose. There has been enough of
writing by implication and by innuendo; I do not believe in its
utility, and I do not approve of its disguise. There should be
no deceit in matters of religion. In my future assaults on
Christianity I shall use the clearest language that I am able
to command. 

Ridicule is a destructive instrument, and it is my
intention to destroy. If a man is cutting down a tree, it is
useless asking him not to strike so hard. But because I make
use of ridicule, it does not follow that I am writing merely
for amusement; and because I tear up a belief by the roots, it
does not follow that I am indifferent to the pain which I
inflict. Great revolutions cannot be accomplished without much
anguish and some evil being caused. Did not the Roman women
suffer when the Christians came and robbed them of their gods,
and raised their minds, through pain and sorrow, to a higher
faith? The religion which I teach is as high above Christianity
as that religion was superior to the idolatry of Rome. And
when, the relative civilisations of the two ages are compared,
this fetish of ink and paper, this Syrian book is, in truth,
not less an idol than those statues which obtained the
adoration of the Italians and the Greeks. The statues were
beautiful as statues; the book is admirable as a book; but the
statues did not come down from heaven; the book was not a
magical composition; it bears the marks not only of human
genius, but also of human depravity and superstition.

As for the advocates of Deism they acknowledge that
Christianity is unsuited to the mental condition of the age;
they acknowledge that the Bible ought to be attacked as
Xenophanes attacked Homer; they acknowledge that the fables of
a god impregnating a woman, of a god living on the earth, are
relics of pagan superstition; they acknowledge that the
doctrine of eternal punishment is incompatible with justice,
and is therefore incompatible with God. But they declare that
Christianity should not be destroyed but reformed; that its
barbarous elements should be expelled, and that then, as a pure
God-worship, it should be offered to the world. "It is true”, they say,
“that God is an idol, an image made of human ideas which, to
superior beings, would appear as coarse and vile for such a
purpose as the wood and the stone of the savage appear to us.
But this idolatry is conducive to the morality of man. That
exquisite form which he raises in his mind, and before which he
prostrates him self in prayer, that God of purity and love,
becomes his ideal and example. As the Greek women placed
statues of Apollo and Narcissus in their chambers that the
beauty of the marble form might enter their wombs through the
windows of their eyes, so by ever contemplating perfection the
mind is ennobled, and the actions born of it are divine. And
surely it is a sweet and consoling faith that there is above us
a great and benignant Being who, when the sorrows of this life
are past, will take us to himself. How can it injure men to
believe that the righteous will he rewarded and that the wicked
will be punished in a future state? What good can be done by
destroying a belief so full of solace for the sorrowful, so
full of promise for the virtuous, so full of terror for the
workers of iniquity? You do not deny that ‘much anguish and some
evil will be caused’ by the destruction of this belief; and what
have you to show on the other side? What will you place in the
balance? Consider what a dreadful thing it is to take even from
a single human being the hopes of a future life. 

“All men cannot be philosophers; all cannot resign themselves with 
fortitude and calm to the death-warrant of the soul. Annihilation has
perhaps more terrors for the mind than eternal punishment
itself. O, make not the heart an orphan, cast it not naked and
weeping on the world! Take it not away from its father, kill
not its hopes of an eternal home! There are mothers whose
children have gone before them to the grave, poor miserable
women whose beauty is faded, who have none to care for them on
earth, whose only happiness is in the hope that when their life
is ended they will be joined again to those whom they have
lost. And will you take that hope away? There are men who have
passed their whole lives in discipline and self-restraint that
they may be rewarded in a future state; will you tell them that
they have lived under an illusion, that they would have done
better to laugh, and to feast, and to say ‘Let us make merry,
for to-morrow we shall die’? There are men whom the fear of
punishment in a future life deters from vice and perhaps from
crime. Will you dare to spread a doctrine which unlooses all
restraints, and leaves men to the fury of their passions? It is
true that we are not demoralised by this belief in the
impersonality of God and the extinction of the soul; but it
would be a dangerous belief for those who are exposed to strong
temptations, and whose minds have not been raised by culture to
the religion of dignity and self-control."

In the first place, I admit that the worship and contemplation
of a man-like but ideal Being must have, through the law of
imitation, an ennobling effect on the mind of the idolater, but
only so long as the belief in such a Being harmonises with the
intellect. It has been shown that this theory of a benignant
God is contradicted by the laws of Nature. We must judge of the
tree by its fruits; we must judge of the maker by that which he
has made. The Author of the world invented not only the good
but also the evil in the world; he invented cruelty; he
invented sin. If he invented sin how can he be otherwise than
sinful? And if he invented cruelty how can he be otherwise than
cruel? From this inexorable logic we can only escape by giving
up the hypothesis of a personal Creator. Those who believe in a
God of Love must close their eyes to the phenomena of life, or
garble the universe to suit their theory. This, it is needless
to say, is injurious to the intellect; whatever is injurious to
the intellect is injurious to morality; and, therefore, the
belief in a God of Love is injurious to morality. God-worship
must be classed with those provisional expedients, Famine, War,
Slavery, the Inequality of Conditions, the Desire of Gain,
which Nature employs for the development of man, and which she
throws aside when they have served her turn, as a carpenter
changes his tools at the various stages of his work.

The abolition of this ancient and elevated faith; the
dethronement of God; the extinction of piety as a personal
feeling; the destruction of an Image made of golden thoughts in
the exquisite form of an Ideal Man, and tenderly enshrined in
the human heart -- these appear to be evils, and such
undoubtedly they are. But the conduct of life is a choice of
evils. We can do nothing that is exclusively and absolutely
good. Le genre humain n'est pas place entre le bien et le mal,
mais entre le mal et le pire. No useful inventions can be
introduced without some branch of industry being killed and
hundreds of worthy men being cast, without an occupation, on
the world. All mental revolutions are attended by catastrophe.
The mummeries and massacres of the German Reformation, though
known only to scholars, were scarcely less horrible than those
of Paris in 1793, and both periods illustrate the same law. I
have facts in my possession which would enable me to show that
the abolition of the slave-trade, that immortal and glorious
event, caused the death of many thousand slaves, who were
therefore actually killed by Sharp, Clarkson, Wilberforce, and
their adherents. But by means of abolition millions of lives
have since been saved. The first generation suffered; prisoners
were captured to be sold, and the market having been
suppressed, were killed. This was undoubtedly an evil. But then
the slave-making wars came to an end, and there was peace. In
the same manner I maintain that even should the present
generation be injured by the abolition of existing faiths, yet
abolition would be justified. Succeeding generations would
breathe an atmosphere of truth instead of being reared in an
atmosphere of falsehood, and we who are so deeply indebted to
our ancestors have incurred obligations towards our posterity.
Let us therefore purify the air, and if the light kills a few
sickly plants which have become acclimatised to impurity and
darkness, we must console ourselves with the reflection that in
Nature it is always so, and that of two evils we have chosen
that which is the least. 

But the dangers of the Truth are not so great as is commonly 
supposed. It is often said that if the fears of hell-fire were suddenly 
removed men would abandon themselves with out restraint to their 
propensities and appetites; that recklessness and despair would take 
possession of the human race, and society would be dissolved. But I 
believe that the fears of hell-fire have scarcely any power upon earth at
all, and that when they do act upon the human mind it is to
make it pious, not to make it good. A metaphysical theory
cannot restrain the fury of the passions: as well attempt to
bind a lion with a cobweb. Prevention of crime it is well known
depends not on the severity but on the certainty of
retribution. Just as a criminal is often acquitted by the jury
because the penalties of the law are disproportione to the
magnitude of the offence, so the diabolic laws which inflict an
eternal punishment for transitory sins have been tempered by a
system of free pardons which deprive them of any efficiency
they might have once possessed. What would be the use of laws
against murder if the condemned criminal could obtain his
liberty by apologising to the Queen? Yet such is the Christian
system, which, though in one sense beautiful on account of its
mercy, is also immoral on account of its indulgence. The
supposition that the terrors of hell-fire are essential or even
conducive to good morals is contradicted by the facts of
history. In the Dark Ages there was not a man or a woman, from
Scotland to Naples, who doubted that sinners were sent to hell.
The religion which they had was the same as ours, with this
exception, that everyone believed in it. The state of Europe in
that pious epoch need not be described. 

Society is not maintained by the conjectures of theology, but by those 
moral sentiments, those gregarious virtues, which elevated men above
the animals, which are now instinctive in our natures, and to
which intellectual culture is propitious. For, as we become
more and more enlightened, we perceive more and more clearly
that it is with the whole human population as it was with the
primeval clan; the welfare of every individual is dependent on
the welfare of the community, and the welfare of the community
depends on the welfare of every individual. Our conscience
teaches us it is right, our reason teaches us it is useful,
that men should live according to the Golden Rule. This conduct
of life is therefore enjoined upon every man by his own
instincts, and also by the voice of popular opinion. Those
cannot be happy who are detested and despised by their fellow-
men; and as for those, the outlaws of society, who, like
domestic animals run wild, herd together in secret places, and,
faithful only to their own gang, make war upon mankind, the
Law, which is seldom evaded, the Law, which never forgives,
chases them from den to den, and makes their lives as full of
misery as they are full of crime.

The current religion is indirectly adverse to morals, because
it is adverse to the freedom of the intellect. But it is also
directly adverse to morals by inventing spurious and bastard
virtues. One fact must be familiar to all those who have any
experience of human nature--a sincerely religious man is often
an exceedingly bad man. Piety and vice frequently live together
in the same dwelling, occupying different chambers, but
remaining always on the most amicable terms. Nor is there
anything remarkable in this. Religion is merely loyalty: it is
just as irrational to expect a man to be virtuous because he
goes to church, as it would be to expect him to be virtuous
because he went to court. His king, it is true, forbids
immorality and fraud. But the chief virtues required are of the
lickspittle denomination -- what is called “a humble and a
contrite heart.”  When a Christian sins as a man, he makes
compensation as a courtier. When he has injured a fellow-
creature, he goes to church with more regularity, he offers up
more prayers, he reads a great number of chapters in the Bible,
and so he believes that he has cleared off the sins that are
laid to his account. This, then, is the immorality of religion
as it now exists. It creates artificial virtues and sets them
off against actual vices. Children are taught to do this and
that, not because it is good, but to please the king. When
Christians are informed that not only our physical but our
moral actions are governed by unchangeable law, and that the
evil treatment of the mind, like the evil treatment of the
body, is punished by a loss of happiness and health, they cry
out against a doctrine which is so just and so severe. They are
like the young Roman nobles who complained when the Tarquins
were expelled, saying, that a king was a human being, that he
could be angry and forgive, that there was room for favour and
kindness, but that the law was a deaf and inexorable thing --
leges rem surdam inexorabilem esse; that it allowed of no
relaxation and indulgence -- nihil laxa-menti nec veniae
habere, and that it was a dangerous thing for weak and erring
men to live by their integrity alone -- periculosum esse in tot
humanis erroribus sola innocentia vivere. Christians believe
themselves to be the aristocracy of heaven upon earth; they are
admitted to the spiritual court, while millions of men in
foreign lands have never been presented. They bow their knees
and say that they are miserable sinners, and their hearts
rankle with abominable pride. Poor infatuated fools! Their
servility is real, and their insolence is real, but their king
is a phantom and their palace is a dream.

Even with Christians of comparatively blameless lives their
religion is injurious. It causes a waste of moral force. There
are passionate desires of virtue, yearnings for the good, which
descend from time to time like a holy spirit upon all
cultivated minds, and from which, strange as it may seem, not
even free-thinkers are excluded. When such an impulse animates
the godless man he expends it in the service of mankind; the
Christian wastes it on the air; he fasts, he watches, and he
prays. And what is the object of all his petitions and salaams?
He will tell you that he is trying to save his soul. But the
strangest feature in the case is this. He not only thinks that
it is prudent and wise on his part to improve his prospects of
happiness in a future state; he considers it the noblest of all
virtues. But there is no great merit in taking care of one's
own interests whether it be in this world or the next. The man
who leads a truly religious life in order to go to heaven is
not more to be admired than the man who leads a regular and
industrious life in order to make a fortune in the city; and
the man who endeavours to secure a celestial inheritance by
going to church, and by reading chapters in the Bible, and by
having family prayers, and by saying grace in falsetto with
eyes hypocritically closed, is not above the level of those who
fawn and flatter at Oriental courts in order to obtain a
monopoly or an appointment.

The old proverb holds good in religious as in ordinary life,
that self-preservation is the first law of Nature. As long as
men believe that there is a god or king who will listen to
their prayers and who will change his mind at their request; as
long as they believe that they can obtain a mansion in the
heavenly Belgravia, so long they will place the duties of the
courtier above the duties of the man, so long they will believe
that flattery is pleasing to the Most High, so long they will
believe that they can offend against the law and escape the
penalties of the law, so long they will believe that acts of
devotion may be balanced against acts of immorality, so long
they will make selfishness a virtue, and salvation of the soul
a higher principle of conduct than social love. But when the
faith in a personal god is extinguished; when prayer and praise
are no longer to be heard; when the belief is universal that
with the body dies the soul, then the false morals of theology
will no longer lead the human mind astray. Piety and virtue
will become identical. The desire to do good which arose in
necessity, which was developed by the hopes of a heavenly
reward, is now an instinct of the human race. Those hopes and
illusions served as the scaffolding, and may now safely be
removed. 

There will always be enthusiasts for virtue as there are now, 
men who adorn and purify their souls before the mirror
of their conscience, and who strive to attain an ideal
excellence in their actions and their thoughts. If from such
men as these the hope of immortality is taken, will their
natures be transformed? Will they who are almost angels turn
straightway into beasts? Will the sober become drunkards? Will
the chaste become sensual? Will the honest become fraudulent?
Will the industrious become idle? Will the righteous love that
which they have learnt to loathe? Will they who have won by
hard struggles the sober happiness of virtue return to the
miseries of vice by which few men have not at one time or
another been enthralled? No; they will pass through some hours
of affliction; they will bear another illusion to the grave;
not the first that they have buried, not the first they have
bewailed. And then, no longer able to hope for themselves, they
will hope for the future of the human race: unable to believe
in an eared God who listens to human supplications they will
coin the gold of their hearts into useful actions instead of
burning it as incense before an imaginary throne. 

We do not wish to extirpate religion from the life of man; 
we wish him to have a religion which will harmonise 
with his intellect, and which inquiry will strengthen, not 
destroy. We wish, in fact, to give him a religion, for now 
there are many who have none. We teach that there is a God, 
but not a God of the anthropoid variety, not a God who is 
gratified by compliments in prose and verse, and whose 
attributes can be catalogued by theologians. God is so great 
that he cannot be defined by us. God is so great that he does 
not deign to have personal relations with us human atoms 
that are called men. Those who desire to worship their 
Creator must worship him through mankind. Such it is
plain is the scheme of Nature. We are placed under secondary
laws, and these we must obey. To develop to the utmost our
genius and our love, that is the only true religion. To do that
which deserves to be written, to write that which deserves to
be read, to tend the sick, to comfort the sorrowful, to animate
the weary, to keep the temple of the body pure, to cherish the
divinity within us, to be faithful to the intellect, to educate
those powers which have been entrusted to our charge and to
employ them in the service of humanity, that is all that we can
do. Then our elements shall be dispersed and all is at an end.
All is at an end for the unit, all is at an end for the atom,
all is at an end for the speck of flesh and blood with the
little spark of instinct which it calls its mind, but all is
not at an end for the actual Man, the true Being, the glorious
One. We teach that the soul is immortal; we teach that there is
a future life; we teach that there is a Heaven in the ages far
away; but not for us single corpuscules, not for us dots of
animated jelly, but for the One of whom we are the elements,
and who, though we perish, never dies, but grows from period to
period and by the united efforts of single molecules called
men, or of those cell-groups called nations, is raised towards
the Divine power which he will finally attain. Our religion
therefore is Virtue, our Hope is placed in the happiness of our
posterity; our Faith is the Perfectibility of Man. 

A day will come when the European God of the nineteenth 
century will be classed with the gods of Olympus and the 
Nile; when surplices and sacramental plate will be exhibited 
in museums; when nurses will relate to children the legends of 
the Christian mythology as they now tell them fairy tales. A day will 
come when the current belief in property after death (for is not existence
property, and the dearest property of all? ) will be accounted
a strange and selfish idea, just as we smile at the savage
chief who believes that his gentility will be continued in the
world beneath the ground, and that he will there be attended by
his concubines and slaves. A day will come when mankind will be
as the Family of the Forest, which lived faithfully within
itself according to the Golden Rule in order that it might not
die. But Love not Fear will unite the human race. The world
will become a heavenly Commune to which men will bring the
inmost treasures of their hearts, in which they will reserve
for themselves not even a hope, not even the shadow of a joy,
but will give up all for all mankind. With one faith, with one
desire, they will labour together in the Sacred Cause--the
extinction of disease, the extinction of sin, the perfection of
genius, the perfection of love, the invention of immortality,
the exploration of the infinite, and the conquest of creation.

You blessed ones who shall inherit that future age of which we
can only dream; you pure and radiant beings who shall succeed
us on the earth; when you turn back your eyes on us poor
savages, grubbing in the ground for our daily bread, eating
flesh and blood, dwelling in vile bodies which degrade us every
day to a level with the beasts, tortured by pains, and by
animal propensities, buried in gloomy superstitions, ignorant
of Nature which yet holds us in her bonds; when you read of us
in books, when you think of what we are, and compare us with
yourselves, remember that it is to us you owe the foundation of
your happiness and grandeur, to us who now in our libraries and
laboratories and star-towers and dissecting-rooms and work-
shops are preparing the materials of the human growth. And as
for ourselves, if we are sometimes inclined to regret that our
lot is cast in these unhappy days, let us remember how much
more fortunate we are than those who lived before us a few
centuries ago. The working man enjoys more luxuries to-day than
did the King of England in the Anglo-Saxon times; and at his
command are intellectual delights, which but a little while ago
the most learned in the land could not obtain. All this we owe
to the labours of other men. Let us therefore remember them
with gratitude; let us follow their glorious example by adding
something new to the knowledge of mankind; let us pay to the
future the debt which we owe to the past. 

All men indeed cannot be poets, inventors, or philanthropists; 
but all men can join in that gigantic and god-like work, the 
progress of creation. Whoever improves his own nature improves 
the universe of which he is a part. He who strives to subdue his evil 
passions--vile remnants of the old four-footed life--and who cultivates
the social affections: he who endeavours to better his condition, and to 
make his children wiser and happier than himself; whatever may be his 
motives, he will not have lived in vain. But if he act thus not from mere 
prudence, not in the vain hope of being rewarded in another world, but 
from a pure sense of duty, as a citizen of Nature, as a patriot of the
planet on which he dwells, then our philosophy which once
appeared to him so cold and cheerless will become a religion of
the heart, and will elevate him to the skies; the virtues which
were once for him mere abstract terms will become endowed with
life, and will hover round him like guardian angels, conversing
with him in his solitude, consoling him in his afflictions,
teaching him how to live, and how to die. But this condition is
not to be easily attained; as the saints and prophets were
often forced to practise long vigils and fastings and prayers
before their ecstasies would fall upon them and their visions
would appear, so Virtue in its purest and most exalted form can
only be acquired by means of severe and long-continued culture
of the mind. Persons with feeble and untrained intellects may
live according to their conscience; but the conscience itself
will be defective. To cultivate the intellect is therefore a
religious duty; and when this truth is fairly recognised by
men, the religion which teaches that the intellect should be
distrusted, and that it should be subservient to faith, will
inevitably fall.

We have written much about inventions and discoveries and
transformations of human nature which cannot possibly take
place for ages yet to come, because we think it good that the
bright though distant future should be ever present in the eyes
of man. But we shall now consider the existing generation, and
we shall point out the work which must be accomplished, and in
which all enlightened men should take a part. Christianity must
be destroyed. The civilised world has outgrown that religion,
and is now in the condition of the Roman Empire in the pagan
days. A cold-hearted infidelity above, a sordid superstition
below, a school of Plutarchs who endeavour to reconcile the
fables of a barbarous people with the facts of science and the
lofty conceptions of philosophy; a multitude of augurs who
sometimes smile when they meet, but who more often feel
inclined to sigh, for they are mostly serious and worthy men.
Entering the Church in their youth, before their minds were
formed, they discover too late what it is that they adore, and
since they cannot tell the truth, and let their wives and
children starve, they are forced to lead a life which is a lie.
What a state of society is this in which “free-thinker” is a term
of abuse, and in which doubt is regarded as a sin! Men have a
Bluebeard's chamber in their minds which they dare not open;
they have a faith which they dare not examine lest they should
be forced to cast it from them in contempt. Worship is a
convention, churches are bonnet shows, places of
assignation, shabby-genteel salons where the parochial “at home”
is given, and respectable tradesmen exhibit their daughters in
the wooden stalls. O wondrous, awful, and divine religion! You
elevate our hearts from the cares of common life, you transport
us into the unseen world, you bear us upwards to that sublime
temple of the skies where dwells the Veiled God, whom mortal
eye can never view, whom mortal mind can never comprehend. How
art thou fallen! How art thou degraded! But it will be only for a
time. We are now in the dreary desert which separates two ages
of Belief. A new era is at hand.

It is incorrect to say "theology is not a progressive science."
The worship of ancestral ghosts, the worship of pagan deities,
the worship of a single god, are successive periods of progress
in the science of Divinity. And in the history of that science,
as in the history of all others, a curious fact may be
observed. Those who overthrow an established system are
compelled to attack its founders, and to show that their method
was unsound, that their reasoning was fallacious, that their
experiments were incomplete. And yet the men who create the
revolution are made in the likeness of the men whose doctrines
they subvert. The system of Ptolemy was supplanted by the
system of Copernicus, yet Copernicus was the Ptolemy of the
sixteenth century. In the same manner, we who assail the
Christian faith are the true successors of the early
Christians, above whom we are raised by the progress, of
eighteen hundred years. As they preached against gods that were
made of stone, so we preach against gods that are made of
ideas. As they were called atheists and blasphemers so are we.
And is our task more difficult than theirs? We have not, it is
true, the same stimulants to offer. We cannot threaten that the
world is about to be destroyed; we cannot bribe our converts
with a heaven, we cannot make them tremble with a hell. But
though our religion appears too pure, too unselfish for
mankind, it is not really so, for we live in a noble and
enlightened age. At the time of the Romans and the Greeks the
Christian faith was the highest to which the common people
could attain. A faith such as that of the Stoics and the
Sadducees could only be embraced by cultivated minds, and
culture was then confined to a chosen few. But now knowledge,
freedom, and prosperity are covering the earth; for three
centuries past, human virtue has been steadily increasing, and
mankind is prepared to receive a higher faith. But in order to
build we must first destroy. Not only the Syrian superstition
must be attacked, but also the belief in a personal God, which
engenders a slavish and oriental condition of the mind; and the
belief in a posthumous reward which engenders a selfish and
solitary condition of the heart. These beliefs are, therefore,
injurious to human nature. They lower its dignity; they arrest
its development; they isolate its affections. 

We shall not deny that many beautiful sentiments are often mingled with 
the faith in a personal Deity, and with the hopes of happiness in a
future state; yet we maintain that, however refined they may
appear, they are selfish at the core, and that if removed they
will be replaced by sentiments of a nobler and a purer kind.
They cannot be removed without some disturbance and distress;
yet the sorrows thus caused are salutary and sublime. The
supreme and mysterious Power by whom the universe has been
created, and by whom it has been appointed to run its course
under fixed and invariable law; that awful One to whom it is
profanity to pray, of whom it is idle and irreverent to argue
and debate, of whom we should never presume to think save with
humility and awe; that Unknown God has ordained that mankind
should be elevated by misfortune, and that happiness should
grow out of misery and pain. 

I give to universal history a strange but true title--The Martyrdom of Man. 
In each generation the human race has been tortured that their children 
might profit by their woes. Our own prosperity is founded on
the agonies of the past. Is it therefore unjust that we also
should suffer for the benefit of those who are to come? Famine,
pestilence, and war are no longer essential for the advancement
of the human race. But a season of mental anguish is at hand,
and through this we must pass in order that our posterity may
rise. The soul must be sacrificed; the hope in immortality must
die. A sweet and charming illusion must be taken from the human
race, as youth and beauty vanish never to return.


THE END








  In 1872
  The slave trade in Cuba was abolished by law in 1886.
1

16

1

16

