
THE NEWGATE CALENDAR


Edited by Donal Ó Danachair

Supplement


Published by the Ex-classics Project, 2009
http://www.exclassics.com
Public Domain


CONTENTS

Supplement

JAMES SWEENY, RICHARD PEARCE, EDMUND BUCKLEY, PATRICK FLEMING,
MAURICE BRENWICK, AND JOHN SULLIVAN,
Convicted of Murder in an Affray

WILLIAM MOULDS
Executed for The Murder of William Turner

RICHARD VALENTINE THOMAS,
Executed for Forgery

JOHN WHITMORE, ALIAS OLD DASH,
Executed for a Rape

JAMES FALLAN,
Executed for the Murder of his Wife.

FREDERIC BARDIE, Alias PETER WOOD,
A French Prisoner of War, Executed for Cutting and Maiming.

ANTONIO CARDOZA,
Executed for the Murder of Thomas Davis

WILLIAM TOWNLEY,
Executed for Burglary.

RICHARD ANDREWS AND ALEXANDER HALL,
Transported for Fraud

LORD LOUTH
Convicted for Abuse of his Authority as a Magistrate.

WILLIAM HEBBERFIELD,
Executed for Forgery.

WILLIAM JEMMET,
Executed for Robbery on the High Seas.

WILLIAM CUNDELL AND JOHN SMITH,
Prisoners of War who Went over to the French,

THOMAS BOWLER,
Executed for Maliciously Firing at Mr. Burrowes.

JOHN LOMAS AND EDITH MORREY,
Executed for the Murder of Edith Morrey's Husband.

JOSEPH SIMMONS WINTER, BENJAMIN ALLEN, WILLIAM TAYLOR, JOHN IVEY, 
& ROBERT COOPER
The Three First Executed for Stealing Silk, and the Two Latter
Transported for Receiving it, Knowing it to be Stolen.

CHARLES FREDERICK PALM AND SAMUEL TILLING
Executed for Mutiny and Murder

WILLIAM BROWN,
Executed for the Murder of a Child.

ROBERT TOWERS,
Imprisoned for Endeavouring to Bribe a Turnkey of Newgate.

WILLIAM BOOTH
Executed for Forgery.

THOMAS NUGENT, & JOHN & WILLIAM FOLKARD,
Pilloried for Attempting to Defraud the Creditors of John Folkard.

THE LUDDITES
Guilty of Rioting and Administering Unlawful Oaths.

WILLIAM HOWE, ALIAS JOHN WOOD,
Executed for the Murder of Mr. Robins.

ANTONIO TARDIT
A French Prisoner-of-war, Executed for the Murder of a Fellow-Prisoner.

AZUBAH FOUNTAIN AND GEORGE TURNER ROWELL
Executed for the Murder of Fountain's Husband.

ROBERT KENNETT,
Executed for Forgery.

WILLIAM BADCOCK, R. BRADY, Alias OXFORD BOB, AND S. HILL
Executed for Forgery.

DAVID SPREADBURY,
Executed for Forgery.

JOHN BRITAIN,
Executed for the Murder of his Wife.

JOSEPH RICHARDSON, JAMES SYMONS, AND NATHAN SYMONS;
The Two First Convicted of Stealing, the Last for Receiving
Stolen Goods.

LUKE HEATH,
Executed for Murder.

JOHN HANNAH
Executed for the Murder of his Wife.

MICHAEL M'ILVENA,
Executed for Celebrating a Marriage, He Being a Layman.

JAMES LEARY,
Executed for the Murder of Edward Clifford.

JOHN DENTON,
Executed for the Murder of Mrs. Denton.

THOMAS FOSS,
Executed for Forgery

CHARLES CALLAGHAN,
Executed for the Murder of Miss Gompertz's Butler.

JOHN DREW MAY,
Executed for Forgery.

JOHN ASHTON,
At his Execution, he Jumped back onto the Scaffold, and had 
to be Pushed off again.

JAMES MITCHELL,
Executed for the Murder of Miss Welchman.

JOHN JAMES
Executed for Murder.

ADMIRAL BRADLEY
Transported for Forgery.

WILLIAM QUIN
Imprisoned and Whipped for a Malicious Assault on a Strike-breaker

MAJOR J. G. SEMPLE, ALIAS LISLE
Several Times Convicted of Swindling and Theft.

CHARLES WELLER
Convicted of Stealing Notes and Bills.

SARAH STONE
Transported for Stealing a Child

ANNE RADFORD
Transported for Perjury.

WILLIAM SAWYER
Executed for the Murder of Harriet Garrett.

THOMAS JESSON
Executed for the Murder of a Child.

JOHN MURDOCH
Executed for the Murder of James Murdoch.

JOHN ELLEM
Executed for Ravishing a Young Girl

ELIZABETH DREW,
Tried for Robbery.

WILLIAM BRADFORD
Executed for Forgery.

ELIZABETH WOOLLERTON
Executed for Poisoning.

ELIZABETH HUNTER AND REBECCA JARVIS
Convicted of Roasting a Child.

JEREMIAH GRANT
Executed for Burglary.

JAMES MARSH
Executed for Murder.

THOMAS CARSON
Condemned for the Murder of C. Cassidy, but escaped by changing
clothes with his brother.

CAPTAIN GEORGE HARROWER
Convicted of Bigamy.

SUSANNAH HOLROYD
Executed for Poisoning her Husband and Two Children.

GEORGE VAUGHAN, ROBERT MACKEY, AND GEORGE BROWN
Convicted of a Conspiracy.

ROGER O'CONNOR, ESQ.
Indicted for Robbing the Mail.

PATRICK DEVANN.
Executed for the Murder of the Lynch Family in Wildgoose Lodge.

JAMES HARRY, ALIAS HARRIS
Executed for the Murder of his Wife.

JEREMIAH BRANDRETH, WILLIAM TURNER, AND ISAAC LUDLAM
Executed for High Treason.

DR. LAURENCE HYNES HALLORAN
Transported For Forging A Frank.

SAMUEL DICK
Convicted of Abduction and Rape.

JOHN DRISCOL, WILLIAM WELLER, & GEORGE CASHMAN
Executed for Forgery.

JOHN KINNEAR, MOSELY WOOLF, AND LEWIS LEVY,
Convicted of Conspiracy.

ROBERT JOHNSTON.
Executed for Robbery after an Attempted Rescue from the Scaffold

HENRY HUNT
A Speaker at the Peterloo Massacre,

JACOB MAGENNIS
Executed for Shooting a Constable.

JAMES LIGHTFOOT,
Executed for the Murder of Thomas Maxwell.

JAMES NESBETT.
Executed for the Murder of Mr. Parker and his Housekeeper.

ROSALIE CURCHOD
Indicted for Child-Murder, but Acquitted.

JAMES MACKCOULL, alias MOFFAT
Convicted Of Robbery after a Long Career as a Thief.

FREDERICK WHITE
Wrongly Convicted of Highway Robbery, but Pardoned.

JOHN THOMPSON AND JOHN BARNICOAT
Executed for the Murder of William Hancock.

BRIDGET BUTTERLY AND BRIDGET ENNIS
Executed for the Murder of Miss Thompson.

DAVID HAGGART, ALIAS JOHN WILSON, ALIAS JOHN MORRISON, 
ALIAS BARNEY M'COUL, ALIAS JOHN M'COLGAN ALIAS 
DANIEL O'BRIEN, ALIAS THE SWITCHER
Executed for the Murder of a Warder in a Jail-break.

JOHN M'NAMARA AND THOMAS MALONY
Executed for the Murder of Mrs. Torrins.

SAMUEL DENMORE HAYWARD,
Executed for Burglary.

WILLIAM WELSH, EDWARD DOOHERTY, LAURENCE WELSH, AND
WILLIAM MARTIN.
Executed for the Murder of Mr. Hoskins.

ROBERT HARTLEY
Executed for Wilfully Stabbing.

JOHN KEYS
Executed for Parricide.

JOHN NEWTON
Executed for the Murder of his Wife.

JONATHAN COOK
Executed for a Rape on a Child.

JAMES WILSON
Convicted of an Attempt to Commit Incest.

THOMAS CHARLES FITZHUE SANDON, ESQ.
Transported for Fraud.

JOHN THURTELL AND JOSEPH HUNT.
Convicted of Murder.

JOHN HILL WAGSTAFF,
Executed for Forgery.

AMY GEORGE
Indicted for the Murder of her Brother.

THE REV. JOHN CARROLL
Indicted for the Murder of a Child, but Found Insane.

HENRY SAVARY,
Convicted of Forgery.

WILLIAM PROBERT
Executed for Horse-Stealing.

ALEXANDER PIERCE
Executed for Murder and Cannibalism.

CHARLES LYNN.
Tried for Murder.

JAMES EVANS
Tried for the Murder of Thomas Price.

SAMUEL GILBERT,
Indicted for Robbery.

ALEXANDER AND MICHAEL M'KEAND
Executed for Murder.

CHARLES THOMAS WHITE
Executed for Arson.

WILLIAM BURT
Executed for the Murder of his Infant Son.

JOHN PEELE, alias GEORGE WATSON
Executed for Forgery.

WILLIAM SHEEN.
Tried for the Murder of his Child.

RICHARD BOWERS
Transported for "Duffing."

JOSHUA SLADE
Executed for the Murder of the Rev. J. Waterhouse.

WILLIAM MILLER
Executed for the Violation and Murder of Mary Anne Lane.

WILLIAM JONES
Tried for the Murder of Elizabeth Jeffe.

WILLIAM HOWARD
Convicted of an Assault with Intent to Rob.

CAPTAIN JOHN BURGH MONTGOMERY, alias COLONEL WALLACE,
alias COLONEL MORGAN
Convicted of Forgery, but Poisoned Himself the Night 
before his Execution.

ANN HARRIS, JOHN COX THE ELDER, JOHN COX THE YOUNGER, 
ROBERT COX, AND JAMES PUGH
Convicted of Murder.

JONATHAN MARTIN
A Madman who Set Fire to York Minster.

JOHN STACEY, THE YOUNGER AND JOHN STACEY, THE ELDER
The First

RICHARD GIFFORD
Executed for Forgery.

JAMES BELL
Transported for Stealing a Body.

WILLIAM BANKS
Executed for Burglary.

ROBERT EMOND
Executed for Murder.

AGRICULTURAL RIOTS
The Followers of "Captain Swing"

WILLIAM SWALLOW, alias WALDON; GEORGE JAMES DAVIS, alias 
GEORGE HUNTLEY; WILLIAM WATTS, alias CHARLES WILLIAMS; 
ALEXANDER STEPHENSON, alias TELFORD; and JOHN BEVERIDGE, 
alias ANDERSON.
Tried for Mutiny and Piracy.

LUKE DILLON
Transported for Rape.

IKEY alias ISAAC SOLOMON
Transported for Receiving Stolen Goods.

WILLIAM GILCHRIST, GEORGE GILCHRIST, and JAMES BROWN
Tried for a Coach Robbery.

WILLIAM KING
Imprisoned for Robbery.

MARY ANNE HIGGINS, AND EDWARD CLARKE
Tried for Murder.

EDWARD HOGSDEN
Executed for Raping his Daughter.

ELIZABETH ROSS
Executed for a "Burking "Murder.

THE REFORM RIOTS
1831-2.

WILLIAM KENNEDY and WILLIAM BROWN
Tried for a Murder Committed on the River Thames.

JAMES BERRYMAN and THOMAS BERRYMAN
The one Hanged, and the Other Transported, For a Burglary 
in which the Victim was Blinded for Life.

RICHARD COSTER
Transported for Forgery after a Long Career as a 
Crooked Businessman.

ALFRED RAE.
Convicted of a Criminal Assault.

JAMES PAGE
Transported for Maliciously Wounding Cattle.

JOHN EDWARDS, alias HEATH; PETER LEGASSER; AND 
JEREMIAH WEEDON
Imprisoned for Kidnapping a Solicitor to Extort a Client's 
Money from him.

JOSEPH MOSELEY AND WILLIAM GARSIDE
Trades Unionists who Murdered a Grinding Employer, 
Executed after a Long Delay.

EDWARD CHALKER AND JEREMY KEYS
Poachers, Tried for Murder of a Gamekeeper.

MARY ANNE BURDOCK
Executed for Murder.

HENRY STANYNOUGHT.
Tried for the Murder of his Son.

ROBERT BALLS, THOMAS HARRIS, and MORDECAI MOSES.
Transported for Forgery.

WILLIAM SUMMERS.
Transported for Larceny.

WILLIAM JOURDAN, alias LEARY; THOMAS SULLIVAN; HENRY MOTT; 
AND WILLIAM SEALE.
Transported for a Robbery at the Custom-House.

JAMES HILLS, WILLIAM HARLEY, AND WILLIAM FISHER, alias 
CURLY BILL.
Tried for Burglary.

HENRY WILLIAMS
Transported for Burglary

GEORGE EDWARD PEACOCK.
Transported for Forgery.

JOHN PEGSWORTH.
Executed for Murder.

CHARLES W. PENRUDDOCK.
A Student, Convicted of Assaulting an Examiner who 
asked him Difficult Questions.

JAMES GREENACRE AND SARAH GALE
The First Executed for Murder, the Second Transported 
as being Accessory to the Fact.

CHARLES SAMUEL BARTLETT.
Executed for Murdering his Mother-in-law, 15th April, 1837

JOHN SMITH, alias DAY; JOHN VARNHAM; and GEORGE TIMMS.
Executed For Murdering a Fortune-teller, 29th April, 1837.

GEORGE DARWELL.
Convicted of Embezzling Money to Give to the Mother of his Child.

GEORGE FLETCHER, WILLIAM ROACH, AND THOMAS TAYLOR.
Executed For Murder.

WILLIAM FRANCIS ADAMS.
Acquitted of Murdering, but Convicted of Robbing, his Father, 
and Transported.

CHARLES KINNAISTER, AND OTHERS.
Executed for the Murder of Australian Aborigines.

ARCHIBALD BOLAM.
Transported for Manslaughter.

LEWIN CASPAR, ELLIS CASPAR, EMANUEL MOSES, AND ALICE ABRAHAMS.
Transported for Stealing Gold-dust.

JACOB FREDERICK EHLERT,
A Norwegian Sailor, Executed For Murdering his Captain.

THE REV. J. E. STEVENS.
Convicted of Sedition.

THE BIRMINGHAM RIOTS
13th of July 1839

THE CHARTIST RIOTS
1839-40.

FEARGUS O'CONNOR, ESQ.
Convicted of the Publication of a Seditious Libel.

JAMES OWEN, GEORGE THOMAS, alias DOBELL, AND WILLIAM ELLIS, 
alias LAMBERT.
Canal Bargemen who Raped and Murdered a Passenger.

WILLIAM RACE,
Convicted of Manslaughter for a Joke that Went Wrong.

JAMES AND WILLIAM LIGHTFOOT.
Executed for Robbery and Murder.

RICHARD GOULD, alias ARTHUR NICHOLSON.
Tried for Murder, but Convicted of Burglary.

THOMAS PATTESON
Convicted of Manslaughter, March 10th, 1840

JOHN TURNER FLYNN
Convicted of Forgery and Transported for Life, 11th April, 1840

ALEXANDER M'LAGHLIN SMITH
Tried for Murder, but Found Insane, 21st of July 1840

HARRISON FLATHER
Imprisoned for Larceny.

RICHARD MOORE
Transported for Forgery.

PATRICK MAXWELL STEWART WALLACE;  MICHAEL SHAW and
STEWART WALLACE
Transported for Inciting a Person to Cast Away and 
Destroy a Merchant Ship.

DAVID SAMS
Transported for Burglary.

WILLIAM STEVENSON
Transported for Larceny.

JAMES INGLETT
A Cow-doctor, Convicted of Manslaughter for Giving a 
Potion to a sick Neighbour 


JAMES SWEENY, RICHARD PEARCE, EDMUND BUCKLEY, PATRICK FLEMING, MAURICE
BRENWICK, AND JOHN SULLIVAN,
Convicted of Murder in an Affray

Illustration: The Affray in which Bolding was killed

THESE unhappy men were natives of Ireland, and belonged to that
numerous class who resort to England in search of employment; but whose
conduct is too often a disgrace to their own country, and a
demoralising example for this. The murder, for which these malefactors
justly forfeited their lives, originated in that vulgar antipathy which
the lower orders of one nation feel for their brethren of another;
forgetful that all men should be brothers in distress.

On their trial, which took place at Chelmsford, on the 16th of August,
1810, it appeared in evidence that John Bolding, for whose murder they
were arraigned, kept the Eagle and Child public house, at Forest Gate,
in the parish of West Ham, and that on Sunday evening, the 20th of May
preceding, a dispute took place In the kitchen, between one Morrisy, an
Irish labourer, and one Thomas, an English carter. There was present
another Irishman, named Scandling, and an officer's servant, of the
Cornish militia.

These silly representatives of their respective countries kept up a
boisterous debate for a considerable time, during which challenges to
fight were given, and Morrisy and the officer's servant were proceeding
to blows, when the housekeeper, Sarah Cumber, interfered, and succeeded
in pacifying them for a moment. Morrisy then proposed to depart; but
the landlord, suspecting that he wanted only to collect his countrymen,
prevented him at first, though it appears he afterwards permitted him
to withdraw, and then bolted the doors. The landlord's conjecture was
right; Morrisy returned with a mob of followers, but was refused
admittance. Soon after a man named Daniel Mahony knocked, when
Scandling, who had remained within, opened the door, contrary to the
wishes and in spite of the remonstrance of the proprietor. Mahony, in
an outrageous manner, stormed, swore, and brandished his stick over his
head. He had not continued long in this violent manner, when a gang of
thirty of his countrymen demanded admittance. This being refused, they
proceeded to break the windows and window-shutters, and Scandling, once
more, in defiance of the opposition of the landlord, unbolted the door.
As the band of ruffians rushed in, the carter and the officer's servant
escaped through the back door; and fortunately for them, as otherwise,
in all probability, they would have met the fate of their host. Mahony
demanded the cause of the uproar, and was answered by a ferocious
Hibernian that the English had insulted an Irishman. 'That's enough,'
he returned, leaping into the bar, and, knocking down the landlord,
continued to beat him till his head was much bruised, his arms broken,
and his body greatly wounded. A female interfering, a blow was made at
her, and she was obliged to fly and hide herself. The ruffians next
proceeded to search for the carter and the servant; but, not finding
them, they swore they would murder some one before they departed, and
actually beat an old man, who was running away, who had three of his
teeth knocked out, and his thigh dislocated from the kicks he received.
These sanguinary brutes next demanded some gin, which was given them,
and they departed, exclaiming 'Who will insult an Irishman?'

Bolding, the landlord, languished seven days, and then expired, in
consequence of the wounds he received. These six men were then taken
up, all the others having absconded, and being sworn to as implicated
in the riot, they were found guilty as accessories to the murder, being
associated for illegal purposes, which, according to Lord Hale, makes
each accomplice responsible for the conduct of a part, or whole.

Sullivan, who was guilty of nothing except being present, was respited,
but the other five unfortunate men were executed on Saturday morning,
August the 18th, 1810.


WILLIAM MOULDS
Executed for The Murder of William Turner


THIS case exhibits a most cruel and treacherous crime -- the
assassination of a fellow-creature, at the very moment when the
murderer had been proffered his assistance.

William Moulds was indicted for the wilful murder of William Turner, by
shooting him on the king's highway, near Farnham, on the 18th of May,
1810. The prisoner was a soldier in the 62d regiment, from which he
deserted from Winchester, accompanied by two females, of the names of
Elizabeth Roper and Mary Fisher. As he was on the road, he declared to
them that he must have some man's clothes, to prevent his being taken
as a deserter, and he would shoot some one to get them. As they went
along they were joined by the deceased; and, after some conversation
about a bed, he told them they should have some straw in his brother's
barn at Farnham. The deceased was walking a few yards before with
Elizabeth Roper, when the prisoner fired at him with his musket, and
the ball entered his back. He had, however, strength enough to run to
Farnham, when he reached the house of a Mr. Bott, a surgeon; he lived
two days, and then expired. A party of soldiers were sent out in
pursuit of the prisoner, and he was apprehended. The deceased saw him,
and identified his person, before he died. After he had shot the
deceased, one of the girls fainted, and he and the other took her into
an adjoining clover field. Here he declared he was sure that the ball
must have entered the man's body, and he could not have run above
twenty yards, and he wished he had gone back to have had his money and
clothes.

The jury found no hesitation in finding him guilty; and the judge
immediately passed on him the sentence of the law. He was executed at
the New Prison, Horsemonger Lane, August the 16th, 1810.


RICHARD VALENTINE THOMAS,
Executed for Forgery

THIS youthful malefactor evinced an extraordinary propensity for that
species of crime which at length brought him to a premature and
ignominious death. He was the son of a respectable tradesman of the
city of London, who placed him, at the age of sixteen, in the
countinghouse of an opulent bargemaster near Blackfriars He had not
been long there when he forged a check on his employer's bankers, for
one thousand pounds, and obtained the money. The fact was discovered;
but his master, in pity to his youth, and from respect to his family,
declined to prosecute, in consideration of being reimbursed. The father
of the guilty youth paid the thousand pounds, and sent the boy to
Portsmouth, where he entered him on board a ship of war then bound for
the West Indies, thinking such a course most likely to prevent him from
the commission of future crimes.

He went the voyage, but on his return be deserted from the ship, and
again bent his course to London, where he renewed his former habits.
From his knowledge of many commercial houses, and of the bankers with
whom they did business, he contrived to acquire large sums through the
means of blank checks, which he filled up, and committed forgeries to a
vast extent, there being no less than thirteen indictments against him,
at the time of his conviction.

During the month of July, 1810, he frequented the Surrey Theatre, and
the Equestrian Coffee-house, contiguous to it, the waiter of which he
sent to Messrs. Smith and Co. to get the banking book of Messrs.
Diffell. This enabled him to ascertain the balance of money which
Messrs. Diffell had in the hands of their banker. He then sent back the
book by the same person, with a request to have a check-book, upon
receiving which he filled up a check for four hundred pounds, eight
shillings, and delivered it to Mr. Johnson, the box and house keeper of
the Surrey Theatre, with whom he appeared to be on intimate terms,
telling him he had some custom and excise duties to pay, requesting him
to get payment of the check in notes of ten and twenty pounds.

Johnson went to Messrs. Smith's; but, as they could not pay him as he
wished, he received from them two notes of two hundred pounds each,
which he immediately took to the bank, and exchanged for the notes
Thomas wanted. The forgery being soon detected, Thomas was taken into
custody, in company with a woman with whom he cohabited. Upon searching
her, a twenty-pound note was found, which was identified by a clerk of
the Bank as one of those paid to Johnson in exchange for the
two-hundred-pound notes. The woman, being asked where she got it,
answered Thomas gave it her; when he, being locked up in an adjoining
room, called out 'No, you got it from a gentleman.'

In a privy which communicated with Thomas's room fragments of ten-pound
and twenty-pound notes were found, and upon several of the pieces the
date corresponded with the entry in the Bank.

In addition to this, Mrs. Johnson, mistress of the Equestrian
Coffeehouse, produced a twenty-pound note which she had received from
Thomas on the same day the check was presented; and which, with the
fragments, &c. made up exactly the sum of four hundred pounds. These
facts being proved on his trial, and the forgery established, he was
found Guilty, and sentenced to be hanged on Monday, September 3, 1810.

From the day of his conviction, August the 20th, until the Saturday
preceding his execution, notwithstanding the zealous exhortation of the
chaplain, who daily attended him, he could scarcely be aroused from an
apathetic indifference to his fate, or to a penitent sense of the crime
for which he was to suffer. On Sunday he attended divine service in the
chapel of the gaol, where near three hundred persons of respectable
appearance were also present, most of whom appeared to be more deeply
affected by the situation of the prisoner than he himself.

He was attired in a fashionable and gentlemanly style. His dress
consisted of a blue coat with gilt buttons, lined through with black
silk; white waistcoat, with black silk breeches, and stockings; his
hair unpowdered, and his upper lip adorned with Hussar mustachios. His
coffin, covered with black, was placed before him; and when the
chaplain stated that the unfortunate youth, who had now but a few hours
to live, was a veteran in the species of crime for which he was
convicted, although he had not yet completed his nineteenth year, the
whole auditory were dissolved in tears; not excepting the gaoler, who
sat by him, though familiar with such scenes; while the youth himself
manifested a pensive firmness, and was the only person present who
appeared indifferent to his fate.

Next morning, September 3, 1810, he was brought to the top of
Horsemonger Lane gaol. His dress was precisely the same as that already
described; and he met his fate with decorous resignation.


JOHN WHITMORE, ALIAS OLD DASH,
Executed for a Rape

THE summary punishment of a ravisher, by a conscientious Emperor of the
Turks, in days of old, if now, perchance, inflicted, might more tend to
check the inordinate, unlawful, lust of men, than all the public
execution of such destroyers of the peace of females.

Our laws, and certainly wisely too, restrain us from seeking redress at
our own hands, except in case of self-defence: but where is the man,
witnessing a brutal attack upon his wife or daughter, that would, by a
jury of his fellow-men, be convicted of a deadly crime, in searching
the heart's blood of their ravisher upon the guilty spot of his
atrocity?

Mahmoud, Sultan of Damascus, one night while he was going to bed, was
addressed by a poor villager, who complained that a young Turk of
distinction had broken into his apartment, and forced him to abandon
his wife and family to his abuses. The good sultan charged that, if the
Turk returned, he should immediately give him notice of it. Three days
after the poor man came again with the same complaint. Mahmoud took a
few attendants with him, and, being arrived at the complainant's,
commanded the lights to be extinguished, and, rushing in, cut the
ravisher to pieces. He then ordered a light, to see whom he had killed,
and, being satisfied, he fell on his knees, and returned God thanks;
after which be ate heartily of the poor man's bread, and gave him a
purse of gold. Being asked the reason of this extraordinary behaviour,
he replied, 'I concluded this ravisher was one who might fancy himself
entitled to my protection, and consequently might be no other than my
son; therefore, lest the tenderness of nature should enervate the arm
of justice, I resolved to give it scope in the dark. But, when I saw
that it was only an officer of my guards, I joyfully returned God
thanks. Then I asked the injured man for food to satisfy my hunger,
having had neither sleep nor sustenance from the moment I heard the
accusation till I had thus punished the author of the wrong, and showed
myself worthy of my people's obedience.'

Princes, nobles, men of fortune --'read, mark, learn, and inwardly
digest!' The hut of the meanest peasant, by the law of Britain, is
sacred as your own gorgeous palaces and castles; and, should you dare
to violate his female relative therein, each injured owner may prove a
Sultan Mahmoud.

John Whitmore was capitally indicted for a rape on the person of Mary,
the wife of Thomas Brown, on the 24th of October, 1810, on the Common
between Hayes and West Bedford. The prisoner was a labourer in the
powder-mills at Harlington Common; and the prosecutrix, who lives at
Hayes, having one of her sons by a former husband living as servant
with Mr. Potts, a farmer, at West Bedford, had gone thither about
twelve o'clock with some clean linen for her son. She stopped at a
public house in the neighbourhood whilst he changed his linen, and
there saw the prisoner, who, after asking her several questions, told
her she had come much the longest way about, on her way from Hayes, and
offered to show her a much shorter cut over the heath on her return.
The prosecutrix thanked him, and accepted his offer. He accompanied her
as if for that purpose, decoyed her two miles out of her way to an
unfrequented part of the heath, amongst some bushes, under pretence of
looking after a stray horse, and there brutally violated her person.

The poor woman, who was forty-seven years of age, as soon as she could,
ran away from him, over the heath, and again lost her way; by accident
she met a gentleman, who put her in the right road, and she reached her
home about eight o'clock at night. She was afraid to tell her husband
what had occurred till the following Sunday.

The husband next day set out with the constable in search of the
prisoner, from the description given by his wife, and on Tuesday traced
him to a public house at Twickenham, where he was known by the familiar
appellation of 'Old Dasher;' and there, after a stout resistance, he
was taken into custody. The facts were, on his trial, which took place
at the Old Bailey, in October, 1810, clearly established by the poor
woman, who evinced through the whole of her evidence traits of modesty
and chastity of mind that would have reflected honour upon any
character.

The prisoner, by the questions be asked her in making his defence,
attempted to impeach her as consenting to his brutal purpose, and
thereby only aggravated his crime.

The common-sergeant summed up the evidence for the jury; who, after a
minute's consideration, found the prisoner Guilty -- Death. The fate of
this malefactor received no commiseration.


JAMES FALLAN,
Executed for the Murder of his Wife.

Few actions can degrade the dignity of man more than that of striking a
woman; and fewer still are more debasing to human nature than that of a
husband striking his wife -- one whom, before the altar, he had
promised to love, cherish, and protect. The frequency of such deeds,
however, have diminished their vileness and atrocity, in the common
estimation of the world; but the brave and the virtuous still regard
them with detestation and horror. Those who are dead to the feelings of
manhood, and wanting in the Christian duties of life, may, however, be
intimidated from such a practice by the following particulars of a man,
who, perhaps, thought, like them, that he might with impunity wreak his
passion on his defenceless companion, whose soothing exclamations of
tenderness were poor protection against the brutal force of her inhuman
husband, whose blows were followed by death, and for which he died upon
the GALLOWS.

James Fallen bore, without deserving it, the name of soldier. He was a
corporal in the guards, from which service he obtained his discharge,
in consequence of a liver complaint, and was admitted a pensioner at
Chelsea Hospital on the 8th of February, 1811, and took up his abode in
a cellar in the Marketplace. The very next day, two of his comrades,
also pensioners, with two servant-women, came to see him, and they
drank pretty freely, until they had finished all the spirits then in
the cellar. Fallan then desired his wife to go out for more; but she,
perhaps, thinking that they had already drank enough, or that her
pocket could not afford any more, refused, or, at least, did not obey;
upon which the friends departed. Fallan then demanded of his wife why
she did not do as he had desired her, upon which an altercation ensued,
and the wife, by no means inclined to silence, bestowed upon her
husband some abusive terms, when he struck her upon the face, which he
repeated, knocking her down several times, though she cried out 'Dear
Jemmy, don't murder me!' He, however, continued beating her with such
violence, that a woman named Sarah Llewellyn, who lodged in the same
cellar with him, attempted to interfere, when he threatened to serve
her in the same manner, and then returned, with renewed violence, to
beat his unfortunate wife, who by this time had sat or fallen down on
the bed. Llewellyn now attempted to get out, but he prevented her. As
his fury had not been yet exhausted, he returned to renew his blows on
his wife; and the woman availed herself of the opportunity to run out
for assistance. She found three women listening at the cellar door, who
went with her up stairs to request a man to come down; but he refused,
and on their return they distinctly heard the continuance of the blows,
the poor woman all the time crying out, 'Oh! dear Jemmy, don't kill
me!' till her groans grew fainter and fainter.

Llewellyn, afraid to venture down, remained on the stairs all night,
and next morning she found Fallan and his wife in bed together, upon
which she expressed her satisfaction. The unfortunate woman appeared
shockingly bruised, and complained very much of a pain in her side.

'Cut my head, and then give me a plaster,' is very applicable to the
conduct of such husbands as Fallan. He now sent for a surgeon, and had
some blood taken from his wife, who did not appear to get better on
that account. On Tuesday morning Fallan went out for the avowed purpose
of procuring another lodging, but did not return until the Saturday
following, when he saw his wife, and then went away again. The
unfortunate woman languished till next day, Sunday, when she died, in
consequence of which her brutal husband was taken into custody.

His trial came on at the Old Bailey, April the 5th, when, in addition
to these facts, it was proved by a surgeon, who opened the body of the
deceased, that she came by her death in consequence of the four false
ribs, on the left aide, being broken, two of which were forced into the
pleura, and had wounded several of the vessels, and occasioned a great
effusion of blood, which was the immediate cause of her death.

Fallan, in his defence, produced a long written statement, imputing the
quarrel to the ill temper of the deceased, and alleged that he had only
struck her with his open hand and the whalebone of a woman's stays; and
that, if her ribs were broken, it must have been in consequence of her
falling over a deal box in the cellar. He concluded by saying, so far
from having any malice towards his wife, he loved her tenderly.

Lord Ellenborough summed up the evidence, and the jury, after a short
consultation, found him Guilty, when the recorder proceeded to pass on
him the awful sentence of execution and dissection on the Monday
following.

Accordingly, on Monday, April 8th, 1811, he was executed in front of
Newgate. He was only twenty-nine years of age, and had seen much
service. He was attended by a Roman-Catholic priest; but appeared quite
indifferent to his fate, and kicked off his shoes when he got upon the
platform. After hanging the usual time, his body was taken to
Bartholomew Hospital for dissection.


FREDERIC BARDIE, Alias PETER WOOD,
A French Prisoner of War, Executed for Cutting and Maiming.

This unfortunate man, who fell a victim to his ungovernable passions,
was a native of Falaize, in Normandy. His parents were respectable, and
he traded in his own vessel to the West Indies, where he had a wife and
two children at the time of his death. His little bark being taken in
1803, by the 'John Bull' letter of marque, he was carried to Liverpool,
and from thence to Chatham, where he was put on board the Canada
prison-ship, in the Medway, along with his captive countrymen.

During the eight years of his sorrowful captivity his conduct was
exemplary; but it appears he was subject to sudden gusts of passion. On
the 12th of March he wanted to go into the cooking-room; but was
prevented by Ebenezer Alexander, a private marine, who was on duty
there, and whose orders were to that effect. The sentinel desired him
to get leave from the sergeant, which he pretended to go for, and
returned, saying he had obtained it. This Alexander refused to credit,
as he knew in that case a corporal would have come to inform him, and
therefore persisted in his refusal. Upon this Wood drew a knife from
his pocket, and, calling the sentinel some vulgar names, said he would
kill him. Alexander, who was not apprehensive of danger, paid no
attention to the threat; but several fellow-prisoners, who knew their
countryman's failing, ran to prevent him. Wood, however, before they
could secure him, came up to the sentinel, and, seizing him round the
neck with his left arm, inflicted with his knife two dreadful wounds in
the left breast. The marine fell, and was carried to the hospital,
where he was confined thirty-one days. Wood was secured, and brought to
trial at the following assizes at Maidstone, when he was found Guilty,
and received sentence of death.

Thursday, September the 5th, 1811, was the day appointed for carrying
his sentence into execution, on Penenden Heath. He was escorted by the
usual retinue, and a vast concourse of people, who sincerely lamented
his fate. A Catholic confessor attended to prepare him for the awful
moment, assisted by the chaplain and Mr. Shelton. He appeared penitent
and resigned; and before he ascended the scaffold he requested of Mr.
Shelton to say something for him to the people who surrounded him,
which he did, as follows:-

'Good people! the poor unfortunate man who is about to suffer the
dreadful sentence of the law desires me, as he cannot speak our
language, to tell you that he is sincerely sorry for having committed
the crime which has brought him to this miserable and untimely end; and
that he trusts, through the prevailing influence of the venerable
priest who attends him, he has made his peace with his God, and rests
with full confidence of forgiveness at his dread tribunal. He also
directs me to warn you against the violence of vindictive passion, by
which alone he was actuated to commit this dreadful crime. He truly
forgives every one, and hopes, in his last moments, you will offer up
your prayers for him; this I am confident you will do, in consequence
of his deep contrition, and the circumstance of his being a stranger in
this country.'

After this he was supported to the platform, and an end was put to his
sufferings.


ANTONIO CARDOZA,
Executed for the Murder of Thomas Davis

THIS malefactor was a sailor, and a native of Portugal. He was indicted
at the Old Bailey, January 11, 1811, along with Sarah Brown, alias
Gott:, a Jewess, and Mary Rogers, both women of the town, for the
wilful murder of Thomas Davis, a British seaman, in Nightingale Lane,
on the night of the 12th of December, 1810.

The facts of the case were these:-- The deceased, somewhat tipsy, was
on his way home, in company with his brother, James Davis, when,
passing these girls in the street, be put his arm round the waist of
Brown, which she resented by striking him several times on the head
with her patten, which she held in her hand. James Davis desired her
not to be angry, as his brother was tipsy, and that he would give her
something to drink; upon which the other woman struck him in the face
with her umbrella. A squabble ensued; Davis flung the umbrella into a
green-grocer's shop, and in the struggle both fell to the ground, upon
which the girl got up first, and, holding him down, called out Antonio!
Antonio! why don't you fetch Antonio?' addressing the other girl,
Rogers, who immediately ran to a public house, and called Antonio, when
Cordoza, and three other Portuguese sailors, rushed out and attacked
the two brothers.

James Davis succeeded in repelling the ruffians, and was on the point
of getting away, when, looking round, he saw the deceased knocked down
by Cardoza, and, while he was down, the vindictive Portuguese took from
his sleeve a knife, and stabbed his victim in the back, the infamous
woman, Brown, all the time crying out to Antonio, 'Kill the b--r! don't
leave a bit of life in him! it's the way all English b--rs should be
served.'

The wounded man exclaimed, 'Brother, I'm killed!' and on being removed
to the shop of Mr. King, a surgeon in the neighbourhood, he died in two
minutes. These facts were substantiated by several witnesses who saw
the transaction; and Cardoza was immediately found guilty of murder;
but Mary Brown only of manslaughter, as there had been a quarrel
between her and the deceased; whereas Cardoza, without any personal
provocation, inflicted the deadly wound. Rogers vas acquitted, as there
was no evidence affecting her, except that of standing by.

Sentence was immediately passed on this desperate foreigner, and he was
ordered for execution on the Monday morning following, January 14,
1811, which was accordingly carried into effect opposite Newgate.

From the time of his trial to the last moment of his existence he
persisted in his assertion of innocence, and was heard to say that,
during his trial, the man who actually committed the murder was in
court. If he was innocent, which we by no means take upon ourselves to
advocate, his fate inculcates as important lesson on the evil of
keeping bad company; and, if not actually guilty of the murder, his
conduct was little less criminal for joining with those that did it, in
defence of prostitutes, for whom be must have been a bully, as they
called individually on him by name when insulted by the deceased.

Previous to his being brought from the Press-yard he cried bitterly;
but on mounting the scaffold he acted with becoming fortitude. He was
attended by a Portuguese clergyman, with whom he joined in fervent
prayer, and a few minutes after eight o'clock he was launched into
eternity. The concourse of spectators was immense, and among the crowd
were several of his countrymen, who seemed much affected at the
melancholy scene. After being suspended for the usual time, his body
was cut down, and conveyed to Bartholomew's Hospital for dissection,
where it was exposed to public view during the day.

Some doubts were entertained by the public as to the power vested in
the judges of ordering the execution of this man during the
indisposition of his majesty, George III. and the consequent deficiency
in the executive power, as the regent was not then appointed, from a
feeling that it would be unjust to deprive a human being of life,
however enormous his crime, while the fountain of mercy was closed. Mr.
Sheridan mentioned this case in the House of Commons the Thursday after
the execution, and was answered by the secretary of state for the home
department that, amen to the statute respecting conviction for murder,
it is asserted that the judge before whom a murderer is convicted,
shall, in passing sentence, direct him to be executed the next day hut
one after his being found guilty, (unless the same shall be Sunday, and
then on the Monday following,) and that his body be delivered to the
surgeons to be dissected and anatomized. The judge may likewise direct
his body to be afterwards hung in chains, but in no wise to be buried
without dissection. In the case of this malefactor, the secretary
stated that the judges who tried him had no doubt of his guilt; and
that, as no application came from the unfortunate man himself, it was
deemed advisable to let the law take its course, otherwise he would
have been respited.

Our readers will please to recollect that we have already stated the
law upon this head, by which they will see that in all cases of capital
conviction, within the city of London, it is necessary that a regular
report of the prisoners should be made to his majesty, or, in the event
of his indisposition, as in the present case, to his representative, of
the respective cases, and his sanction must be obtained before
execution can take place. This rule, however, only applies to the city
of London, as the judges going circuit act under a special commission,
which empowers them to pass sentence of death, and to direct its
execution in all cases, as well as to respite it, and relax the other
restraints upon sufficient cause, without the direct authority of the
king.


WILLIAM TOWNLEY,
Executed for Burglary.

WILLIAM TOWNLEY was a native of Winchcomb and at the age of twenty-nine
exhibited a remarkable instance to what extent human depravity may be
carried. In 1779, when only seventeen years of age, he was, with an
elder brother, convicted of burglary, and sentenced to two years'
imprisonment in the Penitentiary House. He had not long regained his
liberty when he was brought a second time to the gaol, charged with a
capital offence, found guilty, and sentenced to transportation for
seven years, which period he served on board the hulks at Woolwich;
from whence he was only discharged three months when he was a third
time committed for the crime for which he justly suffered.

In the last interval he had entered as a substitute in the
Worcestershire militia, for forty guineas, ten of which he had
received: he soon squandered the money, and then perpetrated a
burglary, for which he was tried at Gloucester, and received sentence
of death.

He persisted in declaring the witnesses against him perjurers, until
within a short time of the execution, when, it is said, just before he
received the sacrament, he admitted his full share in the crime for
which his life became forfeited to the offended laws of his country.

Saturday, the 23d of March, 1811, he was executed at the new drop
before Gloucester gaol, and had been suspended about twenty minutes
when a reprieve arrived! Is the life of man of so little value, that
those intrusted with important power will not study correctness? Some
stupid clerk in office directed it to the sheriff of Herefordshire
instead of Gloucestershire, by mistake! On Friday night it arrived, but
was not opened till next morning, when immediately the importance of
its contents to the wretched object of intended mercy was ascertained,
and an express sent off, by Mr. Bennett, of the hotel, at his own
expense; but, alas! the messenger was twenty minutes too late to arrest
the fatal hand of the executioner; and he whom he came to save was gone
to that 'bourn from whence no traveller returns.' What must have been
the feelings of the clerk who misdirected the letter?


RICHARD ANDREWS AND ALEXANDER HALL,
Transported for Fraud

ANDREWS had been long a depredator upon the public; and though he had
not, like Roberts, the advantage of being a counsellor-at-law, yet he
well knew how to 'keep his neck out of the halter:' he would not, in
fact, touch upon what might amount to a felony; but, with all their art
and knowledge, we are always finding swindlers stumbling upon the
pillory, or strolling on board a transport.

The first public examination of Andrews, of any moment, was at the
Police-office, in Queen Square, Westminster, on the 31st of March,
1807; when Colonel Davison (not of St. James's Square) stated that he
became acquainted with the prisoner in the King's Bench. It was very
material for the colonel to get a seat in parliament; and, as the
prisoner had often represented himself as intimately connected with
some of the first characters in the country, the colonel disclosed his
affairs to him, who undertook to forward his intention. He described
himself as the intimate acquaintance of the Earl of Besborough, Lord
Fitzwilliam, and R. Spencer, Esq., from whom he received contributions
while in prison. After the colonel had left the Beach, he frequently
relieved him with pecuniary trifles, till he was liberated by the
Insolvent Act; and he then carried his pretensions to the extreme, by
observing that he had been offered a seat in parliament by Earl
Fitzwilliam, but it would ill become him to accept it, having been so
recently liberated; and he could, by the interest of the Earl of
Besborough, have the honour conferred on the colonel, as it was by the
interest of that earl that Lord Fitzwilliam's promise was to be
realized. The colonel went to dine with B. Goldsmid, Esq. at
Roehampton, and the prisoner accompanied him in his carriage to the
Earl of Besborough's house, at the same place; but the earl was from
home. He saw the prisoner again in a day or two, when he informed him
that he had conversed with the Earl of Besborough on the subject of a
seat in parliament; and the earl jocosely remarked, 'I should conceive
you to be a Don Quixote to want a seat, after taking the benefit of the
Insolvent Act.' The conversation then became more serious; and the
colonel, as his friend, was to have the seat promised by Earl
Fitzwilliam. The prisoner went on to state that he was connected with
the noble earl, who had four boroughs in Ireland, and who would dispose
of them at four thousand pounds each; and, if the colonel should have
other friends to accommodate, he might have the preference, as the
noble earl had authorized him to find candidates. The colonel found
candidates for all the boroughs the prisoner had talked of, and by his
desire the money was deposited in the hands of a banker. The
candidates, when they became members, were to retain their seats for
five years, in case of a dissolution of parliament. The colonel here
observed that he had such full confidence in the prisoner as by his
artifices to have been led away in a manner that made him look more
like an accomplice than a dupe. He had been so deceived by the
plausible pretences and the solemnity of the prisoner's conduct, that
his mind was tranquillized: thus he had obtained of him (the colonel),
and his friends, by his recommendation, four thousand pounds, he having
got two thousand pounds in two payments, as he said, for the Earl of
Besborough, as part of the consideration for the boroughs in Ireland.
The other money consisted in relieving the temporary embarrassments of
the prisoner, and accepting his bills. The colonel had accepted bills
for a carriage, which the prisoner had made in Poland Street; also for
his stud, &c. besides those of different tradespeople. The colonel,
having at length entertained some suspicion of the prisoner, waited on
the Earl of Besborough, when he found his suspicions realized.

The Earl of Besborough stated that he knew no more of the prisoner than
having received letters from him while in prison, asking relief, which
he granted to him in trifles. He knew nothing of what had been related
respecting the boroughs; and the other noblemen who had been talked of
knew no more of the prisoner than having afforded relief to his
distresses.

A gentleman, who had agreed to purchase one of the boroughs, proved
that he had paid the prisoner four hundred pounds, as part of the
consideration, and had been completely misled. The prisoner was
committed for re-examination.

He formerly kept his carriage, and a dashing equipage, in Half-Moon
Street, Piccadilly; but he was apprehended in an obscure lodging in
Westminster.

In a few days Andrews was again brought to the same office. for a
farther examination. On this occasion the principal evidence against
him was Mr. Harris, an aged gentleman, a surgeon and man-midwife in the
Strand, whose rain had been the consequence of the conduct of the
prisoner.

It appeared, by the statement of this gentleman, that he accidentally
met with a lady, (who turned out to be the wife of the prisoner,) in
1800. It being late at night, he offered to see the lady home; and he
did so, to Edward Street, Cavendish Square. The prisoner expressed his
warmest acknowledgments for the trouble Mr. Harris had taken, and
invited him to dine, &c. at his table.

A mutual intimacy now subsisted between the parties, and Mr. Harris
attended professionally at the accouchement of Mrs. Andrews, in
February, 1801. In April the prisoner took apartments at the house of
Mr. Harris, and remained there some twelve months; but never paid board
or lodging. The prisoner kept his carriage at the time. He used to
represent himself as a man of fortune, and the brother of the person
who was the proprietor of the Dartford powder-mills. Mr. Harris was
employed by the prisoner to inspect Jesuit barks, opium, &c. which he
(the prisoner) used to purchase in considerable quantities. The
complainant, on a certain day in April, 1801, supped with the prisoner,
and others; and, after having drank freely, and reduced himself to a
state of stupefaction, the party retired, and shortly after returned
with a bundle of papers, which he signed, as a witness, without knowing
what they were. The complainant stated that he believed opium had been
mixed with his wine, for he felt himself very ill the next day. Mr.
Harris had not signed these papers many days, when he was arrested at
the suit of Mr. Barron, druggist, in the Strand, though unconscious of
having contracted a debt with that gentleman; but the business was
settled by the attorney, whilst Mr. Harris was in a lock-up house. He
was released, and returned to his house, which was then in Theobald's
Road. He used to ride with the prisoner in his carriage; and on a
certain day, when at the foot of Westminster Bridge, the prisoner
alighted, and observed that he was going for a gentlemen; and he, in a
few minutes, brought a sheriff's officer, who served a writ on the
complainant, who knew of no debt he owed, and he was hurried away in
the carriage to the King's Bench prison, where he remained until
October, 1804, when he was cleared by the Insolvent Act. He could get
no redress for this cruel treatment, and he reflected with horror on
the conduct of Andrews, who called on him again after his release. At
this time a cupboard door was standing open in Mr. Harris's house, and
the prisoner reached a box from off a shelf, and rattled it. The
complainant was at this moment sent for into his shop, and the prisoner
went up stairs with the box, which contained plate to the amount of two
hundred pounds. The complainant returned, and followed the prisoner up
stairs; but he had gone off with the box and plate. Mr. Harris saw the
prisoner again in the evening, when he said that he had made a
temporary use of the plate, to save himself from being arrested, but he
would return it in a day or two; but he ultimately absconded. The plate
was the property of a West-India merchant, who had married the daughter
of Mr. Harris, and it was left in his possessive for safety, whilst the
merchant was gone abroad.

Another charge was exhibited against the prisoner by a young man, in
whose mother's house the prisoner lodged in 1797. He had obtained
twenty-one pounds of the woman, which was chiefly expended in clothing
a female with whom he had cohabited. The prisoner had given the young
man two letters to take to the Duke of Devonshire and Earl Spencer,
which were, according to his account, recommendations for the father of
the youth to get a comfortable place; but whilst he was gone the
prisoner decamped from the house. .The young man had seen the prisoner
with Sir Watkin Lewes, who had informed hiss he would pay the debt; but
he (the witness) had very recently seen Sir Welkin, who said he had
also a charge to institute against the prisoner.

William Brown, late coachman to the prisoner, appeared in his old
master's livery, blue and silver lace, to answer interrogatories
respecting goods which had been obtained by the prisoner from Mr.
Asser, china-man; but Mr. Asser was not present, and the testimony was
of no avail.

The magistrate informed the prisoner that his situation wore a serious
aspect, for he stood charged with felony. The prisoner observed that he
had been advised to say nothing until he came before a jury; but he had
feelings which, irritated by an abominable conspiracy, compelled him to
speak. He then entered into a long vindication of his conduct in a firm
manner, and protested his innocence. He also begged of the persons
present to suspend their judgment till the hour of trial. The
magistrate replied that it was astonishing the prisoner should make
solemn asseverations of his innocence, when it was palpable that,
without fortune, or any visible means of obtaining support, he had been
enabled to keep a carriage and sumptuous equipage -- that there had
been a multiplicity of persons at the office to substantiate charges
against him; and he (the magistrate) considered it the duty of his
official situation to remand the prisoner, for the further
investigation of his conduct. He was therefore remanded accordingly.

On the 10th of April following, Andrews underwent a fourth examination.
The first witness called was Mrs. Harris, the wife of the merchant who,
had lost his plate, and the daughter of Harris, from whose house it was
said to have been stolen. This lady corroborated what had been advanced
by Mr. Young, who redeemed the plate.

Mr. Brown, who resides in the neighbourhood of Bedford Square, stated
that he lived on an independent property, and first became acquainted
with the prisoner in the King's Bench, a few moths since. He (Mr.
Brown) was discharged by the Insolvent Act as well as the prisoner, and
about the same time; they had become the most intimate friends; and Mr.
Andrews, after his release, lived in Great Russell Street, Bloomsbury,
where he kept his chariot and a livery servant, which was afterwards
replaced by a family coach and two livery servants. Mr. Andrews had
given this witness to understand that he was on the eve of coming to an
unlimited fortune, as the heir of Bishop Andrews; and Mr. Brown and his
lady used frequently to dine with the prisoner, as did he and his lady
with them. At Mr. Andrews's dinner party Colonel Davison, Maltby,
McCullum, and others, used to be present; but these persons were never
invited to Mr Brown's table. In a conversation with a Mrs. Roberts, who
used to dine at the prisoner's table, that lady, in the presence of
Mrs. Brown, felt herself surprised at seeing Mrs. Andrews pay some
tradesmen's bills, and publicly deprecated so mistaken an idea! This
witness had subscribed four hundred pounds to Mr. Andrews's system of
finance, besides having done him some little favours while he was in
the King's Bench. He had also some bills of Colonel Davison's
acceptance, which were not yet due. Mr. Brown had also received a
letter from the prisoner, addressed to the Earl of Besborough, which
was to procure him (Mr. Brown) a place of four or five hundred a year
under government, which he delivered to the earl. Mr. Brown had
received this mark of kindness from the prisoner, after he had lent him
four hundred pounds; and he needed no promise for that advance, for Mr.
Andrews, by his open conduct, had completely got the better of his
purse, which he felt no hesitation in opening to him.

A poor man of the name of Newcombe, at whose house the prisoner lodged,
lost twenty-five pounds by him, by paying chandler's shop and other
little scores, and gave a very singular description of the prisoner's
conduct. He acted the part of an embarrassed gentleman, and one day
read a printed speech, which he said he made from the hustings at
Ipswich, when he was a candidate for the representation of that borough
in parliament.

Andrews complained of the unfair conduct of the magistrate during the
inquiry, and again denied ever having had an intention of injuring any
one. A committee, he said, sat daily at Fishmongers' Hall, to carry on
this foul conspiracy against him; and, however his feelings might be
tortured by being made a ridicule in that office, a jury would convince
the world of his innocence.

Again he was brought up, and fresh charges exhibited against him; but
so artfully had he gone about the commission of the different frauds,
that he evaded the full punishment due to his crimes, for near five
years, though during that long period he lived, so use an old saying,
'by his wits.' But justice, though sometimes tardy, will surely at
length overtake the most artful and hardened offender. Andrews, after
this long course of infamy -- he who had duped nobles, and deceived men
of all grades in society -- was at length caught in swindling a tavern
keeper out of a dinner!

He was at length committed, upon seven different indictments, to take
his trial. It appeared in the course of his various examinations that
he committed depredations on all ranks, from the rich and fashionable
down to a poor washerwoman, in whose house, when closely pursued, he
took lodgings, borrowed money of her, and even defrauded her of the
articles that she received in the way of her occupation.

At the Middlesex quarter sessions, on Tuesday, September the 24th,
1811, Richard Andrews and Alexander Hall were put to the bar, charged
upon an indictment with defrauding Isaac Kendall, by means of certain
false pretences, of the sum of thirteen pounds, five shillings, against
the form of the statute in that case made and provided.

When the indictment was about to be read, and the prisoners called upon
to plead, Andrews addressed the Court, and repeated his application to
have the trial postponed, being quite unable, for the want of pecuniary
assistance, to have the professional aid of those who were competent to
support him on so severe an occasion. He said, also, that the want of
money prevented him from procuring the necessary witnesses, whose
evidence could alone prove his innocence, and convince the world that
he was not the man whom newspaper report had so branded; for there was
not a journal published in the nation that did not impose upon him an
assumed characteristic. In some he was called 'Parson Andrews,' in
others 'Captain Andrews;' many had the good nature to dub him 'Doctor
Andrews;' but they all agreed in one point, namely, that of giving him
every name but that which belonged to him. He called God to witness
that , is the whole course of his life he never arrogated to himself
any characteristic that did not belong to him, or assumed any other
description than that of plain Richard Andrews.' Yet he was persecuted
beyond example. He entreated of the Court, he supplicated the Bench,
that he might be allowed a month to prepare himself; that he might have
the benefit of counsel, and be provided with the necessary instructions
for his counsel, as he was convinced, if that indulgence should be
allowed to him, that he would make his innocence, as far as the intent
of wronging the prosecutor, perfectly manifest; at present he could
neither obtain the support of witnesses and proofs, the assistance of
solicitor, nor the aid of counsel. He submitted to the Court that the
prosecutor had two indictments for the one offence against him, and he
begged to know upon which of them he intended to try him, as he
understood that he had preferred another bill against him.

Mr. Alley, for the prosecution, here interfered, and observed, that the
defendant well knew, that although there were two indictments, that yet
there was but one charge, and that was a charge for an offence
committed so far back as the 12th February last, and therefore he could
not complain of surprise; and as to the fact of preferring another
bill, in point of substantial truth it was no such thing. It was no
more nor no less than merely amending a clerical error in the first
bill -- the introduction of a single word instead of another. Therefore
the defendant had not to take this for a bill of the present sessions.

Several observations were made by Andrews, and the counsel for the
prosecution severally replied to them.

At length Mr. Mainwaring stated the sentiments of the Court, the
substance whereof was, that, although they were disposed to give every
reasonable and humane assistance that they could to all persons in the
predicament of the prisoner, yet that they actually did not perceive
that satisfactory grounds were adduced for postponing this trial any
longer. The circumstance of deficiency of pecuniary means was not a
reason why the public justice of the country was to be delayed; but the
prisoner, as in such cases, would find counsel in the Court themselves
-- the judges would be his counsel, as in humanity they ought.

The trial then proceeded. Mr. Alley stated the case, that it was an
indictment under the 30th of Geo. III. commonly called 'the Swindling
Act,' and, after expatiating on the enormity of offences such as the
prisoner was accused of, proceeded to call his witnesses.

Isaac Kendall stated himself to be the proprietor of the coffee-house
situate in St. Clement's Churchyard. He said, that on the 12th of
February last, the two prisoners. Andrews and Hall, came to his house,
and ordered dinner.

Mr. Kendall continued -- The coffee-room was very full, and I was busy
attending the company. Before they finished their dinner they called
for a bottle of wine. There was another gentleman in the coffee-room,
who spoke to Mr. Hall. This gentleman was invited to join them after
dinner

Q. By Mr. Alley -- Is not the person you speak of a most respectable
man? do you not know him very well?-- A. Beyond a doubt.

Kendall -- After dinner they called to me and asked for their bill; I
made it out; it amounted to one pound, seven shillings, and sixpence.
They offered me a check on Drummond and Co.

Q. By the Chairman.-- Who do you mean by they?-- A. Hall offered me the
check; on looking at it I saw an informality, and would not take it. I
then returned it to Hall; Andrews said he would draw another, and they
begged pardon fur the mistake; the check had thirteen on it instead of
thirteen pounds; I saw Andrews draw another for thirteen pounds, five
shillings.

Q. By the Chairman -- Was the first check in the name of Andrews,
though offered by Hall?-- A. Yes.

Q. Did you see Andrews draw it?-- A. I was rather busy at the moment,
but he called for pen and ink, and he had a book of checks by his side.
The draft was for thirteen pounds, five shillings, on Drummond and Co.
While Andrews was doing something with it, I took Hall aside, and asked
him was all right; he answered, 'O! yes! my dear fellow, don't be
afraid;' and, speaking of Andrews, he said, 'He was a rich uncle of
his, who had been very kind to him m various occasions, and that I need
not fear.' The opinion formerly entertained of Hall was so high that I
would have given him forty pounds, instead of the balance of the draft,
had he asked it.

Q. Was any thing said to the gentleman who had joined the prisoners'
company, about going to the theatre?-- A. It was agreed that he should
accompany them there; they did not go out together. It was proposed by
them (the prisoners) to dine at my house on the Wednesday or Thursday
following, when they would bring a party of friends, and the gentleman
was also invited. When the prisoners left the house, the gentleman
stopped at the bar to inquire whether the dinner would be on the
Wednesday or Thursday. In the mean time they went away. I went to the
door along with the gentleman, but they were gone. We looked both to
the right and left, but they were not to be seen. I then suspected
something was wrong. I sent my son next morning to Drummond's, but
there were no effects to pay the draft. In a day or two after, I went,
accompanied by my son, to the bankers'; but it was useless: the draft
has never been paid.

Mr. Heald, from the house of Messrs. Drummond, proved that Andrews had
not, at the time of the drawing the said draft, any cash whatever in
their hands; that the last money which lay in their hands, belonging to
him, was three shillings and sixpence, which was paid to his messenger
three years ago; but he admitted that there was a cash account with the
prisoner Andrews, in their house, and that, within three years previous
to the year 1808, his account exceeded six thousand pounds. It was,
however, all drawn out in January, 1808.

The prosecution on the part the crown being finished, the prisoners
were called on their defence, when Andrews asked a few questions of Mr.
Kendall and Mr. Heald, and then addressed the Court, admitting that he
drew the draft, and that the money was given to his unfortunate friend,
the other prisoner; but he submitted, that as he had kept an account in
the banking-house, even had that account been over-drawn, yet that he
did not consider himself, much less did he consider Hall. as guilty of
any violation of the law. He glanced at the effects which prejudice
must have upon a man so miserably situated as he was, and concluded
with a strong appeal to the merciful consideration of the Court and of
the jury.

Mr. Mainwaring recapitulated the whole of the evidence, making suitable
comments upon it, and upon the law of the case, as far as regarded the
offence charged against both the prisoners, and left it with the jury
to say whether they were guilty or not; and the jury, after a very
short consultation, brought in a verdict of Guilty.

They were both again tried, upon a second indictment, for a like
offence, in defrauding a person of the name of Brundell, who keeps a
tavern at Blackwell, of thirty pounds.

The prisoners went to Mr. Brundell's house and dined; after dinner they
got him to sit down and drink a glass of wine with them, and in the
course of the conversation they signified that a party of twenty would
dine there on the Thursday following, and bespoke a turtle dinner
accordingly for that number, at the rate of twenty shillings a head. In
a little time after dinner, a letter was received by Mr. Brundell at
his bar, and on opening it he found another directed 'To Richard
Andrews, Esq.' which letter was instantly handed up stairs to Mr.
Andrews. Mr. Andrews no sooner received it than a conversation took
place respecting the sale and purchase of an estate; at length the
prisoners again got into a conversation with Mr. Brundell; and, in
short, they tendered to him a draft for fifty pounds on Messrs.
Biddulph and Co. and, desiring him to stop twenty pounds on account of
the intended turtle dinner, got the difference, which was thirty
pounds, from him; and, after finishing two or three bottles, they
walked off. When the draft was presented the next day at Messrs.
Biddulph's the fraud was discovered, for he had no account there, and
Mr. Brundell saw no more of his guests till they were in custody. They
were both found Guilty on this indictment.

Mr. Mainwaring passed the sentence of the Court, which was, that, for
the first offence, they should be imprisoned in Newgate six months,
and, for the second, that they should be transported for seven years.


LORD LOUTH
Convicted for Abuse of his Authority as a Magistrate.

WE have already recorded some desperate and foolish acts of the Irish
peasantry; but, if crime ever admits of palliation, much may be
advanced in apology for the illegal conduct of that oppressed people.
Apprehensive that the laws of the realm are unfavourable to them, they
lie at the mercy of every tyrant who may choose to gratify caprice or
promote his own interest. Driven thus by oppression, can it be wondered
at that they take upon themselves to do what they erroneously suppose
the law will not do for them, and plunge into acts that make them
amenable to justice? The weak and the defenceless are soon overpowered
by legal authority, but their lordly and imperious tyrants, who goaded
them to deeds of blood are applauded for their loyalty, while their
poor tenantry are suspended upon the gibbet as examples to scare the
million, who return from the sight strengthened in their hereditary
opinion that there is "no law for an Irishman." Let them, however,
undeceive themselves, and learn, from the following case, that the
impartial omnipotence of British laws is able to protect the poorest
peasant and punish the most lordly villain.

Lord Louth disgraced at once the peerage and the magistracy*[see Note]
by an act of oppression which, alas! is too frequent in Ireland. His
lordship had a tenant, named Matthews, who occupied four acres of land,
and was employed as a labourer. by his lordship, from 1801 to 1809,
without ever incurring the displeasure of this stem of aristocracy. But
the noble peer thought his tenant too happy, and resolved upon
diminishing his enjoyments, by converting his four acres of poor land
to his own use. Perhaps his lordship wanted to try upon this mighty
farm some new system of agriculture; but Paddy thought his lordship
might put his theory into practice in some corner of his large domain,
and bluntly refused to surrender his little field to the rapacious
nobleman, who; it appeared, wanted it only because he thought, by
sowing turnips in it, he could make it more productive than by leaving
it at a moderate rent with Mr Matthews.

'Provoke not the mighty,' said the moralist; but Paddy did not
understand, or at least did not act upon this maxim, and from that hour
forward he experienced nothing from his lordship but repeated acts of
vexatious oppression. But the Irish are an enduring people, and from
long habit are regardless of such trifling acts of cruelty from their
betters. His lordship vas no philosopher. and he was indignant at
finding Paddy a stoic, when he had not the honour himself of belonging
to any fraternity of sages, although his economical propensities
entitled him to be classed with the respectable followers of the elder
Cato, and the turnip-loving Fabius, whose attachment to cheap diet was
equalled, if not surpassed, by this Irish nobleman.

Paddy had his full share of that shrewd sagacity which Providence has,
for wise reasons, no doubt, so amply dispensed to his countrymen, and
defeated, for a while, by his cunning, the anger of his landlord. But
what can wisdom do, when opposed to power without principle? His
lordship caused Matthews to be summoned before him on an alleged charge
of cutting down some trees of his lordship's between sunrise and
sunset; but the wisdom of Providence has wonderfully qualified all
things in nature. Where it has given the poisonous sting, it has denied
the members of progression, wings or feet. In the moral world, where we
find a bad man we generally find a great deficiency of intellect. It
appeared, that where his lordship accused Matthews of cutting down the
timber, a tree had not grown for centuries; and consequently the
hearing of the case was postponed from that day, Monday, to the
following Saturday.

Matthews thought the charge abandoned; but no! on the following
Thursday his lordship, accompanied by several constables, beset his
house sad made him prisoner. In vain the poor man declared his wife was
dying! In vain he pointed to his dead infant, that required to be
interred! In vain he protested his innocence, sad beseeched his
landlord to allow him to remain at home for another day to perform the
last melancholy office for his child. But the peer was inexorable, and,
without either oath, information, or document whatever, to substantiate
the charge, committed the poor man to gaol for a felony. Here he
remained twenty-four days, and was not discharged until the assizes,
when there was no prosecution.

For this conduct a criminal information was filed against his lordship
in the Court of King's Bench; and, it appearing that he was actuated by
malicious motives, and a vile spirit of revenge, he was found guilty of
abuse in his office of magistrate. The Court recommended him to make
adequate compensation to the injured man, and, to afford him time to do
so, protracted the period of declaiming his sentence.

On the 19th of June, 1811, his lordship was brought up to receive
sentence, and, it appearing that he had paid Matthews three hundred
pounds, Judge Day sentenced him to three months' confinement in
Newgate.

During his lordship's sojourn in durance, his parsimonious habits
attracted the notice of Watty Cox, the editor of the Irish Magazine,
who was confined for a libel. Accordingly Watty honoured his lordship
with a place in his publication, and gave an engraving of the degraded
nobleman in the act of blowing his fire with a mutilated pair of
bellows, insinuating that his parsimony would not allow him to purchase
a good one.

*Note: A memorable reproof of a magistrate occurred at Cardiff this
year, 1811, upon the circuit there. A gentleman of opulence, a
magistrate, and of undoubted repute, addressed a letter to one of the
judges, in which his object was, not only to accuse a culprit
(committed for manslaughter upon a coroner's inquest) of a deliberate
and savage murder, but also, upon the evidence of assertion alone, to
inflame the judicial mind of his correspondent against that prisoner,
by persuading the judge, before-hand, that unless the accused should be
cut off by the law, not a life near him, or within his reach, could be
safe. He represented this man as a conspirator in a desperate clan of
miscreants, who were men of sanguinary habits and passions.

He told the judge that all the witnesses who were to be heard were
partial to the accused, and would suppress the facts they knew, unless
his lordship would make them speak out; and he desired him to keep the
secret of these hints, for which he gave this reason, that every thing
valuable to him was at stake in withholding from this clan a knowledge
of the part he took against them.

When the judge had read this letter, which he received in court, the
bar and grand jury attending, he told them a letter had been just put
into his hand, and he named the writer of it; he added, that
circumstances of peculiar delicacy respecting the subject of that
letter imposed upon his feelings the painful necessity of deferring to
publish the contents till the gaol had been delivered, but that he
should then direct his principal officer to read it aloud, and should
pass a marked and public censure upon it, after delivering which he
should command the deposit of the letter upon the files of the court,
for safe custody, accompanied by a note of its doom, that if the writer
chose to appear he would be in time, and would be heard. When the man
accused of the manslaughter had been tried, and had received sentence
of imprisonment for three months, he was remanded. The writer of the
letter did not appear, and the judge delivered himself nearly as
follows to a numerous audience:--

'You have heard this letter, and your looks were eloquent. They
reprobated this tampering and cruel artifice.

'A magistrate of the county, at whose mercy, in some degree, are the
lives and liberties of men, writes to me for the single purpose of
insinuating and whispering away a man's life, by undue influence upon
the judgment or the feelings of his correspondent.

'His object is, to invert the habit and principle of a judicial trust,
which is that of being counsel for the prisoners, into the new and
sanguinary department of a suborned advocate against them. His letter
prompts me to goad the witnesses into evidence more hostile to the
culprit than it was their intention to give -- advice to me, insinuated
behind the back of the accused, and just before his trial, upon
evidence of assertion alone, unduly and surreptitiously communicated!

'But what heightens the depravity of this insult upon the Court, and
the cruelty of it, as it has taken aim at the parties who are
implicated, is the confidence proposed and claimed.

'My God!' said the judge, 'is it in 1811 that any man breathing, a
subject of this realm, could think a judge base enough to be an
accomplices in this fraud upon the sacred honour of his covenant upon
oath; of his dignified indifference to parties; and. above all, of his
presumptions, which are those of the law, that up to the moment of
conviction, by authentic and sworn proof, the accused be innocent?

     'What can be said for the writer?

'Even to him I would be merciful. is it an error of judgment? Is it
ignorance? But can we forget that he is a magistrate, and that he is a
man? Shall a magistrate be indemnified, or dismissed with a gentle
rebuke, who is ignorant of the judicial honour imposed upon him by his
peculiar office? Is he a man so unenlightened as to be unapprised of
those feelings which tell every honourable mind that no man is to be
condemned unheard, and whispered out of the world by a secret between
his accuser and his judge?

'As a memorial to after-ages of the disgrace inseparable from attempts
like these, I direct the officer to file this letter upon the records
of the Court, accompanied by a note of the fact that it was read aloud
in open Court, and severely censured by the Judge to whom it was
addressed.'

     The other judge assenting, it was made a rule of the Court.


WILLIAM HEBBERFIELD,
Executed for Forgery.

WILLIAM HEBBERFIELD stood capitally indicted for feloniously forging,
and, in a second count, for uttering, knowing it to be forged, a
certain two-pound note, with intent to defraud the Governor and Company
of the Bank of England. Forgeries of their notes to a most enormous
amount had been for a considerable time going on,*[see note] the
authors of which the company were not able to discover. The prisoner
was confined in Newgate under a sentence of two years' imprisonment, by
the Court of King's Bench, on a conviction for conspiracy in aiding the
escape of the French General Austin, a prisoner of war in this country
upon his parole. There was also a prisoner named Barry, confined in the
House of Correction at Clerkenwell, on a sentence of six months'
imprisonment, for uttering counterfeit dollars. Mr. Weston, the
principal clerk of Messrs. Kaye and Freshfield, solicitors of the Bank,
went to Barry in prison on Monday, the 23d September; and, in
consequence of a plan then concerted, he gave Barry eight pounds in
Bank of England notes, which he previously marked with the letter W; he
then accompanied Barry in a coach, together with one of the turnkeys,
named Beckett, to Newgate, where Barry went in, and directly, without
communicating his purpose to any one, to the room of the prisoner,
where there were a number of persons with him. He went up to the
prisoner, gave him six one-pound notes of the marked ones he had
received from Mr. Weston, of which the prisoner returned him three,
saying he had not enough of the other notes ready until to-morrow, and
then gave him, in lieu of the three notes he kept, forged notes to the
nominal value of six pounds. With these Barry immediately returned to
Mr.Weston, who waited in the street, and immediately Beckett went in,
accompanied by Brown and another officer, to the prisoner's chamber,
where Beckett asked him to produce what property he had about, him.
Upon which the prisoner produced from one pocket a handful of gold,
from another a pocket-book filled with bank-notes, from another a
quantity of loose bank-notes, and he also produced a stocking shard
with the like currency. Beckett, on examining these notes, and not
perceiving amongst them any of the marked ones he sought for, told the
prisoner he had some more, and desired him to produce them. Upon which
the prisoner took some other notes from his side-pocket, and laid them
on the bed where he was sitting.-- Beckett took those up. They were the
marked notes; he said these were what he wanted, and returned the
prisoner the rest. Upon which the prisoner, probably prophesying his
purpose, snatched the notes, and thrust them into the fire. Beckett's
assistant, however, rescued them from the flames, and they were proved
to be the same which Barry had paid him just before; and the notes
Barry received in lieu were also proved to be forgeries.

The prisoner was found Guilty -- Death. He suffered before Newgate on
the 29th of January, 1812, with Paul Whitehead, a man of genteel
appearance, who was tried at the same sessions for forging the name of
Thomas Gullan, an acceptor of a bill of eighty-seven pounds ten
shillings, and thereby defrauding Messrs. Roberts, Curtis, and Co. They
met their fate with decent fortitude, and when on the fatal scaffold
shook hands, after which they were launched into eternity.-- The crowd
was immense.

*Note: The number of persons prosecuted for forged notes of the Bank of
England, and for uttering, or having them in their possession, knowing
them to be forged, from the year 1797 to 1811 inclusive, amounted to no
less than four hundred and seventy-one. The number of persons
prosecuted for counterfeiting the tokens issued by the Bank of England,
or for uttering the same, was, in 1804, eight persons; 1805, none;
1806, two; 1807, none; 1808, one; 1809, nine; 1810, six; and 1811,
twenty three.


WILLIAM JEMMET,
Executed for Robbery on the High Seas.

This malefactor had been purser on board his majesty's ship Amphitrite,
and from some unsuccessful speculations had got himself into
embarrassed circumstances. In 1809 he entered into a concern, with some
others, to ship goods for the Brazils. Jemmet. accompanied by a
mariner, named Moore, went to Mr. White, a ship-broker, in London, and
entered into negotiation for the purchase of a Portuguese vessel then
lying in the Thames. They professed to treat on behalf of the house of
Lazarus and Cohen, and purchased the ship for seven hundred pounds,
which was paid for at two payments. They then employed Mr. White to
procure them freight for Pernambuco. The vessel, which they called the
Maria, was then advertised as ready to receive goods, and vast
quantities were shipped; among other things, seven casks of dollars,
containing thirty-two thousand ounces of silver. The cargo was
estimated at eighty or ninety thousand pounds; and the freight,
amounting to eight hundred and eighty-six pounds, six shillings, was
paid in advance.

In April, 1810, the Maria, Captain da Sylva, sailed from the Downs,
where Jemmet went on board; but, instead of proceeding to the Brazils,
they shaped their course for the West Indies. On their way from
Teneriffe to Porto Rico the vessel's sides were painted yellow, and her
name changed from Maria to the Columbia, of New York. The first mate
took the command. They were not suffered to break bulk at Porto Rico,
and in consequence they proceeded to Porto Plato, in St. Domingo, where
they freighted a schooner with part of the cargo, and then sailed to
St. Jago, in the Isle of Cuba, where the dollars were landed by Jemmet.
They then steered for Havannah, where the crew was discharged, and the
vessel dismantled. Neither the owners of the ship nor the cargo ever
heard how either was disposed of.

Jemmet, being dishonestly possessed of property, proceeded to
Philadelphia, where he procured bills on England for six thousand
pounds, with which he returned. But an account of his villainy had
preceded him, and on his appearance in London he was taken into
custody, and committed to the prison. His trial came on at the Old
Bailey, February 28, 1812, when these facts were proved against him by
some of his crew, and he was accordingly found Guilty -- Death.


WILLIAM CUNDELL AND JOHN SMITH,
Prisoners of War who Went over to the French, Executed for High Treason.

Repentance and a corresponding conduct are sure of forgiveness, for the
past, before Heaven; but earthly tribunals differ from those above; and
it is supposed that occasional examples of capital punishment are
necessary for the good of society, though the victims of penal laws may
have ceased to offend, and consequently, from them individually, there
is nothing more to apprehend. In hanging one man, and acquitting
another guilty of the same crime, there may be policy; but there
certainly is not justice; and he that suffers may reasonably accuse his
judges of vindictiveness and partiality. There are, however, shades of
criminality which would warrant a difference of punishment, and we hope
that, in the present case, these shades were found by the
attorney-general, who conducted the prosecution, and we have no reason
to suspect he did not.

In 1808, a number of British sailors and mariners were confined, as
prisoners of war, in the Isle of France [Mauritius]. The prison, being
much crowded, was greatly incommoded with dirt and vermin, and, there
being no way of escaping from such inconvenience but that of desertion,
every art was practiced by their keepers to induce the unhappy
prisoners to enter the French service. Fifty men, among whom were
Caudell and Smith, had not virtue enough to resist the temptations on
one hand, and the hope of escaping from distress and filth on the
other. They forgot their country and allegiance, and put on the enemy's
uniform, acting as sentinels over those who were so recently their
companions in captivity.

These traitors continued to do duty with the French until the surrender
of the island to the British forces, when Caudell and Smith, with ten
others, positively refused to accompany the enemy, and threw themselves
upon the mercy of their country, having immediately surrendered to the
English, while the thirty-eight others marched off to old France.

These culprits were now transmitted to England, and a special
commission was issued for their trial, which took place at the Surrey
Court House, February the 6th, 1812.

Caudell, Smith, and five others, were found guilty of adhering to his
majesty's enemies, when the attorney-general stated that he thought the
ends of justice obtained, and that he would not press the conviction of
the remaining five, who were discharged, not for any want of proof of
their guilt, but through the clemency of the government. He pitied the
situation of the unfortunate men at the bar; but as an example, to
deter others from forsaking their duty, it was necessary that the law
should take its course, in order that those engaged in the service of
their country might be impressed with the conviction, that such
offenders could not expect to escape the hands of justice. There were
reasons for selecting the men who had been tried, as well as those who
were acquitted, and, from his official knowledge of the particulars, he
thought the ends of justice obtained.

The lord chief baron then proceeded to pass sentence, after a suitable
address -- 'That you, and each of you, be taken to the place from
whence you came, and thence be drawn on a hurdle to the place of
execution, where you shall be hanged by the necks, but not till you are
dead: that you be severally taken down, while yet alive, and your
bowels taken out, and burnt before your faces; that your heads be then
cut off, and your bodies cut in four quarters, to be at the king's
disposal.'

The prisoners were then, after again crying for mercy, reconducted to
their cells. Almost every individual in court was dissolved in tears
during the melancholy scene.

On Monday morning, the 16th of March, 1812, at eight o'clock, these two
young men were conducted from their cells to chapel, from whence, after
remaining some time, they were drawn on a hurdle to the place of
execution, and having with becoming fortitude ascended the scaffold,
attended by the clergyman, they again spent a short period in prayer,
seemingly thoroughly sensible of that fate fast approaching them. The
dreadful moment having at length arrived, they were launched off, and
their bodies, after hanging nearly half an hour, were taken down. The
scene then, while the executioner was performing that part of the
remaining sentence, in severing off their heads, and alternately with
his right hand presenting each to the surrounding spectators,
exclaiming, Behold the bead of a traitor!' became truly awful, and
apparently dissolved in tears each individual who beheld the fate of
two men, who thus, in the bloom of life, suffered death, according to
the laws of their country.

The remaining five were pardoned on condition of serving in colonies
beyond the seas.


THOMAS BOWLER,
Executed for Maliciously Firing at Mr. Burrowes.

An unprovoked and foul spirit of revenge, indulged in to excess,
precipitated this hoary sinner on the commission of a crime for which
he forfeited his life to the injured laws of his country. The motives
which prompt other men to deeds of blood were wanting here; plunder was
not the object; nor was there a single worldly advantage which this
desperate man could promise himself from the premature death of his
neighbour; nor does it appear that he received a provocation from his
intended victim that would justify the slightest act of hostility, much
less a premeditated attempt on his life.

Thomas Bowler was a wealthy farmer, who resided near Harrow, sad had
for his neighbour another farmer named Burrowes, who was also a
hay-salesman in St. James's, Haymarket. These men had a trifling
dispute about some trees; but which was amicably adjusted without any
application to lawyers. Notwithstanding this apparent conciliation
Bowler from that moment nourished a spirit of revenge, and about the
middle of March, 1812, in the presence of one Sheppard, in St. James's
Market, said 'Damn that Burrowes's eyes, I'll Burrowes him before long;
he shan't live to the end of June, if I was to be hanged the next
moment.' Sheppard remonstrated, and Bowler replied, 'I'll be d--d if I
don't be the death of him.' This was communicated to Burrowes, who took
no farther notice of it than just to observe 'I don't fear him; he is
too fond of his own life to take away mine.'

Bowler, being a man who never put any restraint on his violent passion
-- indulged his evil propensity for better than two months, and on the
30th of May prepared to carry into execution his foul design, as he
knew his unsuspecting neighbour would be on his way to London at a
certain hour, to attend his duty in the Haymarket.

His preparations were all coolly and deliberately arranged. He provided
a boy to keep a swift horse to carry him out of danger in case of
pursuit; and, as the pan of his blunderbuss lost the priming, he
carried it on that very morning to a blacksmith for repair, telling him
he wanted it to shoot a mad dog. While the smith was employed on the
lock he went out, and kept walking up and down; and, as he saw Burrowes
coming up the road in his chaise-cart, he returned into the smith's
shop, took up the blunderbuss, and stationed himself behind an
elm-tree, which concealed him all but his feet from Mr. Burrowes. Where
Bowler stood was about fifteen yards from the canal bridge, at
Alperton; and, just as the chaise-cart gained the bridge, the assassin
took a deliberate aim, when Burrowes exclaimed 'Don't fire!' and
stooped down in the cart. 'Damn your eyes, take that!' said Bowler,
firing, and wounded Mr. Burrowes in the neck and back. At the report of
the blunderbuss the horse ran away, and the assassin mounted his horse,
and galloped off, leaving his hat behind him, and throwing the
blunderbuss into the ditch.

What added to the atrocity of this act was the age of the perpetrator,
which at the time was more than sixty years. Besides, he was immensely
rich, and had a respectable family to suffer disgrace by his
unprincipled wickedness.

Happily Mr. Burrowes' wounds were not mortal; he gradually recovered,
and diligent pursuit was made after the hoary fugitive. For a week he
avoided the vigilance of Mr. Burrowes' friends; but on the 6th of June
he was apprehended at his own house. To the person who took him into
custody he offered ten, twenty, and, lastly, thirty thousand pounds, to
be allowed his liberty; but his offers were rejected, and he was
carried to the police-office, from which he was fully committed to
Newgate. He thought bail would be accepted, and offered to deposit ten
thousand pounds.

Bowler's friends now began to prepare for his defence; and, knowing
there was no possibility of controverting the fact, endeavoured to
establish a case of lunacy. For this purpose a commission was sued out,
and a jury gave a verdict that he was insane from the preceding March,
in consequence of a fracture in his skull, occasioned by a fall from
his horse.

His trial came on at the Old Bailey, July the 3d, 1812, when the case
of the prosecution being gone through, several witnesses were examined
to establish his insanity. Among these were three or four medical men,
who gave it as their decided opinion that he was in an unsound state of
mind; and various acts of eccentricity and extravagant passion were
adduced in support of the defence. But as his conduct at the time of
the dreadful act, in preparing the means of escape, argued a conviction
of a knowledge of right and wrong, the jury found him Guilty, and he
was sentenced to be hanged.

For some time he supported himself with the hope of royal mercy, till
Thursday, August the 20th, when he was given to understand that his
execution was appointed to take place the ensuing day. He met his fate
with pious firmness, on Friday, August the 21st, 1812.


JOHN LOMAS AND EDITH MORREY,
Executed for the Murder of Edith Morrey's Husband.

'My son, learn to say No,' was the dying injunction of a pious mother
to a beloved youth; and, though the advice was concise, it is one of
the most sage that ever was delivered from mortal lips. He that learns
to say 'No' to the first invitation to crime will never become guilty;
for the climax of iniquity is never attained at once, but must be
approached through all the progressive ways of vice. Reader! peruse the
atrocious narrative we are about to relate; and, while you mourn for
the weakness and wickedness of your species, commune with yourself on
the importance of learning to say 'No,' an ignorance of which brought
this guilty pair to an ignominious death.

John Lomas lived as servant with a farmer named Morrey, who resided in
Cheshire, and by whom he was treated with great kindness. Lomas, not
being more than twenty years of age, attracted the notice of his
mistress; and, though she was the mother of five children, she admitted
a criminal passion for her servant boy. Some acts of kindness on her
part conciliated the youth, and the condescension of the mistress
emboldened him to familiarity. The wholesome barriers of respect and
deference being once broken through, modesty was left without a
protector, and the guilty pair plunged into all the excesses of
forbidden enjoyment. Heinous as was their conduct, had it stopped here,
they would have escaped the miserable condition to which they reduced
themselves. But the guidance of virtue once forsaken, the progress of
guilt is rapid.

This atrocious pair, either apprehensive of discovery, or wishing to
perpetuate their guilty connexion, resolved on removing the
unsuspicious husband, whose existence they thought a drawback on their
mutual happiness.

Various attempts to murder the unfortunate man proved abortive, until
the night of the 11th of April, 1812. Morrey had been out at a cocking,
and returned home at the usual hour. He spoke with his usual kindness
to Lomas, and laughed and joked with his wife as they were going to
bed, little suspecting the dreadful intentions which that barbarous
woman harboured towards the father of her children. Between one and two
o'clock Mrs. Morrey got up and went to Lomas's room, desiring him to
get up, and murder her husband. The infatuated youth obeyed the horrid
summons, and, ascending, had an axe put into his hands; while his
mistress held the candle, Lomas struck his master three blows on the
head, and as the unfortunate man moaned, he was heard by a servant-maid
in an adjoining apartment, who, making a noise, alarmed the murderers,
when they ran out of the room, Mrs. Morrey extinguishing, at the same
time, the candle.

Morrey continuing to moan, Lomas was sent in again to dispatch him but,
after giving several blows, came out without having effected his horrid
purpose. At this Mrs. Morrey said, 'John, he is alive; go in and kill
him;' and put a razor into his hand for the purpose. On his entering a
third time, their miserable victim was yet alive, and seemed to
recognise Lomas, whom he caught by the shirt, and laid his head down on
his breast, in a supplicating manner; but at this moment the monster
drew the razor twice across his throat, and terminated his struggles
for existence.

Mrs. Morrey now went into the servant-maid's room, and prevented her
from escaping through the window, telling her to remain quiet, as there
were murderers in the house.

To save appearances, Lomas ran through the neighbourhood, lamenting and
proclaiming that some villains had murdered his master. Several people
attended, and blood being found on Lomas, and traced to his room, he
was accused of the murder, when he unhesitatingly confessed it, and
implicated his mistress. When the constable came to take her into
custody, she drew from her pocket a razor, and inflicted a deep wound
in her throat; but it did not prove mortal. The razor was found in a
pond, where Lomas had thrown it; and his bloody shirt was taken out of
his trunk, where he had concealed it.

So great was the sensation produced in the country by the perpetration
of this horrid murder, that when the trial of these malefactors came on
at Chester, July 21st, 1812, the court was crowded to excess, it being
computed that four thousand persons attended to hear the verdict.

The trial continued six hours. Edith Morrey wore a veil when she was
put to the bar; but this being ordered to be removed, she held her
handkerchief to her face, and preserved, throughout the awful
investigation, a sullen, unmoved, hardness. From the time of her
imprisonment, she protested her innocence; and, thinking that there was
not a sufficient evidence to criminate her, she spoke with confidence
of acquittal. On the other hand, Lomas all along confessed his crime in
all its horrid circumstances.

The facts of the case being proved, the jury, without retiring,
pronounced them Guilty, and they were ordered for execution the ensuing
Monday. When sentence was passed, Lomas stretched out his hands and
exclaimed, 'I deserve it all -- I don't wish to live; but I hope for
mercy.' His more miserable companion pleaded pregnancy; and, a jury of
matrons proving this to be case, she was respited.

On Sunday, the day before execution, Edith Morrey acknowledged her
guilt, and desired to speak with Lomas. This was granted, and they
partook of the sacrament together, previous to which they had some
mutual recrimination, Morrey being unwilling to acknowledge the minute
particulars of her atrocious conduct. But they parted in friendship;
and, praying for each other, acknowledged their sins.

On Monday, according to his sentence, Lomas was removed from Chester
Castle to the New City Gaol. The sheriffs received him at the
boundaries, and, on being placed in a cart, he fell on his knees, and
continued in prayer till he arrived at the gaol, in front of which the
drop was erected. He declared he would rather die than live, and every
part of his deportment evinced the sincerity of his professions. When
the rope was placed round his neck, he addressed a few words to the
surrounding multitude, observing that he had made his peace with God,
and warned them to take example by his present awful situation. Soon
after he was launched into eternity; but, being in the vigour of youth
and health, he struggled violently before he quitted this mortal state.

The miserable Edith Morrey having given birth to an infant, and the
time of parturition over, she prepared to meet the fate of her
paramour. On the 7th of February, 1813, she was conducted to the place
of execution, and it is some alleviation to our feelings that she died
a penitent. She was dressed in widow's weeds, and, when placed upon the
platform, she advanced to the front and addressed the multitude. 'My
dear Christians, I hope you will take warning by my melancholy
situation. My crime has been of a double nature. In the first place I
have broken one of God's commandments, by committing adultery, and
defiling the marriage bed; and, in the next, I have committed a most
inhuman murder, imbruing my hands in the blood of an affectionate and
most indulgent husband.'-- Then clasping her hands, she exclaimed,
'Lord, unto thee I commend my spirit,' and in a moment after she was
launched into eternity.


JOSEPH SIMMONS WINTER, BENJAMIN ALLEN, WILLIAM TAYLOR, JOHN IVEY, &
ROBERT COOPER
The Three First Executed for Stealing Silk, and the Two Latter
Transported for Receiving it, Knowing it to be Stolen.

THESE men belonged to a gang of desperate villains who frequently
committed depredations on the River Thames; but all their previous acts
of dishonesty were lost in the enormity of the one we are about
recording, which, at the time of perpetration, created a greater
notoriety than any case of felony we remember to have heard of.

The brig 'Velocity,' laden with silk and ostrich feathers, sailed in
the month of May, 1812, from Gibraltar to London. Coming from a country
afflicted with a pestilential disease, the ship was obliged to perform
quarantine on her arrival in the mouth of the Thames. Of this
circumstance the band of pirates got notice, and having ascertained
that a man named Banton, master of the 'Sisters' hoy, was to go down to
Stangate Creek to fetch up the silk and feathers, they engaged him --
nothing loath -- to aid them in making away with the cargo. His mate,
named Knox, was also in the secret, and approved of the scheme. Winter
was also the master of a hoy, and engaged to carry the robbery into
execution; for which purpose he followed with his hoy, that when Banton
should purposely run his vessel aground, he was to come alongside, and
carry off the silk, &c.

Thieves cannot exist without receivers; and these villains had more
than one. Cooper, who kept three public houses, and was turning at the
rate of seventeen thousand pounds a year, agreed to purchase the silk
at a certain price; a man named Ingram was also to receive it; and
Ivey, who was a toy-chandler in Artillery Lane, agreed to make sales
for them. Cooper and Ingram went down to Dagenham to receive the goods,
where it was expected they would have been landed.

On the 14th of July the hoy received the goods, and sailed. Winter
followed; but in consequence of Banton having a Custom-house officer on
board, who was well acquainted with the river, he refused to fulfil his
promise. Thus disappointed, they execrated Banton, and for this time
abandoned their intentions; but on the 'Sisters' coming up to the
Custom House on Saturday, they entered into a new conspiracy to steal
the silk and feathers, there being ten bales of the first, and two of
the latter, on board. Allen and Taylor, who were working men on the
river, were two of those concerned. On Tuesday night they went on
board, when one of the thieves imitated Banton's voice, and told the
officers that he should move out in the river, to be ready for the
morning's tide, as he wanted to get in the London Docks, and requested
of them to go below, and get into bed. The stupid fellows did so, and
the villains carried the hoy into a wharf above Blackfriars Bridge, on
the Surrey side, where they quickly carried off the cargo. When the
officers awoke next morning they found themselves confined; and when,
with great difficulty, they broke through the skylight, they found the
goods in which they were in charge had been carried off.

The silk and feathers were first removed to a stable in Woolpack Yard,
Gravel Lane. The parties afterwards met at several public houses, to
concert means to dispose of the property. Ivey refused to be
immediately concerned, but promised to sell the feathers when the alarm
excited was allayed, and received payment for the part he had already
taken. Cooper then agreed to pay for the silk nine hundred pounds, and
actually sold a part of it to a Mr. Gibbs, of Cumberland Street,
Shoreditch. He then employed one Harris, a clerk, and brother to an
attorney, to dispose of more of it; and this man negotiated with some
of the trade, pretending that he was employed by men of character, but
whose names, from motives of delicacy, he was not at liberty to
disclose. The silk being of a peculiar nature, and sent to the
purchaser in an unusual state of package, he indignantly rejected it,
suspecting that it was part of the stolen silk, then universally
advertised.

Several of the party were apprehended on suspicion; but there being no
evidence against them, they were acquitted. Harris acted as their
professional agent, and supplied them with money. At length a new light
was thrown on the affair. A silk-thrower, whose mills were at Bruton,
was sent some of this silk to prepare; and suspecting, from its state,
that it belonged to that stolen, informed the parties concerned of the
circumstance, upon which several of the villains were taken into
custody; but the affair being of a complicated nature, it was found
necessary to admit some of the accomplices as evidence against the
others. For this purpose three men, named Brown, Fenwick, and Banton,
were admitted as approvers; and Winter, Allen, Taylor, Ivey, Knox,
Cooper, and Harris, were indicted at the Old Bailey, October the 30th,
1812.

Their trial occupied the Court three days, during which time the jury
were not permitted to separate. The facts being deposed against them,
several witnesses were called as to character; and Cooper had the
solicitor of the Customs and Excise examined, to show that he had been
frequently prosecuted as a smuggler, with a view to persuade the jury,
by inference, that he bought the silk, with the idea that it was
smuggled.

The jury, having been charged, retired at twelve o'clock at night, and
soon returned with a verdict of Guilty -- Death -- against Winter,
Taylor, and Allen:-- Ivey and Cooper Guilty -- transportation; and
acquitting Harris and Knox.

Knox, it appeared, knew nothing of the last transaction; and no
evidence went to show that Harris was otherwise employed than as a
professional agent.

After their conviction several instruments were conveyed to Winter and
Allen, with a view to enable them to make their escape; and a similar
attempt was made a few days before their final one upon earth. The
three unfortunate men suffered the sentence of the law, January 25,
1813.


CHARLES FREDERICK PALM AND SAMUEL TILLING
Executed for Mutiny and Murder.

THESE sanguinary men were indicted at the Sessions of the High Court of
Admiralty, at the Old Bailey, on Friday the 18th December, 1812, for
the murder of James Keith, master of a trading vessel, called 'The
Adventure.'-- There were other counts in the said indictment against
the prisoners, charging them with the murder of William Smith, the
first mate of the said vessel, and two black men belonging thereto,
called, the one Joe, and the other John.*[see note]

From the evidence adduced on the trial it appeared that the deceased,
James Keith, was master and sole owner of the vessel in question; and
that, having embarked the whole of his property therein, to the extent
of nearly two thousand pounds, he resolved to make a voyage to the
South Seas upon a fishing concern; and for that purpose engaged a crew,
which, with himself and three boys, amounted altogether to fourteen
persons. Palm was a Swede, an experienced seaman, by his commander
appointed to the post of second mate.

The 'Adventure' sailed from Portsmouth in the month of November, 1811,
and for a part of the time had a prosperous voyage; but one of the crew
becoming sickly, and eventually dying, the captain put into the Island
of St. Thomas's, and took on board the two black men, Joe and John,
already mentioned. He then shaped his course towards Congar, upon the
coast of Africa, intending thus to make his voyage to the South Seas;
but, whilst an hundred leagues off that place, the crew began to show
strong symptoms of mutiny; and, on a morning in April, about four
o'clock, a boy named George, who was at the helm, called to the
captain, saying there was something bad going on upon deck. The
unfortunate Keith, who had already in vain attempted to conciliate his
crew, instantly arose from his bed, and, without putting on his
clothes, hurried to the deck, where he saw Palm, the second mate, in
the act of striking a light.

The captain asked what he was about, when Palm struck him with the
cooper's hammer, which he had ready in his hand. In the mean time,
another man, since dead, attacked the chief mate, who had come on deck
immediately after the captain, and struck him repeatedly with the
cook's axe, and Palm, and two other Swedes (both since dead), took an
active part in throwing the captain and chief mate overboard.

After this all hands went below, except the boy at the helm. Palm
produced a Bible, and they all took an oath upon it, wishing they might
never see the light of heaven if they divulged what had passed.

The boy left at the helm was afterwards sworn; and, after the bodies of
the captain and chief mate had been thrown overboard, the two Swedes
provided themselves each with a pistol and a glass of rum: the rum they
offered to the blacks; and, whilst in the act of drinking it, each shot
his man; when both were immediately thrown overboard by Palm and the
two Swedes.

After this they plundered the captain's property, and Palm had a
five-pound note out of it. Palm then took charge of the vessel; but it
was afterwards determined to scuttle the ship, and take to the boats,
and steer for the coast of Guinea.

Two boats were prepared, and provisions put into them with the crew,
eleven in number; they were three days and three nights before they
reached land, and then one of the boats was swamped, and a boy was
drowned; they then walked along the beach till night, when they lay
down on the sand to sleep, and next day went into the country. The
moment, however, they were discovered, the black natives rushed upon
them, seized, plundered, and stripped them naked, and led them off
through the country, to be sold as white slaves.

In this deplorable state they remained several weeks, traversing a vast
extent of country, during which all of them died through disease,
cruelty of the negroes, or fatigue, except Palm, Tilling, William
Wright, not yet apprehended, and Henry Madis. The survivors were
marched, or rather driven, to Cape Lopez, a southern promontory of
Africa, where the black chief released them, supposing they were
shipwrecked mariners, and, after a short time, a Portuguese vessel
touching there, Palm and Wright took their voyage to Europe in her, and
in a few days, a Liverpool ship also touching there, Tilling and Madis
got a passage in her, and they were landed at Liverpool in September.

Tilling, appearing an object of charity, was admitted a patient in the
hospital; and Mr. Capper, the first mate of the ship which brought them
back to their native country, humanely took the boy, Madis, to his own
home. In about a week after their arrival, when Madis went to see
Tilling at the hospital, he was greatly surprised to see Palm at the
same place, having, on the morning of that same day, been taken in as a
patient from the ship that brought him over.

The day on which young Madis landed in Liverpool he wrote the outlines
of the above sad story to his mother in London; and urged her to send
him money to defray travelling charges, that he might lay the whole
before a London magistrate.

Such was the evidence against the prisoners. The impulse which appeared
principally to occupy the mind of Palm was that of criminating his
fellow-prisoner, whom he laboured to make appear to have acted an equal
part in the bloody scene with himself; which by no means came out in
evidence: on the contrary the work of death seemed to have been done by
Palm and his brother Swedes, of which country the greater part of the
crew were composed.

Witnesses were called to the character of Tilling, among whom was his
sister; who all spoke highly of his former conduct in life. This might
have had some weight in his behalf; indeed nothing vindictive was
proved against him, and those charitably inclined believed that he took
the forced oath, and appeared, after the murderous deeds were done, as
indeed any one would, to retain the blessing of life;-- but Tilling did
not act like Madis, who gave information of the horrid transaction on
his return to his native country. They were both found Guilty, and
suffered at Execution Dock on the 21st December, 1812.

Palm appeared to be about fifty years of age; but the hardships he had
undergone among the negroes in Africa might have had a premature effect
upon his appearance. Tilling bore the marks of youth, not mere than
twenty-five years. They were placed in the cart which led them to
Execution Dock without betraying those emotions natural to men in their
unfortunate situation. Palm, soon as seated, put a quid of tobacco into
his mouth, and offered another to his wretched companion, who refused
it with indignation. Some indications of pity were offered for the fate
of Tilling; Palm, execrations alone.

*Note: The prisoner, Palm, being an alien, was asked, in the usual
manner, whether he would be tried by a jury composed of half
Englishmen, and the other half foreigners. He hesitated; but answered
that he would rather trust himself to Englishmen, than have a single
Swede on the jury.


WILLIAM BROWN,
Executed for the Murder of a Child.

WILLIAM BROWN was a private in the royal artillery, and lived as
servant with Lieutenant Webber. He bore a most exemplary character in
the regiment; though, a short time before the commission of the crime
for which he suffered, some articles were missing from his master's
lodgings, which it was suspected he had stolen; and, as he got some
intimation of the charge against him, he absented himself on the night
of the 4th of April, 1812, from the barrack, and this circumstance
seems to have led to the fatal deed.

The circumstances of the case were of an extraordinary nature. On the
morning of the 5th, he returned to the barrack as early as between five
and six, and called up a person of the name of Jeffecot, with whom he
had lived. After some preliminary conversation, he told him he had
committed a crime for which he must be hanged, and desired that he
might be taken to the guard-house, where he was received by the
sergeant-major. When in custody, he requested to speak with the
sergeant in private. This being granted, he told him that, being
walking in the country the preceding evening, he was going over a
stile, which led into a lane, where a little girl was at play. The
child, alarmed at his sudden appearance, cried, when he seized her in
his arms, and with his finger and thumb strangled her. As soon as she
was dead, he carried her under his arm to some distance, and then laid
her on some stone steps which he described, and where the body was
subsequently found, and, from the marks on its little throat, it was
evidently killed as the monster described. The name of the child was
Isabella M'Guire, aged seven years. Brown could ascribe no motive for
the perpetration of the dreadful act, and, as he had no malice against
the child, he could not tell how he came to do it. We are, therefore,
either to suspect that he had a disposition habituated to cruelty, or
was stimulated to the deed by temporary insanity; for human nature,
thank God, is not altogether so sanguinary, as deliberately to shed
innocent blood, without any provocation whatever.

For this offence he was indicted at Maidstone on the 7th of August,
1812, when he was found Guilty, and underwent, according to his
sentence, the dreadful fiat of the law on the following Monday.


ROBERT TOWERS,
Imprisoned for Endeavouring to Bribe a Turnkey of Newgate.


THERE is something in the human breast which endures us to favour the
efforts of mistaken generosity, and disposes us to regard with
forgiveness those departures from rigid justice which take place in
behalf of friendship. The following case is one of those where justice
is opposed to feeling; and, though we do not find fault with the
sentence, we cannot refuse our sympathy to the sufferer.

Robert Towers was a warmhearted sailor who felt acutely, and whose
actions emanated from his feelings. Allied by blood and friendship to
the unfortunate George Skene, whose case we have already given, he
forgot his crime in the contemplation of the punishment that awaited
his offence; and, with a precipitancy that did more honour to his heart
than his head, he meditated effecting the escape of his friend from
Newgate, about a fortnight after his committal.

For this purpose he invited a turnkey, named Samuel Davis, to drink
with him. They went to the New Inn, where Towers inquired of Davis what
family he had; and then hinted that it was in his power to procure for
himself the means of making them all comfortable for life. Davis,
thinking that the favour required of him related to Mr. Skene's
accommodation, promised to do every thing in his power; but this not
amounting to Towers's expectations, he gave him clearly to understand
that he expected nothing less than Mr. Skene's escape, promising to
release Davis from the necessity of continuing turnkey, and that his
reward should be paid, not in banknotes, but in gold. The turnkey
refusing to accede to these terms, nothing further passed until Mr.
Towers's next visit to his friend, when Mr. Newman called him into a
private room, and confronted him with Davis, who had told his employer
what had passed.-- Towers did not deny the charge; but contented
himself with stating that he offered Davis no specific sum.

Mr. Towers was now taken into custody, and brought to trial at the Old
Bailey, April the 6th, 1812, when, the charge being proved, he was
found Guilty, and sentenced to pay a fine of fifty pounds, and be
imprisoned for twelve calendar months in the gaol of Newgate.


WILLIAM BOOTH
Executed for Forgery.

This malefactor was not impelled by poverty or distress to the
commission of the crime for which he lost his life. He lived near
Birmingham, and occupied two hundred acres of land; but, being desirous
of acquiring wealth by speedier means than the produce of honest
industry afforded, he resorted to the culpable and dangerous practice
of fabricating notes, purporting to be of the Bank of England. Unlike
other criminals, he was not seduced into the act by design or
ignorance; he entered upon it with the full knowledge of the
consequence of detection; and, as he knew that no device or stratagem
could evade discovery, he resolved to bid defiance to the minions of
law, and oppose force to force.

For this purpose he had his house barricaded, the windows secured by
strong iron bars, and the approach to the place of illegal manufacture
secured by three doors, well and studiously fastened with bolts, &c.

Thus shut up, as he thought, in his impregnable fortress, he considered
himself out of danger; but all his precaution could not avail. It was
discovered that he had issued forged notes to a large amount, and the
police of Birmingham were on the alert to apprehend him. For a while he
kept them at defiance; but, at length, the whole posse laid regular
siege to his invulnerable castle. Various modes were devised for
gaining admittance; but all proved fruitless, until one of the
constables procured a ladder, which reached to one of the upper
windows. As he was ascending he saw Booth run to the middle of a room
over the parlour, and take some papers, of the size of bank-notes, from
a rolling-press, and put them into the fire. By breaking open the attic
window the constable procured an entrance, through which he was
followed by several of his comrades. The interior of the house
displayed not less industry to baffle assailants than the exterior.
Trap-doors were ingeniously contrived for opposing an enmity or
facilitating escape; but the activity of the officers of justice
rendered all his precautions of no avail. They jumped through one
trap-door while Booth was escaping by another; and, having pursued him
from concealment to concealment he was apprehended. Part of the papers
were taken out of the fire, and found to have the Bank mark in them.

Booth was fully committed for trial, and a workman of his, being
apprehended, gave information of a trunk of forged notes, which he had
buried by his master's orders. These were produced on his trial, which
took piece at the Stafford assizes, and along with other corroborating
circumstances established his guilt to the satisfaction of the jury,
and he was sentenced to be hanged.

The 15th of August, 1812, was the day appointed for the final suffering
of this unfortunate man. A most distressing occurrence took place at
the time of his execution -- the rope slipping, he fell to the ground,
and many people thought that he was dead; but he got up, and fell upon
his knees, praying to the Almighty for mercy. The scaffold was again
prepared; but, owing to a mistake the drop, remained fast when Booth
gave the signal for it to fall; and it was not until much force was
applied that it gave way, and the miserable criminal was launched into
eternity.


THOMAS NUGENT, & JOHN & WILLIAM FOLKARD,
Pilloried for Attempting to Defraud the Creditors of John Folkard.

AMONG all the frauds of London none are more frequent, or mere
extensive, than those practised by dishonest bankrupts on their
unsuspicious creditors.

John Folkard carried on business, as a silversmith and jeweller, in the
Surrey Road, between four and five years, and was in good credit; a
character he might have retained, had he not entered into a scheme for
enriching himself by speedier means than the profits of his business
afforded. He became acquainted with a money-lender, named Thomas
Nugent, and, in conjunction with him, and his own brother, William
Folkard, he resolved to become a bankrupt; but, that he might do so
advantageously, they fabricated bills, purporting to be drawn on them
by different men, whom they got to swear to their fictitious debts for
a few shillings. Debts, too, were entered on the books, pretended to be
due by men either no longer in existence, or no longer in the country;
and, when all things were prepared, John Folkard's name appeared in the
Gazette, to the great astonishment of his creditors. His object was to
take them by surprise, and to have one of his friends appointed
assignee before they were aware of his design.

From some circumstances of a suspicious nature, the bona fide creditors
saw it was necessary to unite, and get some of themselves chosen
assignee, instead of those proposed by the bankrupt. After a severe
struggle they were successful, and Messrs. Powis, Hemming, and Taylor,
were chosen. On inspecting the list of debts, several appeared
fictitious. One man, who was described as a bullion-dealer on Ludgate
Hill, whose debt appeared to be one hundred and thirty-eight pounds,
was nowhere to be found, and many others, with demands equally as
large, were only just emerged from prison, through the mercy of the
Insolvent Act, and, so far from being able to lend money, were objects
of charity.

The assignees waiting on these people, and insisting on having the
particulars of their accounts, under the threat of prosecution, so
alarmed a woman, who called herself Baroness Minkwitz, that she
disclosed the premeditated fraud.

In consequence of her testimony Thomas Nugent and the two brothers were
taken into custody. On Friday, September the 20th, 1812, their trial
came on at the Old Bailey, when the whole transaction was
satisfactorily proved by parties concerned, and numerous corroborating
facts. After an investigation of ten hours they were found Guilty, and
the Common Sergeant sentenced John Folkard to he imprisoned two years,
and stand twice in the pillory; Thomas Nugent to be imprisoned eighteen
months, and stand once in the pillory; and William Folkard to be
imprisoned one year, and to stand once in the pillory.


THE LUDDITES
Guilty of Rioting and Administering Unlawful Oaths.

THE cotton manufacturers of Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire,
Leicestershire, and some parts of Yorkshire, having suffered under a
considerable reduction of wages and scarcity of work, which they
attributed to the very extensive introduction of machinery, associated
in such numbers for the destruction of frames and looms, and the
annoyance of those manufacturers who had been most forward in
introducing the machines, that those counties became the seat of the
most serious tumults, not unattended with murder. They pretended to be
followers of a leader whom they called General Ludd, and hence arose
the term Luddites. A considerable number of those misguided men were at
length brought to condign punishment.

A special commission was issued for their trial, and was opened by
Baron Thompson at the city of York, on Monday the 4th January, 1813, in
a most impressive charge to the grand jury.

On Tuesday, the 5th, the business of the Court commenced with the trial
of John Swallow, John Batley, Joseph Fletcher, and John Lamb, for a
burglary and felony in the house of Mr. Samuel Moxon, at Whitley Upper:
the jury pronounced them all Guilty.

Throughout the whole of these important trials the evidence was nearly
to the same effect -- administering unlawful oaths -- riotously
assembling -- destroying the frames and looms of manufacturers of cloth
-- breaking into houses -- robbery, and murder. We shall, however,
proceed more particularly to state the cases marked with blood.

On Wednesday, George Mellor, of Longroyd Bridge, William Thorp, and
Thomas Smith of Huddersfield, were indicted for the wilful murder of
William Horsfall, of Marsden, merchant and manufacturer, at Lockwood,
in the West Riding of the county of York.

It appeared from the evidence of John Armitage, who kept a public house
at Crossland Moor, called the Warren House, that Mr. Horsfall had, on
the 28th of April, been at Huddersfield market, and on his return
called at witness's house about a quarter past six in the evening, and
got a glass of rum and water, treated two persons who were there, paid
his reckoning, and rode away:-- did not stop twenty minutes at
witness's; nor did he get off his horse. Between witness's house and
Marsden, there is a plantation belonging to Mr. Ratcliffe, and about a
quarter of a mile from Warren House: About seven o'clock, witness heard
that Mr. Horsfall had been shot. Witness and the two persons whom the
deceased had been treating went out together, and found Mr. Horsfall
about twenty or thirty yards below the plantation, sitting on the
roadside, bleeding very much. They got him down to Warren House as soon
as they could. Mr. Horsfall died there.

Henry Parr was at Huddersfield on the 28th of April last; was upon the
road between Huddersfield and Marsden; and, after he had passed the
Warren House, heard the report of fire-arms -- saw a person riding
before him -- report seemed to come from Mr. Ratcliffe's plantation --
saw smoke arising at the same time, and four persons were in the
plantation in dark-coloured clothes; the person who was before witness
on horseback, after the report, fell down on the horse's chine, and the
horse turned round as quick as possible; Mr. Horsfall raised himself by
the horse's mane, and called 'Murder!' As soon as he called out murder,
one of the four men got on the wall with one hand and two feet, and
Parr called out, 'Have you got enough yet?' and he (Parr) set off to
Mr. Horsfall at full gallop. Mr. H. said, 'Good man, you are a stranger
to me; I'm shot.' Mr. Horsfall grew sick, and blood began to flow from
his side. Mr. H. desired witness to go to Mrs. Horsfall's.

Bannister, a clothier, met Parr on the road, who told witness that Mr.
Horsfall was shot. Witness found Mr. H. on the road-side very bloody.

Mr. Horton, surgeon, gave his testimony professionally. He extracted a
ball from the deceased, and found several wounds in his body, and had
no doubt they were the cause of his death.

Benjamin Walker, an accomplice, stated that the prisoners, George
Mellor and Thomas Smith, worked with him at Wood's; and, in a
conversation about the attack on Mr. Cartwright's mill, Mellor said
there was no way to break the shears -- but shoot the master. Mellor
had a loaded pistol, and said he must go with him to shoot Mr.
Horsfall. The pistol was loaded. Witness and the three prisoners went
to the plantation. Smith and Walker went together, and got to the
plantation first -- Thorp and Mellor came afterwards. George Mellor
ordered witness and Smith to fire, if they missed Mr. Horsfall; witness
did not fire, but heard Mellor say Mr. Horsfall was coming, and soon
after heard the report of a pistol; they waited at a short distance
till the job was done.

     The prisoners attempted to prove an alibi.

The jury withdrew about twenty minutes, and returned a verdict of
Guilty against all the prisoners.

On Friday these wretched men were brought to the place of execution,
behind the Castle at York. Every precaution had been taken to render a
rescue impracticable. Two troops of cavalry were drawn up near the
front of the platform, and the avenues to the Castle were guarded by
infantry.

A few minutes before nine o'clock the prisoners came upon the platform.
After the Ordinary had read the accustomed forms of prayer, George
Mellor prayed for about ten minutes. William Thorp also prayed; but his
voice was not so well heard. Smith said but little, but seemed to join
in the devotions with great seriousness.

The prisoners were then moved to the front of the platform; and, after
saying a few words, the executioner proceeded to perform his fatal
office, and the drop fell.

On the 8th John Baines the elder, John Baines the younger, Zachary
Baines, of the same family, the elder near seventy years of age, and
the latter scarce sixteen, John Eadon, Charles Milnes, William
Blakeborough, and George Duckworth, all of Halifax, were tried for
administering an unlawful oath to John Macdonald; and all, except the
boy, were found Guilty.

On the 9th January, James Haigh, of Dalton, Jonathan Deane, of
Huddersfield, John Ogden, James Brook, Thomas Brook, John Walker, of
Longroyd Bridge, and John Hirst, of Liversedge, were tried for
attacking the mill of Mr. William Cartwright, at Rawfolds. Mr. C. being
apprehensive of an attack being made upon his mill, procured the
assistance of five soldiers, and retired to rest about twelve o'clock,
and soon afterwards heard the barking of a dog. Mr. C. arose; and,
while opening the door, heard a breaking of windows, and also a firing
in the upper and lower windows, and a violent hammering at the door.
Mr. C. and his men flew to their arms; a bell placed at the top of the
mill, for the purpose of alarming the neighbours, being rung by one of
his men, the persons inside the mill discharged their pieces from
loop-holes. The fire was returned regularly on both aides. The mob
called, 'Bang up, lads! in with you! keep close! damn that bell! get to
it! damn 'em, kill 'em all!' The numbers assembled were considerable.
The attack continued about twenty minutes. The fire slackened from
without; and they heard the cries of the wounded. The men that were
wounded were taken care of. They afterwards died. One of the
accomplices, W. Hall, was one of those connected with Mellor and Thorp,
and assembled with many other persons, by the desire of Mellor, in a
field belonging to Sir George Armitage, Bart. on the night of the 11th
of April. They called their numbers, remained there some time, and then
marched off: Hall's number was seven. Mellor commanded the musket
company, another the pistol company, and another the hatchet company:
they were formed in lines of ten each. Two of the men were to go last,
and drive up the rear.-- Some had hatchets, some hammers, some sticks,
and others had nothing.

     Another accomplice gave a similar testimony.

The jury found James Haigh, J Dean, John Ogden, Thomas Brook, and John
Walker, Guilty -- James Brook; John Brook, and John Hirst, Not Guilty.

Jan. 11.-- J. Hay, John Hill, and William Hartley, were next tried, for
a burglary in the house of Mr. George Haigh, of Sculcoates; and found
Guilty.

On Thursday the grand jury, after stating they had no more bills before
them, inquired if any more were prepared.-- Mr. Parke said  'I shall,
with leave of the Court, answer the question put by the grand jury.'
Their lordships intimated assent, and Mr. Parke proceeded 'My learned
friends and myself have examined the different cases which have been
presented to you; and, considering that many of these people have acted
under the influence of other persons, we have, in the exercise of that
discretion confided to us by the Crown, declined, at present, to
present any other bills before you; and I hope this lenity will produce
its proper effects, and that the persons on whom it is exercised will
prove themselves, by their future good conduct, deserving of it. But,
if it be abused, proceedings against them can be resumed.'

Jan. 12.-- James Hay, Joseph Crowther, and N. Hayle, were found guilty
of taking from James Brook a promissory note of one pound, and some
silver and copper coin.

Several prisoners were, through the lenity of government, admitted to
bail, on their entering into recognisances, the prisoners in two
hundred pounds each, and their bail in one hundred pounds each.

Mr. Baron Thompson then passed sentence on the prisoners.-- Fifteen
were sentenced to death; six to be transported for seven years; sixteen
were discharged on bail; and sixteen were discharged without bail.

On Saturday the following malefactors convicted before mentioned were
also brought to the same place of execution, at different times, viz.
at eleven in the forenoon, John Hill, Joseph Crowther, N. Hayle,
Jonathan Dean, John Ogden, Thomas Brook, and John Walker, were placed
upon the scaffold. Many of them, after the clergyman had repeated 'The
Lord have mercy upon you!' in a very audible voice articulated 'I hope
he will.' The bodies, after hanging till twelve o'clock, were then cut
down.

At half past one o'clock, John Swallow, John Batley, Joseph Fisher,
William Hartley, James Haigh, James Hey, and Job Hay, were also
executed. The conduct of the prisoners was becoming their awful
situation.


WILLIAM HOWE, ALIAS JOHN WOOD,
Executed for the Murder of Mr. Robins.

THE following case, while it exhibits the utmost depravity and
wickedness, affords a consolatory instance of the persevering industry
of two officers of justice, whose conduct merits the highest praise,
and well deserved whatever reward had been offered for the apprehension
of the murderer.

On the evening of the 18th of December, 1812, as Mr. Benjamin Robins, a
farmer of Dunsley, near Stourbridge, was returning home from market on
foot, he was overtaken by a man, who, under pretence of inquiring his
way, walked with him for a mile, when be suddenly fired a pistol at
him, and robbed him of twenty-six pounds and his watch. Mr. Robins
reached home in great agony, when the wound was found to be so serious,
that, after languishing eight days, he expired.

The alarm caused by this atrocity induced the magistrates of Bow Street
to send down Adkins and Taunton, two most active officers, by whose
extraordinary exertions the wretch was traced to London, where, after a
patient watch of many days and nights, they at length succeeded in
securing him. He was conveyed directly to Stourbridge, where he was
identified by those who saw him on the day of the murder. At the
Stafford assizes, March the 17th, 1813, he was put upon his trial,
when, in addition to other facts, it was proved that after his
apprehension he had sent a letter to his wife, directed Mrs. Howe,
wherein he told her to go to a rick near Stourbridge, to search for
something. Vickers and Aston went to the rick, and in a hole,
apparently made by a hand, they found three bullets and a pistol, a
fellow to the one found in the box.

A watch, which proved to have belonged to Mr. Robins, was also found to
have been sold by Howe; and, after a trial of ten hours, his guilt was
fully established by the corroborating testimony of between thirty and
forty witnesses. The judge passed on him the awful sentence of the law;
after which Howe, who did not call a single witness, exclaimed, 'My
heart is innocent!'

He appeared quite indifferent during his trial; but at the time of his
execution, Monday, the 20th of March, he seemed to be impressed with
the awfulness of his situation, and manifested corresponding symptoms
of repentance.


ANTONIO TARDIT
A French Prisoner-of-war, Executed for the Murder of a Fellow-Prisoner.

WE have, in the progress of our work, exhibited many a monster of
atrocity; but it was reserved for us to crown the climax of wickedness
with the case of Antonio Tardit, the deliberate murderer of his
countryman, his fellow-soldier, his fellow-prisoner, in a strange
country, where both endured all the deprivations of captivity; and for
what? because he suspected the victim of his long cherished vengeance
to have supplied materials for a satire, in which Tardit considered
himself ridiculed!

In the year 1811, a French prisoner in Porchester depot composed some
verses; and, among the characters introduced in the poem, one, very
unfortunately, struck Tardit, who was also a prisoner of war, as
expressly written to satirize him. This idea, whether erroneous or not,
invariably operated upon the demoniac spirit of the wretch, who sought
numerous opportunities to glut his vengeance on another prisoner, named
Leguey, who, he imagined, had given the hints to the writer of the
verses, enabling him to delineate the characteristic traits in
question.

Fifteen long mouths, with all the irksomeness of a prison, were unable
to cool the fiery vengeance which burned within his breast; and, early
in the year 1813, he prepared to sacrifice his victim. In order to
render his weapon, a large sharp knife, more certain in its operation,
he first sharpened it, and then bound the handle with a thick cord,
that the grasp might be more firm.

This knife he denominated his 'guardian angel,' and slept every night
with it under his pillow. The dreams of this monster so much disturbed
a fellow-prisoner, who slept in an adjoining hammock, that he asked
Tardit if he should not awaken him whenever he became so dreadfully
agitated. 'No!' replied this demon of vengeance, for I am then dreaming
of a deadly enemy who has dishonoured me; and, although be appears to
conquer for a time, yet the vision always terminates by giving me his
blood.'

On Monday evening, March the 1st, 1813, about eight o'clock, Tardit
found the long-wished for opportunity; when rushing upon his victim in
the privy, he literally ripped him open, when the bowels, in
consequence, obtruded themselves, and the unfortunate man bent forward
to receive his entrails, exclaiming, 'I am murdered!'

'Oh, no!' cried the murderer, ironically, it is merely a scratch; then
twice plunged his knife in the back of Leguey, exclaiming, 'Take that
-- and that!' He was proceeding thus to inflict additional wounds, when
his murderous arm was arrested; on which the villain exclaimed, 'I have
now completed my work, and am content; you may take the weapon and me
where you like!'

While they were binding his arms, he desired those around him to stand
aside, that he might glut his vengeance by looking on his immolated
victim, remarking ironically, 'I have sent you before me on your
journey, that you may provide me a lodging.' One of the prisoners then
inquired why he did not prove that he, at least, possessed one noble
sentiment, by plunging the weapon in his own breast after the
perpetration of the deed, in order to escape the gallows, 'It was,'
replied the wretch, 'originally my intention; but it afterwards struck
me that I might expire first, and then the certainty of taking away his
life would not have been known to me, and nothing less would have
gratified my heart.'

Soon after the villain was ironed he fell into a sound and tranquil
sleep, from which he did not awake until late the following morning,
when he said he had not had so undisturbed a repose for the last twelve
months.

Tardit was tried at the ensuing summer assizes for Hampshire, and found
Guilty. In his defence he said Legney had dishonoured him, and reduced
him to despair. Sentence was immediately passed on him, and the next
day but one he suffered the penalty of his diabolical crime.


AZUBAH FOUNTAIN AND GEORGE TURNER ROWELL
Executed for the Murder of Fountain's Husband.

WE should readily admit that some men are naturally depraved, did we
not know the power of habit, whether good or bad; and this should be an
inducement to parents to impress upon the minds of their children those
principles of moral rectitude, which are generally found to lead the
mind from such actions as bring in their train ignominy and disgrace.

We are persuaded that neither of those malefactors, whose case is
before us, heard in their youth many useful lessons, or received,
before their minds were depraved, much wholesome advice. We allude
particularly to Rowell, who seems to have been habitually vicious; but
the unhappy woman who shared his ignominious fate appears more imbecile
than wicked, more weak than criminal; her conduct was perfectly
unaccountable; and, though we must execrate her crime, we can scarcely
refrain from pitying her; for she appears to have fallen a victim to
the arts of Rowell, working on a weak mind, irritated by the brutal
conduct of an unfeeling husband.

At the Lincoln assizes, on the 3d of August, 1813, Azubah Fountain,
aged thirty-six, and George Turner Rowell, aged twenty-three, were
indicted for the wilful murder of Robert Fountain, the husband of
Azubah, by administering four ounces of laudanum in some
elderberry-wine; and, thinking this quantity insufficient, a further
dose of two ounces was given him in a cup of ale, of which he died.

Rowell, who at the time of the murder was, as we have observed, only
twenty-three years of age, was a native of Melton-Mowbray, at which
place he bore a very bad character. From 1807 to 1809 he worked, being
a cooper, with Mr. Skinner, of Bingham, who frequently told him, when
reproving him for his evil practices, 'that he was fearful, when he
left his employ, it would be his lot to suffer the vengeance of the
laws;' a prediction which was too truly fulfilled, for this vicious and
irreclaimable young man was not to be advised.

In 1813 he went to lodge with Robert Fountain at Lincoln, and had not
been in the house more than twelve weeks when the act for which he
suffered took place, and in which the wife was deeply implicated. Of
their guilt there cannot he a doubt; and what makes Rowell doubly
culpable is the fact that he was shout to be married to the daughter of
his host, having received his consent to that effect a day or two
before the murder.

On the ensuing Friday they were both taken to the place of execution
near Lincoln, where they were launched into eternity. Rowell persisted
to the last in denying that he knew to what purpose the laudanum was to
be applied; whilst his partner in guilt continued to assert that they
both had frequent conversations on the subject, and that he knew, when
he got it, that it was to poison her husband.


ROBERT KENNETT,
Executed for Forgery.

A long course of iniquity brought this malefactor to the gallows. The
first mention we bear of him was in the debates in the House of Commons
on the conduct of the Duke of York; where it appeared Kennett, though
not worth a shilling, proposed lending his royal highness seventy
thousand pounds upon annuity, with the additional consideration of a
place to be obtained for him under government, through the interest of
the royal duke.

The address with which Kennett imposed on his royal highness may be
inferred from the several letters*[See Note] which were made public,
and strongly evinced the zeal and pertinacity with which situations
were solicited for him, in return for the supposed accommodation he was
to afford the royal duke.

Before Kennett, however, succeeded in effectually imposing upon his
royal highness, his character was discovered, and consequently all
correspondence ceased. From that time he subsisted on ways and means;
which, as they were practised in private, it is impossible for us to be
acquainted with.

In 1812 he became acquainted with Richardson and Cooke, the two
accomplices, who discovered the villainy of Badcock and others, whose
case will be next given. With these men he planned and forged a bill of
exchange on an unwary tradesman, for the sum of one hundred and sixty
pounds, which they too securely obtained without detection or
prosecution, and lodged in the funds. Having obtained this sum, they
found access to Messrs. Trowers and Co. stock-brokers, who sold for
them the stock they had so recently lodged, and paid them with a draft
on Messrs. Glyn and Co.

Possessing this draft, they forged one like it for two thousand pounds,
and Kennett obtained cash for it in the following manner:-- He took a
lodging in Frances Street; and a young man, having advertised for a
clerkship, was engaged by Kennett. This lad he sent with the check,
which was paid in two large notes; after which he went, as directed, to
the Bank, and obtained small notes for them in exchange. He then went
to Moorgate Coffee House, where Kennett, who had assumed the name of
Blunt, promised to meet him. He was not there, but a note was left
appointing another place. of meeting, where he did not attend; but the
young man at length met him in Warwick Court, Holborn, where he
delivered him the money. At this time he was concealed in a strange
dress -- having on a large wig, brown great coat, top boots, &c.

Richardson and Cooke having informed against all those with whom they
were connected, Kennett was amongst the number; and accordingly he was
apprehended, and brought to trial at the Old Bailey; when he was found
Guilty on the evidence of his accomplices, which was fully corroborated
by the testimony of other witnesses.

When brought up to receive sentence, and asked the usual question what
he had to say why sentence of death should not be passed on him, he
addressed the Court, saying that he was convicted on the testimony of
those who, he urged, were not entitled to credit. He then adverted to
the deplorable state of his family, consisting of a wife and four
children; and added, that his eldest son died fighting for his king and
country; a circumstance for which he thanked God, as he was thereby
saved from the horror of witnessing the ignominious fate of his
miserable father. He then remarked that some of his ancestors had
obtained the highest honours which the city of London had to bestow;
and that his uncle (Alderman Kennett) had filled that chair, as chief
magistrate, from whence sentence of death was about to be passed on
him. He concluded by imploring mercy. After which the Recorder passed
sentence in the usual form.

On Wednesday, June the 16th, 1813, this unhappy man was executed in
front of Newgate. He was brought upon the scaffold at eight o'clock,
dressed in a plain suit of mourning, and attended by the Ordinary of
Newgate, with whom he remained some time in prayer During this short
and awful period be appeared to be perfectly resigned to his fate,
which he met with becoming fortitude.

     *Note: The Letters referred to are as follows:--

Lieutenant-Colonel Taylor presents his compliments to Mr. Kennett, and
is directed by the Duke of York to transmit to him a copy of a letter
from Mr. Pitt's private secretary, in reply to the application which
his Royal Highness made in Mr. Kennett's favour for the Collectorship
of the Customs of Surinam; which answer, his Royal Highness regrets, is
not conformable to his wishes. Colonel Taylor would have sent it
earlier, had he not been absent from London when it was sent to the
Horse Guards.
     August 7th, 1804.

     Downing Street, Friday, 2d August, 1804.
My Dear Sir,-- I have not failed to state to Mr. Pitt the wishes of his
Royal Highness the Duke of York, communicated through you, that he
would nominate Mr. Kennett to the office of Collector of his Majesty's
Customs at Surinam; and I am directed to request that you will submit
to his Royal Highness, that, desirous as Mr. Pitt must at all times be
to attend to his Royal Highness's commands, he is fearful that, from
prior engagements, he is so circumstanced, as not to have it in his
power to do so on the present occasion.
     I am, &.     (Signed)     W. D. Adams.'
     ADDRESSED-- 'Lieut.-Colonel Taylor.'

Colonel Taylor presents his compliments to Mr. Kennett, and is
extremely sorry that be could not wait, as the Duke's carriage was
waiting for him. He is directed by. his Royal Highness to say, that he
will apply for the situation of Assistant Commissary-General, &c. &c.
at Surinam; but that he will be able to do it with more effect, if Sir
H. Mann will write to his Royal Highness, recommending Mr. Kennett.
     Robert Kennett, Esq. &c. &c. &c
     Horse Guards, Aug. 15.

     Bromley Hill, Kent, Aug 30th.
Sir,-- I am sure Mr. Pitt would have been very happy to have attended
to your request, respecting Mr. Kennett; but I know, upon the
application of the Duke of York, he was informed that the office of
collector had been appointed to. As to the other office, having
received a letter, written by the desire of his Royal Highness the
Duke, I made the inquiries respecting it, and I do not find that there
is any such office as Assistant-Commissary and Agent for Prisoners, (or
Commissary-General, as it was called in the Duke's letter,) to be
appointed from hence: the Commissary-General in the West Indies, Mr.
Glassford, recommends such deputies as he finds necessary for
conducting the business of his department; and they are usually
appointed the Treasury in consequence. The office of Agent for
prisoners I conceive to be under the direction of the Transport Board.
     Believe me, Sir, most faithfully yours,
     C. Lowe.

Lieutenant-Colonel Taylor encloses, for Mr. Kennett's perusal, a letter
from Mr. Chapman, and is very sorry to find from it that the situation
of Vendue Master is disposed of. Mr. Chapman has been out of town,
which accounts for the delay in regard to the receipt of the
information now given. Should Mr. Kennett wish to see Colonel Taylor,
he will be here to-morrow, between three and five o'clock.
     Horse Guards, 22d Nov. 1804.

     (Private.)
     Downing Street, 22d Nov. 1804.
DEAR TAYLOR,--Lord Camden desires me to request you will express to the
Duke of York his great regret that the office of Vendue Master of
Surinam was disposed of before your communicated his Royal Highness's
wish in favour at Mr. Kennett.
     Believe me, very sincerely yours,
     JAS. CHAPMAN.

I should have give you an earlier answer, but have been out of town.'
     ADDRESSED--Lieut-Col Taylor, in an envelope, To Mr. Kennett, &c.


WILLIAM BADCOCK, R. BRADY, Alias OXFORD BOB, AND S. HILL
Executed for Forgery.

THESE offenders were brought to justice through the information of two
accomplices, Richardson and Cooke. They all met at the Horns Tavern,
Doctors' Commons, where they agreed to commit forgeries on some banking
house in the city.

It was agreed that Hill was to procure genuine checks, from which Cooke
was to execute the forgeries. Badcock was then to procure porters to
carry the forged checks, that they might be cashed; and Richardson was
to watch the porters, to see that the checks were paid without
hesitation, and to return and inform Badcock 'that all was right.'

On the 4th of September, 1812, Hill received three checks from Parsons,
a hay-salesman, in White-chapel, who did not know for what purpose they
were wanted. From one of these Cooke forged, in the name of Burchell
and Co. to the amount of seven hundred and fifty pounds on the house of
Robarts, Curtis, and Co. The first check being paid. they forged the
two others; and, in two days they robbed the one banking house of three
thousand and eight hundred pounds which these worthies divided among
them at the Moorgate Coffee House.

The notes were then sold at twenty per cent. discount to one Edmund
Birkett, who was subsequently brought to justice.

These facts were fully corroborated by other witnesses in addition to
the evidence of the accomplices, Richardson and Cooke; and the
prisoners were found Guilty -- Death, at the Old Bailey, July 17th,
1813.

On Thursday, July 29th, Badcock was executed in the front of Newgate;
Birkett, already mentioned, suffered also with him; as well as one
Ennis, for forgery, and William Smith, for taking money out of a letter
in the Post Office.

These unhappy men were brought upon the scaffold a few minutes before
eight o'clock; and, after Ennis had remained in prayer some time with a
Catholic clergyman, and the three others with the Ordinary of Newgate,
they met their fate with becoming fortitude. Smith and Ennis evinced
great penitence. Birkett had contrived to secrete a pistol, with so
much address as to evade detection upon the search which took place the
night before the execution; and about eleven o'clock, although a
fellow-prisoner and one of the turnkeys were in the cell with him, he
discharged a ball into his left side. He failed, however, in his object
of destroying himself, and only inflicted a wound which caused much
pain. He ascended the scaffold without assistance, and submitted to his
fate with the others.

Brady and Hill subsequently underwent the sentence of the law in the
same place.


DAVID SPREADBURY,
Executed for Forgery.

Tins case illustrates the remark we have often made, that crime,
however ingeniously committed, cannot escape detection -- nay, the very
solicitude to avoid suspicion is frequently the cause of creating it;
and it generally so happens; that, while the depredator thinks he is
flying from danger, he is only plunging into the coils of justice.

David Spreadbury arrived in the dress of a gentleman at Deeping, on the
26th of March, 1813, in the Peterborough coach, and ordered a chaise
from the New Inn, saying he was going to Lincoln. Before he took his
departure, however, he got the proprietor of the inn to change for him
a note for ten pounds, which afterwards turned out to be a forgery: it
purported to be of the bank of Johnson and Eaton, of Stamford. He was
next found on the road from Newark to Grantham, having hired a chaise
at the Kingston Arms, where he got another ten-pound note exchanged. He
said, at Newark, that his luggage had gone on by the coach, and that be
was anxious to overtake it. He accordingly set off in the chaise; but,
suspicion arising, the note was shown to some person, who was a good
judge, and found to be a forgery. One of the waiters now mounted a
swift horse, and pursued the villain, of whom he got information at
Foston toll-bar, where he had received good notes for another forgery
for ten pounds. The waiter, hearing this, continued the pursuit.

The post-boy suspected that all was not right, in consequence of
Spreadbury saying at each turnpike that he had no change, and
presenting a ten-pound note in payment, and actually passed through one
without paying, though the post-boy knew he had abundance of change in
his pocket.

The post-boy at length observed that they were pursued; and, suspecting
that it was some one from his master, he slackened his pace. Spreadbury
observed this, and urged the boy to proceed, but without effect; for he
refused to use the whip, and kept moving slowly.

Near Grantham Spreadbury expressed his apprehensions that their pursuer
was a highwayman; and, as the post-boy continued obstinate, he thought
it better to trust to his heels, and accordingly jumped out of the
chaise. He ran forward to Grantham; but the post-boy and waiter did not
lose sight of him, and he was apprehended in a little lane, which he
thought to make his way through, but was disappointed, as there was no
egress at the extremity.

On searching him, there were found on his person about forty pounds in
good notes, and some silver; and, in the passage where be thought to
secrete himself, were discovered seven ten-pound notes, forgeries, and
one blank-note, unsigned, rolled up. There was no doubt but he had
dropped these when he found there was no hope of eluding his pursuers.

At the summer assizes, at Lincolnshire, he was capitally indicted for
uttering forged notes, knowing them to be such. Of his guilt there
could not be a doubt, and he was accordingly convicted. The judge
passed on him the awful sentence of the law, and the unfortunate man
suffered, on Friday, Aug. the 13th, 1813.


JOHN BRITAIN,
Executed for the Murder of his Wife.

This is a melancholy case; and the victim of offended laws excites our
pity, though we must approve his punishment.

John Britain was indicted at the Warwick assizes, August the 18th,
1813, for the wilful murder of his own wife. On his trial the principal
evidence against him was his own son, who, on the sight of his father,
was scarcely able to sustain the shock. His countenance betrayed his
horror at the painful part he was called on to act: nor were his
feelings confined to himself: judges, counsel, jury, and spectators,
were alike affected at the scene. After some time had been allowed the
witness to recover himself, the judge (Sir S. Le Blanc) told him that
the task was, indeed, a painful one; but that it was a duty he owed to
his God, his country, and the memory of his deceased mother, to relate
to the Court such circumstances of the murder of his deceased parent as
were within the compass of his knowledge, recollecting that his father
had broken the chain that binds society together. After repeated
encouragement from the counsel, he proceeded in his testimony, with but
little interruption, and in the course of it stated the following
facts:

The witness was sleeping, on the morning of the 6th of April, in the
same room with his father, mother, and a younger brother; about six
o'clock, on being suddenly disturbed by a noise which proceeded from
that part of the room where his parents slept, he rose and went to the
spot, and there found his father standing in a threatening attitude
over the bed in which his mother lay. On examining the bed, be found
his mother weltering in her blood, which flowed from a wound she had
received from a bar of iron which his father held in his hand. The
prisoner was again in the act of raising his hand to strike the
deceased, when witness rushed up to him, and wrested the bar from his
grasp, exclaiming at the same time, 'O, my dear father, have mercy!'
and, in his endeavours to obtain the murderous weapon, received a
violent blow on one of his arms. On his father becoming cooler, witness
went again to his mother, and saw that she was much bruised about the
head and face, her blood flowing very fast: her speech was gone, and
she appeared to be in extreme agony. He wiped the blood from her face
with some water, and his father in a short time came to the bed and
assisted him. Witness left the room to call for the assistance of his
neighbours, and then proceeded in search of medical aid. The witness
further stated, that he had often been disturbed in his rest, during
the last six or seven months previous to the murder, by his father's
singular behaviour; as, for instance, by getting out of bed at night,
going down stairs, and misplacing the furniture, and by his use of
strange expressions. He was convinced that his father laboured, at
times, under mental derangement, but nothing had occurred of that
description within a mouth previous to the murder.

Some other evidence, in corroboration of the facts above stated, was
gone through, when the prisoner was called upon for his defence. He
accordingly uttered a long and unconnected address, partaking more of a
soliloquy than of any thing else. He seemed to rely on his insanity at
the time the fatal deed was committed, and on the act being voluntary
and unpremeditated.

The learned judge, in summing up, stated to the jury that they had to
confine themselves to the question, whether the prisoner was sane at
the time of committing the deed, the fact of the deceased having met
her death at his hands being indisputable.

     The jury in ten minutes returned their verdict -- Guilty.

On the following Friday he was executed in front of Warwick gaol, in
the presence of a large concourse of spectators. He declared that he
had no animosity against his wife the time he went to bed on the night
of the murder; but that, on a sudden and irresistible impulse, and
without any provocation, he jumped out of bed, and perpetrated the
horrid crime with a bar of iron. After condemnation he manifested an
appearance of calmness and serenity. He left three children to lament
his shocking end, and bewail the fate of their mother.


JOSEPH RICHARDSON, JAMES SYMONS, AND NATHAN SYMONS;
The Two First Convicted of Stealing, the Last for Receiving Stolen
Goods.

ON the night of the 29th of March, 1813, the house of the Marchioness
of Downshire, in Hanover Square, was broken into, and robbed of plate,
jewels, &c. to the amount of four thousand pounds. The villains
effected their entrance by means of a lamplighter's ladder, which they
had released from the place where it had been lodged behind the
marchioness's stables.

For several days they escaped the most diligent pursuit of the police,
but were at length brought to justice through the information of their
accomplice, Richardson, who, it appeared, had been the principal
executer of this robbery, though not the planner of it.

Richardson, although but a young man, is supposed to have committed a
number of daring robberies, and had broken out of two of the strongest
prisons in the kingdom. Being suspected of this robbery, he was
apprehended by Becket, an officer, who, on searching him, found
banknotes to the amount of five hundred and twenty-three pounds, which
he offered to give Becket if he would let him go; he was, however,
conveyed to the House of Correction, where he disclosed the
circumstances of the marchioness's robbery, and accompanied the
officers to various places in search of the parties concerned.

At No.4, Seymour Court, they found Old Symons in bed, and took him into
custody. He at first denied that his name was Symons, but Adkins knew
him when he had put on his clothes. Under the bed, in a box, they found
a large quantity of the marchioness's property. Next day more rings and
jewellery were given up by Richardson; and Harry Adkins found young
Symons locked up in a cupboard in the house of one Levi, a Jew.

The family of the Symons' were a notorious set of cheats and robbers,
and on this occasion planned the robbery which the young Symons and
Richardson executed. The mother and daughter, having shared in the
plunder, were also apprehended, as well as one Frankill, a well-known
character.

The parties were indicted at the Old Bailey, June the 5th, 1813, when,
after a protracted trial, young Symons and Richardson were found Guilty
-- Death; and Old Nathan Symons guilty of receiving the property,
knowing it to be stolen. The others were acquitted for want of
evidence, and Richardson, in consequence of his timely information, was
considered a fit object for a commutation of punishment. He was
subsequently pardoned, and became an useful spy for the police.

The trial excited great interest; and the Duke of Sussex, Marchioness
of Downshire, and several of the nobility, were present the whole time.


LUKE HEATH,
Executed for Murder.

WE have thought it our duty, frequently, to remark upon the evil
consequences of excessive drinking, as we find it, too often, the
immediate cause of many of those crimes which bring ruin upon families,
and disgrace and ignominious death upon individuals. Yet, fraught as
intoxication is with evil, we still hesitate to pronounce it as
productive of crime in its consequence as that demoralizing vice --
seduction. The case we are about to detail saves us from the necessity
of comment, as it fearfully illustrates the fatal tendency of this too
common sin; and holds out an important lesson to the youth of both
sexes, in which they may learn that forbidden enjoyments, and
honourable fidelity, are as opposite to each other as light and
darkness.

Luke Heath was the son of a respectable farmer, who lived in the parish
of Cow-Honeybourne, Gloucestershire. In the same parish, and within a
quarter of a mile of Heath's residence, dwelt a poor man, named James
Harris, the father of three daughters, two of whom were married, and
the youngest, Sarah, lived in the house with him.

Unfortunately, Luke Heath formed an acquaintance with this girl, and,
dreading that the old man would not sanction his addresses, he
prevailed on her to permit him to visit her without her father's
knowledge. Unhappily, she consented, and, from meeting him in the
pent-house, she agreed to admit him to her bedroom, after the old man
had retired to rest.

The better to prevent a discovery of their stolen hours, they oiled the
hinges of the doors which led to their apartment, lest their creaking
might create suspicion in the father, who, thus undisturbed, slept
soundly, nor dreamed of the destroyer of his child being under one roof
with him.

In unhallowed love, the birth of the enjoyment is the death of the
passion; and the woman who complies with the lover's importunities,
soon witnesses a termination of his attentions. Heath and his mistress
soon repented of their criminal intercourse; for appearances were
beginning openly to declare that she was about to become a dishonoured
mother. Their meetings were no longer attended with impatient rapture.
Reproach was all on one side, and repentance on the other, while the
intervals were spent in fruitless conjectures about what should be
done. No doubt she requested of him to blot disgrace from her character
by marriage, and the sequel seems to imply that he must have consented.

On the night of the 22d of June, 1809, James Harris and his daughter
retired to rest. Next morning the old man arose; but, as he could not
go to the kitchen without passing through his daughter's room, he was
somewhat alarmed at finding her door open, and herself not in bed,
which, at the hour, was rather an unusual thing. Suspecting that she
had gone into the garden, he went to look for her, and on his way found
the back door ajar, a pitchfork thrown across the path, hut no
appearance of his daughter. He then proceeded into the village, and, at
the house of one of his married daughters, learned, for the first time,
that Sarah was with child by Luke Heath.

This information increased the poor man's apprehension for the safety
of his child; and, after going to the house of his third daughter to
inquire for her, he returned home, and was told that Sarah was found in
the pond into which it had been thrown after it was murdered. There was
a scar on the left temple, and a hole in the back part of the head; the
fork was found bloody, which the old man had not observed before, and
blood was also scattered about the pent-house and the path adjoining.
The pond where the body had been found was about sixty yards from the
house.

The village was now alarmed, and suspicion instantly fell upon Heath,
who was apprehended on his father's farm, dressed in a dirty smock
frock. He denied all knowledge of the murder, and, when asked where was
his other frock, he said be had no other. He attended the coroner's
inquest; but there being no evidence to implicate him, he was
acquitted.

In a few days, however, circumstances arose to increase the suspicion
against him, in consequence of which a warrant was granted, but he
could not be found, neither could anything be discovered in his
father's house which might throw light on the mysterious affair. But
his sudden flight was presumptive evidence of his guilt; and
accordingly every exertion was used to apprehend him. The officers of
justice were dispatched throughout the kingdom in pursuit of him; and,
after a diligent search of three months, they returned unsuccessful.

Near four years had elapsed, when Heath was discovered to have been
living, during the two preceding years, in the neighbourhood of
Kidderminster, as a farm servant, where he went under the name of
Farmer John. Information was given to a magistrate, and he was taken
into custody. He denied he knew Sarah Harris, that he ever heard of her
mother, or that he ever lived in Gloucestershire; but, on
Cow-Honeybourne being mentioned, he hid his face in his hands, became
greatly agitated, and shed tears. Who asked where he had spent the two
intervening years between his departure from Gloucestershire and his
visit to Kidderminster, he said he was on beard a man of war; but an
officer of marines, being present, questioned him, and, from his
answers, inferred that he had never been on board ship in his life.

While Heath remained in Kidderminster gaol, he confessed to a
fellow-prisoner that Sarah Harris had been pregnant by him, that she
was murdered with a pitchfork, and he was the man, but hoped he would
not tell.

Heath was now removed to Gloucester, where his trial came on at the
summer assizes, when the evidence of his guilt was conclusive.

The jury found him guilty, and the judge passed on him the awful
sentence of the law.

On Heath's return to prison, after his condemnation, he made a full
confession of his guilt, and appeared truly penitent. On Monday, August
30. 1813, he was executed. The multitude who witnessed his sufferings
were immense; but he did not address them. After a short ejaculation he
was turned off; and, having hung the usual time, his body was given to
the surgeons for dissection.


JOHN HANNAH
Executed for the Murder of his Wife.

This case exhibits so much brutal insensibility, that we shall give it
in the words of the witnesses on whose testimony he was convicted. He
was indicted at the general sessions for Yarmouth, September the 3d,
1813, for the wilful murder of his wife. His age was sixty-seven years.

On the trial, Elizabeth Betts deposed that she rented a room directly
over the one in which the prisoner lived; that on the morning of the
15th of April she was alarmed about three o'clock with a dreadful cry
of murder; she went down stairs and called out, 'You old rogue, you are
murdering your wife;'-- she heard Elizabeth Hannah say, 'For God's sake
come in, for my husband is murdering me!' but witness, knowing the
violence of the prisoner's temper, was afraid, and said she dare not go
in, but went up stairs to dress herself, with a view of procuring
assistance; she went out and told a neighbour, of the name of Thomson,
that Hannah and his wife were quarrelling, and was going to the
watch-house to procure some assistance; she, however, did not succeed,
the watch being off duty; on her return her children were crying and
out of bed, which obliged her to remain with them; she called
frequently to the prisoner to come out of his room, or he would be the
death of his wife; she heard the cries of the deceased about a quarter
of an hour after her return from the watch-house; she distinctly heard
three heavy groans, after which all was silent, and she went to bed;
she got up about six o'clock, and did not leave the door of the
prisoner till it was opened by the constable.

James Storey, a constable, deposed that he broke open the door of the
house, and entered the room with several neighbours, when he saw
Elizabeth Hannah lying on the bed, dead, with her arms by her side, as
if laid out, and the bedclothes covered smoothly over her; the
bed-clothes were removed, said he saw the deceased had apparently a
bruise on the front of her neck; he saw the prisoner sitting near the
bed-side, smoking a pipe, and looking at the bed. He said to him, 'Why,
John, surely you have murdered your wife:' to which he replied, 'She
was always quarrelling with me.' Witness said there were other means of
getting rid of her than killing her. The prisoner made no reply.

The prisoner made no defence, and the jury brought in their verdict,
Guilty. The trial lasted five hours, during which the prisoner, who was
represented of a most ungovernable temper, remained entirely unmoved.
He behaved likewise with the same brutal insensibility at the place of
execution on Monday, September 6th, 1813. On ascending the gallows he
confessed 'That he was the murderer of his wife, by strangling her with
his hands, and not with a rope, as had been stated; he said they had
lived a very uncomfortable life for many years past, owing to his wife
giving her company to other men, which was the cause of his committing
the murder.' The instant before being turned off, he particularly
requested to see his daughter, when he was informed it was not
possible, as she was confined in Bedlam; he also desired the gaoler to
look under the step of the cell, and he would there find four shillings
and sixpence. He had disposed by will of some little property, the
joint savings of himself and his wife. A signal was then given, and the
unfeeling man was immediately launched into eternity. The body, after
hanging the usual time, was delivered to the surgeons for dissection.
The gaoler, on his return, found the money, as described, in the cell.


MICHAEL M'ILVENA,
Executed for Celebrating a Marriage, He Being a Layman.

THE happiness of the greater portion of mankind may be said to be
domestic; and, as this depends entirely upon the female part of the
community, any thing which tends to destroy their character, and
consequently their peace of mind, should be guarded against as a direct
attack upon the happiness of society in general. Woman, deprived of her
maiden innocence in civilized countries, may be said to be an outcast
from society -- deserted by her own sex, and insulted by that of her
destroyer; abandoned to despair, or plunged into prostitution, where
the excess of crime may cause a momentary forgetfulness of her
miserable condition. The man who prevails upon her to make the first
fatal step toward such a vicious course deserves the universal
execration of his species; but the villain who steals her virtue under
the sanction of apparent matrimony, and, when she fondly imagines she
is an honoured wife, finds herself a forlorn object for the finger of
Scorn to point at, deserves what befell Michael M'Ilvena -- the
gallows.

This villain was an impostor, who aspired to no greater notoriety than
that which he acquired by cheating the credulous and simple inhabitant
of a village. He was a native of Ireland; and, in his migration.
through the, northern part of that kingdom, personated, successively,
the characters of a Catholic priest, a Protestant minister, and a
lawyer. The last place we find him in was the village of Ballinahinch,
where he went under the appellation of The Counsellor.

While here he became acquainted with a man of the name of Christopher
Jennings, with whom he conspired to debauch a young girl, named Mary
Hair.

This unsuspecting creature was only seventeen years of age; and had
been servant, a year and a half, with Mr. Knox, of Drumanockan, near
Dromore. Having spent the Christmas of 1812 with her father and mother,
she was returning to her master's house, when she met Jennings on the
road, with whom she had been acquainted. He took her into a public
house, and made, as he had often done before, proposals of marriage to
her. The artless girl consented; and both proceeded to Ballinahinch,
with the intention of procuring a clergyman.

Jennings took her into a public house, where M'Ilvena was sitting, and
to whom she was introduced by her intended husband; who said,

There is the minister who will marry us.' It must be observed that Mary
Hair was a Protestant and Jennings a Catholic; consequently it was
necessary the ceremony should be performed by a Protestant clergyman;
for a Catholic is prohibited marrying a Protestant subject under any
circumstance; and Jennings might have suspected that Mary, simple as
she was, would have declined the union, had M'Ilvena professed himself
any thing but a Protestant clergyman.

M'Ilvena, with assumed sanctity, pulled out his book, and went through,
what Mary thought, a ceremony; joining their hands, and interrogating
the parties in the usual form. After the ceremony the poor girl asked
for a certificate. This at first was refused; but, as she insisted on
it, he took pen and ink, and wrote the following:--

'These are to certify that Mary Hair is this day joined in marriage to
Christopher Jennings, of Drumara. As given under my hand, this 26th
December, 1812.

     W. M'G.'

This scrawl contented the deluded girl; and the mock parson intimated
that he was always paid for such duties. Mary then gave him ten
tenpennies, which he threw on the table in an indignant manner; saying,
'Am I to be college-bred, and learned, and not. receive my just dues?'
To carry on the farce, Jennings said, 'And please your reverence, Mr.
Gawdy, whatever is your demand I'll pay.' The parson then took up the
tenpennies, and put them in his pocket; after which he went out to
procure the new-married couple a lodging.

In a short time he returned, saying he had engaged lodgings for them;
and, after partaking of another jug of punch, he conducted them to the
house of a poor woman, named M'Kee who, hesitating to admit them,
M'Ilvena declared they were man and wife, lawfully married; which the
old woman still seeming to doubt, he said, 'Blud and ounze, won't you
believe my word of honour?' This succeeded; and the unfortunate girl
admitted the villain; Jennings, to the rights of a husband.

Next morning Jennings directed her to give notice to her master; and he
undertook to break the business to her father and mother. The poor girl
was parting from him with reluctance, when he told her unblushingly
that she was not his wife, and that she was deceived.

The unhappy girl was awakened to all the misery of her situation; and
ran, in a state of distraction, to her parents, to whom she related all
that had occurred. The necessary proceedings were immediately taken,
and the counsellor and Jennings were committed to prison. At the summer
assizes for Downpatrick, August the 17th, 1813, they were brought up
for trial. M'llvena was first indicted; and, Mary Hair having deposed
to the foregoing facts, she was cross examined, with a view to affect
her testimony, by endeavouring to make her acknowledge a former
connexion with Jennings. This she indignantly denied; and, when asked
if she had had any objections to be treated by Jennings, she replied to
the counsel, 'I suppose you have treated a girl before now yourself.'

M'Ilvena, in his defence, produced Jennings, who swore to palpable
falsehoods. First, that he had an intimate knowledge of the prosecutrix
long before the time mentioned in the indictment; next, that she never
represented herself as his wife; and that M'Ilvena never pretended to
join their hands together, or otherwise unite them in marriage.

Jennings, having given his evidence, was ordered back into the dock
from whence he had come, and M'Ilvena was found guilty: after which he
was called on, in the usual form, why sentence of death should not he
passed on him. He appeared quite unmoved; and said he was not guilty of
the crime imputed to him. The judge then proceeded to pass sentence on
him; which he did in a very impressive manner, though frequently
interrupted by exclamations of innocence from the prisoner. The offence
being made by a particular act of parliament a capital felony, he was
sentenced to be hanged. He asked for a long day, which was humanely
granted, and his execution was deferred to the 18th of September, on
which day it took place, in the midst of a vast concourse of
spectators.

The day after M'Ilvena's trial, Jennings was placed at the bar, on an
indictment for conspiring to debauch Mary Hair. He was almost instantly
found Guilty; when the judge told him his crime was much enhanced by
the attempt he made to screen his accomplice from punishment, in which
he committed wilful and corrupt perjury. The sentence of the Court was,
that he should stand for an hour on the pillory, be imprisoned for one
year, and pay a fine of fifty pounds.


JAMES LEARY,
Executed for the Murder of Edward Clifford.

IT has, no doubt, been observed by our readers, that no small part of
ours Calendar has been occupied with details of atrocities, in which
the natives of the sister island have been concerned. There are causes
which tend to demoralize and deprave the lower orders of that
unfortunate country,-- their local insurrections, and continual
migrations. The first, in addition to its evil tendency, subjects them
to the vengeance of penal laws; and the latter exposes them to all the
temptations to which poverty is subject, when released from those
wholesome restraints which keep poor men temporal and honest.

The nominally high wages in this country, when contrasted with the low
price of labour in Ireland, induce many of that kingdoms to emigrate to
England, where they find, too late, that the poor man may change his
master, but not his condition; for he that has to live by labour must
labour whilst he lives. By far the greater portion of them, however,
like birds of passage, pay us only periodical visits; and these, whose
strange manners and singular dress make them little less remarkable
than the cuckoo, are mostly natives of the barren mountains of
Connaught, which they desert, in summer, for the fertile plains of
England.*[see note].

But there is another race of Hibernians, very different from these --
natives of the south of Ireland, who are either obliged to fly from the
violated laws of their country, or desert it in the hopes of bettering
their condition. Liverpool, Bristol, and London, are the scenes where
they play their part, and where, it must be admitted, they exhibit the
degrading vices of human nature in the utmost perfection. This does not
arise from any innate depravity, or national propensity to vice: it
proceeds directly from circumstances. Speaking a different dialect,
frequently a different language, and professing a proscribed religion,
they encounter everywhere prejudice and reproach; to fly from which
they are compelled to associate with each other, and drown their
misfortunes in gin and brandy: vice follows as a thing of course, and
crime too often ensues. The poor man, thus, who in his native village,
was sober and industrious, because he had a character to lose, is
gradually initiated into vice, because he has no longer a character to
sustain. Such a man has no sufficient inducement to he moral -- and
soon learns that, where so many are otherwise, individual wickedness is
likely to pass undiscovered. Add to this the influence of bad example,
and it can be no longer surprising that the labouring Irish in London
are brutal, drunken, and vicious.

These observations have been drawn from us in consequence of the case
we are about to narrate, and in the hope that it may be read by some of
the Irish themselves. From it they may learn to refrain from
transmitting false intelligence to their countrymen at home, whom,
instead of deluding to quit Ireland,*[see note 2] they should deter
from visiting London, where they are sure to encounter misery; and that
too often leads to those crimes, for which many, who, like them, were
once innocent, have suffered an ignominious death.

James Leary, whose case is now before us, was a native of Ireland, and,
in addition to the shrewdness and cunning of his countrymen, possessed
that persevering and concealed wickedness which belongs to criminals of
all nations. Of his guilt there does not remain a doubt; yet the
deliberate and hardened cunning of the man has thrown such a mystery
over the whole case, that no one can pronounce with certainty who
actually perpetrated the murder. There is, however, a melancholy
consolation in knowing that Leary deservedly suffered; for, if he did
not strike the blow, he confessed he was a spectator, and might have
prevented it.

Edward Clifford was a native of Cahir, in the county of Tipperary,
Ireland. He there became acquainted with a woman, named Burke, whose
husband had deserted her. She was the mother of four children, and, in
1813, was pregnant of another, of whom Clifford was the father. To
avoid the disgrace which the publicity of their criminal intercourse
would surely bring upon them, they resolved to quit Ireland, and remove
to London, where Clifford promised to support Mrs. Burke and her
children by his labour.

Clifford had saved, by his earnings, sixteen or seventeen pounds, and
Mrs. Burke's effects produced thirty pounds. With this sum they set off
for the British metropolis, where they arrived early in the July of
1813. Clifford could not speak a word of English; but Mrs. Burke, who
now assumed the name of Clifford, could, as she had been in London when
a child. When they alighted from the waggon, at Fleet Market, they sat
down on the flags, and were addressed by one of their countrywomen, who
turned oat to be the wife of Leary. She affected much kindness, and
they were happy in meeting with one so cordial in a strange place. They
inquired for lodgings, and Mrs. Leary invited them to her own room, in
a lane that led into the market, to which they instantly removed, and
where they passed for man and wife.

They continued four days with Leary, who was a bricklayer's labourer,
and were charged two shillings and sixpence a night for their bed,
which they were told was too much by one Slattery, whom they had known
in Ireland, as he had only left it three months before. Slattery
recommended them to a room in Church Lane, St. Giles's, to which they
removed, and he went to lodge with them.

Here they continued for three weeks, without any hope of procuring
employment, and Clifford seemed anxious to return to Ireland. On
Saturday night, July the 24th, Leary, for the first time, paid them a
visit, at eleven o'clock, and, being asked what brought him so late,
answered he came to let Clifford know he had procured him work. Next
morning Clifford went to Leary's lodgings about the work; and his wife,
or rather she who assumed the title, followed him. They appeared to
have been quarrelling, and, Leary saying Clifford was to dine with him,
she insisted he should not. During the time they remained in the room
Leary contrived to whisper in Mrs. Clifford's ear that her husband was
determined to set off for Ireland, but charged her, for her life, not
to mention who told her. She, notwithstanding, accused Clifford with
intending to desert her; but he denied it, and inquired who told her,
which she refused to answer.

Clifford and his wife, after this, returned to their own lodgings,
where they remained until five o'clock, at which hour, just as they
were sitting down to dinner, Leary and his wife, unexpected, and
uninvited, came in. Mrs. Clifford was much displeased, as Mrs. Leary
was very drunk, though her husband was quite sober. Some beer was sent
for, and about eight o'clock they stood up to go home. Previous,
however, to doing so, Leary had drawn from Mrs. Clifford the
particulars of how they kept their money; for she had imprudently told
Mrs. Leary, on her first coming to town, that they had a trifle. On
this occasion she acted with similar incaution, and informed Leary that
her husband kept his own money about him, and that she had also a small
sum, about which he knew nothing.

On Leary's going down stairs he called Clifford, and took him off with
him. The poor unfortunate woman, apprehensive, from what she heard in
the morning, that herself and children would be deserted, went out in
search of her husband. She found, at nine o'clock, that he was drunk in
Leary's room, and insisted on his going home with her he complied, and
in their way was overtaken by Leary, who took them into a public house,
and made Clifford drink a glass of gin. After coming out of this one,
he wheeled them into another, where they had some beer. Here he
promised Mrs. Clifford that her husband should be in work on the
morrow.

On their way up Holborn Hill, they walked too quick for Mrs. Clifford,
who was far advanced in pregnancy. She requested they would wait for
her; but Leary said they were going to his employer. She remonstrated
against it, as it was too late to call on any gentleman, particularly
as it was Sunday evening. 'Never fear, Mrs. Clifford,' said Leary; 'do
you take your time, and we shall be home before you, and have half a
gallon of beer on the table.' They then left her, it being near ten
o'clock.

The unfortunate woman then made the best of her way home; and, seeing
her .husband had not arrived, she sat up smoking the pipe -- no
uncommon amusement with her countrywomen -- until the clock struck
twelve. Slattery was in bed, and bore evidence to this fact. Being
uneasy about Clifford, she arose about two, and between three mad four
went to Leary's lodgings. The door was locked on the outside, and Mrs.
Leary said her husband was not within; for he had concealed himself
when he heard the knock at the door. She then returned home, with
intention to follow Clifford, who, she supposed, had set off for
Ireland, and requested of her brother, who lived in Parker Street,
Drury Lane, to procure her a pass from the parish. Between seven and
eight o'clock, however, she heard of the murder of Clifford; and being
taken to a public house in Grey's Inn Lane, where the body was, she
recognised it.

The remains of this unfortunate man were found in a pond at the bottom
of Gray's Inn Lane, into which he had been thrown, after being
murdered: his brains had been knocked out with, as was supposed, a
hammer, and one of his pockets was turned inside out: in the other were
found only three halfpence, although it appeared he had, the preceding
evening, thirteen or fourteen pounds about him.

Suspicion immediately fell upon Leary. Two officers went to his
lodgings, at which his wife appeared greatly alarmed. and refused to
tell where her husband worked. They, however, discovered; and, on going
there, they saw him descending a ladder, with a hod on his shoulder.
Unwilling to surprise him, they inquired for his master, when he
replied, 'It is not my master you want; it is me.' They said it was,
and apprehended him. On their way to the office, Leary said, 'I have
hard of this poor man who has been killed.' On being asked how he
heard, he said, 'Never mind how; I have heard.' On his person was found
only one shilling and sixpence; nor was any money found in his room,
though it was searched. A hammer, which seemed to correspond with the
cuts in the hat of the deceased, was found buried in some coals.

After Leary was put in the strong room, he wished to see a person named
Macarthy, a shoemaker, to whom he said, 'What do you think of this job
of mine?' Macarthy replied, 'I think it a very bad case, and that the
evidence brought against you will hang you;' and pressed him to
acknowledge his guilt. Leary then hinted that, if he could get a person
to prove that he was at home at ten o'clock, it would set all right.
Macarthy said, 'Suppose you could do that, where were you between the
time you left Mrs. Clifford and ten o'clock?' Leary said, 'There is
where I shall fail.' Macarthy said he thought there was nothing would
get him through it. 'Nothing,' said Leary, 'but one thing; and that is,
to fix it upon somebody else.' Macarthy replied, 'If that is what you
wanted me for, I will leave you to your fate, and you will be hung like
a dog, and not one of your countrymen shall come forward to give one
shilling.' On parting, Leary said, 'I know I shall be hanged: may I go
to hell if I have any more to do with the murder than you.'

The coroner's inquest having sat on the body of the unfortunate Edward
Clifford, it was removed, on Monday evening, to a public house in St.
Giles's, there to be waked after the manner of his country. Several
hundred persons went to see the remains of the unfortunate man, and on
Thursday Leary was brought from the House of Correction, Coldbath
Fields, in a hackney coach, heavily ironed, and well guarded, in order
that he might see the body he was charged with so cruelly mangling. On
entering the room, the lid of the coffin was removed, and his motions
were watched. He took the hand of the deceased, declared his innocence
of his blood, and said he should not know the man. He was certainly
much altered. Leary trembled exceedingly; but, on going down stairs, he
resumed his fortitude, and drank a pint of porter in the parlour: after
which he was removed to Hatton Garden for further examination. On
Friday evening the remains of poor Clifford were buried in St. George's
burying-ground, attended by multitudes of his country-people.

From the time Leary beheld the mangled remains of Clifford he laboured
under great agitation of mind, and was troubled with frightful dreams
-- the midnight testimonies of a guilty conscience. He appeared
horror-struck; and parted, at night, with reluctance from the turnkey.
On Sunday he wished to see the gaoler; and, after confessing that he
knew of the murder, signed a long statement, in which he attempted to
throw the charge upon the miserable widow -- we call her widow, as we
have called her wife, to prevent confusion in our narrative.

In consequence of this pretended confession, Mrs. Clifford. or rather
Mrs. Burke, was committed to Coldbath Fields' Prison, and her children
were sent to St. Pancras Poor-house, although a benevolent lady, Dear
Fitzroy Square, had undertaken to provide for them. So great was the
interest excited in her behalf, that some gentlemen had subscribed
fifty pounds; but, at the request of the magistrates, they held it
over, until some light was thrown upon the mysterious affair.

Leary's statement displayed a mind of great acuteness and
circumspection; but, as it was not founded on truth, his allegations
were easily confuted. In minor points he strictly adhered to facts;
but, in the most material, he evidently departed from truth: for it was
proved, by more than one witness, that Slattery, whom he accused of
throwing the body into the pond, stopped at home the whole evening, and
that Mrs. Clifford purchased a candle, and lit it in the street where
she lived, at eleven o'clock.

It is true, the unfortunate woman, Mrs. Clifford, or Mrs. Burke, as we
shall call her in future, did not exactly communicate her situation to
the magistrates at the first and second examination; but delicacy
might, and no doubt restrain her from acknowledging that she was not
married to the deceased, or that her husband, who had culpably deserted
her, was still living. But, while we make this extenuation of her
conduct, let as not be accounted advocates for its impropriety; on the
contrary, we condemn her, not only for concealing these facts on so
solemn an occasion, but also for alleging that she had no money, when
she had placed six pounds in the hands of a chandler to keep for her,
end which six pounds she hail without Clifford's knowledge.

On the other hand, it must be admitted that Leary's statement evinced
much cunning and wickedness; he took care to hint that Mrs. Burke had
meditated the crime, as he said he felt a stick under her clothes,
insinuating the hammer with which the deed was perpetrated; and, that
the act might appear to have had a motive, he alleged that Slattery
aided her, from which it might he implied that herself and Slattery
made away with Clifford, that they might cohabit together. This was a
deep-laid scheme to implicate them both; and, to qualify himself for a
king's evidence, he stated that he was looking on while the bloody deed
was doing. Luckily for the ends of justice, this statement was
satisfactorily contradicted in evidence, by which it appeared he
pursued his diabolical ends with the most cruel patience, inebriating
his victim, and then, under pretence of taking him to his employer,
way-laying him. Still it must be admitted that he could have no enmity
to the man, and that, if plunder was his object, he could have robbed
him, as he was drunk, without murdering him to prevent detection. These
are considerations which superadd to his own declaration of not having
actually perpetrated the deed, and which must for ever involve the case
in mystery.

Mrs. Burke was delivered in prison of her fifth child, and, at the next
examination, which, for her convenience, took place at the House of
Correction, Coldbath Fields, her other four children, three girls and a
boy, were also present, and the two eldest gave their testimony a very
correct and respectful manner, which interested all present, among whom
were some of the royal family, and numbers of the nobility; so great an
interest did the case excite.

After this examination Leary was committed to Newgate; and on Friday,
September the 17th, he was arraigned at the Old Bailey. Mrs. Burke
appeared as principal evidence against him, and her testimony was
corroborated by that of several others.

Leary, in his defence, complained of misstatements in the newspaper,
and charged several of the witnesses for the prosecution with perjury.
He said he was the son of a schoolmaster -- to show he was not
ignorant; and that, unlike others in his station of life, he was not
addicted to petty theft.

He received an excellent character from several persons; but the jury
found him Guilty, and he was sentenced to be hanged the ensuing Monday.
He now became visibly affected, burst into tears, and seemed lost in
affliction. He shook his head with bitterness at Macarthy; but, before
his removal from the dock, he extended it to him with apparent
forgiveness; but Macarthy refused to take, what he called, his
blood-stained hand.

On Monday morning the platform was erected as early as five o'clock,
with the railing round it. At six the circle was formed by the
constables, and the crowd began to assemble from all quarters of the
town. The day was remarkably fine, and every window, and all the tops
of the houses that had any view of the gallows, were covered with
spectators. The Rev. Mr. Devereux arrived about six o'clock, and was
admitted to the unfortunate prisoner, whom he found walking about his
cell with hurried steps, clenched hands, and his eyes turned about
seven minutes, Denton's cap being pulled over his face all the time.
Leary appeared very penitent and attentive to Mr. Devereux. At seven
minutes before eight his cap was pulled over his face, and they were
both launched into eternity. After the bodies were cut down they were
put into a cart, and conveyed to the dissecting room, St. Bartholomew's
Hospital, escorted by the city marshals, and a large posse of
constables, where they were delivered up to the surgeons. Leary was
observed to be a full quarter of an hour in convulsive agony, but
Denton was dead almost as soon as he was let drop.

We have used no common diligence in collecting the particulars of this
mysterious case, and shall not protract it by any comments of our own.
One thing, however, may not be unnecessary to state, as it holds out a
forcible lesson to our readers. Drunkenness appears to have been the
means by which the murder was perpetrated. Had the unfortunate Clifford
continued sober, he had escaped assassination; and, though his former
conduct in cohabiting with a married woman, and then bringing her from
her own country, deserves loud condemnation, yet it produced less
mischievous consequence than that of getting inebriated. May others
learn, from this case, that the man who, under the mask of good
fellowship, prevails on his friend to drink till he is intoxicated, is
a concealed enemy, and should be studiously avoided.

Note 1: We take the following description of Irish cottiers from the
'Dublin and London Magazine,' for 1825:--

'The word cottier, in Ireland, is synonymous with labourer in all other
countries; and those who come under the denomination are composed of
that class of society who are doomed, by a wise Providence, literally
to earn their bread by the "sweat of their brow." We have no right,
therefore, to expect in these any thing not found in the major part of
the population of all kingdoms -- any thing but a perpetual necessity
to toil and economise -- any thing but what are the associates of a
poor man -- want, worldly want, and a long train of what many will
consider privations. Nine-tenths of mankind are necessarily reduced to
this condition; and, whatever theorists may say, in this condition they
must continue while the economy of this world prevails.

'An Irish cottier is to be looked upon as the poorest man in the
kingdom; one who, if he was not entitled to the appellation he bears,
would be called a labourer, depending on his daily toil for support. At
present he enjoys a portion of independence, which he would then lose;
and cannot be under the apprehensions of him who has to provide for the
day that is passing over him, because he can, if the fault is not his
own, always possess an annual supply of provisions which habit has
reconciled him to, that places him beyond the reach of absolute want,
pauperism, and hunger.

'A cottier in Ireland is a poor man, who possesses from one to ten
acres of land, upon which stands his habitation -- mean, to be sure;
but in what country do the poor possess splendid dwellings? For this
holding he is generally obliged to work for his landlord -- sometimes
all, and sometimes half his time, according to the quantity of ground
he occupies; but he frequently pays a certain rent, and employs his
time in whatever way he thinks fit. Those who pay in labour are small
cottiers, who have not more than two or three acres, which supply them
with oats and potatoes; their employers, in almost every instance,
being bound to give them feeding for a cow, and one or more sheep.

'The nominal price of labourers -- six or eight pence a day -- sounds
low; but it should be recollected that, in Ireland, the farm-servants
are all boarded; and that those who are thus paid are constantly
employed -- in their own words -- wet and dry. The cottier has his work
always provided for him, and for this, if he has common industry, his
family are put in possession of absolute abundance; for a single acre
of land, properly cultivated, will produce him at least sixty pounds of
potatoes for every day in the year, while his cow supplies him with
milk; and, as he can keep a pig, a goat, sheep, poultry, &c. he can
have meat, drink, and clothes.'

*Note 2: As late as 1824, near two hundred Irish peasants were
literally kidnapped by an unprincipled Master of a steam packet, which
sailed between Cork and Bristol. He sent his agents through the
country, to the distance of twenty miles, to inform the peasantry that
thousands of hands were needed in London, where men received six and
women four shillings a days, and that there was a certainty of constant
employ for five years. The credulous people, who were only paid
sixpence a day. and board, at home, immediately began to prepare for
their journey, and, to provide for the expenses, sold their pig, pot,
and every thing else they wore possessed of. They paid sixteen
shillings for their passage; yet the unfeeling wretch who commanded the
packet, and whose conduct deserves execration more than half the
depredators recorded in this work, refused to let them either boil a
kettle, or have boiling water, without sixpence for every time they
wanted it, so that, on their arrival in London, they had not a farthing
in their pockets. Finding that they had been cruelly deceived, they
wandered through the streets, not knowing what to do. Information being
given at Marylebone Street Police-office, they were brought up, when an
old woman, named Eleanor Walsh, with much feeling detailed the above
particulars. She implored, above all things, that they might be sent
home; for, though their cabins and everything else were gone, still
they would be able to make out something to eat in their own country,
which they could not hope to do in this. The magistrate expressed his
indignation at the supineness of the authorities in Cork in permitting
mach an imposition, and wrote concern-rag it to the Home department, in
consequence of which instructions were given to provide against a
repetition of such a transaction. The poor people were sent home.


JOHN DENTON,
Executed for the Murder of Mrs. Denton.

This unfortunate man, whose case becomes doubly notorious from the
circumstance of his having suffered at the same time with Leary, fell a
victim to passion, brought on by intoxication. It is a melancholy
truth, and one which should be impressed on the mind of the reader,
that the greater number of malefactors who fall victims to the violated
laws may attribute their misfortunes to drunkenness, and its
concomitants, poverty and debauchery.

The facts of this case are short. John Denton had been a sailor in the
early part of his life, but latterly followed the trade of a rigger,
and was accounted a good workman. He was acquainted with a man of his
own name, and, after his death, became very attentive to his widow, who
resided in Bow Lane Buildings, in the parish of Bromley. Denton
sometimes lived in the house: but it does not appear that any improper
connexion took place, though they were very intimate, and he was very
partial to her.

On the 13th of June, 1813, Denton was somewhat outrageous in his
manner, no doubt from frequent potations of gin and beer, as it was
fair time; and he struck a woman named Mrs. Whitehead. The widow
considered his conduct improper and unmanly; and desired him to leave
her house, and never enter it again. He came, however, in the evening,
about seven o'clock, manifestly for the purpose of having revenge for
the supposed insult. Mrs. Denton had her daughter and female friend
with her when he entered; he kept one hand in his breast, and held a
pot of beer in the other. He wanted the widow to drink with him, but
she refused, and took some liquor of her own, saying 'Get you gone,
John; you are a disgrace to your sex.' He asked 'What do you say? am I
disgrace to my sex?' She replied in the affirmative, and he started up,
drew a knife from his breast, rushed upon her, and ran her through the
arm, the point of the knife penetrating her side. He was immediately
taken into custody; and, when asked what induced him to commit the
crime, he answered 'It was all for love.'

The widow survived only a month; for the artery of her arm being
divided, a mortification ensued, which terminated in death. Denton was
brought to trial at the Old Bailey, September the 18th, 1813; and
though several witnesses deposed to various acts of extravagance, with
a view to prove him insane, he was found Guilty. The particulars of his
execution we have already given in the preceding case.


THOMAS FOSS,
Executed for Forgery.

THE man who fabricates a single bill, or check, may say something in
palliation of his crime; but the deliberate forger of a bank-note has
nothing to advance in extenuation of his guilt. He goes systematically
to work, procures agents, and deliberates upon the means of defrauding
the public in a permanent manner.

Few forgers of a more dangerous character than Thomas Foss have ever
committed depredations on the public. He had been long employed in the
Bank of England as copper-plate printer; but left it to commence
business on his own account. He joined another person; but kept a
private press of his own, without the knowledge of his partner.

So persevering was his industry, that he learned the art of engraving,
and invented a method for impressing the water-marks upon paper. Having
thus arranged every thing necessary for his purpose, he struck off some
notes, and gave them to two persons, named Norman and Gwyn, to pass.
These fellows had not continued long in their nefarious traffic, when
their career was stopped t they were detected, and committed to prison.

While in confinement each of them, unknown to the other, offered to
become king's evidence, and they were both admitted. In consequence of
their information Foes was taken into custody, and the whole apparatus
for fabricating forged notes was discovered.

Foss was indicted at the Old Bailey, September 18th, 1813, when, in
addition to these facts, the printer to the Bank swore that the
signature to the notes was in Foss's handwriting. He was accordingly
found Guilty, received sentence of death, and was executed in front of
Newgate, November the 10th, 1813. He died penitent.


CHARLES CALLAGHAN,
Executed for the Murder of Miss Gompertz's Butler.

HARDENED depravity attended this unfortunate and guilty young man
through his short and vicious life; for, though he was not more than
nineteen years of age, he committed many depredations, and when justice
overtook him he refused to repent. He died as he lived.-- without the
fear of God in his heart.

About the middle of December, 1813, the Misses Gompertz, who lived in
Vauxhall, were alarmed one night by the report of a pistol, and, on
going down stairs, found that their butler had been murdered by some
villains, who had effected their escape. Several articles of plate were
missing, and information of the robbery and murder was given at the
different police-offices.

Soon after, Callaghan, and one Hylas Parish, were apprehended on
suspicion, as they were about leaving London, under very mysterious
circumstances. No evidence, however, could be adduced against them,
sufficient to detain them, on that charge; but, fortunately for the
ends of justice, there were found on Callaghan duplicates of pledged
property, which warranted their committal for a burglary in the house
of Mr. Taylor, of Chatham.

These youthful depredators had not remained long in prison when Parish
was induced, in the hope of pardon, to make a full confession. He
stated that himself and Callaghan became acquainted at Vauxhall
Gardens, and that they subsequently lodged together in the London Road.
Callaghan and he agreed to commit a robbery, in the hope of recruiting
their exhausted finances; and Callaghan proposed the house of the
Misses Gompertz as the object of attack, as he had lived there for some
time in the capacity of footman. Having thus agreed on their plan, they
went one evening, about dusk, to reconnoitre the premises; after which
they went to the Surrey Theatre.

When the performance was over. they returned, and, having gained
admission into the garden, they forced open the kitchen window-shutter,
but could not open the window itself, in consequence of which they cut
out a pane of glass and, having disburdened themselves of their coats,
they forced their way through. When they had got in, they were alarmed
by a rustling. noise, .which soon ceased, and they supposed it was made
by a cat. Parish stuck a light, he having some tinder with him; and,
observing the tea-things on the dresser, they took up six silver spoons
and a pair of sugar-tongs. Before they proceeded any further they took
off their shoes, and then went into the pantry, where they were
surprised to find the butler asleep in bed. This caused them to retreat
into the kitchen, where they found two silver waiters. Callaghan then
recollected that the butler had a watch, which always hung at the head
of his bed, and desired Parish to go and fetch it.

Parish accordingly went, and while he was feeling for the watch the
unfortunate man awoke, and, thinking it was a cat that was annoying
him, hissed it away; immediately after he started up, and ran to the
kitchen window; at which Callaghan exclaimed 'Give it him -- give it
him, Bill!' Parish accordingly, to intimidate the butler, fired his
pistol into the ceiling; but Callaghan, coming up to him, placed the
muzzle of his close to the unfortunate man's ear, aid blew his brains
out. In their flight Callaghan left his shoes behind him; but they
carried off part of the silver, which they pledged next day in town,
except a small portion, which they carried to Gravesend, where they
sold it.

In consequence of this confession Parish was admitted king's evidence,
and Callaghan was indicted at the Surrey assizes, March the 31st, 1814,
when the testimony of his accomplice was fully corroborated by that of
other witnesses. He made no defence, and was instantly found Guilty.

On the ensuing Saturday he was executed, at the tap of Horsemonger Lane
Prison, At half past nine o'clock he was removed to the chapel, from
whence, after remaining a short time, he was brought out to have his
irons knocked off, previous to his having the sacrament administered to
him; in the course of which he was frequently exhorted to confess his
guilt of the crime for which he was about to suffer. But the pious
solicitude of the chaplain was of no avail; and in that state of
obdurate hardihood which attended him throughout he was launched into
eternity, after which his body was given to the surgeons.


JOHN DREW MAY,
Executed for Forgery.

THE advocates for the abolition of capital punishment might adduce this
case as a further illustration of the principle, that hanging one man
does not prevent another from failing into the same crime; otherwise we
should not see, at each successive sessions, men arraigned for forgery
whose situations in life warrant us in supposing that they were not
ignorant of the consequence of detection when they committed the crime.

How many have suffered for forgery, who had not even a remote intention
of fraud! A merchant's credit, like a woman's honour, (once suspected,
it is lost,) is frequently at the mercy of an hour; and, to prevent the
tottering reputation ,from falling, forgery, particularly of bills, is
too often resorted to as the means of obviating a temporary
embarrassment. It is, no doubt, a dangerous resource; but it is one
which some, whose credit is yet high, have ventured to adopt, escaping
detection by timely meeting their engagements; whilst others,
incautious and unfortunate, have been disappointed in their
expectation. The bill has been dishonoured, the forgery has been
discovered, and the miscalculating culprit has been suspended on the
gallows, because he had not a few pounds to take up a fictitious
endorsement.*[see note].

We do not think that the man on whose case we are now entering comes
under the description of those whose crime admits of palliation. He
pocketed the money, and could not possibly refund it; and therefore we
must condemn him as the very worst of forgers, for he imposed upon
those who confided in him, and defrauded those whom he could not
afterwards remunerate, if his villainy passed undetected.

In October, 1813, Mr. John Drew May, a respectable bill-broker, was
brought before the lord-mayor on a charge of altering end interlining a
certain bill, which was originally drawn for twenty-eight pounds, eight
shillings, and sixpence, but which Mr. May paid away to a Mr. Berry,
for one thousand and twenty-eight pounds, eight shillings, and
sixpence, an addition being made to it, while in his possession, of one
thousand pounds.

The discovery was made by Mr. Berry carrying the bill, for discount, to
the house of Down, Thornton, and Co. where it was found to have been
altered. May, on being questioned on the subject, said he received it
from a person at the west end, whose name and residence he was entirely
ignorant of.

May was remanded, to admit of further inquiry; and on the 12th of June
he was brought up for final examination, when the prosecutor, Mr.
Thornton, wished to decline proceeding, in consequence of two similar
charges being about to be preferred against the prisoner by the
admiralty; but the lord-mayor thought it was no longer optional with
Mr. Thornton, and, therefore, bound him over to prosecute.

The next charge preferred against Mr. May was for altering a navy bill.
The case was this:-- The victualling board had various contracts, and
these were uniformly paid by bills, at different dates, on the
treasurer of the navy, and which bills passed, in the money market,
with the facility of bank-notes. In the present instance a bill for
seven hundred and thirty-two pounds, thirteen shillings, and eight
pence, was paid to a Mr. Ringsford, payable in ninety days. This bill,
after passing through several hands, came, at length, in its original
state, to Mr. May, and he was charged with inserting the figure of one
before the seven, making the bill appear to have been drawn for one
thousand, seven hundred, and thirty-two pounds, thirteen shillings, and
eight pence. Whether he actually did so himself, or not, it is
impossible to say; but it was proved that he personally received that
sum for it, from Bruce, Warren, and Co. bill-brokers. The bill
continued in circulation until due, each succeeding hand taking it for
the value of one thousand, seven hundred, and thirty-two pounds,
thirteen shillings, and eight pence, without inspecting the body of the
bill; and. what appears still stranger, it was actually paid at the
navy board for that amount. At length the fraud was discovered, and Mr.
May was charged with the forgery.

For this last offence he was indicted at the Old Bailey, December 2,
1813, when the bill was traced, in its original state, to his hands,
and was proved to have been passed by him in its interpolated
condition. His counsel exerted themselves much to throw the blame upon
Mr. May's clerk, named Lacey, his brother-in-law, who was thoroughly in
his confidence, but who had absconded. It was proved that Lacey carried
Mr. May's check-book, which he occasionally filled up, Mr. May's
signature being affixed to the blank check. But, on the other hand, it
did not appear that Lacey had any benefit in interpolating the bills,
supposing he had done so; nor did May show that Lacey had either
defrauded him or others.

Mr. May, being called on for his defence; addressed the jury with much
feeling, observing that not only his life, but, what was infinitely
dearer to him than life, his character and honest fame, were now in
their hands. He was one of eight children, and had received a liberal
and virtuous education; and, till the moment of this accusation, had
lived with credit and reputation. He was content that his life should
be forfeited, if any man could say that he had been wronged by him. He
had been bred to business, had a wife and three children, and, after
the labour of the day, was wont to seek domestic enjoyment in the bosom
of his family, where he was sure to find it. Was it probable that a man
so circumstanced would resign his claim to these endearments by
committing a crime which could not fail to bring ruin on himself, and
disgrace on those who were nearest and dearest to his heart? There was
no proof that he had forged the bill, none that he had uttered it,
knowing it to be forged; the cue rested upon mere suspicion; and upon
that suspicion any man might be placed at that bar.

He had reposed unlimited confidence in his clerk, and had left blank
checks with him to fill up. His clerk was now beyond his reach; nor, if
he was present, could he be compelled to answer any question which
might criminate himself. Should the jury entertain any doubts, (and he
was convinced they must have insurmountable ones,) the judge would tell
them that he, the prisoner, was entitled to the benefit of them. He
made no complaint on the subject of the prosecution, nor of the manner
in which it was conducted; and he was certain the public prosecutor,
having discharged what he conceived to have been his duty, would be the
first to rejoice at his acquittal.

Several witnesses were then called, who gave the prisoner an excellent
character for integrity and honour in his commercial transactions; and,
the judge having summed up the evidence, the jury retired, and
continued in consultation for two hours -- a dreadful interval of
suspense to the unfortunate prisoner, who, on their returning with a
verdict of Guilty, became so agitated that he was scarcely able to
stand.

When brought up to receive sentence, Mr. May briefly addressed the
Court. He stated that, though, on his own account, he had no wish to
live, stripped of the unblemished reputation he had formerly enjoyed;
yet, for the sake of his parents, and of near and dear connexions, he
wished his life to be spared. He acknowledged he had been found guilty
after a long and patient trial; and hoped that the long confinement he
had undergone, and the anxiety of mind with which it had been
accompanied, would be looked upon as some expiation, even upon the
supposition that he had been guilty of the imputed crime. It had not
been proved that the bill, in its original state, had ever been in his
hands, or that he had either forged it himself, or had uttered it,
knowing it to be forged. The forgery must have been by another, who
entirely possessed his confidence, and who had left the country. Did he
seek to elude justice? He had been seized in the bosom of his family,
in all that security that was the attendant on innocence. The bill had
passed undetected through the hands of others; in the same manner,
also, it might have passed through his. From the pressure of extensive
business, he had been unable to examine all the bills that had passed
through his hands, and the examination of them had in consequence been
frequently intrusted to his clerk, as also the filling up of checks. He
hoped it would be stated to the prince regent, that the jury had taken
three hours to consider their verdict, which showed that no common
doubts hung over his case. At all events, he was confident that he was
before a tribunal where any doubts on the side of justice would leave
room for the voice of mercy to be heard, and to prevail.-- The most
profound silence obtained while Mr. May was addressing the Court.

Sentence of death was then passed on the unfortunate man in the usual
form.

From the time of Mr. May's condemnation his friends spared no exertion
in endeavouring to procure an extension of the royal mercy; and their
hopes were alive until Friday evening, April the 3d, 1814, when they
were given to understand that the law should take its course. The
unfortunate man took leave of his three brothers that afternoon, as his
execution was appointed for the next morning. His unhappy wife, being
confined by indisposition, was saved the misery of a last interview.

He suffered with four other unfortunate men for forgery, Sturman for
setting fire to his house, and another man, for burglary. May, being
asked how he felt, answered 'Happy,' and requested that his friends
might be assured of that fact his last words were, parting at the
scaffold, 'This is the worst part of the ceremony; to go forth thus,
and to die in a manner which will cast reflections on my posterity --
it is this only part which gives me pain.'

*Note: On Tuesday, June the 8th, 1813, Joseph Nash, a grocer, in
Newgate Street, was found guilty of forging an endorsement on a bill
for four hundred and eighty-nine pounds, and three shillings. It
appeared that bills with the same name endorsed on them had been
frequently passed and honoured; but, in consequence of temporary
embarrassment, he was unable to meet this one when due; though his
property was fully adequate to discharge all his debts, and, a few days
after the bill became due, he offered the money it the Bank, which was
refused. Here was absence of guilty intention, and Mr. Nash was
afterwards pardoned.


JOHN ASHTON,
At his Execution, he Jumped back onto the Scaffold, and had to be
Pushed off again.

THE circumstance which attended the execution of this unfortunate man
alone entitles him to a place in our pages, for otherwise his case is
void of interest.

He was apprehended for a highway robbery, and convicted at the Old
Bailey, when he received sentence of death. From the time of his
conviction, he either affected, or suffered, complete insanity; but
this did not release him from the consequence of his sentence; and, on
Monday, August 22d, 1814, he was executed in front of Newgate, along
with William Henry Lye, for burglary; John Mitchell, for forgery;
Francis Sturgess, and Michael Mahoney, for highway robbery; and John
Field, alias Jonathan Wild, for burglary. By half past six o'clock the
Old Bailey, and houses adjacent, were crowded to great excess. At half
past seven Mahoney was brought forward, for the purpose of being
disencumbered of his irons. While his irons were knocking off, it was
found necessary to search for a knife to cut some part of the cordage,
which confined the irons. Mahoney, seeing this, stooped, and, with an
Herculean effort, tore it asunder. This being the only Catholic, the
Rev. Mr. Devereux attended him in constant prayer, in which he joined
most fervently. Sturgess, Field, and Mitchell, conducted themselves
with great propriety. The unfortunate Ashton had been in a state of
insanity since the receipt of the awful warrant for his execution. In
the Press Yard he distorted his countenance horribly. He was the fifth
who mounted the scaffold, and ran up the steps with great rapidity;
and, having gained the summit of the platform, began to kick and dance,
and often exclaimed, 'I'm Lord Wellington!' The Rev. Mr. Cotton, who
officiated for the first time as Ordinary, enjoined him to prayer, to
which he paid little attention, and continued to clap his hands as far
as he was permitted by the extent of the cord. Mitchell often invited
him to prayer. All that could be done was ineffectual, and it was
necessary to have two men to hold him during the awful ceremony. When
they released him for the purpose of the Lord's Prayer being said, he
turned round, and began to dance, and vociferated, Look at me; 'I am
Lord Wellington!' At twenty minutes past eight o'clock the signal was
given, and the platform fell. Scarcely, however, had the sufferers
dropped, before, to the awe and astonishment of every beholder, Ashton
rebounded from the rope, and was instantaneously seen dancing near the
Ordinary, and crying out very loudly, and apparently unhurt, 'What do
ye think of me.? Am I not Lord Wellington now?' then danced, clapped
his hands, add huzzaed. At length the executioner was compelled to get
up the scaffold, and to push him forcibly from the place which he
stood.


JAMES MITCHELL,
Executed for the Murder of Miss Welchman.

JAMES MITCHELL was a native of Salisbury, where he first lived with a
farmer in the capacity of ploughboy. He afterwards removed to Loudon,
and became a gentleman's servant. While in this situation he got
acquainted with Miss Mary Ann Welchman, to whom, for two years, he was
in the habit of paying his addresses.

Miss Welshman was a ladies' dress-maker, and lived as forewoman with
Miss Macey, who carried on that business in Mount Street. She was an
elegant young women, about four-and-twenty years of age, and of a most
amiable disposition. To her, in an evil hour, Mitchell paid his
addresses, under the name of Smith, and represented himself as purser
on board some ship. The credulous girl believed him worthy and
honourable, and permitted him to visit her, at the house of her
employer, where he was, for some time, treated with politeness and
friendship. At length his own conduct betrayed his deceptions; he
obtruded himself at improper hours, and more than once offended the
young ladies in the workroom by the coarseness and indelicacy of his
conversation. This coming to the knowledge of Miss Welchman's brother,
he prevailed, with some difficulty, on his sister, to forego the
acquaintance of Smith, alias Mitchell.

In accordance with her brother's advice, Miss Welchman had several
interviews on the subject with Mitchell; but still he. continued coming
to the house, notwithstanding her prohibition, and persevered in his
visits, although she had repeatedly denied herself. On Friday, August
the 5th, 1814, he called at Mount Street, and was ushered into the
workroom, where Miss Welchman was sitting.

He continued in the room the whole of the evening, and was very abusive
in his language. Miss Welchman desired him several times to leave the
house; but he refused, unless a letter was returned to him, which Miss
Welchman declared she had destroyed. He then wanted her to provide
supper, which she refused; he next wished her to go out with him, which
she also refused, and declined lending him some money which he
requested of her.

About eleven o'clock Miss Macey and her work-people went down to
supper. Miss Welchman followed, leaving Mitchell above, without any one
with him; but, as if recollecting something, she returned, saying she
wasted to be alone with him for about five minutes.

She had scarcely entered the room when a loud scream was beard, and
presently the report of a pistol, which was instantly followed by
another. The house sad neighbourhood became greatly alarmed. The
assassin was seen descending from the first-floor window, and running,
without a hat, down the middle of the street. The people of the house,
on entering the room, saw the once lovely Miss Welchman a lifeless
corpse, a pair of pistols lying on the floor, which on inspection bore
evident marks of being the instruments with which the murder had been
perpetrated. There was also found in the room the hat of Mitchell; and
it appeared that, during the tune of Miss Welshman's absence, he had
opened the window-shutters, as they had been previously closed, and
could not have been opened in the interval between the firing of the
pistols and the escape of the assassin.

On examination, it was found that Miss Welchman had been shot in the
head; one bullet had entered her temple, and the other had been
resisted by the substance of the forehead. She lived a few minutes, but
was unable to speak. It was evident Mitchell was the assassin; for no
other man had been in the house, and several persons proved that no one
whatever went out through the hall from the time the report of the
pistol had been heard till after the examination of the premises.

The apprehension of Mitchell was now desired by all. The officers of
justice were dispatched in pursuit of him, but without effect; for, as
he had been for a length of time out of place, a clue to his last
residence was not easily found. At length word was brought to town that
he was in custody at his native place, Salisbury, to which he had bent
his steps, and where he had been recognised by his old master, the
farmer, who, having heard of the murder, immediately had him secured.

On the 13th of August he was brought up to Bow Street, in the custody
of Taunton, where he underwent an examination, after which he was fully
committed to Newgate. Mitchell appeared very little affected at his
situation, and preserved a sullen silence.

Friday, September the 16th, Mitchell was arraigned at the Old Bailey,
for the murder of Miss Welchman. The evidence was circumstantial, but
conclusive; and, when called on for his defence, he denied the crime
with which he was charged, and said that it was not proved the pistols
and hat were his. He called no witnesses, and the jury, having been
charged, retired for a few minutes, and returned with a verdict of
Guilty.

The Recorder, after silence hid been proclaimed, then pronounced the
dreadful sentence of the law, which was heard by the prisoner without
the least apparent emotion. 'Odious,' said the Recorder, 'as the crime
of murder always was, in this instance it was attended by every
possible circumstance of aggravation. He had, in the gratification of
his blood-thirsty vengeance, taken away the life of an unoffending
female, with whom he had proposed to connect himself in marriage. Where
Nature had called aloud for kindness, he had exhibited cruelty; where
he should have appeared in the character of a protector, he stood her
murderer. In relation to an offence of such enormity, human laws
concurred with the divine precept, "Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man
shall his blood be shed." The sentence of the law was, that he shall be
taken back to prison, and on Monday morning taken to some place of
execution, there to be hanged until dead, and his body delivered to the
surgeons for dissection.'

As this malefactor suffered along with Hollings, we shall give his case
next; after which we shall give the particulars of the execution of
these two atrocious monsters.


JOHN JAMES
Executed for Murder.

THIS unfortunate man was a farmer at West Witten, in the North Riding
of Yorkshire, and the crime for which he suffered was the consequence
of a litigation between him and his landlord.

In November, 1813, one William Ridley, a sheriff's officer and
auctioneer, went to seize some hay of James's, under pretence that he
was in arrears for rent, which it subsequently appeared was not legally
due. James had several reasons for disliking Ridley, in addition to
that arising from his officiousness on the present occasion. He had,
not long before, seized some of his hay, and, being auctioneer at the
sale, he knocked down to himself, at fifteen shillings, what was well
worth five pounds, if fairly exhibited.

The unfortunate James, teased by litigation, and naturally irritable,
vowed vengeance on the present occasion against Ridley, if he attempted
to distrain for rent which was not due. The bailiff, hardened in such
scenes, treated the denunciation with contempt, and proceeded directly
to the field where the hay-stack was situated. Just as he opened the
gate to give admission to his followers, the revengeful and infatuated
James rushed from behind a hedge, seized Ridley, and, in an instant,
plunged a knife several times into his back and neck. The bailiff,
without a groan, fell down and expired.

James was now taken into custody, and brought to trial at York, March
the 28th, 1814, when he was found Guilty; for, though it was fully
proved that he owed no rent, and that the conduct of the deceased was
highly aggravating, still it did not justify the summary vengeance
inflicted on him, or extenuate the crime of murder.

When asked what he had to say why sentence of death should not be
passed on him, he briefly replied, 'That he submitted to the laws of
his country, though he had no law shown to him.'

The judge then proceeded to animadvert on the enormity of his crime,
and ordered him for execution the next day but one.

William, the brother of John James, was indicted for aiding and
assisting; but the charge against him amounted only to some words
subsequently spoken, expressive of his satisfaction at the death of
Ridley; and these, though they evinced a malignant obduracy of heart,
were not sufficient to implicate him in the crime of his brother;
consequently he was acquitted.

On the fatal consequences of giving way to sudden bursts of passion we
have frequently remarked; and we hope our readers have not forgotten
the examples we have adduced: if they have, we can only recommend their
reflecting for a few minutes on the fate of this unfortunate man --
torn from home, and all the endearing associations which made home
agreeable, and afterwards suspended an ignominious spectacle on the
gallows, because he had not learned to curb the natural viciousness of
his temper, and seek justice where it would not ultimately be denied
him.


ADMIRAL BRADLEY
Transported for Forgery.

HIGH and chivalrous honour has always characterized the British navy;
hut, as it is composed of several thousands, we cannot hope to see it
entirely free from unworthy members, though we really did not expect to
find a rear-admiral convicted of a petty fraud, in practising which he
committed a deliberate forgery to obtain the mighty sum of three
pounds, eight shillings, and sixpence.

All vessels which bring home foreign letters are entitled to twopence
for each, as a remuneration for their trouble, and this they are always
paid by the postmaster of the port where they come to anchor. The
gallant admiral availed himself of this circumstance to commit the
fraud for which be was transported. On the 10th of March, 1814, he
brought four hundred letters to the post-office at Gosport, and
received two-pence for each letter. He subsequently repeated his
visits, and on the 10th of the following month he brought one hundred
and eleven letters, which he said had come in the Mary and Jane, then
lying at Cowes. For these he was paid three pounds, eight shillings,
and sixpence, for which he gave his receipt, and signed it with the
name 'William Johnson.'

The postmaster's son, suspecting that all was not right, made inquiries
about the Mary and Jane, and found that there was not, nor had been,
any such vessel at Cowes. In consequence of this, a constable was sent
to where Admiral Bradley lodged at Southwich, for at this time he was
on the retired list. The admiral was asked if his name was Johnson: he
said no, but that he had a friend in Portugal of that name. He denied
being at Gosport with the letters: but the postmaster, his son, and
daughter, knew him quite well, having seen him frequently.

The admiral was now fully committed, and brought to trial at the summer
assizes at Winchester, in 1814. The above facts were fully proved, and
it appeared in evidence that the admiral's conduct, at times, was very
eccentric. He received a very good character from several naval
officers; but he was found Guilty, and received sentence of death, to
be executed on Saturday, the 6th of August. His friends succeeded in
averting such a disgrace, and had the sentence commuted to
transportation for life.


WILLIAM QUIN
Imprisoned and Whipped for a Malicious Assault on a Strike-breaker

THIS misguided man was a native of Dublin, where he worked in a
coach-maker's yard. In 1814 these was what is called a turn-out amongst
coach-builders for higher wages, and Quin was one of those who
contended for the new regulations. On the 1st of September he met a man
named Kelly, a blacksmith, who had come up from the country in the hope
of getting employment. He asked Kelly what he was doing. 'Looking for
work,' he replied. What hire did you ask?' inquired Quin. Kelly
replied, 'Not any particular wages; but a gentleman told me there was a
turn-out amongst the men, but that, if I chose to work for sixteen
shillings and three-pence, he would employ me.' 'I won't go into any
yard,' said Quin, 'under nineteen shillings and sixpence or a pound,'
and then left him.

Kelly, driven by distress, did go into Mr. Long's yard, in Mary Street,
for sixteen shillings and three-pence a week, where he had only worked
a few days when the combinators resolved to slate him, the Dublin flash
word for an unmerciful beating.

On the 15th of the same month they put their threat into practice, just
as Kelly and two other men were going across the street to their work.
The two men saw their danger, and ran; but Kelly, apprehending no
danger, was proceeding regularly into Mr. Long's yard, when a man came
up, and struck him in the eye with a stone. Kelly, being recently from
the country, knew how to handle his limbs, and tripped up his
assailant; another, who attacked him, he served in the same way; when
four men, armed with clubs, ran across the street, and knocked him
down; and, when down, pommelled his face against the pavement, until
released from his perilous situation by Mr. Long's men. Kelly
recognised Quin as being the first of the four men who beat him, and it
was Quin who knocked him down with the new spoke of a coach-wheel.

For this barbarous attack upon an unprotected stranger Quin was
apprehended, and indicted September the 24th, 1814, for the assault,
The jury, without hesitation, found him Guilty; and the recorder,
previous to pronouncing sentence, observed that, if the prisoner
possessed any of the common feelings of humanity, he must perceive the
wickedness of the act he had committed, from the situation in which he
had left the unfortunate prosecutor. The Court were at a loss what
punishment to inflict for a misdemeanour accompanied with such
atrocities. There was no crime short of murder or high treason that
called for a higher degree of punishment than that of which the
prisoner had been convicted: yet he trusted that the sentence which he
was about to pronounce would have a more salutary effect than that
which was pronounced, not a fortnight ago, for a similar offence. If
that sentence had had the desired effect, the prisoner would not now be
standing at the bar of the Court, an atrocious offender against the
peace of the country. There was, however, one consolation, that, under
such circumstances of brutality, death did not ensue; for, if homicide
had been the consequence, no power on earth would have prevented the
prisoner from suffering an ignominious death. When men of the
description of the prisoner enter into those illegal combinations, they
do not see the fatal consequences likely to follow: they are as bitter
enemies to themselves as to the man they attack -- disgraceful to
themselves, disgraceful to their families, and disgraceful to their
country: and all this is done, and those atrocious acts committed, to
prevent an innocent and unoffending man from earning an honest
livelihood,-- against a man guilty of no other crime--against whom
there was no cause ever to harbour resentment: but it seemed to be the
determination of such men as the prisoner to carry their rules and
regulations into execution with more despotic sway than is practised in
the most inflamed counties.

The prisoner was sentenced to be imprisoned for six months on each of
the indictments; and, on the indictment for the assault with an intent
to murder, to be publicly whipped twice, to be fined fifty marks, and
to give security for good behaviour, himself in one hundred pounds, and
two sureties in fifty pounds each.

On the 2d of November Quin underwent the first whipping; but it
appeared the common executioner by no means did his duty, and for this
purpose another was provided for his second laceration. The figure of
this person was highly grotesque: he appeared to be an able tall man,
in a grey coat, with a huge wig, and a large slouched hat; but his face
was the most singular part of his appearance; it was completely covered
with yellow ochre, strongly tattooed with deep lines of black. He,
however, fully answered the purpose for which he was employed, cutting
the unfortunate and misguided man's back at every stroke, which he bore
with a firmness and stoicism worthy of a better cause. Quin chewed a
bullet between his teeth the whole of the way, and did not suffer even
a groan to escape him. When arrived at the Royal Exchange he smiled on
the crowd with the air of a martyr; and the people set up a shout,
mixed with hisses and execrations, against the magistrates and police;
but the executioner was the principal object of their fury, and they
manifested every disposition for riot, which was timely suppressed, and
several of the ringleaders were taken into custody.


MAJOR J. G. SEMPLE, ALIAS LISLE
Several Times Convicted of Swindling and Theft.

This notorious character was born in Scotland, of a respectable family,
in 1769. In 1775 he entered the army, and went to America, being then
only sixteen years old. The following year he was taken prisoner, but
was soon released, and shortly afterwards sent home, in consequence of
being wounded.

Being afterwards on the Continent, he entered the army of Frederic the
Great, at the time when that monarch was marching against the Empress
Queen Maria Theresa. In 1779, however, he quitted the Prussian army,
and returned to England, but immediately repaired to the Continent
again. At Harwich he became acquainted with an English lady of great
respectability, whom he soon married. Being a short time after in
France, his wife introduced him to the Duchess of Kingston, who
persuaded him to accompany her to Russia, where he was soon appointed
by Prince Potemkin a captain in the Russian army. His conduct was such
as gained him various honours from Potemkin; but, being dissatisfied
with the service, he quitted it in 1784, and retired to Copenhagen,
from whence, after visiting the King of Prussia, he returned to
England.

We wish the after-occurrences of Major Semple's life were as free from
censure as those we have already enumerated; but our narrative is
unfortunately interrupted by a circumstance, which appears to justify
various assertions derogatory to his character that were afloat
previous to this period.

On the 1st of September, 1785, the major was indicted at the Old
Bailey, on a charge of feloniously stealing a post-chaise, value fifty
pounds, the property of John Lycett, a coachmaker in Whitechapel. The
indictment charged him with hiring a post-chaise for a limited period,
which he never returned; the defendant, however, protested that the
chaise was regularly ordered and sent home, and therefore the
transaction could be only looked upon as a debt. The judge, however,
thought otherwise, and the prisoner was found Guilty.

Semple, in his own Memoirs, speaking of this occurrence, says: 'The
case stood thus with me: I had bespoke a travelling post-chaise of a
coachmaker, Mr. Lycett. It was ordered to be finished on a particular
day, and on that day he sent it home. My then situation rendered such a
carriage necessary for me, and I was at that time able to pay for it;
but my fatal turn for extravagance soon put that out of my power. After
remaining some time in town, I went again to the Continent, and, during
twelve months, passed and repassed very frequently; on which occasions
several attempts were made to arrest me for the debt: nor was there any
idea of calling it a fraud till a year after the carriage was delivered
to me at my lodgings at Knightsbridge. I am far from vindicating the
non-payment of a just debt, but I solemnly declare that I had not the
smallest idea of defrauding the coachmaker.'

After sentence Semple was of course committed to the charge of the
keeper of Newgate, by whom he was lodged in the state apartments, where
he remained a considerable time, until he was sent to Woolwich, where,
by the intercession of his friends, he received his majesty's pardon,
on condition of going abroad.

While in Newgate he invented a new saddle and accoutrement for cavalry,
a model of which he sent to the King of Prussia.

From Woolwich Semple went to France, where he became acquainted with
Bernyer, Pethion, Roland, and several of the then leaders. He was
present at the trial of Louis XVI. and shortly after resolved on
returning to England, in consequence of the irruption with this
country, which he then saw was inevitable. He therefore obtained a
passport, which he had scarcely done when he was denounced to the
Committee of Public Safety, as a spy, and going to join the enemy.
Being, however, secretly apprized of what was going forward, he was
able to effect his escape, although with some difficulty, before the
arrest was issued.

On his escape Semple joined the allied army against France, and
distinguished himself on various occasions, particularly in the battle
of St. Fronde, which lasted three days. On the retirement of the King
of Prussia from this campaign, Semple lost his best friend, and, being
shortly after wounded, he found himself incapacitated from service, and
almost destitute of the means of existence. After a short retirement,
however, he recovered sufficiently to remove to Augsburgh; on his
arrival at which place he was suddenly arrested by order of the Baron
d'Ompteda, in the name of his Britannic Majesty; no reason, however,
was assigned for the arrest, and he was liberated in a short time.

Considering he had been ill used on the Continent, Semple again
returned to England; and in 1795 we again find him at the bar of the
Old Bailey, on a charge of stealing in the shop of Mr. Wattleworth, in
Wigmore Street, one yard of muslin, two yards of calico, and one linen
shirt.

It was proved that the prisoner came into the shop of Mr. Wattle-worth,
about noon, on the 10th of November, 1794, and, showing two patterns,
one of muslin, and the other of calico, said he wanted them matched for
Mrs. Coningham, of Egham Green. They could not find an exact match in
the shop to the muslin; but he chose one; and a yard being cut off and
two yards of calico, he said he would give them to the lady's servant,
then at the door, and, calling in a man, gave them to him. He then said
that he had just arrived from the Continent, and should want a quantity
of shirts, and wished to take one with him to consult his sister, who,
he thought, would be a better judge of the linen than he was; that he
would bring it back in the morning, and then give his order. This
sister he called Coningham; and, as the witness had a customer of that
name, he made no hesitation, but gave him the shirt under those
conditions. This happened in November; but the prosecutor never saw the
prisoner again until January, when he was in custody in Bow Street.

The counsel for the prisoner contended that they had not made out the
charge of the felony, the evidence, if true, amounting only to that of
obtaining money under false pretences. Mr. Justice Buller, who tried
the cause, admitted the counsel was perfectly right as to the calico
and muslin; but he did not agree with him in respect to the shirt, and
therefore should leave it to the jury.

Semple, being called upon for his defence, begged permission to read a
few words which he had put to paper, fearful his embarrassed situation
might otherwise prevent him from saying what be wished. This paper
stated that he did not mean to deny he had unfortunately been in that
place before; but some of the public prints had so misrepresented
facts, that he had reason to fear the minds of the public might be so
far prejudiced against him as to suppose he had spent his whole life in
committing depredations: to prove that this was not true, he begged to
show bow his latter time had passed.

On going abroad, he found the French engaged in a war, fighting, as he
thought, for freedom; he entered their service, and was soon honoured
with rank in their army.

This, however, at much hazard, he quitted, on their declaring war
against this country. and went over to the Austrians, with whom he for
some time served as a volunteer.

The commander, noticing his exertions, gave him a commission of so
small rank, in which he continued until he was recognised by some
British officers, and it was instantly circulated through the army that
he was the convicted Semple, he having taken upon himself the name of
Lisle.

On this he was obliged to quit that service; but, still willing and,
desirous to serve, he went toward the Rhine, and obtained a commission
under the hereditary prince.

He had not, however, been long here, when a British officer sent to the
commandant that he had been condemned to transportation, without
stating that the time had expired.

Being thus suspected of being a runaway felon, he was taken into
custody by the police, and confined in a prison for more than five
weeks, without even the permission of pen and ink.

The fact being cleared up, he was set at liberty, but not without
losing his situation; he again, however, went into the field, and was
twice wounded.

This induced him to return home, and he sent a letter to Mr. Dundas, a
copy of which he desired might be read; but the Court thinking it
irrelevant, it was not admitted.

He then concluded, that he had been thus persecuted because he was
Major Semple, and which had also brought him to that bar on that day,
upon a charge of which he was totally innocent.

The jury, however, found him Guilty of stealing the shirt, but Not
Guilty upon the charge of the muslin and calico; and he was accordingly
transported.

Had this action failed, several other indictments were out against him,
on various charges of swindling; notwithstanding which, such was the
mixture of Semple's character, that various persons of the greatest
respectability interested themselves in his behalf, among whom were
Burke and Boswell, who both wrote to the under secretary of state,
interceding for the royal mercy.

After remaining in Newgate, on the state side, for two years, in a
state of uncertainty as to his future destiny, he was at length removed
to Portsmouth, and from thence proceeded to New South Wales. On his
passage a mutiny took place on board the vessel, and twenty-nine
persons were sent adrift in an open boat, among whom was Semple, who
had contrived to conceal a quantity of gold in some soap, by which
stratagem he succeeded in taking it with him. After a dangerous passage
they landed in safety at Fort St. Pedro, in the province of Rio Grande.

The governor of the fort received them with great hospitality, and
Semple was introduced as a Dutch officer and passenger. In consequence
of a quarrel, however, with an ensign, the latter exposed Semple's
character, which so irritated him that he would have murdered him with
his sword, if he had not been prevented. After remaining some time in
the Brazils, he left it in 1796, and arrived at Lisbon, where he was
arrested in consequence of his Brazilian quarrels. By an order,
however, from the British minister at Lisbon, he was sent on board an
English vessel, and conveyed to Gibraltar. While here he was arrested
on account of the discovery of a conspiracy; nothing, however,
appearing against him, he was conveyed to Tangier, where he remained
some time.

In December, 1798, an order arrived from England, ordering him home in
custody; and he was accordingly sent on board a ship, and arrived at
Portsmouth the following April. He was immediately conveyed to
Tothillfields' Bridewell, where he remained till he was again sent out
of the country.

From this period nothing particular occurred in the major's life until
his return from Botany Bay in 1810, when he resorted to his former evil
practices; but as he became more notorious he became less successful,
until at length he was reduced to the utmost distress, and had recourse
to the basest means of supporting a miserable existence.

In 1814 he went into a cheese-monger's shop in Devonshire Street, Queen
Square, and ordered a small quantity of bacon and butter to be sent to
No.42, Cross Street. He met the messenger at the door, and, taking the
articles from him, seat him back for six pennyworth of eggs. When the
boy returned he knocked at the door, and was informed that the person
he inquired for did not live there, and that they knew nothing about
him. This was true, for the major had only made a feint of going in to
deceive the boy, and had made off when the lad was out of sight.

For this offence he was apprehended, and brought to trial at the
Middlesex sessions, December the 3d, 1814, and found Guilty, when, for
the third time, sentence of transportation for seven years was passed
on him.

It must be lamented that a man possessing the courage and ability which
Semple certainly did would not pursue the path of honour, which he
might have done so profitably to himself and so serviceably to others.
As an additional proof of his talent, we insert the following lines,
which were written by him to a young lady at Richmond, in Yorkshire, to
whom he was to have been married, but fortunately his character was
timely discovered:--


For ever, O merciless fair!
Will that cruel indifference endure?
Can those eyes look me into despair,
And that heart be unwilling to cure?


How oft what I felt to disguise
Has my reason imperiously strove,
Till my soul almost felt from my eyes,
In the tears of the tenderest love!


Then, Delia, determine my fate,
Nor let me to madness be drove;
But, oh! do not tell me you hate,
If you even resolve not to love.'


CHARLES WELLER
Convicted of Stealing Notes and Bills.

THIS malefactor was paid to protect the property he stole, being guard
of the Swansea mail-coach, out of a parcel sent by which he purloined
notes and bills to the amount of two thousand three hundred pounds.

In the month of October, 1813 the above parcel was forwarded from the
bank of Newport, in Monmouthshire, to Down and Co. bankers, in London;
and, for the better disguising its value, the property was put into a
box, and the box packed in a coarse canvass bag, and directed to Mr.
Fothergill, a relation of one of the partners in the bank.

The box and bag arrived as directed, but without the property, and
every exertion was made to detect the robber. In the course of his
inquiries, Vickery, the Bow-Street officer, learned that some
bank-notes had been concealed at a place called Totterdown Hill, near
Bristol, by a woman named Hickman, with whose daughter the prisoner was
particularly intimate, and who absconded soon after; but being
apprehended, as was Weller also, she was admitted evidence against him.
The notes were traced in various directions, some even to Paris.

On Saturday, January the 14th, 1815, Weller was indicted for this
robbery; and, the facts being proved, he was found Guilty; but, the
offence not being capital, he was only sentenced to fourteen years'
transportation. Many men have been hanged for a crime of much less
magnitude.


SARAH STONE
Transported for Stealing a Child

THE public attention was so much excited by the case of Mrs. Magnis,
who stole the little boy in 1811, that an express act of parliament was
passed, making child-stealing felony, thereby subjecting the offender
to transportation -- a punishment by no means too severe for this
species of crime, by which families are thrown into the greatest
confusion and distress.

The following curious case was the first which occurred after the
passing of the act; and, though we rejoice at the conviction of the
woman, we cannot but smile at the simplicity of the ignorant tar, whose
credulity seems extraordinary, though his paternal affection was
amiable.

At the Old Bailey sessions, January the 18th, 1815, Sarah Stone was
indicted for feloniously stealing, on the 14th of October, 1814, a
female child, seven weeks old. The following was the evidence against
her:-

Catharine Kreemer, the prosecutrix, deposed that she was a poor woman,
residing at No.3, Swan's Court, Cowheel Alley, Golden Lane: her husband
was a labourer; she had had six children, two of them twins, and was
occasionally obliged to solicit charity in the streets for their
support. On the 14th of October the twins were about seven weeks old,
on which day she went out with one of her children, five years old,
having her twins in her arms; and, whilst she was sitting on the steps
in St. Paul's Churchyard, the prisoner accosted her -- gave her a
penny, saying she had fine babies in her arms -- and observed that, if
she would go with her she would introduce her to a .fine lady, who
would give her half a guinea. She accordingly set off with the
prisoner, carrying her twins, and followed by her other child. In
Cheap-side her cloak fell from off her babes, when she requested the
prisoner to put it over them, to prevent them from catching cold, who
offered to carry one of them. She delivered the largest of them into
her arms, and they proceeded together to the Commercial Road, where, at
the corner of a public house, the prisoner gave her threepence, to get
something to drink. The prosecutrix thanked her for the money, but said
she did not want either beer or gin, but wished to see the fine lady.
The prisoner said she would go and show the lady her fine twin, and
immediately return to her. She followed the prisoner up a court, not
choosing to part from her child, when her little girl, who was walking
by her side, fell over some bricks. She assisted her to get up, and
then turned round to look for the prisoner, who was gone out of sight.
The prosecutrix immediately screamed out, being unable to pursue the
prisoner, from the incumbrance of her two children. Her cries collected
a number of people about her, some of whom were going to take her into
custody, on account of the clamour she raised. This was about three
o'clock in the afternoon; she ran about in search of the prisoner and
her child until half past seven o'clock. She particularly noticed the
prisoner's person, who had a tooth broken out in her right upper jaw,
was of a swarthy complexion, had dark eyes, and was much pitted with
the small-pox: she was dressed in a reddish spotted gown, a light
shawl, and a black straw bonnet. Poor as she was, the prosecutrix
immediately had advertisements and hand-bills published, with this
description of the prisoner, for which she paid seventeen shillings.
The same night she gave information at Lambeth Street police office.
Six weeks afterwards she was taken on board a ship in the Thames, when
the prisoner was pointed out to her, and she immediately recognised
her, and found her lost child in the prisoner's arms. As she ascended
the side of the ship she heard a child cry, and knew it was the voice
of her infant. The moment she perceived it she asked the prisoner to
let her have a kiss of her baby, when a sailor, who was standing by,
said 'No, not if you were the Queen of England,' and took the child out
of the prisoner's arms. Her child appeared thinner than it was when she
lost it. The prisoner was not suckling the child.. She never
entertained a doubt of the prisoner being the woman who stole her
child. Dalton then took the prisoner into custody, and went ashore with
her, the prosecutrix, and child. When she undressed the child she found
the piece of blanket it had on when she lost it round its body. The
prisoner said it was very silly of the prosecutrix to think the child
was hers, it being her own, and seemed very unwilling to part with it.
The twins were females, and greatly resembled each other. The sailor
said he was the father of the child, and acted as if he thought so.

Elizabeth Murray, a widow, deposed that she lived next door to the
prosecutrix: had known her for fifteen years: remembered her being
delivered of twins: saw her in Golden Lane about six or seven o'clock
in the evening of the day on which she lost one of them; saw a child
that was found on board of a ship by the prosecutrix, which she
believed was the same that was lost, though it was much wasted. It died
last Friday. The mother had plenty of milk, and kept them in 'good
case.'

Ebenezer Dalton, the officer, deposed that he went with the prosecutrix
on board the Hugh Inglis East Indiaman where he saw the prisoner, and,
from the description he had had of her from the prosecutrix,
immediately knew her: she had a child in her arms, which she fed with
pap. He told the prisoner he had come about the child, which she said
was her own, and she would show him the room where she was delivered:
that she was taken in labour in the Minories, and named the very day on
which the child was lost, when she stated a young woman took her to her
apartments, where she was immediately delivered, in White Horse Court,
Rosemary Lane: the young Woman's name, she said, was Mary Brown. When
there, she could show the officer where the man-midwife lived who was
fetched to attend upon her, as it must be near the place, the young
woman who went for him having been absent only a very short time; that
she was delivered at three o'clock, and returned to her home in
Blythe's Buildings, Sun Street, Bishopsgate, at five o'clock, in a
coach, where she lived with her mother, though in a separate apartment;
and Swaine (the sailor who refused to let the prosecutrix kiss the
child) was its father. When the prosecutrix first saw the prisoner with
the child in her arms, she flew towards her, and would have struck her
if he had not interfered, exclaiming, 'That is my child, and that is
the woman who stole her from me.' The prosecutrix's description of the
prisoner's person was correct, except with regard to her age. He
brought the prisoner to London, accompanied by the prosecutrix, who
refused to be again separated from her child, and it was restored to
her by the order of the magistrate. He then inquired ineffectually, at
every house in White Hart Court, for a person named Mary Brown; and, on
telling the prisoner of his ill success, she said she must have
mistaken the name of the court; but, if she were to go herself, she
could find the place. He went with her by desire of the magistrate, and
she led him to Johnson's Court, Rosemary Lame, and pointed out a house,
in which she said she was delivered in the front room, up one pair of
stairs. Miller, another officer, who was along with them, went into the
house, and returned with Elizabeth Fisher, who inhabited the room
described by the prisoner, who, when she saw her, appeared much
confused, and said she did not know her, though she was sure of the
house; and Elizabeth Fisher professed herself unacquainted with the
prisoner. He went to the only man-midwife near, who said he had never
delivered a woman in the house they mentioned, and the prisoner said he
was not the person. Swaine gave up his voyage, and accompanied the
witness and prisoner in a post-chaise to London, to assert his right to
the child. There were other women with children in their arms besides
the prisoner on the deck of the ship, when the prosecutrix, without
hesitation, fixed upon her as the woman who stole her child.

Isabella Gray deposed that she lived at No.3, Blythe's Buildings, in
Sun Street. The prisoner and Swaine lodged in her house as man and
wife. Saw the prisoner go out about one o'clock on the 14th October:
remembers her dress, which she described to have been the same as that
the prosecutrix swore was worn by the woman who stole her child.
Prisoner had lodged in her house about three months. The witness went
out in the afternoon, and on her return was told by the prisoner's
mother that she was delivered. Saw the child, and remarked it was a
very large one, appearing like a child of a month old more than like a
new-born infant. The prisoner heard her say this, but made no reply.
Swaine was in the room at the time: witness asked him if that was his
child. He said 'So they told him: he had just come into the house.'
Prisoner had previously appeared like a woman who was pregnant: never
saw any medical man or other person attending the prisoner on account
of her lying-in.

Grace Brown deposed that she lived opposite to the prisoner in Blythe's
Buildings: saw her come into the court about five o'clock in the
afternoon of the 14th of October. The prisoner did not appear as if she
had been just delivered: she had had children herself, and did not
believe that any woman who had been only delivered that afternoon could
have walked up the court as prisoner did. Prisoner had been big six
months: she had jumped out of a two pair of stairs' window whilst she
was said to be pregnant: never spoke to the prisoner.

The prisoner, in her defence, told the same story to the Court which
she had related to Dalton, and pointed out Elizabeth Fisher as the
person who took her into her room, where she persisted she was
delivered, and that Elizabeth Fisher called herself Mary Brown, to
which name she said she answered before the magistrate.

Elizabeth Fisher was called, and declared she never saw the prisoner
before she was brought to her house by the officer; that, when before
the magistrate, she had answered to the name of Brown, on some person's
addressing her by that appellation, being greatly alarmed by the
circumstance of appearing before a magistrate.

The mother of the prisoner, Swaine, the reputed father of the child,
and two other persons, ineffectually endeavoured to establish the
prisoner's innocence, and to prove that the child was her own.

The jury unhesitatingly found her Guilty; sentence, seven years'
transportation. A sum of money, for the relief of the prosecutrix, was
subscribed by the jury.


ANNE RADFORD
Transported for Perjury.

Few subjects have excited greater complaint than the inconsistency of
the English criminal code. A man is hanged for cutting or maiming, with
intent to kill, because, say the commentators on the law, though the
wounded man recovers, that is no palliation of the crime, for the
offender deserves the same punishment as if the object of his attack
had actually expired, the intention being the same. By analogy, this
argument applies to those who falsely endeavour to swear away the life
of a man; yet the most aggravated perjury is only punished with
transportation, and in most cases with only fine and imprisonment,
though an artful perjurer may as much endanger the life of an innocent
man as the infuriated assassin, for circumstances may be such, in
either case, as to preclude the possibility of defence. The case we are
going to narrate will illustrate the foregoing remarks.

In the latter end of the year 1814, Anne Radford, a poor man's
daughter, aged nineteen, accused her sweetheart, John Bird, a farmer's
servant, of having murdered a rival of his, one Buckhill, a gentleman's
servant, two years before. Bird was accordingly apprehended, and his
accuser deposed as follows: -- That one evening, in the month of June,
she and Bird were walking along the road, about eight o'clock, when
they met Buckhill, whom Bird immediately attacked, knocked him down,
cut his throat, and then dragged him into a neighbouring corn-field,
where he buried him. The particulars she described with such apparent
candour and minuteness, that it was impossible to suspect her story to
be fabricated.

Bird was committed to Exeter gaol; and Anne Radford, not being able to
procure bail to prosecute, was also sent to prison, there to be taken
care of until the ensuing assizes.

The momentary wonder which this extraordinary charge excited having
somewhat subsided, the sober part of the people began to reflect on its
improbability. The publicity of the place where the alleged murder was
committed, the early hour at which it took place, and the silence which
attended the transaction, no one having ever heard of any such murder
in the neighbourhood, seemed to attach falsehood to the charge, and
throw discredit on the accuser's story. But then the circumstantial
manner in which she described the deed, and the absence of any
inducement to prompt her to fabricate so atrocious a statement, as well
as the fact of Buckhill not having been since seen in the
neighbourhood, were considered corroborating proofs of the truth of her
charge, which she alleged having made to rid her conscience of an
intolerable burden that pressed heavily upon it during the last two
years.

The magistrates had her brought to the field where she stated Buck-bill
to have been buried, and had the place dug up where she described the
body to have been deposited; but, though the utmost diligence was used,
nothing was found to lead to a supposition that any such interment had
taken place.

In the mean time it was confidently reported that Buckhill was still
alive; and Bird's master, whose humane and praiseworthy exertions merit
the highest eulogium, went in search of him. Having travelled seven
hundred miles, he at length found the object of his pursuit, who had
just returned from France, where he had been with Lord Beauchamp's
family during the two years preceding.

To save a fellow-creature from ignominy and death, Buckhill hastened to
Exeter, where the assizes were about to be held; and, on Radford
hearing of his presence, she declared her whole story was a falsehood,
though up to that moment she persisted in her wicked allegations.

When Bird was arraigned at Exeter, January the 16th, 1815, in a most
crowded court, the Recorder asked Radford what she had to say: she
replied, 'Nothing, sir; I am guilty:' upon which Bird was discharged,
and a bill of indictment was then presented to the grand jury, and
found against Anne Radford, for wilful and corrupt perjury. She was
immediately put upon her trial, and said, 'Though I know I am guilty, I
am advised to plead Not Guilty.'

Her affidavit having been read, Buckhill, the man stated to have been
murdered, was called. He deposed that he never knew Bird, and
consequently that he could not have had any quarrel with him. About two
years before he was in the habit of privately visiting the prisoner in
her father's garden, during the eleven days which he stopped in the
country, since which time he knew nothing of her.

Bird having also been called, and his evidence gone through, the jury,
without hesitation, found the prisoner Guilty, and she was sentenced to
seven years' transportation.

Were it not for the zeal of Bird's master in finding Buckhill, the
circumstantial and minute evidence of this wicked girl would in all
probability have convicted him of murder. What a lesson for jurors!


WILLIAM SAWYER
Executed for the Murder of Harriet Garrett.

WILLIAM SAWYER was a young man in the commissariat department of the
British army, and the circumstances of his case are of a most
extraordinary and singular nature. In the month of February, 1814, he
went out to Portugal, where he lived in the same house in the Campo
Major, at Lisbon, with a friend, Mr. Riccord, who had a female, named
Harriet Gaskett, under his protection. An attachment grew up between
this unfortunate woman and Sawyer, though he had a wife at the time in
England; and his attentions were so apparent that they excited jealousy
in his brother officer, who appears to have remonstrated with his
friend and mistress, which occasioned much infelicity.

On the 27th of April they met at dinner, with two or three other
officers; but such was the agitation of their feelings, that Riccord,
Harriet, and Sawyer, ate no dinner. The latter appeared greatly
dejected; and, as well as Harriet, withdrew as soon as possible.

In the evening the party heard the report of three pistol-shots; and,
on going into the garden, Harriet and Sawyer were found both lying on
the ground. Harriet was quite dead, but Sawyer had not been mortally
wounded. On being removed into the house, he was left in the care of a
brother officer, while the others went in search of a physician; and
during their absence he contrived to get a razor, with which he cut his
throat in a dreadful manner, but not mortally.

Next day the officers met, and reduced the facts to writing, which
Sawyer signed. When he was sufficiently recovered he was removed to
England, where, shortly after his arrival, he was indicted at the Old
Bailey, April the 7th, 1815, for the above murder. His case excited
great interest, and the court was filled long before the arrival of the
judges.

     The above facts being deposed to --

Mr. Tobin was called.-- Was at Lisbon at the time of this unfortunate
transaction. Knew the parties before the 27th of April, and saw them
together the evening before. Mr. Riccord seemed indisposed. Witness
called to see him the next morning; saw the prisoner on that occasion:
he requested him, the witness, to accompany him to view a house which
he wished to take. Witness did so, and advised him not to take the
house; he, however, said he would take it. In the evening, about eight
o'clock, Mr. Riccord and Mr. Green called at his house: they were much
agitated. They stated that the prisoner and the deceased had murdered
each other, or something to that effect. and requested witness to go
and render what assistance he could. Witness went to Mr. Riccord's
house, and found the prisoner lying on the floor, with his throat cut,
and a wound in his temple. Remained some time with him, and assisted in
washing his wounds. There was a paper on the table, on which the
prisoner appeared to have been writing. Witness inquired where Harriet
was; and, handing that paper, the prisoner wrote that she lay in the
garden in the first lane from the house. Witness went in consequence of
this information, and found the deceased. She was quite dead. There was
a wound in her temple. The prisoner was finally removed from the floor
on which he lay to a sofa in an adjoining room. About eleven o'clock
the doctor came. Saw nothing more that night: went to the prisoner the
next morning at eleven, and found him in bed. Several gentlemen were
assembled to inquire into the facts of the case, who judged it
advisable that the prisoner should be called upon to give some account
of the fatal transaction. In consequence of this opinion witness wrote
down on a paper such facts as had come to his knowledge respecting the
calamitous circumstance. This paper was read over to the prisoner
distinctly; he afterwards read it himself, and subscribed to the
corrections of its contents: he also signed his name to it. Upon this
paper having been read over, they saw that it was not sufficiently
clear for the want of the word 'my.' Witness, therefore, went once more
to the prisoner the next day, and requested permission to amend it. He
pointed out that the paper, as it existed, left room to doubt whether
Harriet had not murdered herself: he therefore requested the prisoner
to say who had fired the pistol-shot by which she had been killed. The
prisoner said he fired it, and desired the necessary correction to be
made to the paper, which was accordingly done. There was also another
memorandum written, to which he likewise signed his name. To these
papers there were four subscribing witnesses.

The papers in question were now put in and read. The first was dated
28th April, 1814, and was, in substance, as follows:-

'Having laid violent hands upon myself, in consequence of the death of
Harriet, I think it but justice to mankind and the world, being of
sound mind, solemnly to attest that her death was occasioned by her
having taken part of a phial of laudanum, and "my" discharging a pistol
at her head, provided for the occasion. I took the residue of the
laudanum myself, and discharged two pistols at my head. They failing in
their effect, I then retired to the house, and endeavoured to put an
end to my life, leaving myself the unfortunate object you now behold
me.
     '(Signed) WILLIAM SAWYER,'
     And three witnesses.

The word 'my,' in the above paper, was interlined, as stated in Mr.
Tobin's evidence.

The second paper was dated seven o'clock, Saturday evening, the 30th of
April. It was nearly as follows:-- 'The word "my," interlined in the
above paper, was inserted with my full concurrence. I have heard the
contents of that paper deliberately read, and entirely agree to them.
We mutually agreed to destroy each other; and then she requested me to
destroy her previous to my destroying myself.'

Captain Thomas Tyrrell witnessed the signing of the second paper by the
prisoner, and, at Mr. Riccord's request, produced to him another paper
for him (the prisoner) to sign. This was for the purpose of removing
any imputation against Mr. Riccord's character. Witness then read over
a paper of considerable length, which was signed by the prisoner: it
was, in substance, as follows:--

'On my arrival in Lisbon I called upon Mr. Riccord, who, in consequence
of some attention which I had shown him, when ill, on a former
occasion, received me with great kindness, and invited me to his house.
I lived there with Harriet and him for some time, with great happiness,
till about three months back, when Mr. Riccord manifested some
displeasure, in consequence of some civilities, of more than a common
description, which I paid to Harriet. This, however, was soon
forgotten, as I assured him there was no ground for his suspicion. On
or about --- Harriet gave way to my solicitations, and agreed to live
with me, provided Mr. Riccord went to England, and was restored to his
family:

Here the witness stated, that, in addition to the declarations, he had
put several questions to the prisoner, which he had answered. They were
as follow:--

Q. Harriet having declared, in the most solemn manner, to Mr. Riccord,
that she never had any connexion of an intimate nature with you, it is
but just that you should state whether you had such connexion, and when
and where that connexion took place?-- A. I had connexion with Harriet,
and slept with her three times, during the time that Mr. Riccord was
obliged to sleep at the Convent.

Q. When Harriet ran towards the well, did not Mr. Riccord tell you
might live together, and that he would go to an hotel, and only waited
for Harriet to hand him some things?-- A. He did.

Q. Then, if you had this permission, why did Harriet require you to
shoot her, when you had a full opportunity of living together?-- A.
Harriet assigned as a reason for asking me to shoot her, that, if she
lived with me, she was sure Riccord would shoot himself; and, although
she had promised not to live with me, she had not promised not to die
with me.

Q. Was it not Harriet's request that you should destroy her, because
you said you would destroy yourself if she did not live with you?-- A.
No, so help me, God! I declare that she entreated me to shoot her,
without any such declaration on my part.

The prisoner was then called upon for his defence, and put in a written
paper, in which he stated that, in consequence of his being unable to
articulate, from the wound in his throat, he had committed to paper all
he had to say in his defence. The paper then went on to state that the
prisoner had felt the sincerest affection for the unfortunate
individual in question; towards whom he had never meditated the
slightest injury. He perfectly recollected her having entreated him, to
shoot her, but had no idea of what passed subsequently, till some time
afterwards, when he was told he had signed papers, of the contents of
which he had no recollection. He then expressed acknowledgments for the
efforts made by his prosecutors to bring forward Mr. Riccord, who would
have been a material witness in his behalf; and had only to lament that
these efforts had not been attended with success.

Several persons were then called to speak to the general humane
character of the prisoner, among whom were General Sir Edward Howard,
Colonel Sir William Robe, W. Stacey, Esq., E. Weaver, Esq., Mr. Wells,
and Mr. Guy.

A Mrs. Nicholls proved that the deceased had lodged with her from June,
1813, to February, 1814. She was of a most violent and tyrannical
disposition, and had a pistol, which she kept constantly in her room.

Lord Ellenborough summed up the evidence, when the jury retired, and,
after an absence of two hours, returned with the verdict of Guilty; but
recommended the prisoner strongly to mercy, on the ground that there
was no malice on his part towards the deceased, further than the act
itself imported.

Lord Ellenborough now desired to hear whether any thing was to be
submitted as a ground for respiting the sentence of the prisoner.

Mr. Alley repeated his former arguments, and contended that the
prisoner could not legally receive sentence for a crime committed in
another kingdom, where there were laws to which he was distinctly
amenable.

Lord Ellenborough considered this point as decided, and therefore did
not think it proper to reserve it. He was induced to believe, however,
that there were other grounds upon which a motion for a respite of
sentence might have been claim ed. He desired the counsel for the
prisoner to look to the indictment, and see whether that did not
present some points which it would be proper to reserve for discussion.

Mr. Alley and Mr. Curwood having looked in compliance, with his
lordship's intimation, to the indictment, but not immediately
discovering any points of the nature alluded to his lordship, to save
the time of the Court, stated there were two points which had presented
themselves to him, on the face of that indictment, as sufficient under
the set to warrant him respiting the judgment of the prisoner:-- The
first was, that the prisoner was said to have committed the murder in
question 'against the form of the statute,' bit the particular statute
infringed was not specified, as it ought to have been; and, next, it
was not stated that the prisoner was a 'British subject;' and therefore
the Court adjudged that the sentence should be respited accordingly.

On the 12th of May Mr. Sawyer was brought up to receive the decision of
the judges, which Sir Simon .Le Blanc delivered as follows:--

'William Sawyer wee tried and convicted, under the authority of a
special commission, appointed for that purpose, for the wilful murder
of Harriet Gaskell, in the kingdom of Portugal, a subject of our lord
the king, and in the peace of the king.

'Upon this conviction, three objections were taken upon the indictment,
in arrest of judgment. The first of these was, that the jurisdiction of
this country had no power whatever to try the offence of an individual
committed in a country beyond the seas, and under the dominion of a
foreign power; second, that the indictment did net, upon the face of
it, show that the parties were British subjects; and; third, that the
indictment did not conclude, as being agreeable to the form of the
statute, &c. With respect to the first point of objection, namely,.
that which related to the 33d of Henry VIII., the words and
construction of that statute must be taken as implying that the
offender must be tried by a jury where the offence is committed; but it
also appeared, from that statute, that, if a murder is committed upon a
British subject, it may be lawful, upon information of such murder
being given, for any of his majesty's counsel to bring the offender to
justice, whether the offence he committed within or without the
kingdom, or any of his majesty's shires. That such offender shall be
tried under a special commission of the great seal, either within or
without the kingdom, or any of his majesty's shires, for such offence,
the words were sufficiently clear, and admitted of the construction
which had, since the passing of the act, been put upon them.' [He then
cited three cases where convictions had taken place pursuant to this
statute. The first was the case of one Chambers, who had committed a
murder in Barcelona, in the kingdom of Spain, in 1709, when the law
took its course: the next was the case of one Ealing, who was convicted
of a murder committed in Sweden in 1720: and the third was that in
which Captain Roche was convicted of the murder of one Ferguson, at the
Cape of Good Hope, in 1775.]

'In all these cases the construction of the act quoted applied, and the
law had taken its regular course. They were all cases, too, where the
offence had been committed beyond the seas, and out of the dominions of
his majesty. With regard to the second objection, the words of the
statute are, "that if any person shall commit such offence of murder
against any subject, in the peace of the king," &c. and sufficient
appeared upon the face of the indictment to show that the subject so
murdered was a British subject, and in the peace of the king. As to the
last objection, stating that the indictment did not conclude "under the
form of the statute," &c. it did not appear of so much importance,
being interwoven with the other arguments, and sufficient appearing on
the face of the indictment to make the case dear, agreeably to the
statute.'

The learned judge concluded by saying, that, after the fullest
consideration that could be given to the case, the judges were
unanimously of opinion that there was no ground whatever for arrest of
judgment.

The recorder then proceeded to pronounce the awful sentence of the law.

The prisoner appeared deeply affected throughout, and, upon hearing the
awful decision and sentence, remained motionless for some time. when at
length he faintly requested one of the officers to entreat the Court to
recommend him to the royal clemency. He was then taken from the dock.

Monday, May the 22d, 1815, being the day appointed for the execution of
this infatuated man, at an early hour an immense number of spectators
assembled in the Old Bailey, to witness the awful scene. Since the
sentence of death was passed on him he assumed a degree of sullenness;
and the only declaration he was heard to make was 'that he would not be
executed:' this was considered to import the he was resolved on
self-destruction. His intentions, however, if such they were, were
defeated by the constant attendance of two officers night and day. On
Sunday he received the sacrament, after which he appeared more
composed. About three o'clock on Sunday his wife went to the prison,
for the purpose of taking a farewell: she was announced by an officer;
but the unhappy man gave a peremptory order that she should not be
admitted, and all that could be urged could not induce him to see her.
When he went to his cell he was much depressed, and refused any kind of
sustenance: about two o'clock he laid down, and soon after became very
sick, and vomited copiously. He continued restless until half past six
o'clock, at which time he was visited by the Rev. Mr. Cotton who prayed
to him fervently. A little before eight o'clock. Mr. Sheriff Reay,
attended by the usual officers, proceeded from Justice Hall towards the
cell. The unfortunate gentleman was introduced into the Press-yard by
the Ordinary: he was very dejected, and did not utter a word during his
being conveyed to the platform. At eight o'clock precisely, every
necessary arrangement being complete, the fatal signal was given, and
the unhappy man was launched into eternity. During the ceremony a
profound silence prevailed throughout the populace. He died under
evident symptoms of paroxysm, and a quantity of blood gushed from his
mouth, from the cut in his throat. At nine o'clock the body was taken
to Bartholomew's Hospital in a cart, attended by the under-sheriff and
officers. He was dressed in a suit of black, and was not ironed.


THOMAS JESSON
Executed for the Murder of a Child.

The man who has no self-respect, or principles of honour, is seldom
virtuous; and, though reason may conduce to good conduct, yet
ninety-nine men out of every hundred are influenced by feeling only;
and, happily for society, the general feeling of mankind is on the side
of virtue and morality.

In the case before us we have a deplorable instance of the bad
consequences which uniformly proceed from conduct in opposition to what
the world approves. Jesson married a woman with an illegitimate child,
the daughter of a wealthy seducer, at her breast; and, though he
promised to protect, and apparently did caress the infant, yet he
privately hated and detested the innocent cause of his anger; for he
was aware of the circumstances attending its birth and filiation before
he married its imprudent mother.

Whoever reads the history of delinquents (and we know not one more
copious than the 'Newgate Calendar') must be struck with the obvious
advantages which, even in this world, attend a life of propriety and
virtue. Scarcely a case of atrocity, horror, or dishonesty occurs, but
we find the parties concerned immersed in sin and crime. If men, they
are the companions of prostitutes, whose extravagance and dissipation
are to be supported by illegal means; and, if women, we find them
either abandoned to shame and infamy, or living in secret or open
defiance of the laws of God and society. The parties before us, though
not exactly of this class, were nevertheless far from being models of
propriety: the woman was a mother before she was married; and the man
undertook to father her child begotten in shame. From such a connexion
little good was to be expected. though what followed could not possibly
be anticipated.

Thomas Jesson, a nailer, aged twenty-five, was indicted at the Salop
assizes, March the 24th, 1815, for the wilful murder of his wife's
child, in the parish of Hale's Owen, on the night of Saturday, the 28th
of the preceding January. By the evidence of a surgeon it appeared that
the right cheek and temple were bruised very much, the skin was
ruptured on the right side of the child, and the lower jaw was broken
exactly in the centre. He observed a large fracture on the back part of
the head: after removing the scalp two large portions of the bone were
entirely detached, and pressed upon the brain. A single blow would not
have caused the fracture of both the jaw and the head.

The prisoner stated that he was in a fit when it was done; and that he
knew not how it happened. This, however. did not appear from the.
evidence to be the fact; and the jury brought in a verdict of Guilty,
in the propriety of which the judge fully concurred, and immediately
passed sentence of death upon him.


JOHN MURDOCH
Executed for the Murder of James Murdoch.

PHILIP, King of Macedon, derived less glory from all his victories than
from one single act of justice. One of his veterans had been billetted
on a poor peasant, who treated him with great hospitality; but the base
soldier, in return for such kindness, resolved to ruin his host: he
fabricated a tale for the ear of his commander, injurious to the
character of the peasant, and solicited for himself the home and geld
of his benefactor. His villainy was detected, and the indignant monarch
ordered to be branded, on his. forehead, 'The ungrateful guest'-- a
stigma which, in Christian times, is, we are sorry to say, often
merited by modern soldiers, as the following case will show:--

John Murdoch was a discharged soldier, who, in the beginning of the.
year 1815, visited a namesake of his, with whom he was formerly
acquainted, at Langrig, a small village near Whitburn, Scotland.
Although of the same name, there was no relationship between them; but,
on the strength of nominal connexion, the veteran received a hearty
welcome from his friend, James Murdoch, who lived in a house by
himself, and kept a little shop.

For eight days the old soldier was hospitably entertained; but, like
the 'ungrateful guest,' he wished to possess himself of the property of
his host, and, horrid to relate, he one night took up a carpenter's
adze, and clove the poor man's head in two! after which he concealed
the body in a corner.

Next day, the shop not being opened as usual, the neighbours became
alarmed, and, going to inquire, they were told by the murderer that the
old man had gone to Whitburn, and would not return until the evening.
This not satisfying the people, they rushed forward, and soon
discovered the mangled corpse of the deceased.

The 'ungrateful guest' attempted to escape; but he was pursued, and
quickly overtaken. When examined, the money of the poor shopkeeper, as
well as his watch, was found upon the wretch, who was fully committed
for trial.

On Monday, February the 18th, 1815, he was indicted for this murder in
the High Court of Justiciary, Edinburgh, and found Guilty. The
execution of a murderer does not take place in Scotland so soon after
conviction as in this country; and this malefactor did not suffer until
the 29th of the following March.


JOHN ELLEM
Executed for Ravishing a Young Girl

THIS brutal and unmanly villain richly deserved the fate he earned for
himself; for he that forcibly violates the person of an unprotected
female is unfit to fill any station in civilized society, and commits a
private injury which nothing on earth can recompense, as his
unfortunate victim may be said to walk through life an animated corpse,
shunned by the living, and insulted by the wicked and the thoughtless,
while the commiseration of the humane only renews those tortures which
nothing but death can assuage. The man who subjects a female, otherwise
innocent and lovely, to such a life as this, deserves more tortures
than are found in physical death.

John Ellem, a wealthy rope-maker, at Barking, was indicted at
Chelmsford, July the 14th, 1815, for ravishing Anne Pearson, on the
24th of March.

Anne Pearson, the prosecutrix, stated that she was sixteen last
Christmas. On the 24th, her master, his wife, and the servant boy, went
out to go to London, but her master returned in about half an hour; it
was about six o'clock: he asked her if the kettle boiled, and told her
to get the things; there was no person in the house but themselves;
having placed the tea-things, he desired her to go up stairs and fetch
his pocket-book; she went, but could not find it; she called down
stairs to say it was not there; he again called up to look into his
waistcoat pocket; she did, it was not there; she told him so, and he
desired her to look into his jacket pocket; it was not there: she then
heard him coining up stairs, and she, having a suspicion of his
intention to take improper liberties with her, shut the door and locked
it; he knocked at the door, and desired her to open it; she refused,
unless he would go down stairs; he said if she did not open the door he
would break it open, adding, what the hell do you think I want with
you? She then opened the door; he immediately threw her upon the bed:
she got up once, and had reached the door, but he again caught her and
accomplished his purpose; he then went down stairs, and she followed in
about two minutes; he walked about the room whistling; she left the
house in less than half an hour, and went to her mother's. On her way
she met a young friend, who asked her what she was crying about. She
said her master had behaved rude to her; she told her mother the same,
but did not then tell her the whole. Her friend came in shortly
afterwards, and she told her the particulars, desiring that she would
tell her mother, as she did not like to do it herself. In the evening,
when she went to bed, disclosed the whole to her mother, who (on the
Monday), this being Good Friday, sent for Mr. Desormeaux, the doctor.--
She was subjected to a very severe cross-examination. She said she
could not have been heard to cry out; she could not get to the window;
she denied having had any loose conversation with a milkman on that
same day; she knew a Mr. Smith, a doctor, at Barking, but she had never
applied to him for any medicines, or had ever spoken to him. Her
mother, Mr. Desormeaux, and Caroline Walker, were called, who confirmed
her as to her immediate disclosure of the facts, except that Mr.
Desormeaux said, that, in stating the mode of perpetration, she had
described it differently with respect to confining her hands. The
prisoner, being called upon for his defence, said he left it to his
counsel. They called witnesses to show a contradiction in parts of her
testimony. The washerwoman's girl said, that, when she had brought the
waistcoat, she had another girl with her, and that she came in a
laughing manner, as though nothing had happened; but the principal
witness was Richard Baker Smith, who described himself as a surgeon and
apothecary, now residing at Ilford, then at Barking. He said the girl
came to his house about ten o'clock on the night of the 1st of April.
When he opened the door, he supposed she came about a certain disorder,
and he asked her if it was so. She said no; but some young men had been
playing tricks with her, and she wanted some physic. A woman was with
her, wrapped in a red cloak. He told her to come in the morning. He was
sure it was her, as he knew her and her family. Upon cross-examination
he proved a most ignorant man; so much so, that he spelt dropsy,
dropsee, and fistula, festerly. He insisted, however, that he was a
regular-bred medical man, and had two hundred venereal patients from
Barking alone, and produced a certificate, which, upon examination,
proved to be a certificate written by himself. The girl, who was
confronted with him, most solemnly denied ever having spoken to him. He
named also the mother's brother as his patient. He happened to be in
court, and denied the fact. The witness said, 'If not him, he had had
his wife under his care.' His lordship expressed great indignation at
the conduct of this witness. The foreman of the prisoner was called to
prove a conversation between the girl and a milkman on the day of the
transaction, which she denied. He said two other persons heard it, but
they were not present. The noble and learned judge having detailed all
the evidence on both sides, the jury, after a very short deliberation,
found the prisoner Guilty. His lordship immediately passed sentence of
death upon him, assuring him that he need not hope for mercy in this
world.


ELIZABETH DREW,
Tried for Robbery.

THIS singular trial took place at Cornwall, July the 26th, 1815, and
occupied the Court for a considerable time, during which the
spectators, the Bar, and the Bench, were convulsed with laughter.

Elizabeth Drew was indicted for robbing Thomas Martin of a watch, some
wearing apparel, &c. &c.

The prosecutor, who was an Irish seaman, with his arms folded, in an
erect though careless attitude, a smile of apparently invincible good
humour on his countenance, and every minute casting a significant
glance on the prisoner, answered the interrogatories of the Bench in a
language which his lordship declared to be wholly incomprehensible but
which was composed of technical phrases, delivered with a rather slight
brogue. In vain was it that he was desired to cut short his prolix
narrative: honest Tom Martin knew how to keep, but not to abridge, a
log-book; every interruption caused him to lose his reckoning, and he
found it easier to begin anew than to splice a broken story. He had
marked down every course he had steered, and every variation of wind
and weather he had experienced -- every port he had made, and every
harbour which he had anchored -- from the time he had embarked with the
prisoner to the hour of his appearance in court; and he would relate
the whole. He said he was armourer of the Severn frigate, and was in
Hamoaze in the beginning of the present month, when he got his long
liberty. He knew the prisoner; and why should he not? She washed for
him, and was a country girl of his own. He was surprised that the judge
did not know that long liberty lasted a month. The prisoner was on
board the Severn for four or five days before he got his long liberty,
and he told her he was going to spend it in Ireland. On her expressing
a wish also to visit her dear country, which she had not seen for three
years, he said he would pay her passage. This offer she accepted on
condition that one bed should serve them during their voyage; to which,
of course, he made no objection. Some smugglers coming on board, he
resolved to have a parting jollification with his messmates, and bought
half a gallon of rum. He had a hearty booze before he left the ship, so
that, when he came on shore, he was rather top-heavy. On coming to
North Corner he gave his companion two pounds to take her clothes out
of pawn; after which they shortened sail, and came-to at the second
public house on the right hand as you go up. Here they drank some beer,
and Tom got intoxicated, so that he determined to cast anchor, and take
a nap. However, having the same confidence in his country-girl as if
she had been his real wife, he gave her charge of his money, which
amounted to twenty-seven pounds, before he turned in to sleep. A
canvass bag, containing five white shirts, four pair of stockings, and
sundry other articles of wearing apparel, with a prayer-book, called
the 'Key of Paradise,' a pocketbook, and a green book that he used to
keep his accounts in, he left in the bar. He had his watch in his
pocket when he fell asleep.

The prisoner took the bag from the bar, his watch from his pocket, and
the lady even took his handkerchief from his neck, and put an old rag
in its place, not worth a penny. The watch was as good a watch as ever
went; she was worth ten guineas of any man's money. The seal and key
were gold; the chain was what is called composition, and he could not
tell what it was worth. But, after all, he wished his country-girl
should have fair play: he was sorry to come against a woman; he would
rather come against a man by ten degrees. Finding himself plundered, he
made inquiry for his companion, and he just got a sight of her in the
public house; but she gave him the double, and he saw her no more till,
after a long chase, he made her out at Callington. When he saw her he
clapped his hand on her shoulder this way (giving a specimen of his
mode of salutation by a smart slap on a gentleman's shoulder who sat
near the witnesses' box); but, said he, 'madam knew nothing about me;
she did not know me at all.' The manner in which he pronounced this,
with an arch smile on his countenance, pointing to the prisoner, and
casting a significant glance first on her, and then on the judge, would
have done honour to the most celebrated of the Thespian votaries; it
was one of the best pieces of comic acting we ever saw, and completely
overturned the gravity of the Bench, drawing a peal of laughter and
applause from a crowded Court. Order being restored, Tow Martin
proceeded with the same degree of sang froid. Having once got sight of
the chase, he was not to be baffled, but kept her close on board until
the constable, whom he had hailed on reaching Callington, had procured
a warrant. His ungrateful countrywoman, finding she could not give him
the double a second time, resolved to adopt soother manoeuvre, and,
desiring to be left alone with him, gave up the watch as a
peace-offering.

Being desired to produce the watch, Tom first hesitated, and then owned
that he had pawned it for two guineas, in order to prevent the
necessity of his going on hoard before his long liberty was expired; a
circumstance that he appeared most seriously to deprecate. His lordship
then asked what he had done with the double he said the prisoner had
given him. 'What did I do with it?' replied the witness, evidently much
amused at the misconception of the Bench; (his lordship supposed that
by double was meant a duplicate given by pawnbroker;) why I could do
nothing; she gave it to me entirely: But, as it is going as it is, I'll
out with the whole on her. This waistcoat on me, my lord'--

Judge.-- 'No matter about did waistcoat; it is not mentioned in the
indictment.'

     Witness.--'Ay; but I'll tell all about it.'

His lordship, however, would hear nothing about the waistcoat, and told
the witness he knew not what to make of his story; on which Tom replied
-- 'I believe, my lord, I've told it very fair; it is very fair
doctrine, and there is no Englishman but will understand what it
means.' His canvass bag, he said, was found at the prisoner's lodgings;
but the 'Key of Paradise,' and the rest of its contents, except a pair
of stockings, were gone,

His lordship summed up the evidence, as well as he could collect it
from the prosecutor; and the jury, not thinking that the things
produced were sufficiently identified, acquitted the prisoner.


WILLIAM BRADFORD
Executed for Forgery.

This unfortunate culprit was a young man, twenty-three years of age, of
most respectable connexions, and held a situation as clerk in the
Victualling Office, where he had various opportunities of becoming
acquainted with the forms of bills, as well as a correct knowledge of
the handwriting of those by whom they were usually signed.

Thoughtless extravagance plunged him into pecuniary difficulties, from
which he resolved to relieve himself by committing forgery. Desperate
and criminal as the resolution was, he carried it into effect by
fabricating a bill for eight hundred and sixty-eight pounds, nine
shillings, and sixpence, purporting to be drawn on the commissioners of
his majesty's Victualling Office by Robert Tieverton, purser of the
Acasto, and certified by Alexander Robert Kerr, the captain.

Bradford then procured an unsuspecting friend, named Williams, to carry
the bill for acceptance to the Victualling Office; and so well was it
executed, and every thing managed with such adroitness, that it passed
through all the necessary offices without exciting the least suspicion.
He next sent it to the Bank of England, and got it discounted.

Suspicion was, however, subsequently excited, and Bradford was taken
into custody. A fifty-pound note was found in his lodging, which turned
out to be one of those paid for the bill at the Bank: and eventually
every one of the notes was traced to his possession; even a ten-pound
note, with which he redeemed his watch, proved to have been one of
these.

The trial of this miserable young man came on at the Old Bailey,
October the 28th 1816, and lasted for five hours. The evidence was
conclusive, and he was accordingly found Guilty. When he was removing
from the bar he fainted, so great was the impression made upon him by
the verdict.

The efforts of his friends to procure a commutation of his sentence
proved unavailing, arid the law was left to take its course. On
December the 8th, he was visited by his two younger brothers, for the
purpose of taking leave of him; but when the hour of parting came,
their feelings were wound up to such a pitch, that the keepers with
difficulty separated them from the unhappy sufferer; and, even after
they had been taken from the cell, the younger brother clung to every
object in his way, exclaiming, in a dreadful paroxysm of grief, 'My
brother! oh, my unhappy brother!' At length they were tranquillized,
but did not quit the mansion of misery for some time.

During Tuesday night Bradford was attended by, the Rev. Mr. Budge, and
he appeared tranquil, joining most fervently in prayer with his friend.
In the course of the night he took a little negus, but it did not
remain on his stomach. He slept for about two hours, and afterwards
partook of some toast and water. The next morning, Wednesday, December
the 10th, 1816, being the time appointed for his execution, he was
brought, at eight o'clock, to the Press-yard, and disencumbered of his
irons: after which he walked with a firm step to the scaffold; and his
last words were  'O Lord, spare my soul; for I am a miserable sinner!'


ELIZABETH WOOLLERTON
Executed for Poisoning.

This wicked woman, unlike the unfortunate Eliza Fenning, had the crime
brought home to her, which she aggravated by attempting to throw the
charge upon her daughter.

Elizabeth Woollerton, the wife of a farmer, residing at Denton,
Norfolk, and the mother of nine children, was tried on a charge of
having mixed a certain quantity of arsenic in a cake, which cake she
sent as a present to her uncle, Tifford Clarke, Esq. on the 2d day of
July, 1816, thereby intending to kill him; and part of the said cake
being eaten by Robert Sparkes, son of Benjamin Sparkes, occasioned his
death.

Mr. Benjamin Lone, apothecary at Bungay, said that the prisoner had
purchased from him a quantity of arsenic on the 22d of June; also on a
prior occasion.

It was proved by the prisoner's daughters, who were admitted evidence
against her, that she had made the cake in question, and sent it to her
uncle. it further appeared that she stood indebted to her uncle in the
sum of two hundred pounds, and who intimated leaving her by his will a
further sum of five hundred pounds.

Mr. Clarke proved the having received cakes from the prisoner on a
former occasion, the eating of which had made him extremely ill, and in
consequence he desired her not to send him such cakes in future; and
for the reason alluded to he refused to eat of the cake in question.
The housekeeper of Mr. Clarke, upon this, unknowingly sent the poisoned
cake to her son-in-law, Sparkes, who had a family of five children.
Upon receipt of it, the mother of the deceased divided the cake into
equal portions for the children's breakfast next morning, previous to
their departure far school at an early hour. The youngest of these, a
boy six years old, was the first to eat his portion, which ultimately
proved fatal to him; the other four were dangerously ill, but by means
of timely assistance recovered, not having ate their full proportions:
owing to this circumstance, the eldest, a girl about twelve years old,
perceiving an acrid taste, took from her brothers and sisters that
which remained uneaten.

The surgeons who opened the body of the deceased proved, by means of
analyzation, that that part of the cake found in the stomach contained
arsenic, occasioning the death of the boy; and, in like manner, that
part of the cake which had not eaten. The prisoner, in her defence,
persisted in her innocence, after an attempt to throw it upon her
daughter, an interesting girl fourteen years of age! She was found
Guilty -- Death; and pursuant to her sentence was executed on Monday,
July 17, 1816, at Ipswich, amidst an immense crowd of spectators.


ELIZABETH HUNTER AND REBECCA JARVIS
Convicted of Roasting a Child.

THESE were worthy descendants of Mother Brownrigg, of notorious memory;
and, had not their wicked proceedings been fortunately interrupted, no
doubt they would have earned for themselves the fate of their infamous
predecessor in this unnatural species of cruelly.

Elizabeth Hunter, aged forty-six, resided in the parish of Barking, and
was in the habit of receiving parish children to nurse. Rebecca

     Jarvis aged twenty-one, was a servant in Hunter's employ.

Catherine Evans stated on the trial that she was in the habit of
washing and ironing clothes for the prisoner, and that on the morning
of the 24th of May she went at an early hour to look for work, when she
found Hunter chastising one of the children she had under her care,
whom she told to strip. The child did so, when Hunter and Jarvis bound
it hand and foot. Evans asked the former what she was going to do with
the child, when she replied that she was going to roast it. Evans
instantly apprized a neighbour, and they went together to Mrs.
Hunter's, whom they found with her servant holding the child stripped
before the fire. The child was very close, and cried out greatly. They
were so shocked at the sight that they ran out of the house; but
returned again, when the child was gone. Not being able to get a sight
of it, they went to the parish officers, and informed them of the
circumstance. Au officer was in consequence sent to take away the
child, who being found in a dangerous state, the perpetrators of the
cruel act were apprehended, and indicted at the Chelmsford assizes on
the 3d of August, 1816, when they were found Guilty, and Mrs. Hunter
was sentenced to eighteen months' imprisonment, and Rebecca Jarvis to
six, in the county gaol.


JEREMIAH GRANT
Executed for Burglary.

Illustration: Grant and his Companions attacked by the Military.

THE exploits of this celebrated Irish freebooter were fully equal to
those of the accomplished robber Duvell. Captain Grant was the son of a
poor peasant in the Queen's County, and early evinced a predilection
for the bread of idleness. His progress in literature was very
trifling; indeed it has been stated that he could neither read nor
write. His fertile genius, however, obviated this misfortune, and his
daring spirit triumphed over minor obstacles. He sallied out, before
the age of twenty, to levy contributions on the highway, and before he
was twenty-one a chosen band of followers hailed him Captain.

His depredations for several years were confined to his native county,
where his improvident liberality secured him the esteem and blessings
of the lower orders, while the terror of his name, and dread of his
vengeance, kept those of a higher rank in complete subjection to his
authority.

Like Rob Roy, he levied an annual tax on the farmers, which they
cheerfully paid, as it secured them from the nocturnal visits of his
followers; for Grant was a man of strict honour and a rigid
disciplinarian, who punished with severity any dereliction of duty in
his band.

Notwithstanding the offer of reward for his apprehension, Captain
Grant, as the country people called him, was to be seen at every fair
and pattern in the country, and had a more numerous acquaintance than
the village doctor. At every farmer's table he was welcome, and the
cottages that gave him shelter were sure of reward; for he freely
shared the contributions he obtained with danger.

With the ladies he was a second Macheath, and more wives than one
claimed him for their husband; and no wonder, for he was frequently
complimented, on his person and manner, by the mistresses of those
houses which he visited without the formality of an invitation. But it
must be observed that Grant never forgot his accustomed humanity and
politeness; and, unless when attacked by the police, he never did an
individual a personal injury. His behaviour always evinced a degree of
refinement above his education and birth; so much so, that even those
who suffered from his depredations never spoke of him but as an
accomplished villain.

His person was of the most elegant symmetry, and his agility
surprising. At rural games he had no rival; and he danced with so much
grace, that the country girls were often heard to wish he had not been
a robber.

His character at length grew so notorious in the Queen's County, that a
consultation of magistrates was held for the purpose of devising means
for his apprehension. In consequence of the measures they adopted
several of Grant's followers were brought to justice, and they died, as
their Captain expressed it, of the 'gallows fever.' . For some time his
knowledge of the country and the partiality of the peasantry towards
him, aided him in evading the pursuit which was made after him; but a
traitor was found, and Grant was delivered into the hands of the
Philistines.

The gentry of the country, and ladies of the first rank, crowded to the
gaol of Maryborough to see the 'bold outlaw,' which, it was supposed,
so much affected his sensibility, that he took his departure, one
night, from prison, through a window, having first contrived to cut the
bars that guarded it.

Dreading another specimen of the rudeness of the Irish aristocracy, he
prudently resolved to leave the Slieve-Bloom mountains, and, with the
remnant of his banditti, he removed to the wood of Killoughran, in the
county of Wexford, within four miles of the town of Enniscorthy. Here
he continued for some time, and made frequent visits to the
neighbouring towns, where he was known by the name of Cooney.

In the March of 1816 he made a journey to his native county, where he
robbed the house of Thom Cambie, Esq. of money and plate to a large
amount. Mrs. Cambie .was at home, and he behaved with so much
politeness, that she ordered him supper and wine. The captain, being
impatient of delay, applied his teeth to extract a cork from a bottle;
upon which the mistress observed 'it was a pity to spoil his fine white
teeth,' and immediately stood up and procured him a cork-screw. Grant,
on his departure, took the liberty to borrow Cambie's horse and gig, in
which he rode to his retreat in the wood of Killoughran.

The captain's occasional depredations in the county of Wexford excited
great alarm, for a robbery there then was a thing of very rare
occurrence. Notice was given of the banditti retreat, and Archibald
Jacob marched the military out of Enniscorthy and surrounded the wood.
Some of the soldiers and yeomanry penetrated the fastness, and in the
thickest part of the shade they discovered the 'Robber Chief,' and five
of his followers, on a bed of straw, situated in a romantic cave. The
freebooters defended themselves with desperate valour, and, ere they
surrendered, wounded five of the military. In the cave were found all
the utensils of housebreaking, and abundance of arms.

The captain was committed to Wexford gaol by the name of Cooney; but.
the evidence against him being doubtful, it was apprehended he would be
acquitted, when fortunately it was discovered that he was the
celebrated Captain Grant. The gaoler of Maryborough now claimed his
body, and he was forthwith transmitted to his former abode. This was
fortunate for the ends of justice; for it was discovered that on the
night of his removal he had matured a scheme of escape from the Wexford
gaol.

His trial came on at Maryborough August the 16th, 1816, when he was
found Guilty of the burglary in Mr. Cambie's house. To the question
'What reason he had why judgment and sentence of death should, not be
passed on him?' he replied in the most firm, collected, and, indeed,
feeling manner,-- 'My lord, I only beg of the Court some short time to
arrange things before my departure for another place; not in the idle
hope of escape or pardon, but to make restitution to the persons who
have suffered by my had line of life. I have been visited in my cell by
some blessed people, who have, thank God. given this turn to my mind,
and to which I implore your lordship's attention.'

Grant's conduct throughout the trial was firm and collected, and was
spoken of by the judge in terms of melancholy approbation.

Sufficient time was allowed him to make the arrangements he wished,
after which he met his fate with decent fortitude and pious
resignation, at Mary borough, August the 29th, 1816.


JAMES MARSH
Executed for Murder.

THIS was a most hardened and deliberate murderer, and had the audacity
as well as wickedness to face his God with 'all his. sins upon his
head,' and no 'preparation made.'

James Marsh and a man named Parsons lived in the employ of Mr. Metford,
of Glastonbury, in Somersetshire. One Saturday morning, Parsons was
going, as usual, for the purpose of paying the spinners of Mr. Metford
their wages, and carrying in his cart a supply of work for the ensuing
week. He was assisted in loading the cart by Marsh, who afterwards
followed him on the road towards Wells. On his way he provided himself
with the bone of a horse's leg, and got permission of Parsons to ride
with him in the cart.

At a moment when Parsons was offering him a pinch of snuff, he knocked
him down with the bone, repeated his blows and afterwards cut his
throat. He was immediately after detected in endeavouring to hide the
body. He fled instantly, but, being closely pursued, was apprehended,
and confessed the murder.

The deceased had twelve pounds of his master's money; and this sum, it
was supposed, tempted the wretch Marsh to take away his life, as he was
in want of money to provide for his wedding, which was appointed to
take place the ensuing week. This money was found on him.

For this dreadful deed he was brought to trial at the Spring assizes
for Somersetshire, in 1816, when he was found Guilty, and ordered for
execution.

From the time of his apprehension Marsh appeared quite insensible to
the enormity of his crime, and behaved in the most hardened and
audacious manner. He confessed his crime to the chaplain; but assigned
no reason for it. On arriving at the fatal spot, finding the chaplain
about to call him to prayers, he said 'No, I shall say no more -- where
is the man? (meaning the executioner;) I am ready.' He was, however,
prevailed on to join in prayer, after which he again called for 'the
man,' and frequently repeated 'Make haste, I am ready.'

Thus perished this desperate murderer, in the 26th year of his age. He
was a good-looking man, and of a mild countenance; not at all
indicating the dreadful depravity of his mind.


THOMAS CARSON
Condemned for the Murder of C. Cassidy, but escaped by changing clothes
with his brother.

THE Irish, though seldom successful on the stage, are nevertheless
capital actors, but generally give to tragic parts a comic effect. The
following case of successful adroitness is only one out of many such
tricks played off through the prisons of that country. Similar cases
have frequently occurred, and a few years before this period two
convicts made their escape the same day, unknown to each other, out of
Wexford gaol.

Thomas Carson, and his brother John, were tried at the Meath assizes in
the spring of 1816, for the wilful murder of a man named Cassidy. The
Carsons belonged to a corps of yeomen, that is, a kind of local
militia, and, being Protestants, were thus privileged to carry arms. Of
these, however, they made a bad use, and turned them against one of his
majesty's subjects, named Cassidy, whose life they took away, through
wanton cruelty, in 1800, in Kilmainham Wood, in the county of Meath.
John was acquitted; but Thomas Carson was found Guilty, and ordered for
execution on the following Friday morning, at one o'clock.

At five o'clock on Friday morning a brother of the prisoner went to see
the unhappy culprit, and informed the gaoler that Mr. Wainwright, the
clergyman would attend in a short lime to pray with, and administer the
sacrament to, his brother. The judge had, from humanity, directed that
his relations should have free access to the prisoner, so that his
brother was permitted to go into the condemned cell to him. Some time
after the gaoler entered the cell, and said that the time was very
abort, and, if the clergyman was expected, they had better send for
him. The brother offered to go for him, and accordingly did. Shortly
after Mr. Wainwright came; and being shown into the cell, continued a
long time in prayer with the prisoner. The time of execution
approaching the gaoler came in accompanied by the prisoner's uncle. The
clergyman told the prisoner he had no time to lose -- that his uncle
had come, and would communicate with him in the administration of the
sacrament. The prisoner entreated to be allowed to pray a little
longer, and appeared absorbed in devotion. At length the gaoler
becoming quite impatient, he rose from the straw on which he was
kneeling, and welcomed his uncle. The latter instantly exclaimed, Good
God! how grief has altered him! -- this cannot be Tommy!' and, looking
nearer No, said he 'this is Anthony Carson!' The clergyman was amazed
-- the gaoler ran down stairs, and discovered that the person whom he
had sent for the clergyman was no other than the convict himself, who
had not thought proper to return.

Coming back into his cell, the gaoler cried out in a rage, 'Your
brother is gone off! what shall I do? I am ruined!' 'Gone off!' cried
Anthony, with great surprise; 'Oh! he has taken away my big coat!'

The two brothers served in the same corps, and were so alike in
appearance that Anthony came to the prison in a frieze great coat,
which he gave to the convict, who, thus disguised, passed all the doors
of the prison, and walked deliberately into the street, from whence, in
great apparent affliction, he looked up at the preparation for
execution, and passed on as if to Mr. Wainwright's house.

Diligent search was made for the fugitive, but without effect. The
brother was detained, but the extent of his crime was a misdemeanour.


CAPTAIN GEORGE HARROWER
Convicted of Bigamy.

ALTHOUGH the conduct of Captain Harrower was far from blameless, yet we
have no hesitation in pronouncing him a 'man more sinned against than
sinning.' He met treachery, in more instances than one, where he had a
right to expect gratitude; and was prosecuted by him who should, for
many considerations, have been his friend.

The captain's conduct, even from the most fastidious, admits of many
palliations. His first wife might be said to be, though not physically,
morally dead, and his treatment of his second seems to have been
honourable, kind, and tender; for she reprobated his prosecution, and
continued to perform towards him, even after accusation, all the
offices of an affectionate wife. But, whatever censure may be cast upon
him, it was not for the ungrateful father of his second wife to drag
him to a court of justice, in the hope of transporting him from his
country, for the base purpose of revenge or lucre, at the expense of
his daughter's happiness.

At the Old Bailey sessions, February the 17th, 1816, Captain George
Harrower was indicted for having married one Susannah Anne Giblett, on
the 12th of October, 1812, his former wife, Mary Usher, being then
living.

It appeared in evidence that the captain was married at Bombay, in
1794, to Mary Usher, who afterwards becoming a lunatic, he was obliged,
on leaving that country, to leave behind him.

After residing some years in this country, and feeling conscious that
the unfortunate state in which his wife remained at Bombay precluded
the possibility of his ever seeing her again, he resolved on marrying
Miss Susannah Giblett, the daughter of a butcher in Bond Street, which
he did on the 12th of October, 1813, with whom he lived in perfect
happiness.

The circumstance of his former marriage, however, coming to the ears of
his father-in-law, Giblett, the latter took advantage of it to obtain
money from Harrower, who, in his defence, adverted to the period when
he had the misfortune to become known to the prosecutor, Giblett, who,
in draining him of his purse, and instituting proceedings against his
liberty and character, had left him but one consolation, an amiable and
beloved wife, unfortunately the daughter of the worst of men. The
prosecution, he said, was the result of a foul and infamous conspiracy,
and not that of a desire to support the laws of the country, or to
punish those who transgressed them. He had been introduced to Giblett
in an unguarded way, and, feeling a consciousness of his own integrity,
did not suspect a contrary principle to prevail in him. After the
acquaintance between them was matured, he married his daughter, upon
whom he settled a jointure of ten thousand pounds. He afterwards lent
Gibbett sums of money amounting to seventeen thousand pounds; and
further sums, which raised the whole of what Giblett had succeeded in
drawing from him to more than thirty thousand pounds. In fact, he had
not only deprived him (Capt. Harrower) of all the money he could by
possibility extract, but he had robbed his own daughter of the ten
thousand pounds which had been settled upon her. Every means was used
by Giblett to cause his wife to leave him, and live at home with
himself, when he offered to give up certain apartments in his house for
her accommodation; adding, that they would be able to get the whole of
the money to themselves, and he (Captain Harrower) 'might go and
starve.' These proposals, however, were always uniformly and
indignantly refused by his wife. He alluded to the commission of
bankruptcy which had been issued against Giblett, by which he had
contrived to defraud him of his money, and mentioned a circumstance
which that person had been heard to declare, namely, 'that he would try
and get the money into Chancery, if other designs failed of depriving
him of the property.' He went into a variety of other statements, the
object of which was to represent Giblett to be a character of the worst
description; a character such as he never thought existed in England,
and as he trusted never would be found in it again. He concluded by
protesting his innocence, and trusting that the Court would rescue him
from the infamous plot which had been laid against him, and restore him
to the arms of a beloved and only partner.

The jury, after retiring half an hour, brought in a verdict of Guilty.
but strongly recommended the prisoner to mercy.

The laudable recommendation of the jury was subsequently attended to,
and Captain Harrower, after a short confinement, was restored to
society, and the arms of her who at least deserved to be his wife.

In less than two years afterwards Giblett was committed to Newgate, and
confined to the apartment which Captain Harrower had occupied, for not
giving satisfactory answers to the commissioners, on his bankruptcy.


SUSANNAH HOLROYD
Executed for Poisoning her Husband and Two Children.

THIS is a most shocking case, and shows to what an extent human
depravity may be carried. Susannah Holroyd was the wife of a weaver,
named Matthew Holroyd, who had the misfortune not to live on good terms
with her, though they had three children. She was in the habit of
nursing illegitimate children, and at the time of poisoning had one of
these in the house, as well as its mother. About a fortnight previous
to the horrid deed she had a very extraordinary conversation with this
woman, whose name was Mary Newton. She told her that she had had her
fortune read, and that in the course of one week, and within the period
of the ensuing six weeks, three funerals would go from her door.

She did not delay her destined purpose, however, until the six weeks of
the fortune-teller had expired; for in about a month afterwards she
went to the shop of a chymist, and purchased an ounce and a half of
arsenic, to fulfil the prophecy.

This happened on Saturday, the 13th of April, 1816, being Easter-Eve.
Next morning her husband had some coffee for his breakfast, and soon
after became ill. The children were likewise affected. To restore them
she prepared some water-gruel, and in it she mixed the poison. The
wretched man felt that the gruel had an uncommon taste, and at first
refused to take it; but she urged him so strongly, by telling him that
it was 'the last gruel she ever would prepare for him,' that he
complied with her entreaties, not knowing the enigma hid under these
words.

As he grew worse, she called in a doctor, the better to allay
suspicion, and was intrusted by the physician with the remedies to be
administered; but she refused to apply them, saying 'her husband would
die.'

The wretched man died on the 18th following, and his son, a boy of
eight years old, survived him only six hours, and the child of Mary
Newton died the Tuesday following, in great agony.

This wicked woman was now apprehended, and on being brought before a
magistrate, made an unreserved confession of her guilt.

Her trial came on at the Lancaster assizes, September the 13th, 1816,
when she was found Guilty on the clearest evidence, and the judge
pronounced on her the awful sentence of the law, ordering her for
execution on the following Monday. She evinced throughout her trial the
greatest indifference to her situation; but on hearing her sentence she
appeared somewhat affected.

In addition to the horror felt at her crime, there was a pretty general
belief that, in her occupation of nursing illegitimate children, she
had murdered, at different times, several infants in the same manner
that she had taken away the life of her husband and the other two
victims of her unprovoked malice.


GEORGE VAUGHAN, ROBERT MACKEY, AND GEORGE BROWN
Convicted of a Conspiracy.

WHILE the lord-mayor was detecting the 'men of blood' in the city the
magistrates at Bow Street were not less meritoriously employed in
tracing similar crimes to a police-officer, named Vaughan, and several
others not immediately employed by the magistrates, but who were well
known as loungers about the different offices. Several of these
atrocious wretches were apprehended, and many revolting circumstances
disclosed.

George Vaughan, Robert Mackey and George Brown, were tried at the
Middlesex sessions, on the 21st of September, 1816, on a charge of
conspiring to induce William Hurley, Michael Hurley, William Sanderson,
William Wood, aged thirteen, and Dennis Hurley, to commit a burglary in
the house of Mrs. M'Donald, at Hoxton; arid, by having them convicted
of the fact, thereby procure for themselves the rewards given by
parliament for the conviction of housebreakers.

It appeared on the trial that Drake,[*see note] who had been au acting
lieutenant in the navy, had been introduced by Mackey to Vaughan, when
the latter proposed that Sanderson and the others should commit a
burglary at the house of a friend of his in Gray's Inn Lane. Drake
accordingly spoke to Sanderson and the others, who agreed to do it.
This he communicated to Vaughan and Mackey, and they went to Brown's
house to talk over the matter. About eleven at night Drake went with
the men to the house which was to he robbed, but which they could not
effect in consequence of the watchman. Some time after, the burglary in
Mrs. M'Donald's house was planned, for which Vaughan found the money.
Brown kept Mrs. M'Donald out of the way, and Drake took the five men to
the house, when Vaughan and Mackey came up, and took the men into
custody. Vaughan had promised Drake part of the rewards.

Various witnesses were examined, who proved the facts against the
prisoners, and Mackey made a full confession, which exposed the
nefarious conduct of the conspirators, and stated that Vaughan
furnished the skeleton-keys and crow-bar which was used at Mrs.
M'Donald's.

The prisoners being found guilty, the Court sentenced them to five
years' imprisonment in the House of Correction, and at the expiration
of that time to find security for three years, themselves in eighty
pounds, and two sureties in forty pounds each. Vaughan was tried two
days afterwards, with John Donnelly. The latter for burglariously
breaking into the house of James Poole, and stealing therein thirty
yards of cloth; and the former for counselling, aiding, and abetting
him in the same, on the 16th of December, 1815. On which charge both
prisoners were found Guilty.

*Note: William Drake, the accomplice and evidence against Vaughan in
one of his exploits, is a person whom the town loungers and treasurers
of electioneering anecdotes will recognise as an accuser of the late
Mr. Sheridan, whose natural daughter he married. It seemed that Drake
forged a certificate from that gentleman, while Treasurer of the Navy,
recommending a Jew slopseller to the captains of ships of war, for
which he obtained five guineas, or thereabouts. This affair Drake made
known to Mr. Paull; and by means of a petition of the latter to the
House of Commons against Mr. Sheridan's return for Westminster, an
investigation took place, when it plainly appeared that Drake had taken
advantage of his known connexion with Mr. Sheridan to sell a forged
recommendation, and afterwards, in revenge for merited neglect, had
attempted to prove him corrupt, by means of his own forgery, offering
his services to Mr. Paull, who was his dupe, for that express purpose.
The extreme contemptibility of this man, and that of another reptile
with whom he was connected, were so apparent to the house, that Drake
was, by unanimous vote, committed to Newgate, and the whole business
fell to the ground. He said he had lost his leg at Camperdown -- it was
not true: that he had half a dozen pensions for services -- he had only
one from the Greenwich chest. His time, place, and circumstances, with
respect to the immediate subject of his evidence, were nearly all
proved false; and, in short, he was altogether disregarded as a
dissolute and abandoned character. His real history proved him to be a
young man whom an unfortunate accident injured in his professional
career, and who had consequently fallen into idleness and bad company.
His utter degradation at present it is unnecessary to dwell upon,
presenting, as he does, the horrible picture of superior address and
cunning prostituted to the vilest purposes. And hence another feature
of the blood-money system; the friends it creates are all of the
specious Belial kind -- creatures who possess talents to concert means
and ends with exceeding plausibility. The necessity of making such men
as Drake witnesses, too, grows out of it; for though it fortunately
happens in the present case that his evidence is fully supported, the
indecency of this exhibition, combined with impunity to so much
wickedness, produces a sensation of moral loathing, which saps the
foundation of general philanthropy and good will to mankind.-- W. Hone.


ROGER O'CONNOR, ESQ.
Indicted for Robbing the Mail.

THIS gentleman, though of retired habits, has had the misfortune to be
almost perpetually before the public, and sometimes in situations and
under circumstances very inconsistent with his rank or fortune.
Although Mr. O'Connor has been most honourably acquitted on more
occasions than one, we shall make no apology for introducing his case
here; for, as all men are liable to be accused of malpractices, it is
satisfactory to know, that there is but one legal ordeal for the high
and the low, through which they may expect to come off honourably, if
not guilty.

Mr. O'Connor traces his ancestry to the last king of Ireland, and has
uniformly evinced an extraordinary attachment to his native country.
Whether the links of genealogy are unbroken or not is of little
consequence; for the individual must be judged by his actions, and not
by his name or pretensions. Mr. O'Connor, though not an Irish monarch,
which some of his countrymen say he ought to be,*[see note 1] is
certainly an independent Irishman. His education was that of a
gentleman; his profession that of the law; and his fortune ample, being
at least four thousand pounds a year.

The reader may recollect the case of Arthur O'Connor, which we have
already given. That gentleman was brother to the subject of this
sketch; and the principles for which Arthur was prosecuted were
supposed to be those of his elder brother, Roger. Accordingly we find
him apprehended, on the suspicion of treason, at his seat of
Connor-ville in the county of Cork, in 1796, and from that year to 1803
he may be said to have been a state prisoner; for he was no sooner
liberated than he was again arrested, and passed, a state shuttlecock,
several times between the Irish and English ministers.

During these peregrinations he displayed great firmness, and, on the
coast of Ireland, actually saved the lives of the officers in whose
custody he was. Refusing the terms accepted by his brother, and the
other state prisoners, in 1798 he was transmitted to Fort George, in
Scotland, and, at length, was liberated from prison, on condition that
he should reside in Middlesex, for the absurd timidity of the
government apprehended his influence in Ireland too much to permit his
return; and when they did comply with his earnest solicitations, it was
on condition that he should not visit the south, where his name was
supposed to be a tower of strength.

In consequence of this prohibition Mr. O'Connor had to dispose of his
family mansion, and choose another place of residence. He became the
purchaser of Dangan, in the county of Meath, the estate of the Marquis
of Wellesley, where he continued to live engaged in agriculture and
literary pursuits, never mixing in politics; and, although the intimate
friend of Sir Francis Burdett, he has never appeared to give either the
baronet or his friends any support, though possessed of large property
in England.

O'Connor was what is called in Ireland a marked man; that is, he was
one whose movements the minions of power watched closely, and,
consequently, in a country where the gentry are all connected with the
powers that be, he was not regarded with much respect. Almost every
assizes exhibited a case in which O'Connor was either a witness, a
plaintiff, or a defendant; and wherever his name appeared, angry
discussion was sure to follow, though his fearless independence, and
well-known courage, kept it within proper bounds.

For several years his name, except when introduced at the assizes, was
almost forgotten, until the year 1817, when a most extraordinary charge
was exhibited against him; nothing less than an accusation of having
robbed the Galway mail five years before.

Two notorious characters, named Owen and Waring, were apprehended for a
robbery in 1817, tried in Dublin, and found guilty. They received
sentence of death, and the day of execution was appointed; but before
the fatal hour arrived they charged Mr. O'Connor with being the captain
of the banditti who had robbed the Galway mail. The circumstances which
they detailed were so minute, that O'Connor was apprehended, and the
two approvers received the royal pardon, to qualify them as witnesses
against the persons accused, for O'Connor's steward, named M'Keon, was
also included in the charge.

The robbery of the Galway mail had taken place in 1812, ten miles from
O'Connor's residence at Dangan; but the mail-bags, and some of the
fire-arms, were subsequently found in the demesne, a circumstance
which, when combined with others,*[see note 2] served to give a
probability to the charge of Owen and Waring.

The arrest of O'Connor upon such a base charge produced au
extraordinary sensation, not only in Ireland, but in England, which was
considerably heightened by an address from that gentleman, then in
Newgate, entitled "Third Attempt upon the Life of O'Connor." In this
pamphlet he attributes, perhaps justly, the prosecution to a conspiracy
against his life; but when he insinuates that government, from
political motives, brought all their power and influence to give effect
to the charge, we can hardly suppose it possible, though we are ready
to admit that the gentlemen of the post-office, as they were bound to
do, supposing him guilty, did all in their power to convict him.

Mr. O'Connor's trial came on at Trim, August the 6th, 1817, the
prisoner having been removed thither, by habeas corpus, from Newgate.
The court was crowded to excess, and O'Connor, with his friend Sir
Francis Burdett, were allowed to sit within the bar.

Several witnesses having proved the robbery of the mail on the 2d of
October, 1812, and the conviction of Richard Waring for the said
robbery, Michael Owen, the chief informer, was called.

He stated that he had been a labourer in the employ of Mr. O'Connor, at
Dangan, and that previous to the robbery he was asked by his master if
he would join in robbing the Galway mail; he said that he would; and
that Mr. O'Conner procured him and others arms; that they repaired to
the turnpike gate at Cappagh Hill, stopped the mail, shot the guards,
and robbed the coach and passengers; that on their arrival at Dangan
Mr. O'Connor met them -- hoped they had had 'good luck,' and then in a
private part of the demesne proceeded to divide the booty, which
amounted to three hundred and fifty pounds each -- that O'Connor took
his portion, and obtained two hundred pounds more from two of the
robbers, to whom he had afforded previous protection.

Owen further stated he had been twice tried for the robbery -- once on
the capital charge, and at another time for passing some of the stolen
notes; that he had been recently found guilty of a robbery in the
county of Dublin, and sentenced to death, and that he obtained his
pardon for having given information against Mr. O'Connor. On his
cross-examination he admitted that he could not tell the number of
robberies he had committed, they were so many.

After the examination of other witnesses, Sir Francis Burdett deposed
to his knowledge of the prisoner, to whom he gave a high character for
honour, principle, and integrity. The jury, without retiring, gave a
verdict of -- Not Guilty, and the court rang with approbation.

'I have suffered mach.' said O'Connor, 'What what would I not suffer
for a day like this?'

Mr. O'Connor, being thus triumphantly acquitted, commenced a
prosecution of Waring for perjury. Waring's trial came on at Greets
Street, Dublin, October the 30th 1817; and the post-office, as if still
believing in his statement, employed the most eminent counsel to defend
him. From Mr. O'Connor's evidence it appeared that he had more than
once given Owen and Waring good characters, when on their trial for
robberies; and it was proved that he had evinced great solicitude fur
them at one of the Trim assizes. This suspicious attachment of Mr.
O'Connor for such abandoned ruffians as murderers and mail-coach
robbers produced its effect upon the jury; but what helped to throw
complete discredit on Mr. O'Connor's evidence was the fact, elicited on
his cross-examination, that he did not believe in the Jewish
dispensation, or the Christian atonement. This acknowledgment of his
infidel opinions created a buzz of disapprobation; and, when the
acquittal of the prisoner was announced, it seemed to give great
satisfaction: so fickle is the opinion of the multitude, that a word
will convert their applause into condemnation!

In this case there appears something very strange and unsatisfactory;
but, as we are unable to penetrate the mystery which must for ever
environ it, we leave our readers to draw their own conclusions. One
word, however, is necessary. Mr. O'Connor was acquitted by a jury, and
is therefore to be considered innocent; while it is very possible that
his apparent solicitude for such wretches as Owen and Waring might have
arisen from the purest humanity, and active friendship for the
unfortunate portion of his countrymen, with whose destiny he boasts to
have connected himself. At all events, let it not be supposed that we
'set down aught in malice,' either in respect to Mr. O'Connor or his
prosecutors.

Since 1817 Mr. O'Connor has published the 'Chronicles of Eri,' and, if
we believe himself, he was, at the time of his trial, engaged on a work
on the Bible. It has not yet appeared, and, it is to be hoped, never
will.

*Note 1: In a humorous little work, lately published by Mr. Moore,
entitled, 'Memoirs of Captain Rock,' the etymology of the name is thus
accounted for: R for Roger, O C for O'Connor, and K for King. e. Roger
O'Connor King. This is a double-edged satire, for it ridicules at once
the supposed pretensions of the individual, and the folly of
etymologists.

*Note 2: An extraordinary robbery took place at Dangan in 1813. We
extract the particulars from the Irish papers, and can vouch for their
authenticity; for they were afterwards fully proved in evidence when an
action was brought to recover the sum lost from the county:--
'Mr. Roger O'Connor, of Dangan, in the county of Meath, for which place
he pays an annual rent of one thousand five hundred pounds to Colonel
Burrowes, who resides in London, has been in the habit of refusing to
pay his rent at any place but on the premises. A Mr. Francis Gregory,
agent to Colonel Burrowes, after some preliminary discussion with Mr.
O'Connor, employed Mr. Doyle, postmaster of Trim, to receive the latter
half-year's rent. On the 28th ult. Mr. Doyle went to Dangan for this
purpose: at the gate he was accosted by a person, who said he was
stationed there to give Mr. O'Connor immediate notice of his approach;
and Mr. Doyle followed him into the house, where he found Mr. O'Connor
and his Son Roderick; when Mr. Doyle entered, O'Connor desired his son
to withdraw. He then proceeded to pay Mr. Doyle the rent, amounting to
seven hundred and fifty pounds, and which was chiefly in one-pound
notes. Mr. Doyle observed upon the inconvenience of that mode of
payment, and requested the use of pen and ink to mark the notes. This
was refused: Mr. Doyle, after counting the notes, left the house -- and
within thirty yards of it, and before he had got to the stable, he was
attacked from behind by two persons in disguise, whose faces were
masked; they knocked him down, tied a handkerchief over his face,
robbed him of the money he had just received, and some silver of his
own; having bound his legs with a cord, and forced a sack over his
head, they left him. During the whole transaction, the robbers never
uttered a word. No person whatever having come to his assistance, Mr.
Doyle remained for some time before he was able to extricate himself.
On his return to the house he saw a lady, to whom he mentioned how he
had been treated. Shortly after Mr. O'Connor arrived. who expressed
great surprise at the robbery. Mr. Doyle then took his departure. The
robbery been committed at eleven o'clock in the day, the necessary
steps are in progress to levy the money upon the county of Meath. We
have every reliance that the gentlemen of that vicinity will use their
best exertions to discover the persons engaged in this most mysterious
transaction.'


PATRICK DEVANN.
Executed for the Murder of the Lynch Family in Wildgoose Lodge.

Illustration: The Attack on the Lynch Family

In the county of Louth in Ireland, and at the distance of about nine
miles from the town of Dundalk, stood some years ago a house called
Wild-Goose Lodge -- a name conferred upon it from its whimsically
chosen situation on a small peninsula jutting into a marsh meadow,
which was occasionally transformed into a lake by the winter floods of
the Louth. In summer, the residence was reached from the meadow without
difficulty; but during winter, the case was very different, it being
then approachable only by a narrow neck of land hemmed in by the
surrounding waters. At a period to which we refer, Wild-Goose Lodge was
tenanted by an industrious man, name Lynch, and his family. Lynch had
been successful in improving a few fields attached to his dwelling, and
somewhat elevated above the yearly inundations; he was in the habit
also of raising a considerable quantity of flax, which he manufactured
into cloth, and carried to the adjoining markets of Dundalk or Newry,
where it was readily sold to advantage. By these means he rose in
respectability among his neighbours, and comfort and contentment smiled
around his dwelling. But an evil hour came, and he himself was
unhappily in some measure instrumental in bringing it on.

An illegal association, bound by secret oaths, sprung up among the
Roman Catholics living around Wild-Goose Lodge. Lynch, though a
moderate man, believed that such a combination, on the part of those
who held the same opinions with himself, was necessary to counteract
similar demonstrations on the opposite or Protestant side, and he
therefore joined the association. A very short time sufficed to show
him the imprudence of his conduct. Wild-Goose Lodge was a central point
in a remote and secluded district; and the members of the association,
not without the countenance at first of the occupier, began to make the
house their usual point of assemblage. Their numbers, however, speedily
increased so much as to submit the family to great inconvenience; and
their views, besides, so far exceeded Lynch's own in violence, as to
place him under just apprehensions lest he should be held as the
leading promoter of all that might be said or done by those who made
his dwelling their nightly haunt. Forced to act, in this dilemma, for
the sake of himself and his family, he came to the resolution of
desiring his neighbours to assemble no more under his roof. This
interdict excited a strong feeling of ill-will against him among the
leaders of the combination, and they afterwards habitually gave him
every annoyance they could think of, with the view of ejecting him from
the place.

Once liberated, in some degree, from the consequences of his
imprudence, Lynch persisted in the line of conduct he had entered upon.
The result was, that one night a party of men, disguised, entered his
house, stripped him in presence of his family, and after flogging him,
destroyed his furniture, insulted his wife, and cut the web in the loom
from the one selvage thread to the other down to the beam on which it
rested. These wanton injuries to an honest, industrious, and (leaving
aside his junction of an illegal union) well-conducted man, were
galling and hard to bear. Lynch was the husband of an amiable,
affectionate wife, and the father of a young family, depending on him
for subsistence. If he did bear it in silence, further injuries might
follow, and himself, with the wife of his bosom and his helpless babes,
be deprived of their all, and thrown upon the world to beg for
subsistence. Again, to denounce those with whom he had joined in an
oath, was a proceeding not only full of danger, but to which Lynch
could with difficulty bring his mind. Anxious and irresolute, he
appealed to the minister of his religion for protection, but it was of
no avail. His midnight persecutors continued to harass him; and at
last, seeing the ruin of his family inevitable, unless he bestirred
himself, and being able to point out and identify those who had injured
him, Lynch determined to brave the anger of his assailants, and appeal
to the laws of his country. Having formed this resolution, he held to
it, in spite of the most awful and ominous endeavours to intimidate
him; and two of the party, who had attacked his house, were prosecuted,
convicted, and suffered death.

Terrible was the wrath of the secret associates, among whom it chanced
there were some men of such characters as are happily rarely to be met
with in the world. One of the oaths taken by this body was, that no one
member should bring another before the bar of justice. Certainly this
oath, bad as it was in every sense, never contemplated that one member
was not to resent the gross injuries done to him by another. But, as
might have been anticipated from the previous exhibition of feeling,
Lynch was held, in the strongest sense of the word, to have violated
the oaths he had taken.

Not far from Wild-Goose Lodge stood a chapel, where the association met
after the ejection of its members from the house of Lynch. The leading
man of the body, Patrick or Paddy Devann, was clerk to the priest of
the district, and had the charge of the chapel. Within this building,
consecrated for widely different purposes, the midnight band assembled
on a night destined by the leaders of the party for the destruction of
the unfortunate Lynch. Devann, the principal agent in the scene, in
order to make a deeper impression on the minds of the crowds present in
the chapel, assembled them around the altar, and after administering an
oath of secrecy to them, descanted on the falling off of Lynch, and the
necessity of suppressing all defections among themselves. He then
darkly hinted the object of the meeting to be Lynch's punishment, and
hoped that it would serve as a warning to them all to be firm to the
obligations on which they had entered, and true to the interest of the
body. Having finished his address, Devann then lifted from before the
altar a potsherd containing a piece of burning turf, and, moving from
the chapel, desired them to follow him.

Some scores of the band were on horseback, having come from distant
places at the imperative summons sent to them. Many more were on foot;
and all these moved stealthily onwards, Devann preceding them, towards
the devoted victim. To the credit of human nature it must be stated,
that few of this numerous party had the slightest idea of what was
intended by the originators of the movement. As the men went along,
they were inquiring among themselves in whispers, what was to be done;
even those who had heard Devann's threats did not believe that they
would be enforced, or that any further injury would be done than had
been inflicted before.

Silence reigned along the party's route, as they approached the abode
of the unoffending, unsuspecting, and sleeping family.

While the majority of the persons present still remained ignorant of
what was to be accomplished, but obeyed their leaders passively, an
extensive circle of men was formed by Devann's directions around the
devoted dwelling. Then those few who were aware of all the enormity of
the project, crept forward along the ground towards the house, the pike
in one hand and the lighted turf in the other. Well did the wretches
know that there was no chance of escape for those within, for the house
was filled with the flax by which poor Lynch made his bread; and as
soon as it was caught by the flame, extinction was a thing next to
impossible. The turfs were applied, and in a few minutes the house was
on fire -- with a family of thirteen souls beneath its blazing roof!
The flames rose towards the sky, and illuminated the adjacent scene.
Speedily were heard from within the supplicating cries .of the
miserable victims, "Mercy! for God's sake, mercy!" But the cry was
vain. So far from evincing any feelings of compunction while the work
of destruction was going on, the wretches who had caused it stood ready
with their pikes to thrust back those who might attempt to escape. One
attempt was made to move their pity; and had the men hearts, they must
have been moved. The wife of Lynch, while her own body was already
enveloped in flames, had endeavoured to preserve the infant at her
breast, and she appeared at the windows, content to die herself, but
holding out her child for mercy and protection. Frantically she threw
it from her. And how was it received? On the points of pikes, and
instantly tossed back into the burning ruins, into which at the same
time sunk its hapless mother. One other only of those within, and this
was a man, one of Lynch's assistants, appeared on the walls, beseeching
for mercy; but he likewise received none. The veins of his face were
visible, swollen like cords, and horror was painted on his whole
aspect. He, and all who were within, perished. Lynch himself, either
cut off early, or resigned to his fate, never appeared, either to
denounce the act of his persecutors, or to supplicate their pity.

It is impossible to say with what feelings the main party encircling
the house at a little distance beheld the consummation of the purposes
of the night. The majority of them certainly felt horror, while others,
in whose mind a blind hatred of Lynch was predominant, felt mingled
sensations of horror and exultation; and the conjoined feelings
expended them selves in cries, that were re-echoed by the groans of the
victims. The terrified peasantry of the neighbourhood who had not
joined the associated throng, started from their pillows, and gazed
towards the ascending flames of Wild-Goose Lodge with fear and
shrinking; for they too well knew the feelings of the district to
regard it as a common accident, which it would have been their duty and
their pleasure to have aided in suppressing and relieving. Until all
sounds of life, therefore, were extinct within the burning house, the
authors of the deed looked on undisturbed. When all was over, they
skulked away, each to his own home.

The winds of autumn and the storms of winter had swept the ashes of
Wild-Goose Lodge over the fields which Lynch had cultivated, ere any
one of the actors in this atrocious crime was brought to justice. But
the presence of some of the less guilty of them having been discovered,
and brought home beyond a doubt, these, in order to save themselves,
made a revelation of all they knew and had seen. Anticipating this, the
ringleaders fled to various parts of the country; but the arm of the
offended law overtook them. Devann was found in the situation of a
labourer in the dockyards of Dublin, and others were taken at different
times and places. Eleven were executed; and to mark the atrocity of
their crime, their bodies were hung in chains at Louth and other spots
in the neighbour hood of Wild-Goose Lodge. Devann was executed within
the roofless walls of the house in which his victims were immolated,
and his body was afterwards suspended beside those of his associates.

The date of his trial was the 19th of July 1817, and he was executed
immediately afterwards.


JAMES HARRY, ALIAS HARRIS
Executed for the Murder of his Wife.

GUILT was brought home to this man by a succession of circumstances
which at once established his crime, and showed the finger of
Providence visibly pointing out the murderer, whose deep-laid schemes
of secrecy could not shelter him from the punishment awarded by
justice.

Harry, alias Harris, lived in the parish of Dixtone, in Monmouthshire.
For fourteen years he had been from home, and during his absence his
wife supported herself by attending women lying-in and by sewing. After
his return they lived very unhappily; it appeared that the wife had a
most aggravating tongue, and Harry was not blessed with much patience.

On Sunday, the 30th of March, 1817, Mrs. Harry was seen, as usual, at
church, and subsequently at her own cottage, dressed in her accustomed
gown, shawl, &c.: but next morning she was missing. Harry said she had
been called up during the night, and he expressed much surprise at her
not appearing during the ensuing week. At length, the murdered remains
of the unfortunate woman were found buried in an adjoining wood, and
from attending circumstances suspicion fell upon Harry, who was
apprehended, and brought to trial, August the 15th,1817, at the
Monmouth assizes, when it was satisfactorily proved that he had
murdered his unfortunate wife; and, for concealment, had buried her in
an adjoining wood.

On the following Monday this wretched man paid the forfeit of his
existence on the gaol of Monmouth, in the presence of several thousand
spectators. No sooner was the unhappy culprit convinced that he had no
mode of escape, than he sunk into a sullen apathy. His brother, his
son, and his friends, were alike regarded by him as obtrusive, and were
forbade his presence. Avarice seemed to be his ruling passion, and the
loss of the trifling property, in amassing which he had derived so much
pleasure, seemed to have solely occupied his mind. At length, by the
exertions of the chaplain, he was induced to confess his guilt. He
admitted the justice of his sentence, and acknowledged the fact of his
having murdered his hapless wife, under circumstances, however, he
said, on her part, of great aggravation. It appeared, from his
statement, that he killed her on the Sunday night by a blow on the
temple with some heavy instrument, but not the stone produced on the
trial; and when her spirit had fled for ever, he employed himself in
cleaning up those traces of the deed which her flowing blood produced.
Having at length partially accomplished this work, he secreted the body
under the bed, and in the garden buried some of those clothes with
which he had been performing his terrific labours.-- Thus matters
rested till the succeeding night, when he went forth to the Cross Wood
side, and there dug the grave, in which he immediately deposited the
remains of the deceased, hoping that by the course of conduct which he
had adopted he should avert suspicion, until be should he enabled to
depart from a spot which his conscience rendered peculiarly terrible.


JEREMIAH BRANDRETH, WILLIAM TURNER, AND ISAAC LUDLAM
Executed for High Treason.

IN an introductory paragraph to our account of the Spafields' riot we
took occasion to mention the most prominent causes of public
discontent; and though these had partially disappeared in 1817, still
the impulse given to disaffection continued to operate for a
considerable time, being protracted by the injudicious, if not
unconstitutional, resort of government to the base system of spies and
informers, who no doubt fanned that flame of disloyalty which had
nearly caused a traitorous explosion in the county of Derby, more
formidable and appalling than that for which Brandreth and his
ill-fated companions suffered.

No doubt the seeds of disloyalty, at this period, had been sown through
the kingdom with a strange industry, and that the infatuated populace
were too accessible to opinions of a dangerous tendency; but was it
wise, was it humane, to take advantage of their ignorance and delusion,
to hurry them upon illegal proceedings, that their crimes might qualify
a few of them for that punishment which was to be inflicted only for
the purpose of warning others of their danger, and deterring the
infatuated by exhibiting the decapitated victims of the law? The vile
agent of government, in the northern districts, was a wretch named
Oliver, for whose history and practices we refer the reader to the
Parliamentary Reports of 1818.

Of Oliver, it is supposed, the three unfortunate men, who form the
subjects of this case, were victims; for the contemptible insurrection
which they headed originated among the peasantry of Pentridge,
Southwingfield, and Wingfield Park, in Derbyshire, the last places in
England that w could be suspected of becoming the scene of treason and
rebellion; and, therefore, it is rational to conclude that no ordinary
deceptions were practised on them to cause a departure from their
peaceful habits and contented homes. The country is fertile and
picturesque; the population thin and scattered; and the inhabitants
simple, industrious, and affectionate. How these became the willing
instruments of villainy, we are unable to state; but it has been fully
ascertained that they were deluded by those who were in correspondence
with Oliver, and who consequently were his dupes.

Jeremiah Brandreth, better known by the name of the Nottingham Captain,
was one of those original characters for which nature had done much,
and education nothing. Of his parents, or early habits, we know
nothing; for on these subjects he maintained a studied silence, and
since his executive nothing calculated to remove our ignorance on these
points has come to our knowledge. All we know with certainty is, that
he had been in the army, and that his wife, and three children, resided
at Nottingham, where he was compelled to apply to the parish officers
for occasional support.

The figure and countenance of this man were subjects well adapted for
the wild and impassioned pencil of Salvator Rosa, and would not have
been unsuitable to stand prominent in a group of mountain banditti. His
age was not more than six-and-twenty; yet he evidently possessed an
influence of command, and resolution, irresistible to common men. His
eye was black and piercing. and his whole face indicated a character of
daring intrepidity, and decision of no ordinary kind. Those who had
seen him declared that it was no wonder that ordinary men looked on him
with a kind of awful respect, not unmixed with dread; for he might have
sat for the picture Lord Byron has drawn of the 'Corsair.'


'BUT who that chief? -- his name on every shore
Is famed and feared -- they ask, and know no more.
With those he mingles not but to command,
Few are his words, but keen his eye and hand.


'His name appals the fiercest of his crew,
And tints each swarthy cheek with sallower hue;
Still sways their souls with that commanding art
That dazzles -- leads -- yet chills -- the vulgar heart.
What is that spell, that this his lawless train
Confess, and envy -- yet oppose in vain?
What should it be that thus their faith can bind?
The power, the nerve, the magic of the mind!
Linked with success -- assumed and kept with skill
That moulds another's weakness to its will
Wields with their hands -- but still to these unknown,
Makes even their mightiest deeds appear his own


'Unlike the heroes of each ancient race,
Demons in act, but gods at least in face.
In Conrad's form seems little to admire,
Though his dark eye-brow shades a glance of fire.
Robust, but not Herculean -- to the sight
No giant frame sets forth his common height;
Yet in the whole -- who paused to look again,
Saw more than marks the crowd of vulgar men
They gaze and marvel how -- and still confess
That thus it is, but why they cannot guess.
Sun-burnt his cheek -- his forehead high, and pale,
The sable curls in wild profusion veil.


'There breathe but few whose aspect could defy
The full encounter of his searching eye.


'There was a laughing devil in his sneer,
That roused emotions both of rage and fear;
And where his frown of hatred darkly fell,
Hope withering fled -- and Mercy sigh'd farewell.'

Such was the man who might have done honour to a better cause, had
fortune afforded him the opportunity. His companions, though not more
fortunate, were less remarkable. William Turner lived in the village of
Southwingfield, where he erected, with his own hands, a neat stone
cottage for his parents; his character was unimpeachable until this
insurrection, and his only fault was that of being too partial to
drink, under the influence of which he lost all sense of prudence, and
all power of control.

Isaac Ludlam had, until this event, also possessed the esteem of his
neighbours. He inherited some property from his father, and had rented
some farms; but, speculating too high, he became unfortunate, in
consequence of which he assigned all his effects to his creditors. He
then endeavoured to support himself and family, consisting of a wife
and twelve children, by providing and carting stones for
house-building. In the severe pressure of the times this resource
failed him, and, in an evil hour, this grey-headed old man joined in
Brandreth's desperate attempt. Ludlam regularly attended the Methodist
meeting, and, in the absence of a preacher, conducted the prayers and
praise of the people.

These unfortunate men acted under complete illusion. Formal statements
of the number of the disaffected were given them, as well as the
quantity of arms and ammunition, &c. accompanied with flattering
pictures of the liberty, happiness, and wealth, which were to wait upon
success.

On the 5th of June, Brandreth came from Nottingham to the neighbourhood
of Pentridge, to take command of the rebel forces; and on the 9th, they
proceeded on their march for Nottingham, where it was reported several
thousand anxiously waited their coming, that they might unite in
forwarding a revolution. Their numbers were truly contemptible, not
exceeding forty or fifty; yet, small as they were, they committed
several excesses, and Brandreth shot one harmless man. It was during
the night they commenced operations; and next morning, on the approach
of a score of cavalry, they precipitately fled, leaving their arms
promiscuously scattered behind them. Several were then apprehended, and
several more the two or three ensuing days, Brandreth among others.

To try these thoughtless rebels, a special commission was issued, which
was opened at Derby, October the 15th, 1817. Brandreth was the first
put on his trial; and as the evidence against him was conclusive, he
was, of course, found Guilty. Turner and Ludlam were also convicted, as
well as a young man named Weightman, whose sentence was afterwards
commuted to transportation. Justice being now satisfied, twelve men
pleaded Guilty, and the remainder were discharged. Those who pleaded
guilty received sentence of death, but were afterwards respited.

The unfortunate Brandreth, on being removed to prison, after his
conviction, although he exhibited a manly firmness, was, nevertheless,
much affected. The other prisoners thronged around him in anxious
suspense to hear his fate. He uttered the single and appalling word --
Guilty and, in a moment, a perfect change was visible in the
countenances of those whose fate was undecided.

Brandreth throughout his confinement seemed to have entertained a
confident expectation of acquittal, and this hope appears to have
rested solely on the supposed impossibility of identifying him, as he
was a total stranger in that part of the country, and had, from the
time of his committal, allowed his beard to grow, which completely
shaded his whole face. The singular cast of his features, however,
aided by the peculiar and determined expression of his eye, rendered
his identity unquestionable; and almost every one of the witnesses
swore to the person of the 'Nottingham Captain.' This wretched man,
both before and after his conviction, evinced the utmost propriety of
conduct. He appeared calm and happy, and exhibited great firmness in
the contemplation of his unhappy fate.

His companions in misfortune, however, evinced much less fortitude; for
each appeared the very picture of despair. They attributed their
melancholy situation to Brandreth, and a man, named Bacon, who seems to
have evaded the punishment merited by his crime.

November the 7th, 1817, was the day appointed for the execution of
Brandreth, Turner, and Ludlam. At a quarter before twelve, the hurdle
was drawn up at the door of the prison, into which Brandreth got; and
proceeded immediately to the scaffold. He looked coolly round upon the
immense multitude of spectators, and in a load and firm voice said 'God
bless you all, and Lord Castlereagh!' He stood resolute and silent,
whilst the executioner adjusted the rope; and at twenty-five minutes
before one the drop fell, and he was launched into eternity; after
hanging half an hour, the body was cut down and laid on the bench. The
cap was removed from the head; and the neck having been pressed close
on the block, the executioner struck the blow, and the head was at once
detached from the body. The head fell into the basket; and the hangman,
seizing it by the hair, held up the ghastly countenance to the
populace, exclaiming, 'Behold the head of the traitor, James
Brandreth!' From the manner of this functionary the mob were
apprehensive that the head was to be flung in the midst of them, and
they rushed back in great precipitation. They were, however, soon
undeceived, and upon the same course being pursued with regard to
Turner and Ludlam, they had regained their confidence.


DR. LAURENCE HYNES HALLORAN
Transported For Forging A Frank.

THIS unfortunate gentleman was a scholar and a clergyman. For many
years he was head of a seminary where some of the brightest characters
of the day had received the rudiments of a classical education. Yet
this venerable preceptor, in the winter of life, was transported to
Botany Bay for seven years -- a punishment which some Of our readers
will doubtless think disproportioned to his offence, when they hear
that his crime was that of having forged the frank of a letter whereby
he defrauded the Post-office of tenpence.

When placed at the bar of the Old Bailey, September the 9th, 1818, and
asked the usual question by the clerk, he addressed the Court as
follows:--

'My lord, owing to the long period of my confinement on this charge,
upwards of twenty months, the death during that period of the only
witness who could substantiate my innocence, the exhaustion of my
pecuniary resources, and my consequent inability to employ counsel, or
have the advantage of professional advice, I have no alternative left
me but to plead guilty to the offence with which I am charged.'

Mr. Baron Graham advised him to consider well the effect of his plea.

He replied: 'My lord, I have no alternative; I stand here unarmed and
defenceless against a phalanx of powerful opponents arrayed against me,
and determined to prosecute. It would be a waste of your lordship's
time to plead not guilty. I must persist in my plea.'

     His plea was then recorded, and he was ordered from the bar.

September the 30th be was brought up to receive sentence, when he
addressed the Court at considerable length, reflecting severely on the
motives which influenced the prosecution, and urging the improbability
that a man not in s state of actual infatuation would voluntarily
commit such en offence as that laid to his charge for the sake of
tenpence, and that not to pass into his own pockets, but into that of
the promoter of the prosecution.

     He was then sentenced to seven years' transportation.


SAMUEL DICK
Convicted of Abduction and Rape.

Illustration: The Abduction of Miss Crockatt.

THE barbarous practice of forcibly carrying off females prevails in
Ireland to a shameful extent. Dishonoured women are too often induced
to bestow their hand on the ravisher, and thus the success of one
villain stimulates the lust and avarice of twenty. The law, which
visits this crime with death, has not been sufficient to abolish so
base and abominable a practice, as the Irish newspapers are, from time
to time, filled with details of cases of abduction.

The robber may plead necessity, and the murderer provocation; but the
wretch who deliberately invades the chastity of a female whom he wishes
to make his wife, is not only without any excuse whatever, but betrays
such a total absence of manly feeling that we know not any offender
whose crime deserves a more speedy and capital punishment. Such a
monster should be hurried, with a fearful precipitancy, out of society;
for he has given proof that he is unfit for the company of virtuous and
honourable men, by deliberately attempting to debase what all the world
regards as sanctified and pure. Among the lower orders in Ireland, and
sometimes among those of a higher rank, this practice is not looked on
in the light it deserves. Indelicate and gross minds can see no moral
turpitude in an abduction which terminates in marriage; but, as female
purity is the vital essence of morality in society, whoever invades
that source of all our virtues, and all our happiness, should be hunted
down as a monster that preyed upon the dearest interests of man.
Besides, it is a crime fearful, not only in its consequences, but in
its commission. Family anguish must proclaim its commencement; virgin
screams announce its completion; and protracted grief seal its guilt;
for how can that woman, though a wife, feel happy, who is liable to
have the 'slow unmoving finger of scorn' pointed at her, as one that
had been 'dishonoured among men?'

Samuel Dick was one of those contemptible wretches. who would arrive at
wealth through the charnel-house of lust, where his own sister stood
the officiating goddess. His case is one of revolting indelicacy and
deep-laid villainy. We shall give it in the words of the counsel
retained to prosecute the accused at the Carrickfergus assizes, March
the 21st, 1818.

"The prisoner, Samuel Dick (said he) stands indicted for the forcible
abduction and subsequent defilement of Elizabeth Crockatt, the
prosecutrix. She is a young woman of respectable family in Derry; and
upon the death of her father she became possessed of about two thousand
six hundred pounds: this property, her youth, being scarcely seventeen,
and her personal attractions, have been the causes of two different
atrocious outrages, for the purpose of obtaining possession of them. In
August last, upon the Sabbath day, while returning from the meeting,
she was forcibly carried off, and taken to Ballymena, where she was
rescued by her brother and her uncle. On their return home, her mother,
alarmed for her safety, sent her for some time to reside within a few
miles of Stewartstown, with a Mr. Matthew Fairservice. On the night of
the 3rd of November, Mr. Fairservice's family were invited to spend the
evening at Mr. Henry's, where the prosecutrix met Miss Jane Dick,
sister to the prisoner, and who is related to the prosecutrix. The
prosecutrix, with Mr Robert Fairservice, his sister, and Miss Dick,
then went from Mr. Henry's upon the car to a ball at a Mr. Park's,
where she danced the greater part of the night. While at Mr. Park's,
Miss Dick invited prosecutrix to Stewartstown, which she declined. When
they had got on the car, Robert Fairservice drove rapidly towards
Stewartstown, without paying any attention to the remonstrances of the
prosecutrix; when in Stewartstown they drove to the prisoner's house,
where she saw the prisoner: after breakfast Miss Dick asked Miss
Fairservice and the prosecutrix to go to Dungannon with her, as she
wished to make some purchases. She was prevailed upon, and did go into
Dungannon; remained shopping there until the evening; returned to
Stewartstown, dined in the prisoner's house; and about nine or ten
o'clock the prosecutrix was asked by Miss Dick to go out to the next
door to assist her in purchasing some thread; and the distance being so
trifling, she did not think even of putting on her bonnet. When out of
the hall-door, she was forcibly seized by some person, and put into a
chaise in which was the prisoner, who caught her by the arm; when in
the carriage she found her cloak and bonnet had been previously placed
there, which was sufficient proof of the preconcerted plan. The
prosecutrix, the prisoner, with Miss Dick, and the other person, were
driven to Lurgan, a distance of twenty miles, before day-light in the
morning, the prisoner Dick guarding the prosecutrix with a pistol!
After some time she was again put into the chaise, and driven to the
house of a person named Swayne, where, after having wept and fasted the
whole day, she was prevailed upon to go to bed with Miss Dick. From the
fatigue she had suffered the two preceding nights, joined to the
anxiety of mind she had undergone, she fell asleep; and found on
awaking, that in place of Miss Dick being her bed-fellow, the prisoner
at the bar was. The next morning the prisoner attempted to soothe the
prosecutrix by promises of marriage, and went to Dr. Cupples, of
Lisburn, to procure a licence, leaving his sister and the other person
to watch over her till his return; in spite of them, she contrived to
escape to the house of a Mr. English, where she was protected until
delivered into the hands of her uncle." This statement being supported
by the evidence, the jury without hesitation found the prisoner Guilty
-- and he was sentenced to death.


JOHN DRISCOL, WILLIAM WELLER, & GEORGE CASHMAN
Executed for Forgery.

THAT the punishment of death does not deter from the commission of
crime is very evident in cases of forgery; for though an offence rarely
pardoned, yet its progressive increase had now become an undoubted
fact, at once alarming and melancholy. In 1814 the number of detected
one-pound forged notes on the Bank of England was 10,342; in 1815,
14,035; in 1816, 21,860; in 1817, 21,421; and from the 1st of January
to the 10th of April, 1818, 8,937. The facility of imitating the Bank
of England notes at this period, and the ease with which they were put
into circulation, were the inducement to hundreds who embarked in this
dangerous trade; and though they knew the consequence of detection, yet
each hoped he was the fortunate one who was to escape. This is the
'flattering unction' which every criminal lays to his soul, and no fact
can more forcibly illustrate the impolicy of capital punishments.

At this period, 1818, the victims of forgery were more than ordinarily
numerous. Days were occupied at the Old Bailey with their trials and
convictions only; while Newgate was crowded to excess with those who
waited, in horrid suspense, for the Recorder's report. The public mind,
ever alive to sympathize with the unhappy, took the alarm, and felt
great indignation at the conduct of the Bank, who, they thought, should
have procured a bank-note, impossible to imitate by the ordinary
process of engraving.

In consequence of this general complaint, a committee of scientific men
sat to examine all specimens that might be submitted to them by
artists. Many curious engravings from copper, wood, &c. were sent in,
but none of these, it seems, though some of them were ingenious and
beautifully executed, were of a nature that would warrant their
adoption, as engravers were found who could exactly imitate them in a
few days. From this it appears nothing could be fabricated, but what
could be imitated by ingenious villainy.

At the same time, it must be observed that the public were too easily
imposed upon; for most of the forgeries were so indifferently executed
that the least attention would be sufficient to detect the counterfeit.
It was a very erroneous. though very prevalent, opinion, that the Bank
had a private mark by which they instantly detected a forgery. They had
not, nor could not have, any such distinguishing mark.

Another complaint was, that the Bank had no right to assume the office
of prosecutor, when they never sustained any loss. But it was necessary
for them to protect the public, among whom their paper passed with as
much facility as the current coin of the realm, and in discharging this
duty they incurred incredible expense.*[see note]

The public voice, in some measure, prevailed; the Bank was compelled to
change its mode of proceeding, and allow the accused to plead guilty to
a minor charge, which subjected them to transportation, whereas the
evidence against them would have proved the capital charge. Numbers
availed themselves of this privilege, and even those who traversed were
tried only on the minor charge; a course rendered absolutely necessary
from the number of convictions, as the public could not, at the time,
have endured the spectacle of twenty or thirty persons suspended on the
gallows for passing forged notes. In that case, indeed, the satirist
might exclaim:--


Scarce can our fields, such crowds at Tyburn die,
With hemp the gallows and the fleet supply

Driscol, Weller, and Cashman, were three of those, however, on whom the
law was allowed to take its course. They were tried, on separate
charges, at the Old Bailey, September the 12th, 1818, and were
individually convicted of having sold forged notes. Driscol pleaded
guilty at first, but was prevailed upon to alter his plea. The
witnesses against them were two persons of bad character, but there was
no doubt of their guilt. Whether they had been entrapped into the crime
is not exactly known. Driscol was an illiterate Irish labourer, and
likely to be operated on by a designing villain; but Weller and Cashman
were old offenders, and could not be suspected for dupes. Cashman was a
Jew, and had not long returned from the hulks. The fate of these men
was no sooner known with certainty, than a meeting was held in the
'Bread Street Ward,' where a petition in their behalf was agreed to.
They were also induced to apply themselves to the fountain of mercy.
These applications proved, however, unavailing, and the unhappy men
were left to their fate. A man of the name of Williams was to suffer
with them, and he and Weller received the sacrament on Sunday, when the
Rev. Mr. Cotton preached a very appropriate sermon. Driscol, being a
Roman Catholic, did not attend, and Cashman, being a Jew, was visited,
in his cell, by members of his persuasion, who were constant in their
attentions. It is a custom with the Jews to watch every motion of a
brother, for some hours before the fatal moment arrives. Ten men sat up
with Cashman the whole of the night. The visits during the day were all
cheerfully received, with the exception of those from a wife or child,
which sometimes broke in upon the train of meditation from which so
much relief had been obtained.

On Tuesday morning, December the 15th, 1818, at five o'clock, the usual
apparatus, preparatory to the execution of criminals, was moved to the
front of the debtors'-door of Newgate. From this moment to the time of
execution the crowd increased till the Old Bailey and all the avenues
to it were completely filled. At half past seven the sheriff entered
the inner yard, when the prisoners, Driscol, Weller, Williams, and
Cashman, had their irons knocked off. At eight o'clock the bell tolled
as usual, and the prisoners were brought out.

A Quaker lady (Mrs. Ripley) had been admitted to the prisoners, and had
taken much pains to give them religious instruction; she was with them
again by six o'clock on Tuesday morning, by their own desire. Driscol
was the first who mounted the platform, which he did in almost hurried
manner, and with great agitation. Having ascended it, he gazed wildly
around upon the spectators, and once or twice pushed his cap from his
mouth. Weller was the next ushered to the scaffold, and he exhibited a
considerable portion of firmness. Williams followed. Cashman, alias
Emanuel, followed: he was a Jew, and, by the tenet of the Mosaic
religion was not permitted to sleep during the night; he was attended
by a priest of his own persuasion, and Mrs. Ripley, who manifested
great anxiety for his future state. She accompanied him even to the
scaffold, but there her feelings overcame her, and she burst into
tears. The priest who attended him furnished the executioner with a
peculiar kind of cap, which was substituted for the ordinary one used
upon such occasions. By a quarter past eight, all the malefactors were
arranged, Driscol labouring under great emotion and agitation. The
Mosaic priest, the Rev. Mr. Devereux, and the Rev. Mr. Cotton,
continued for a few minutes addressing prayers to the delinquents, when
Mr. Cotton gave the signal, and thus they were launched into
eternity.-- Immediately upon the unfortunate culprits being launched
off, some of the populace vociferated --'Shame! shame! Murder!
murder!!'-- After hanging the usual time, their bodies were cut down,
and given over to their friends for interment.-- The Rabbis who
attended Cashman were permitted to cut him down. They took away the
rope along with the body. Shortly after, a great crowd of Irish, men,
women, and children, applied for the body of Driscol, which they bore
away with the usual custom of howling. The bodies of the other two were
taken into the prison, to be delivered to their friends.

So much had been apprehended from the public indignation on this
occasion, that the Bank had a body of guards down lest an attack might
be made, by the mob, upon that establishment. Within the walls of
Newgate preparation had also been made to resist any attack, and
similar precaution was manifested in other places. Happily no
disturbance took place on the melancholy occasion.

Note: An account of the number of persons prosecuted by the Bank for
forgery, or for uttering or possessing forged notes, from the 1st of
January, 1798, to the 1st of January, 1819; stating where prosecuted,
and the total expense incurred each year on account of such
prosecutions up to the 1st of October, 1818, being the latest period to
which the account could then be made up, was laid before parliament
about this time, of which the following is a brief abstract.

In the year 1798 the prosecutions took place in four counties; the
number amounted to twelve, and the expense was 4,130l. 16s.
Year.
Counties.
Prosecutions.
Expense.
1799
8
15
£5,705 0 10 
1800
14
44
12,753 7 6
1801
12
54
11,349 18 7
1801
20
63
15,618 19 1
1803
7
9
3,861 1 6
1804
5
25
6,148 3 4
1805
15
28
9,873 1 7
1806
6
10
2,849 17 9
1807
15
45
11,844 12 3
1808
13
34
8,136 16 7
1809
16
68
16,414 9 3
1810
15
29
8,070 19 9
1811
9
33
7,536 12 6
1812
13
64
15,752 1 5
1813
16
65
15,306 17 1
1814
12
47
10,952 10 11
1813
17
63
13,818 13 3
1816
22
120
25,971 8 11
1817
25
143
29,910 4 1
1818
26
242
34,357 7 0
Next to Middlesex, Lancaster presents the greatest number of
prosecutions: indeed, during the first half of the years here quoted,
the number prosecuted at Lancaster considerably exceeded those tried at
the Old Bailey.

From another paper prosecuted, including the same period, from January,
1798, to January, 1819, it appears, that Bank forgeries have increased
in number from 1,102 to 30,476, and, in value, from 8,139l. to 36,301l.
The account stands thus:--
Year     Total Number.   Total Net Value.
1798      1,602          £8,139
1818     30,476         £36,301
There is a curious disproportion between the value, as compared with
the number, in these two cases: which is explained by the fact, that in
the first of the years quoted, there were 139 forged notes above 20l.;
and in the last only one above that value.


JOHN KINNEAR, MOSELY WOOLF, AND LEWIS LEVY,
Convicted of Conspiracy.

The commercial world affords great opportunities for knaves to practise
their impositions in, but we are not aware that it has ever been
subjected to a more extensive system of fraud than that effected by the
trio whose names head the present article.

These dishonest sons of Israel were reputed merchants in London, and
contrived for several years to keep up a tolerable character. They were
in extensive trade, and kept separate concerns, turning each in
business something like three hundred thousand pounds a year.

With the profits resulting from this trade they were, however,
dissatisfied, and resolved to grow rich by speedier means. They
originated three mercantile houses, and placed as proprietors in them
three men, who were, in fact, merely paupers. The first was John Meyer,
a Jew, who kept a house on Tower Hill, for the reception of sailors.
This man they supplied with money, gave him a character, and reported
him as a merchant of an inexhaustible capital. The next was Henry
Weiller, a German Jew, who, having served under Napoleon, came, in
1816, to England, with ten francs in his pocket. This fellow they
dressed up, and instructed him to represent himself as a foreign
merchant. Weiller having been once in business in Paris, and being
known to a respectable house there, he procured a letter of
recommendation to a London banker. By this means he established his
credit, and began to pass bills with amazing rapidity.

Having these two houses under their control, they wanted another, and
in the formation of this they shewed the greatest skill; for they
established it in such a manner, as to procure goods to a large amount,
without creating suspicion. They took a Jew boy, named Joseph Leigh,
who had been once or twice tried at the Old Bailey, and represented him
as the son of a Dutch merchant. Levy then called upon a man named
Reeves, who had been known in the Manchester trade, but who had been
unfortunate in business, though his character stood yet high at
Manchester. To him Levy represented Leigh as a youth well acquainted
with the Continental trade, and stated that his father, being a wealthy
man, proposed giving him a thousand pounds, provided he could get a
person to join him who understood the country trade of England. Reeves
consented to become his partner, and articles of partnership, with a
great shew of candour, were drawn up between them. The one thousand
pounds was then handed to Reeves, and lodged at a banker's. Levy also
lent them five hundred pounds, and appeared a very good friend. He
introduced Reeves to Meyer, as well as to Weiller, and recommended his
dealing with them, as they generally traded on ready money. Reeves
readily became their dupe. He made a circuit of the manufacturing
countries, being supplied with the loan of one thousand pounds, and
sent home goods to the amount of thirty-three thousand pounds, for
which he paid by bills on Meyer. Before the conclusion of his business,
however, he was informed that Meyer had absconded; and, on hastening to
London, he found himself not possessed of a shilling, all the goods he
had purchased having been sold, on their arrival, to Meyer.

A disclosure now took place, and it was found that these fictitious
houses had practised the vilest impositions. Weiller was sent out of
the way, but, being apprehended in Holland, he was brought back, and
made a bankrupt of. On his examinations it was discovered that Kinnear,
Woolf, and Levy, were the contrivers of the fraud, and, in consequence
of this information, they, with several others, were indicted for a
conspiracy. Meyer and several others who were implicated escaped
detection, but the three leaders in, and contrivers of, the scheme were
brought to justice in the Court of King's Bench, April the 20th, 1819,
before Lord Chief Justice Abbott and a special jury.

Reeves, Leigh, and Weiller, were the principal evidence against them,
and after an investigation of two days they were found guilty. No
sooner was the verdict made known, than the vast crowds who waited for
the decision manifested the greatest satisfaction. A man named Le Vay,
who was indicted with them, was acquitted. The trial disclosed the
means by which they procured credit. One of the fictitious houses
served to give a character to the others, while at the same time they
played into each other's hands, by drawing and discounting bills,
accepting and negotiating drafts, &c. &c. The goods thus dishonestly
procured were shipped off to Holland, India, &c. on Levy's account.

On the 30th of April a motion was made for a new trial, on the ground
of the jury having dispersed and slept at home, no officer being sworn
to keep them together, or prevent their intermixing with the multitude.
The Court, however, decided that the mere separation of the jury was no
ground for setting aside the verdict, unless some improper tampering
with them could be shown, the Court having a discretion to allow the
jury to disperse. The application was, therefore, refused, though it
was the opinion of some leading counsel that a new trial would have
been granted in consequence of this irregularity.

On the 14th of May they were brought up to receive judgment, when two
affidavits were put in on the part of the defendants, stating that the
deponents had seen two of the jurymen, on the first night of the trial,
conversing with Mr. Harmer and Mr. Adams, the solicitors for the
prosecution. In answer to these, affidavits of the jury, the above
gentlemen, &c. were put in, denying that any such intercourse had taken
place; also two affidavits of the owners of the houses, where the
deponents on the part of the defendants stated themselves to reside,
stating that no such persons lived there; whence they were supposed to
be fictitious names.

The sentence of the Court was, that John Kinnear should be imprisoned
in the gaol of Ilchester for two years; that Lewis Levy should be
imprisoned in the gaol of Gloucester for two years, and pay a fine of
five thousand pounds; that Mosely Woolf should be imprisoned in the
House of Correction, Coldbath Fields, for two years, and pay a fine of
ten thousand pounds: and that Levy and Woolf should be farther
imprisoned till those fines were paid. Levy had sent large quantities
of goods to India, obtained by this conspiracy, and the Court
considered that from the sale of those goods he might obtain
remittances to pay his fine.


ROBERT JOHNSTON.
Executed for Robbery after an Attempted Rescue from the Scaffold

The extraordinary circumstances attending the execution of this
unfortunate man give his case a melancholy interest. Our readers,
doubtless, recollect the singular conduct of the Edinburgh mob, at the
execution of Porteous. A scene, if possible more disgraceful, occurred
on the present occasion.

Robert Johnston was a native of Edinburgh, where he spent the first
part of his life without reproach. His parents were poor, and Robert
was employed as a carter. In his twenty-fourth year he got into bad
company, and was engaged in the robbery of a chandler in Edinburgh, and
being apprehended he was brought to trial with two others, and found
guilty. His companions had their sentence commuted to transportation
for life, but on Johnston the law was ordered to be put in force.

The execution was directed to take place on the 30th December 1818, and
on that day, the judgment of the law was carried out, but under
circumstances of a most extraordinary nature. A platform was erected in
the customary manner with a drop in the Lawnmarket, and an immense
crowd having assembled, the unfortunate culprit was brought from the
lock-up house at about twenty minutes before three o'clock, attended by
two of the magistrates, the Reverend Mr. Tait, and the usual other
functionaries. The customary devotions took place, and the unhappy
wretch, with an air of the most undaunted boldness, gave the necessary
signal. Nearly a minute elapsed, however, before the drop could be
forced down, and then it was found that the toes of the wretched
culprit were still touching the surface, so that he remained half
suspended, and struggling in the most frightful manner. It is
impossible to find words to express the horror which pervaded the
crowd, while one or two persons were at work with axes beneath the
scaffold, in the vain attempt to hew down a part of it beneath the feet
of the criminal. The cries of horror from the populace continued to
increase with indescribable vehemence; and it is hard to say how long
this horrible scene might have lasted, had not a person near the
scaffold, who was struck by a policeman, while pressing onward, cried
out 'Murder!' Those who were not aware of the real cause of the cry
imagined that it came from the convict, and a shower of stones,
gathered from the loose pavement of the street, compelled the
magistrates and police immediately to retire. A cry of "Cut him down --
he is alive," then instantly burst from the crowd, and a person of
genteel exterior jumped upon the scaffold, cut the rope, and the
culprit fell down in a reclining position, after having hung during
about five minutes only. A number of the mob now gained the scaffold,
and taking the ropes from the neck and arms of the prisoner, they
removed the cap from his head and loosening his clothes, carried him,
still alive, towards High Street; while another party tore the coffin
prepared to receive his body into fragments, and endeavoured
unsuccessfully to demolish the fatal gallows. Many of the police were
beaten in this riot; and the executioner, who was for some time in the
hands of the mob, was severely injured. In the meantime the
police-officers rallied in augmented force, and retook the criminal
from the mob, at the head of the Advocates' Close. The unhappy man,
half alive, stripped of part of his clothes, and with his shirt turned
up, so that the whole of his naked back and the upper part of his body
were exhibited, lay extended on the ground in the middle of the street,
in front of the police-office. At last, after a considerable interval,
some of the police-officers laying hold of him, dragged him trailing
along the ground, for about twenty paces, into the office, where he
remained upwards of half an hour, while he was attended by a surgeon,
bled in both arms, and in the temporal vein, by which suspended
animation was restored; but the unfortunate man did not utter a word.
In the meantime a military force arrived from the Castle under the
direction of a magistrate, and the soldiers were drawn up in the street
surrounding the police-office and place of execution.

Johnston was then carried again to the scaffold. His clothes were
thrown about him in such a way, that he seemed half naked, and while a
number of men were about him, holding him up on the table, and
fastening the rope again about his neck, his clothes fell down in a
manner shocking to decency. While they were adjusting his clothes, the
unhappy man was left vibrating, upheld partly by the rope about his
neck, and partly by his feet on the table. At last the table was
removed from beneath him, when, to the indescribable horror of every
spectator, he was seen suspended, with his face uncovered, and one of
his hands broke loose from the cords with which it should have been
tied, and with his fingers convulsively twisting in the noose. Dreadful
cries were now heard from every quarter. A chair was brought, and the
executioner having mounted upon it, disengaged by force the hand of the
dying man from the rope. He then descended, leaving the man's face
still uncovered, and exhibiting a dreadful spectacle. At length a
napkin was thrown over his face amidst shouts of "Murder," and "Shame,
shame," from the crowd. The unhappy wretch was observed to struggle
very much, but his sufferings were at an end in a few minutes. The
soldiers remained on the spot till the body was cut down; and, as it
was then near dusk, the crowd gradually dispersed.

The bleeding of the unfortunate culprit by a surgeon, with the view of
restoring animation, was, we apprehend, an illegal torture, as by it
the poor wretch was made to suffer a double death. It is true the
authorities did not call in the surgeon; but it is equally true that
they did not prevent, when they might, the surgical process. The whole
proceedings were afterwards properly investigated, and those to whom
blame was attached were punished.

The following is a remarkable instance of a similar scene which
occurred in France in the year 1828.

Peter Hebard, who had been confined in the prison at Abbey, in France,
for five months, expecting the final order for his punishment, having
been convicted of a murder, committed under aggravated circumstances,
and who had been allowed to indulge in hopes of a reprieve, was told to
prepare for death in the afternoon. For nearly five years an execution
had not taken place at Abbey, and the consequence was that an immense
crowd assembled, which could with difficulty be kept in proper order by
a large body of gendarmes. The prisoner was bound to the board laid
across the scaffold; and upon the usual signal, his head was placed
between the lunette in the guillotine. The knife fell with a trembling
motion, but did not touch the criminal. A cry of horror arose from the
crowd. The knife was again lifted -- it fell a second time, but without
reaching the criminal's neck. A volley of stones was discharged at the
executioner and his two assistants. For the third time the instrument
was let down, but it only inflicted a slight wound. The executioners
then quitted the scaffold for fear of the stones, and the criminal's
head continued for some minutes bound to the block. The chief
executioner again mounted the scaffold, and the knife fell twice more
without success. The excitement in the crowd became indescribable. The
executioner fled, the criminal lifted his head up, and was greeted with
cries of "Bravo!" but he could not get away from the cords. One of the
executioners then got on the scaffold, told the unhappy man to turn his
head, and at the same time seized him by. the neck, and gave him
several wounds with a shoemaker's knife. Hebard's head, nearly half
off, hung on his shoulder; the spectacle was so horrible, and the
spectators so enraged at the executioner, that he was obliged to make
his escape amongst the gendarmes. Hebard, who was found standing up to
the block, still breathed, and remained for two hours in that
situation, during which time he frequently opened his mouth. It appears
that the scaffold had been intentionally damaged by a person who acted
as assistant to the executioner on account of a grudge. A question
might arise, whether the executioner's assistant had a right to stab
the criminal, and so alter his punishment, which was to die by the
guillotine.


HENRY HUNT
A Speaker at the Peterloo Massacre, Convicted of a Misdemeanour.

Illustration: The Peterloo Massacre

The name of Mr. Hunt is too well known to require it to be introduced
to our readers with any long explanation of the particular character
which he filled up to the time at which he underwent an imprisonment
for a misdemeanour against the government. He was probably the most
popular demagogue of the day, with the exception of Wilkes; and, like
his prototype, he appears to have been totally undeserving the
confidence or the applause of the people. Like Wilkes, too. he was the
occasion of several deluded people losing their lives, while he himself
escaped with a comparatively trifling punishment.

Hunt was born at Widdington, in the parish of Upavon, near Salisbury
Plain, on the 6th November 1773. His father was a respectable farmer;
and our hero, when young, being designed for the church, obtained the
rudiments of a classical education. At sixteen years of age, however,
he altered his mind and joined his father, and having attained great
proficiency in his new business, he was treated with great confidence
by his father, from whom, at this early age, he imbibed principles
diametrically opposed to those which he afterwards espoused. At the
time of the threatened invasion in the year 1795, Hunt joined the
Evelyn corps of militia; but his commanders having refused to permit
their men to quit the county in which they were enrolled, our hero,
indignant at the supposed cowardice of his fellows, after having
delivered himself of his maiden oration, urging them to volunteer in a
new corps, threw his sword at his commander's feet, and immediately
afterwards joined a corps established under the patronage of Lord
Bruce. It appears, however, that although his lordship's loyalty was
greater than that of the officers of the Evelyn militia, his attachment
to his manorial rights was so strong, as to occasion a serious quarrel
with his followers; for some of them having exercised their powers of
sharp-shooting against his lordship's pheasants, they immediately
obtained their dismissal from his troop. Hunt was enraged at this
supposed affront, and riding to the parade, he publicly challenged his
late noble commander to fight a duel. Lord Bruce had not expected to
meet with so violent a reception, and fairly fled; but in a few days
afterwards he obtained a criminal information against his challenger,
in the Court of King's Bench, who was in consequence fined 100l., and
sentenced to six weeks' imprisonment. Old Hunt by this time had
discharged the debt of nature, and the penalty was soon paid; but the
six weeks during which our hero was detained in the Queen's Bench
prison served to banish all those feelings of loyalty with which he had
before been inspired; and having associated himself with some persons,
who were professed democrats, he soon joined them in their political
creed. At about this time he was married to the daughter of a
respectable inn-keeper, for whom he is said to have formed a most
romantic attachment. The heat of his passion appears to have worn off
very soon; and ere five years had elapsed he seduced another man's
wife, who eloped with him from Brighton. The conduct of Hunt in
reference to this person appears to be of a most extraordinary
character; for in his Memoirs, he speaks of the unalterable attachment
which he bore her, and with the most fulsome declarations of his love
for her, dwells on the happiness which he had experienced in her
society up to the time of the publication of his work, when she was
still living with him (1824). His indignant and injured wife, it
appears, received an annuity of 300l. from him, with which she
continued to maintain her two daughters, while her son remained under
the care of his father, and his mistress.

Mr. Hunt, at this time, appears to have been living in a style of
considerable pretension. The high prices of farm produce enabled him to
maintain a large establishment, and he followed the sports of the field
with great avidity, while he resided in Bath during the months which
constituted the "season" of that then gay city.

We do not profess to give any lengthened history of his remarkable
career, because to do so would be to exceed the limits and intention of
a work of the character of the present; but the following, we believe,
will be found to be a faithful, though necessarily short, narrative of
the chief circumstances of his life.

While in Bath Mr. Hunt formed an acquaintance with the son of a brewer,
who deluded him into a partnership; and it appears that he absolutely
lost eight thousand pounds in a brewing concern at Bristol, which was
the first occasion of his becoming acquainted with the people of that
city.

In 1804 he first attended a public meeting, which was held at Devizes,
respecting the conduct of Lord Melville; and, in the next year, he
first affixed his name to a public address, calling on the inhabitants
of Wiltshire to oppose the corn laws. Having once embarked in politics,
he was ever restless, and on every possible occasion he forced himself
upon public notice with officious zeal; and in 1807 he came forward at
Bristol, to propose Sir John Jarvis, as a fit representative for that
city.

His noisy interference on all public questions at this time, drew upon
him a host of enemies, particularly among his own neighbours, who
forbade him to sport upon their grounds; and, as no gentleman would
hunt with him, he was obliged to dispose of his stud of horses. On one
occasion he committed a trifling trespass, on which an action was
brought against him, when he effectually pleaded his own cause, and,
encouraged by success, he determined, from that day forward, to
dispense with the assistance of counsel in any legal proceedings in
which he might be engaged.

In 1809 he held the first meeting for reform, for by this time he had
become a disciple of Cobbett. In 1811 he took a large farm in Sussex,
called Rowfant, where he continued to reside for one year, at the
expiration of which he sold it, and went to live at Middleton cottage,
which is situated on the western road, three miles from Andover.

In 1812 he stood twice candidate for Bristol, but was defeated by a
large majority on the opposition of the venerated Sir Samuel Romilly.
This year he also became a liveryman of London, and from that time
Guildhall was often favoured with his presence. He now attended almost
every public meeting throughout the country, and gradually became the
idol of the mob, to whose comprehension his speeches were admirably
adapted. His patriotism, however, proved injurious to his private
affairs, for we find, that in 1815, he had overdrawn his account with
his bankers, who refused to advance him any more money.

In 1816 he attended the notorious meeting in Spa-fields, where he acted
as chairman; but it is only justice to say, that he had held no
previous communication with Thistlewood and his colleagues, except for
the purpose of striking out some portion of their resolutions, which he
considered as offensive. In the year 1818, he appears to have become so
flattered by the success which his previous exertions as a popular
speaker had gained for him, that he resolved to stand for Westminster,
in opposition to Sir Francis Burdett; but whatever may have been his
popularity among his own peculiar party, the experiment was
unsuccessful, and at the close of the poll it was found that his
friends had given only forty-one votes for him; and he had also to
regret his rashness in thus publicly thrusting himself forward, as,
while upon the hustings, he was soundly horsewhipped by a gentleman,
upon whom he had previously inflicted a cowardly and an unmerited
injury.

In the year 1819 the principles of radicalism appear to have reached a
point of almost ungovernable fury, and Hunt secured to himself the
character of the best and firmest champion of the party, by his conduct
at a public meeting, which took place at Smithfield at this period, and
at which, in truth, it appears that he acted in a manner without
reproach.

An event, however, soon afterwards occurred which procured for him
still greater notoriety. The Manchester reformers, who had posted up
notices of a meeting to be holden on the 9th of August in this year,
for the purpose of proceeding to the election of a representative, as
at Birmingham, where the people had, some time before, elected Sir
Charles Wolseley as their legislatorial attorney or representative, was
informed by the magistrates that as the object of the proposed
assemblage was unquestionably illegal, it would not be permitted to
take place. In consequence of this expressed determination on the part
of the authorities, the meeting was abandoned, but fresh notices were
issued for a new assemblage on the 16th of the same month, with the
avowed legal object of petitioning for a reform in parliament. An open
space in the town, called St. Peter's Field, was selected as the place
of meeting, and never upon any former occasion of a similar nature was
so great a number of persons known to have met together. For some hours
before the proceedings were appointed to commence, large bodies of
people continued marching into Manchester from the neighbouring
villages and towns, formed in ranks five deep, and many of them armed
with stout staves, while the whole body stepped together as if trained
for military purposes. Each party bore its own banners, and among
others two clubs of female reformers made their appearance, bearing
flags of white silk. By mid-day it was calculated that 60,000 persons
had assembled. The magistrates, it appears, were anxious that the peace
should be preserved, and a number of special constables were sworn in,
who formed themselves in a line, from the house in which the justices
were sitting, to the stage or waggon fixed as a platform for the
speakers. Soon after the business of the meeting had commenced, a body
of yeomanry cavalry entered the ground, and advanced with drawn swords
towards the stage, when their commanding officer called to Mr. Hunt,
who was addressing the meeting, and informed him that he was his
prisoner. Mr. Hunt endeavoured to procure tranquillity among the
people, and offered to surrender himself to any civil officer who
should present himself, and should exhibit his warrant; and a constable
immediately advanced and took him into custody, with some other persons
who were similarly engaged. Some uneasiness being now exhibited among
the mob, the yeomanry cried out to seize their flags. The men stationed
near the waggon, in consequence began to strike down the banners, which
were attached to the platform, and a similar course being pursued with
respect to those which were raised in other parts of the field, a scene
of the most indescribable confusion ensued. The immense number of
persons on the field, rendered it almost impossible for the military to
move without trampling down some of them underfoot; and some resistance
being offered, many persons, including females, were cut down with
sabres, and while some were killed, the number of wounded amounted to
between three and four hundred. In a short time, however, the ground
was cleared of its original occupants, and as they fled in all
directions, military patroles were immediately placed in the streets,
to preserve tranquillity.

It would be almost impossible to give any lengthened or minute
description of this riot, or "massacre," as it has always been called
by the radical opponents of government, without in some degree entering
into the very strong feeling of party prejudice, which has been
universally excited upon the subject. The real circumstances of the
case may be said to be unsettled even to this day; and while the
magistrates and their friends declare that, the Riot Act having been
read, the subsequent proceedings on the part of the soldiery were both
justified and necessary, the friends of the people as invariably deny
the allegation of the reading of the Riot Act, and therefore contend
that the introduction of a military force was harsh and
unconstitutional. The whole transaction does not appear to have
occupied more than ten minutes, in the course of which time the field
seems to have been cleared of its recent occupiers, and filled with
different corps of infantry and cavalry. Hunt and his colleagues were,
after a short examination before the magistrates, conducted to solitary
cells, on a charge of high-treason, and on the following day notices
were issued by the magistrates, by which the practice of military
training, alleged to have been carried on in secret, by large bodies of
men, for treasonable purposes, was declared to be illegal. Public
thanks were, by the same authority, returned to the officers and men of
the respective corps engaged in the attack; and, on the arrival in
London of a despatch from the local authorities, a cabinet council was
held, the result of which was, the return of official letters of thanks
to the magistrates, for their prompt, decisive, and efficient measures
for the preservation of the public tranquillity; and to all the
military engaged, for the support and assistance afforded by them to
the civil power.

The circumstances of the Manchester case eventually turned out to be
such, that government, by the advice of the law officers of the crown,
found it expedient to abandon the threatened prosecution of Mr. Hunt
and his colleagues for high-treason. Those persons were accordingly
informed that they would be proceeded against for a conspiracy only,
which might be bailed; but Mr. Hunt refused to give bail, even, as he
said, to the amount of a single farthing: but some of his friends
liberated him. On his return from Lancaster, where he had been
confined, to Manchester, Hunt was drawn about two miles by women, and
ten miles by men. In fact, his return was one long triumphal
procession, waited upon by thousands, on horse, on foot, and in
carriages, who hailed him with continued shouts of applause.

The sensation produced throughout the country by this fatal business
was intense. Hunt's conduct was universally applauded, and he received
the thanks of nearly every county in England, and those even who
opposed him on principle now forgot their enmity, and hailed him as the
uncompromising champion of liberty. His entry into London was public,
and some of the first characters of the day honoured him with their
presence, whilst hundreds of thousands welcomed him with deafening
applause.

The agitation had hardly subsided when true bills were found against
Hunt and his companions, and their trials came on at York, and
continued, without intermission, for fourteen days, during which time
Hunt displayed powers of intellect, and acuteness of perception, of
which even his friends did not suppose him to be possessed. He was
found guilty, however, and ordered to be brought up to the Court of
King's Bench for sentence, but he afterwards moved, in person, for a
new trial. Although he argued with all the tact and ability of the most
experienced lawyer, his motion was refused, and he was sentenced to two
years and a half imprisonment in Ilchester jail.

He had not been long incarcerated when he brought to light a system of
the most infamous cruelty which had been practised on the unfortunate
inmates of that prison by the barbarous jailor. Mr. Hunt himself, being
treated with great cruelty, addressed a letter to Mr. Justice Bayley,
detailing cases of atrocious cruelty; and the question being at length
brought before the House of Commons, an inquiry followed. Hunt
substantiated all his charges, and the inhuman jailor was dismissed and
punished, while the country rang with the praises of his accuser.

The period of his imprisonment having expired, he again made a public
entry into London; but he found that the times had changed, even during
that short time. The public prosperity had banished discontent, and
with it that wild enthusiasm, which had before been exhibited in his
favour, and he was greeted with none of those demonstrations of delight
which had been before exhibited. He made several attempts to arouse the
lethargy of his former admirers, but in vain; and he at length betook
himself to repair his broken fortunes by the manufacture of English
coffee, with roasted corn, and subsequently in 1824 he added that of
blacking; and so successful was he in this enterprise, that "Hunt's
matchless "became almost as celebrated as the polish of Messrs. Day and
Martin.

Mr. Hunt was subsequently returned as member for Preston in Lancashire,
and he died while yet representing that place in parliament.


JACOB MAGENNIS
Executed for Shooting a Constable.

This culprit was a native of Ireland, and by trade a weaver. In 1816 he
came to England, and worked at his business at Stockport, where his
restless disposition led him to associate with the reformers, who at
this period were extremely violent. Magennis seems to have been an
enthusiast in the cause, and constantly attended the sermons of a
disaffected man named Harrison, who was subsequently tried, convicted,
and punished, for having preached sedition. The pulpit should never be
converted into a rostrum for popular declamations; for religion and
politics have no necessary connexion. This Harrison kept a school at
Stockport, and officiated on Sundays as a dissenting clergyman, in
which capacity, it is to he apprehended, he did much mischief.

The magistrates of Stockport became alarmed at the doctrines publicly
preached by this reverend demagogue, and issued a warrant for his
apprehension; but, being aware of their design, Harrison left
Stockport. A bench warrant was then procured, and a constable named
Birch was sent to execute it. He did so, and on the 23d of July, 1819,
brought the divine a prisoner to Stockport; and, for security, kept him
confined in his (Birch's) house.

It was no sooner known that the idol of the mob was in custody, than a
number of people collected in a very tumultuous manner about the
constable's house. Alarmed for safety, Birch went out by a back door,
with the determination of consulting a magistrate concerning his duty,
but had not proceeded far when a man named Bruce accosted him. Having
known this man before, Birch stopped to speak with him; and, while in
conversation, he received the contents of a pistol, fired over Bruce's
shoulder by Jacob Magennis.

In the confusion that ensued Magennis made his escape, and passed over
to Ireland, where he was apprehended, and brought to Chester gaol.
Bruce was also taken into custody on the charge of aiding and
assisting, as it was supposed he acted is concert with Magennis and
another man, who could not be identified, though only the three were by
at the transaction. Bruce was a stranger at Stockport, not having lived
in it more than a few months, during part of which time he acted as
usher in Harrison's school, and latterly had taken a school on his own
account. He also kept a nightly school, where people were taught to
make speeches. His manners and address were, however, far above that of
his noisy pupils.

Birch's wound happily did not prove mortal; and on the trial, which
took place on the 8th of April, he was able to give his evidence. The
Jury found both Guilty, and when the verdict was pronounced, Magennis
declared that Bruce was innocent; for it was he (Magennis) who fired
the pistol.

Bruce was afterwards respited, and finally received the royal pardon,
for it appeared he was not guilty; but Magennis underwent the awful
sentence of the law at the time appointed. He was a man of strong
capacity, but uneducated. He employed his few last days in writing his
life, which he desired to be published; but it never was. He met his
fate with fortitude,, and was sincerely penitent.


JAMES LIGHTFOOT,
Executed for the Murder of Thomas Maxwell.

The guilt of this young man was established with irresistible
certainty, and other circumstances which transpired after his execution
leave no doubt of his having perpetrated the crime for which he
suffered. Yet, untainted with either sedition or infidelity, which are
often forced to account for moral phenomena, independent of their
influence, Lightfoot solemnly protested his innocence with his last
breath, and surrendered his life on the scaffold with a coolness and
fortitude that would be celebrated in a martyr.

This malefactor's case shows that a man conscious of a deadly crime can
die with all the appearance of innocence, apparently pious, and
seemingly impressed with the truth of Christianity, which excludes the
liar and the impenitent from the joys of Heaven. We cannot find, even
in the full view of dissolution, a refutation or confirmation of any
system of opinions, so contradictory are the operations of the human
mind.

James Lightfoot was one of nineteen children by the same parents,
thirteen of whom were living at the time of his execution. His father,
who had been accidentally killed in 1816, was a poor man, and his
children had all to earn their bread by laborious industry, and were
generally employed as servants by farmers in Cumberland, in which
county they all resided.

James, in 1820, lived with a farmer, named Leach, at Cumwhitton, and
had got married about twelve months before, his age not being quite
twenty-one. In the neighbourhood of Cumwhitton lived a tailor, named
Maxwell, who, with his son, Thomas Maxwell, an amiable youth of
eighteen, worked for all the people in the place. Thomas and Lightfoot
were inseparable companions, whenever leisure permitted their being
together; yet this youth, generally beloved and esteemed by all who
knew him, was treacherously assassinated by Lightfoot, for no other
discoverable motive but that of robbing him of fifteen shillings, four
of which he had himself paid him a few minutes before.

Country tailors generally go from house to house to work, and are
frequently obliged to give servants and poor people credit until such
time as they can get money. The 20th of May, in Cumberland, is the day
for hiring and paying servants their wages; and this too is the time
when country tradesmen expect to get their money. On the eve of this
day, in 1820, Thomas Maxwell, being going his annual round to his
customers, called at Mr. Leach's, where he was kindly received, as
indeed he was everywhere. Having smoked a pipe, he went to the barn
where Lightfoot was threshing, to give him a smoke. While in the barn
Lightfoot asked his master for four shillings, which be gave to
Maxwell, being that sum in his debt. After a little time the youth took
his departure, signifying his intention to cross a ford, which was
situated a few hundred yards tress Mr. Leach's house, His way lay
through a plantation, and here it was that he was murdered.

Immediately after his departure, Lightfoot entered the kitchen, sad
took out a loaded gun, although he had been repeatedly told not so
touch it. Shortly after, a report of a gun was heard in the plantation
through which Maxwell had to pass, and Lightfoot, who had been missed
from the barn, was seen running towards the house in a crunching
manner, as if he wished not to be seen. His master had entered the
house before him, and, though angry at seeing the gun in his hand, he
forbore to speak, as Lightfoot was to leave his service the next day.

The father of the murdered youth, alarmed for his son's absence, was
inquiring next morning for him; and apprehensive, as the river was much
swoln, that he might have been drowned, he had it dragged for the body.
Notwithstanding all the poor man's exertions and anxiety, the deceased
was not found for a week, so secluded was the place where the mangled
remains had been deposited. Suspicion immediately fell upon Lightfoot,
and when taken into custody his exclamation betrayed his guilt; for
when the constable arrested him his first words were -- 'What! me
murder Tom Maxwell on Friday!' The reply of the officer was pointed
--'You know the day better than I do.' When taken before the coroner he
said to the father of the deceased, 'Do yon think I would murder your
son for fifteen shillings?' Fifteen shillings was the exact sum the
poor boy had about him; for before he left his father's house his
sister saw him put eleven shillings into his parse, which, with the
four received from Lightfoot, made the fifteen shillings. The purse was
found empty, lying beside the mangled remains of the unfortunate boy.

On the 16th of August, 1820, Lightfoot was brought to trial at
Carlisle, and was found Guilty, after a protracted inquiry into his
case. The evidence against him was conclusive, though circumstantial;
and the learned judge (Bayley) concurred in the verdict of the jury,
though in his charge he had mentioned every thing that bore in favour
of the prisoner, saying that a verdict of acquittal would not establish
the innocence of the accused, but imply that the evidence was not
sufficient to convict him.

Lightfoot, on being removed from the bar, declared that he was a
murdered man, being perfectly innocent of the charge imputed to him. An
idea that the denial of his guilt would diminish the disgrace brought
upon his family was probably the motive of his obstinate protestations
of innocence. His mother visited him the day before execution, and
indirectly encouraged him to deny his crime, by saying, 'You are
innocent, James; keep up a good heart.' Yet this woman was well aware
of his guilt; for the Sunday after the murder had been committed, and
before any one had been accused, she was heard to exclaim, in a
fainting fit, 'My son has murdered a man!' Lightfoot's wife brought
forth her first child about the time he perpetrated the murder, and so
shocked was the poor women on hearing the charge against her husband,
that she had not recovered at the time when he was ignominiously
launched into eternity.


JAMES NESBETT.
Executed for the Murder of Mr. Parker and his Housekeeper.

The night of Friday the .3rd of March 1820, was marked by the
perpetration of a murder, not exceeded in point of atrocity by any
whose circumstances are detailed in our Calendar of Crimes. It bears a
striking resemblance to that committed by Hussey; for the victims were
an old gentleman and his housekeeper -- a Mr. Thomas Parker, aged
seventy, and Sarah Brown, about forty-five years old.

Mr. Parker had been a working jeweller in London, where he had made a
fortune sufficient to enable him to retire to Woolwich, where he
resided for twenty-three years. His house was situated in
Mulgrave-place, Red Lion Street, at a short distance from the Artillery
Barracks. He was an inoffensive, gentlemanly man, and was much
respected by the whole neighbourhood. At one o'clock on Saturday
morning, the 4th of March, the sentinel on duty at the north arch of
the Artillery Barracks observed a dense smoke rising from Mr. Parker's
house. He gave an alarm; and several of the artillerymen rushed forth,
and found the flames bursting from the parlour window. The men rapped
at the door with great violence, but no answer was returned. The cry of
"Fire" spread; two engines arrived on the spot, and commenced playing
into the window. The men then forced the street-door, and rushed into
the passage; and from thence they went up stairs into the front room on
the first floor. Here the ravages of the fire were perceptible; the
furniture of a bed had been partly consumed; but in the bed itself
there was no appearance of a human being. The men then ran into the
bed-room on the second floor, which was found in flames; but having
extinguished them, they continued their search for the inmates of the
house; but neither Mr. Parker nor his servant could be found. It was
now discovered that the flames were bursting forth with great violence
from the parlour below, and that they were spreading rapidly to the
upper floor; and every exertion became necessary to procure their
suppression. A hole was cut in the floor of the bed-chamber, through
which water was poured; and by this means, added to the incessant
playing of the engines without, the danger was subdued. In a short time
the parlour-door was thrown open, and a man belonging to the artillery
having entered, he perceived a heap of something lying behind the door.
He attempted to lift it up, when he found it to be the mutilated
remains of a human body which was much burnt. A second body, which
proved to be that of a female, was found stretched in the same place,
although not so much disfigured. A further investigation of the
premises now took place, when it was perceived that blankets had been
nailed up against every window, as if to conceal the appearance of the
flames within. Fire had been communicated in three different places --
the parlour on the ground floor; the bed-chamber on the first floor;
and the bed-chamber on the second floor. The drawers about the house
were found standing open, and articles of apparel were lying about; and
in the kitchen, some silver utensils were strewed on the floor. At
break of day the bodies of Mr. Parker and his servant were examined,
and it was found that the former was burnt nearly to a cinder; the left
leg and foot, on which there was a black silk stocking and a shoe, only
remained entire. The skull, however, although the flesh was burnt off,
remained whole, and afforded convincing testimony of murder: on the
left side, towards the back, there was a terrific fracture. The woman
lay stretched upon her face; her apparel was partly consumed, and her
hair, which was very long, was hanging around her in matted and
dishevelled locks. A horrible wound, apparently inflicted with a blunt
instrument, was discovered over her eye, and at the back of her head
there were three distinct fractures. The fact that the whole
circumstance was the effect of a diabolical plot to murder Mr. Parsons
and Mrs. Brown, and to conceal the crime by firing the house, now
became obvious; and the utmost exertions were made by the police to
apprehend the perpetrators of the foul deed. Several persons, whose
conduct was deemed suspicious, were taken into custody; but as the
evidence against them was very trifling, they were discharged. At
length, however, the real murderer was apprehended at Portsmouth, and
several articles of Mr. Parker's property were found in his possession,
particularly two watches, some silver spoons, a silver ladle, &c.

This person went at Portsmouth by the name of James Watson, but his
real name was James Nesbett. He had been in the artillery for
twenty-three years, and after his discharge lived in Woolwich, where
his wife kept a chandler's shop. They had five children; the eldest
aged eighteen years, and the youngest at this time only sixteen months
old. Nesbett himself followed that vicious and dangerous occupation --
smuggling; bringing lace, silk, &c. from France, and carrying back
other contraband goods from this country. In pursuit of this traffic he
stopped some time at Portsmouth, where he cohabited with a girl of the
town, who was afterwards the principal witness against him.

While sleeping with this girl she observed him to be very much troubled
in his mind, as he frequently started in his sleep, and sometimes
terrified her; so much so, that she left him on that account only. He,
however, allured her back by presents; and, to account for the
unnatural agitation in his sleep, he told her that he had killed two
men in a duel, and one woman with a blow; and also promised to
communicate another important secret to her. From this he was prevented
by his being taken into custody; but he had already told her enough to
induce the strongest suspicions as to his guilt.

When brought to Woolwich the people received him with a shout of
exultation -- a circumstance which affected him so much, that he was
obliged to be carried before the justices, who were then sitting. He
denied the crime with which he was charged; but after his committal to
Maidstone, he confessed that he had been privy to it, having stood
sentinel at the door while the work of destruction was going on inside.
His accomplices he stated to have been old soldiers, whom he did not
know -- a tale as improbable as untrue; for it was distinctly proved
that he was himself the only person engaged.

Nesbett's trial came on July the 28th 1820, when his guilt was
established by a chain of circumstantial evidence so conclusive, that
the jury did not hesitate many minutes about their verdict'.

In addition to other facts proved against him, it appeared that when he
first visited Portsmouth, he was remarked for possessing excellent
sight, but that after the murder he wore, whenever he appeared abroad,
spectacles -- the identical pair he had taken from Mr. Parker. In
addition to the spectacles, he wore different dresses to disguise
himself; but, notwithstanding all his caution, he was known, and
apprehended; not, however, without much difficulty, for he attempted to
shoot the officers, having a case of pistols loaded to the muzzle.
Fortunately he was prevented from firing, and thus was preserved from
having an additional murder to answer for.

Nesbett's countenance indicated great firmness of purpose, but nothing
of atrocity. During his trial he showed great fortitude and
self-possession, which was not disturbed by his hearing the awful
sentence of the law, which consigned him to an ignominious death.

This wretched criminal was executed according to his sentence on
Pennenden Heath, July the 31st 1820. It is gratifying to know that, in
the interval which elapsed between his condemnation and execution, he
acknowledged the justice of his sentence.


ROSALIE CURCHOD
Indicted for Child-Murder, but Acquitted.

THIS lovely but ill-fated girl was a native of Switzerland. Her father
resided at Lausanne, and a young gentleman of that town had paid his
addresses to her, contrary to the wishes of her family, who had forbad
him the house. His attentions, however, were clandestinely continued
for a considerable length of time, until Mademoiselle Curchod's health
becoming seriously affected, her friends, guessing the secret,
determined to remove her far from the cause of her indisposition,
hoping that, by change of scene, her health would be restored, and that
she would forget the object of her attachment. England was resolved
upon as the place of her sojournment. The prospect of so painful a
separation produced the strongest sensation in the minds of the lovers.
An opportunity for a stolen interview was found, and in the tumult of
ardent passion that event occurred which, in the end, plunged the
unhappy object of ill-fated love into the deepest affliction. She
reached England; and the friends to whom she was recommended thought
that, by employing her mind, the purpose of her friends might be more
effectually accomplished, and they therefore placed her at the
boarding-school of a lady named Siffkin, at Barking, in the capacity of
French teacher. There she continued until the month of December, 1818.
In the unhappy interval she experienced the progressive symptoms of
approaching child-birth. On the 20th of December she was delivered of a
male infant unknown to the family. In three days afterwards the dead
body of the infant was found in a pan in her bed-chamber, and in the
result, after a coroner's inquest, she was consigned, in the prime of
youth, beauty, and finished accomplishments, to the horrors of a
dungeon. The author of her sufferings had been informed of the
consequences of their illicit intercourse (but before they became
exposed), and had set out for England with slender means, intending at
all hazards to unite his hand to hers in marriage. He had arrived at
Paris in pursuit of his Journey: but his pecuniary funds being
exhausted, he was detained so long, that he did not reach England until
three days after the victim of his attachment had been committed.

At the ensuing spring assizes she was indicted for the murder at her
child, and at the hour appointed for her trial she was conducted into
court with the assistance of some female attendants. Agitated in every
limb, and overwhelmed with grief, she was almost carried into the dock,
and seated on a chair. She was attired in deep mourning, and her face
was completely concealed with a veil, which, if even removed, would not
have been enough to satisfy the brutal curiosity of some individuals in
court, whose unfeeling anxiety to behold the beauty of her countenance
called forth the indignant animadversion of the judge, who checked the
inhuman indifference to her awful situation. Her head, during the whole
time, was bowed on her bosom. Nothing but the contour of her elegant
person confirmed the opinion entertained of her charms. With great
difficulty. she sobbed aloud, in French, that she was not guilty.

Fortunately for her, the surgeon who attended her during her illness
could not swear that the child had been born alive, and, consequently,
she was acquitted.


JAMES MACKCOULL, alias MOFFAT
Convicted Of Robbery after a Long Career as a Thief.

Mackoull Robbing the Minister of his Watch on Quitting the Pulpit.

The name of this offender is already known to our readers, by his
connexion with his no less notorious compeer, Huffey White, whose case
is already given.

Mackcoull, though he had an honest father, was educated a thief, and
from infancy was initiated into all the mysteries of picking pockets,
shop-lifting, and house-breaking. He was born in the parish of St.
Sepulchre, London, in the year 1763. His father, Benjamin Mackcoull, a
man of good character, was a pocket-book maker; but, being unfortunate
in business, he was appointed a city officer, in which situation he
continued until his death. This poor man did all in his power to bring
his children up in honesty; but, unfortunately, his praiseworthy
exertions proved abortive, in consequence of his wife being a base
unprincipled woman, who might be said to have educated her offspring
for the gallows; for though they all, except one, singularly escaped
such an ignominious death, they are all allowed to have richly merited
it.

James had three sisters and two brothers. The daughters emulated the
example of the mother, and were, with her, frequently convicted of
petty crimes, being among the most expert and notorious thieves in
London. They all lived till within a few years of James's death,
notwithstanding their abandoned and vicious lives. The younger brother,
Benjamin, was executed in 1786 for street-robbery; but the eldest,
John, was always fortunate in eluding justice, though well known as a
notorious character. He was frequently tried for various offences, but
uniformly escaped conviction.

James Mackcoull received a very limited education, and could just read
and write. At school he was frequently detected purloining the
playthings of other boys; and at a very tender age he robbed a poor man
who sold cats'-meat through the streets. The young villain saw the
vender of offal put his money, as he received it, into a bag which hung
on the handle of his barrow, and, watching his opportunity, when the
owner's back was turned, he cut the cord, and carried off the booty.
Emboldened by success, he ventured again and again, and soon associated
himself with gangs who were known to infest the entrances to theatres
and places of amusement.

The father, ignorant of the vicious habits of the son, bound him
apprentice to a leather-stainer, in Clerkenwell; but James, encouraged
by his mother, adhered to his former comrades, and soon gave occasion
to his master to discharge him.

He now became a notorious thief, and, by shifting his quarters,
continued to elude detection; but, having been engaged with another in
snatching the seals of a gentleman's watch in St. James's Park, they
were pursued. Mackcoull's companion was apprehended; and he only
escaped detection by going at night on board the Tender, at Tower Hill,
and entering as a volunteer.

For two years he remained on board the Apollo frigate, in the character
of an officer's servant, and afterwards on board the Centurion, in the
same capacity. In the absence of temptation even a rogue may be honest;
and Mackcoull acquired so good a character in the navy, that he was in
a few years appointed purser's steward, and in the course of nine years
saved a considerable sum of money. In 1785 he returned to London,
where, in a short time, he dissipated all his earnings in the society
of the dissolute and abandoned, and to repair his finances had recourse
to his former habits of dishonesty. He soon eclipsed all his companions
in iniquity, and shone pre-eminent as a pugilist, horse-racer,
cock-fighter, gambler, swindler, and pickpocket. To carry on his
depredations with success he assumed various characters, and succeeded
in all. Not even the sanctuary of religion was free from his desperate
villainy; for he frequently went there to pick pockets, and on one
occasion deprived the preacher of his watch, on his way from the
pulpit. The knowledge and acuteness he displayed, as well as the
successful manner in which he avoided discovery, procured him among his
associates the appellation of "The Heathen Philosopher."

Being at Brentford during an election, Mackcoull saw a self-important
baker very busy among the electors, and observed him put a bundle of
notes into his side pocket. Desirous of possessing the notes, Mackcoull
made various attempts, but failed until the evening, when, learning the
baker's extreme passion for the science of astronomy, he went into his
shop and invited him out to view a strange alternating star. The baker
declared he would not lose the sight for fifty pounds, and accordingly
hastened into the street, and, while he was busy with his telescope
viewing the starry heavens, Mackcoull contrived to ease him of the
notes in his breast pocket, after which he quitted the spot and
hastened to London.

A thief, to use a vulgar adage, throws out with a shovel what he brings
in with a spoon; or, in other words, his improvidence is greater than
his precarious gains, and, in addition to a thousand other
apprehensions, he lives in continual dread of want and poverty.
Mackcoull, notwithstanding all his address, was in continual pecuniary
embarrassments, and when unsuccessful as a pickpocket at the theatre,
or a fair, had to go to bed supperless. His particular misfortunes seem
to have consoled, on various occasions, his less notorious brethren,
for it has passed as a remarkable saying among the thieving tribe,
'That the best hand will miss at times, like Jem Mackcoull.'

In his twenty-eighth year he married the mistress of a brothel, and
assisted her in furnishing her house in Clifford's Inn Passage, which,
in addition to its being a receptacle for unfortunate women, he made a
depot for stolen property. He planned several burglaries, but was an
actor in none. The stolen property he always deposited in a recess,
formed by the shutting up of a window, which he called Pitt's picture,
in allusion to the window-tax. This secret recess was, however,
discovered by the ferrets of the law, and Mackoull was obliged to make
a trip to the West Indies, a phrase he frequently made use of to
signify a removal from London,. His friends endeavoured to hush the
business, but their efforts failed, and Mackcoull was compelled to quit
the country.

In 1802 he arrived at Hamburg, and took the name of Moffat. In company
with two others he affected the air of a merchant, and pretended to
have large consignments from England and Scotland. Of the latter
country he said he was a native. He had recourse here to his former
practices, and supported himself by gaming, picking pockets, and
shop-lifting. He was no sooner suspected in one town than he removed to
another, but had to make a precipitate retreat in 1805, and came home.
In London he found it not prudent to stop, and therefore went to
Edinburgh, where he arrived the 10th of September, and called himself
Moffat.

In Scotland he followed his usual practices, and, the better to conceal
his real character, pretended to follow the business of a dyer of
leather, and took premises for the purpose, into which skins sere seen
to be taken, but no one ever saw any coming out. A gentleman pickpocket
was then a character unknown north of the Tweed; and Mackcoull had so
plentiful a harvest, that he brought his wife from London, and she
passed in Edinburgh for a genteel proper woman. Being of a facetious
turn, full of anecdote, and not deficient in low wit, Mackcoull was
regarded as an agreeable companion, and was known in the different
taverns and coffee-houses as the good-humoured red-faced Englishman.

In the beginning of November, 1806, William Begbie, porter to the
British Linen Company, was assassinated in the entry leading to the
bank at Edinburgh, and robbed of a bag containing five thousand pounds.
Though this daring murder took place in clear day-light, the
perpetrator was never discovered; but subsequent events lead to the
presumption of Mackcoull being the ruthless assassin. The large notes,
payment of which was stopped, were afterwards found in a spot
frequented by Mackcoull, who no doubt purposely left them there.

Until 1808 Mackcoull committed his depredations with impunity; But
about this period he was detected picking a gentleman's pocket in the
theatre; for which offence he was committed to prison; but, strange to
say, he was liberated without being prosecuted. He now returned to
London, and concealed himself for some time in the neighbourhood of
Somers Town, but again visited Scotland the following year. on his
arrival he was apprehended for passing forged notes; but having
artfully got change of a five-pound note on his journey in presence of
a fellow-passenger, the latter, a respectable man, came forward and
procured Mackcoull's liberation. After this he visited Glasgow, Perth,
Dundee, and Montrose, and during his migrations met with a notorious
character named French, with whom be agreed to rob one of the Scotch
banks, and they hastened to London to procure the necessary implements.
On their arrival French was apprehended on a charge of burglary, tried,
and sentenced to transportation for life, in accordance with which he
was sent to the hulks. In consequence of this event the robbery of the
Scotch banks was deferred.

Meeting with the notorious Huffey White, whose case we have already
given, Mackcoull agreed with this expert housebreaker to rob the
Chester bank. White, having just escaped from the hulks, was very poor,
so that Mackcoull had to provide for the expenses of the journey, &c.
White at the time lodged with a blacksmith, named Scoltock, who lived
in Tottenham Court Road, and who supplied him with the implements of
housebreaking. Arrangements having been made with this descendant of
Vulcan, the villains set off for Chester, to reconnoitre, desiring that
the keys, &c. should be forwarded to them on a certain day, directed to
James Wilson.

Scoltock executed his order with punctuality; but on the way the box,
in which the implements were sent, yielded to the friction of the
coach, and one of the skeleton keys protruded through an opening. An
officer being sent for, he concealed himself in the office until
Mackcoull and White called, and then took them into custody. When taken
before the magistrate, Mackcoull said his name was James Martin, and
White said his was Evans. Not being able to give an account of
themselves, they were committed, May the 17th, 1810, to the House of
Correction, as rogues and vagabonds.

Information of the transaction being given at Bow Street, an officer
was dispatched to Chester, who soon recognised this pair of notorious
villains. White was tried the ensuing assizes for being at large before
the expiration of his sentence, and was condemned to death, but had his
sentence commuted to transportation for life. On the 10th of January,
1811, Mackcoull was discharged from Chester Castle, and on his arrival
in London he met French, who had made his escape from the hulks, and
they agreed to go and put their former determination of robbing a
Scotch bank into execution. But as neither of them were very expert at
the business, they resolved to release Huffey White from the hulks,
whose abilities in this way were of a superior order.

They soon effected the escape of White, and all three set off for
Glasgow, Scoltock, as usual, promising to send the necessary implements
of housebreaking after them; for which he was to be paid when the job
was done; indeed, so poor were the parties, that French had to sell his
furniture to meet the expenses of the journey.

On their arrival in Glasgow they took lodgings in the house of a Mrs.
Stewart, and gave their names as Moffat, Stone, and Down, and spent
their time chiefly in smoking and drinking, occasionally going out to
adjust their keys, &c. under the pretence of fishing. The Paisley Union
Bank, in Ingram Street, was the object of their attack; but on the
arrival of the implements they found they could not open it. White,
alias Down, thought to obviate this difficulty by making a pewter key,
but neither would this answer, and Mackcoull had to set off to London
to give Scoltock the necessary instructions. On his return they were
too successful, and robbed, one Saturday night, the bank of Scotch
notes to the amount of twenty thousand pounds, after which they posted
to London, changing a twenty-pound note at every stage.

As the thieves had, on leaving the Bank, locked the doors, the robbery
was not discovered until Monday morning, when a person went in pursuit
of the fugitives, and traced them to London. An officer from Bow Street
was then dispatched in search of the robbers, and that evening White
was apprehended in Scoltock's house, where Mackcoull had only a few
minutes left him, to provide some wine. The implements of housebreaking
were found on the prisoner, but no money; for on their arrival in
London Mackcoull had deposited the whole with the noted pugilist, Bill
Gibbons, who acted as flash banker to such characters. There is no
honour among thieves. Mackcoull assured his companions that the booty
amounted only to sixteen thousand pounds, thus pocketing four thousand
pounds for himself. On the apprehension of White, Mackcoull went into
concealment, and French, who dreaded the ferrets of the law, sent for
Mrs. Mackcoull, and proposed, as the only way to save their lives, to
return the money to the bank, and thus hush the business. To this she
consented, and her husband also acquiesced with the view of making his
own fortune. His wife had been an acquaintance of Sayer, an officer who
attended on the king, and through him she procured a pardon for her
husband as well as for White and French for escaping from the hulks, on
giving up the money to the bank- To this proposal the agents readily
agreed; but, when Mrs. Mackcoull brought the notes, they were found
only to amount to eleven thousand nine hundred and forty-one pounds,
with which the gulled agents were obliged to return to Scotland.

The pardon obtained for White and French did not relieve them from
their former sentence of transportation, and, accordingly, White was
once more transmitted to the hulks. French for a while kept out of the
way; but, meditating revenge on Mackcoull for the part he had acted,
the latter contrived to have him apprehended, and sent to New South
Wales.

Mackcoull, being now in possession of eight thousand pounds, had it
reported that he was gone to the West Indies, when, in fact, he was
passing the notes in Scotland, in the purchase of English bills. In
1812 he was arrested in a brothel in London, having abandoned his own
wife for the charms of one Mary Reynolds, who had turned housekeeper,
alias mistress, of a brothel. Mackcoull was now transmitted to Glasgow,
where he arrived the 8th of April, 1812, and committed to gaol. While
here he did not seriously deny the robbery, but offered to make
restitution to the bank, and promised their agent one thousand pounds,
and gave them a bill for four hundred pounds. The bank not being at
this time prepared to substantiate his guilt, he was discharged the
following July, and the agent of the bankers absolutely received from
Mr. Harmer, of London, the one thousand pounds, which, however,
Mackcoull subsequently recovered by suit at law from that able
solicitor, he having paid it without sufficient authority.

Mackcoull now considered himself beyond all danger, and in company with
one Harrison, a brother of Mary Reynolds, made several trips to
Scotland, and purchased commercial bills in the name of James Martin, a
merchant, and everywhere introduced his friend Harrison as a most
respectable merchant. In 1812 he opened a deposit account with Messrs.
Marsh and Co. bankers, in the name of James Ibel, and had in their
hands at one period above two thousand pounds.

In March, 1813, he again visited Scotland to vend more of the stolen
notes, but was taken into custody, and bills and drafts, in favour of
James Martin, to the amount of one thousand pounds, which he had
purchased, taken from him. Owing; however, to Mackcoull having run his
letters against his Majesty's advocate, he could not again be committed
for the same offence, and consequently he was discharged out of
custody, the bank, however, holding the bills.

On his return to London he paid a, visit to his wife: but an
altercation ensuing, he struck her; for which he was, after being tried
at the Quarter Session, sentenced to six months' imprisonment. While in
'durance vile,' Huffey White 'died in his calling,' an event which gave
Mackcoull mach satisfaction, as he apprehended great danger when he
heard of his old associate below at large.

In 1815 he resolved to recover the bills and drafts from the
magistrates, by whom they had been taken from him; and as they refused
compliance with his request by letters, he visited Glasgow in person,
and demanded, in the most insolent manner, the restitution of what he
called his property. This being refused, he commenced an action against
them, which, more than any other case that ever came before a court of
justice, proves the glorious uncertainty of the law; for it continued
to be litigated for five years; and, the bankers having become the
defendants, the country, for the first time, witnessed the singular
fact of an acknowledged thief contending with persons for the property
he had actually stolen from them.

During the progress of this protracted case, Mackcoull attended the
courts of law in person, and gave instructions to his agent. He always
conducted himself with the greatest sang froid and treated with
contempt and derision the allusions made by counsel to his character.
At length it was ruled that Mackcoull should be interrogated in person
before the court; and after some hesitation he consented. This
circumstance was no sooner known, than crowds flocked to hear his
examination, which lasted for several days. He behaved in the most cool
and determined manner; and when his absurd replies elicited a laugh in
court, he always smiled with seeming self-approbation. The account he
gave of himself was that he traded as a merchant, and that he chiefly
transacted business with one James Martin, whose residence he could not
tell. He objected to many questions put to him with the acuteness of a
lawyer, and at length the session rose without having come to any
decision; and Mackcoull returned to London in great spirits, to arrange
with his brother John about some letters he had, on his examination,
promised to write to Mr. James Martin, who was obviously a fictitious
character. The following letter and answer were then prepared by John,
and both, as was afterwards proved, in his handwriting:--

     Edinburgh, 10th May, 1819.
'Dear Sir -- I am still detained here with that infernal suit against
the partners of the Paisley Union Bank, whose agents here, while in the
act of themselves robbing that bank with both hands, have made myself a
most unwilling instrument in their hands, and art and part guilty with
them. The Lord Ordinary, when I complain to him of this, tells me, that
they must not be obstructed in their lawful avocations; and how long I
am to be stuck up between the bank and their agents, or, in other
words, placed between the hammer and the anvil, will depend upon the
ability of the bank or of myself to continue the litigation. For six
years has this process been most actively carried on before Lord
Gillies, Ordinary, who they say is among the hest of the Scottish
judges, without one relevant averment, and without a definitive
judgment. Though his lordship sees the most pointed charge of forgery
made by me against one of the bank agents, and has admission of all of
them distinctly stated upon his record, of their having robbed me by a
prostitution of the police law, he, nevertheless, refuses judgment:--
he has not energy to direct them to return my money, which the defender
admits was forcibly taken from my person.

'His lordship, after six years' litigation, is going to send the bank
defence to the Jury Court, namely, that I and one White robbed with
false keys their bank; and this pretty little defence, which the
rhetoric of Mr. Erskine, the celebrated Scotch counsel, who wrote on
Black of Inverkeithing's case, has spun out in two thousand folio
pages, embraces all that they have been speaking about for the last six
years. Lord Gillies, fatigued with this nonsense, has at last obliged
them to plead issuably, and to confine their pleas to the fact of the
robbery; but, ere the bank can enter the Jury Court, it has occurred to
them as proper, after so long an acquaint. once, to discover, from
myself, who I am? where I come from? what business I follow? and
whether my conduct through life has been, like theirs, honest and
moral?--it has pleased the Scottish judges to indulge their curiosity
in all this, so that the bank agents, as one of the honourable judges
expressed himself from the bench, might have an opportunity, from "his
biographical sketch," to trammel me before the jury, in case the
history of my life, taken by surprise, and upon their interrogatories,
shall be incorrect. This, you must know, is Scotch law, and Scotch
practice, and, I may add, Scotch breeding; and I have, of course,
submitted to three several examinations before this inquisitorial
court. These honourables have now got my life and travels for those
last sixteen years, together with some account of yourself; for they
have made, of necessity, the discovery that you and I have been most
deeply connected in business together. What this biographical account
may suggest to the fertile mind of our modern Cicero, whose grimaces in
pleading are really frightful, I know not; but, if you come to this
country soon, you had better empty your pockets ere you cross the
Tweed, for greater ruffians never infested Hounslow Heath than those
who have robbed me with impunity. I have myself expended eight hundred
pounds in my attempts to get my money from them, of which, without the
least dread or fear for the consequences, they openly confess in a
court of law that they robbed me! I want a judgment in terms of their
own confession, and that I cannot get. I never knew what a court of
inquisition was till I came to Scotland. In my judicial declaration, I
was asked if I made any entry, in any memorandum book, of the money I
received from your cousin and Harrison? "declare, I dare say I did."
Interrogated, What book I referred to, and where it now is? "declare, I
think it was a memorandum book for the year 1815, which, I think, is
now in the hands of Mr. James Martin, but that I am not sure." Being
requested to write Mr. James Martin to transmit all his books, for the
purpose of being put into the hands of the clerk of the process,
"declare, that he has no objection to write to Mr. Martin, as desired,
but be is sure Mr. Martin will not pass the books out of his hands." So
you see what has passed; and it lies with you to say what I shall
report to the Lord Ordinary. The session has risen, and will not again
sit till May, when I shall thou use every exertion in my power to get
away with my property and with my character from that court and that
country where I now am, through the medium of a jury. I have sacrificed
eight hundred pounds of law expenses. I have lost six years of my time,
together with the fatigue and trouble of going and returning to London,
and hitherto for no other purpose than to hear myself abused. For these
six years my life has been made a burden to me. Mr. Jamieson, who
conducts my suit, often tells me, what I believe to be true, that not a
person in the whole United Kingdom could have manifested so much
resolution and firmness; and he tells me that not one case could so
opportunely occur to show the general distress of the nation. God only
knows whether the practice is general: if so, I sincerely pity those
who shall run the hundredth part of the gauntlet I have done; for it is
a general robbery. The Scots live like fishes -- the large devour the
small!

'If there is any truth in the story about the bank being at all robbed
with false keys, it may, as I am told, happen that this man White, who
is said to be my accomplice, may turn out to be some Edinburgh deacon
or magistrate, with a gold chain and cocked hat; for it was by them,
along with, the procurator fiscal, that my money was first of all taken
forcibly from my person, under the pretence of a crime, but for the
covered purpose of taking my money. They have dropped the charge, but
detained my property!

You can have no conception to what length corruption and oppression is
gone in this part of the United Kingdom; and what is most lamentable,
the higher orders of society are chiefly implicated in it: this you
will see from the advocation. In short, my good air, all I can tell is,
that, after the most active research which, during the course of six
years, could be made after roguery, all that is hitherto made out is,
that, of all of us concerned in that fraudulent inquiry, there is but
one honest man among us, and that is myself: they are all of them
chargeable, from the face of the records, but one. But, put jests
aside, I have been shockingly used; and, if you can make a step down
this way, as a witness for me at the jury trial, I shall be well enough
pleased? I am,' &c.

[The reading of this letter occasioned a great deal of amusement in
court, from the grave folly in which it is couched, particularly its
reflections on the Scotch courts.] 'And this,' continued the learned
counsel, 'is from an honest man, demanding the surrender of his own
books!' He would now read the answer of Mr. Martin, which was of a
piece with the foregoing, and was written according to the instructions
of Mackcoull, by Mackcoull's own brother. The jury would perceive what
a fraternal correspondence it was:--

     'April 13, 1819.
'Sir,-- Your application to me, relative to the books in my possession,
is so very strange and absurd, that I am really at a loss to account
for it. In the name of reason, what can the books have to do with the
bills taken or stolen from your person? It is but a short period since
you informed me that Sir William Forbes and the Commercial Bank had
declared they cancelled the bills -- and I am now told they are not
cancelled. What am I to think of this juggling? if yon report truly, I
do not only think, but am justified in saying, Sir William Forbes and
the Commercial Bankers are a set of scoundrels, and the greatest
villains in existence; and certainly not deserving any credit whatever.
I shall, most assuredly, report their conduct, not only to the bank
directors of England, but post them in every commercial town in Europe.

'Let these fellows have any books belonging to me, or in my possession!
Certainly not. Pray let me ask, how am I to know, when they are in such
villainous hands, what use they may make of them to answer their own
ends and purposes? Afterwards I may then be told by some of the gang,
"O, they are honourable men, and would not do so bad an action!" and so
to be cozened by their honourableships. Although I am but a plain,
blunt Englishman, I know these sort of honourables too well to trust
them with any thing they can construe to make subservient to their
purpose. I would not, after such swearing, lying quirks, tricks, and
subterfuges as these honourables have been guilty of, trust them with
the piece of tobacco paper now before me. I therefore decidedly decline
having any thing to do with such honourables, and wish to have no other
communication with them but in a court of justice, where I could
scarcely even there think myself safe (particularly in a Scotch court,
where they are permitted to say and swear what they please through
their agency.)

'I shall be away from here in a day or two, either for Berne or the
Italian States. I am exceedingly ills and have been for a long time;
indeed my health is daily declining. Your agent, Mr. Jamieson,
certainly knows what is best to be done with these honourables; and,
therefore, if there is no other alternative, you must wait with
patience the issue. Trusting you are better in health than I am, I
remain
     'Your very sincere friend,
     (Signed) 'JAMES MARTIN'

At the close of every session, during the progress of the case,
Mackcoull went regularly to London by sea; and returned in the same
manner, when the courts met. On these occasions he was to be seen in
Edinburgh every evening at a low public house, surrounded by journeymen
and apprentices, whom he amused with his humorous description of Scotch
bailies, lawyers, and bankers, applying to them the most ludicrous
names and epithets that could be devised, denouncing against them
vengeance and public exposure. He was extremely generous, and was
looked on by this low company as a little king.

During the summer sessions he produced the letters supposed to be to
and from Martin, and, as if now confident of success, he urged his
counsel to accelerate the business; but, as before, the court rose
without coming to any decision. The bank was at this time in a critical
situation: unless they proved Mackcoull's participation in the robbery,
and that the bills &c. were purchased with notes stolen from the bank,
they would have to deliver up to Mackcoull not only the bills, &c., but
to pay all attendant expenses, besides incurring the disgrace of losing
the action -- an action unparalleled in the annals of any court of
Europe, brought by a public depredator -- a convicted rogue and
vagabond -- who was at large, and who was prosecuting with their own
money a respectable banking company, for attempting to keep part of the
property of which he had robbed them. But this was not all. Mackcoull's
intention, if successful, was to follow up the decision with an action
for damages, in which it was the opinion of many that he would also
succeed.

In December 1819, Mackcoull and his agent urged the matter so
strenuously, that the trial was fixed for the 20th of February 1820;
and the issue to be tried was, whether Mackcoull was concerned in the
robbery.

To prepare for the trial, the bank sent Mr. Donovan, an intelligent
officer in Edinburgh, from Glasgow to London, to trace the route the
robbers had taken nine years before, and to procure witnesses. Donovan
was successful, and brought down with him Scoltop, who had prepared the
instruments by means of which the robbery was effected, Mrs. Huffey
White, several waiters at inns, and even Mrs. Mackcoull, who consented
to give evidence against her husband. The most eminent lawyers at the
Scotch bar were engaged on each side; and on the morning of the trial,
May the 11th 1820, every avenue to the court was crowded to excess, so
intense was the interest excited by the case. The result was against
Mackcoull, for the witnesses completely established his guilt; and so
unexpected was the appearance of some of them to him, that he
frequently ran out of court, and on seeing Scoltop actually swooned
away.

Mackcoull's career of villainy was now near its end. On the 19th of
June he was indicted for the robbery, in the High Court of Justiciary;
and the same witnesses being again examined, the jury returned a
verdict of Guilty -- Death. Towards the conclusion of the trial
Mackcoull often looked about him with a kind of vacant stare, and was
observed frequently to mutter and grind his teeth. When the verdict was
announced he gave a malignant grin; and when sentence was passed, he
bowed respectfully to the court. On being carried back to jail his
fortitude forsook him, and he appeared overwhelmed with despair. At
this moment he said with emotion, "Had not the eye of God been upon me,
such a connected chain of evidence never could have been brought
forward!" His spirits, however, soon returned, and he received the
number of visitors, who were led by curiosity to see him, with great
cheerfulness.

Although he had treated his wife with great unkindness, she now came
forward and supplied him during his imprisonment with every luxury in
profusion. She also made application for a reprieve: and whether from
her exertion or not, on the l4th of July a respite arrived, and in
three weeks after a reprieve during his majesty's pleasure.

All who visited Mackcoull did not do so from mere curiosity. One man
went for the laudable purpose of awakening in his mind some sentiments
of religion, and to induce him to repent of his manifold crimes, as a
necessary means of salvation. This person was attached to the
Methodists, and one day brought with him a friend, a missionary, whom
he introduced to Mackcoull. The convict received his guests with great
politeness, and soon began to question the missionary so closely
concerning his travels in Germany. that he was glad to fly to Poland
and Silesia; when, finding that Mackcoull had not been there, he began
to expatiate on the ignorance and barbarism of the people, wham he
represented as eating jackasses. 'Hold! hold!' said Mackcoull, 'I do
not believe you; for, if they eat asses, how the devil did you escape
being devoured?'

In the month of August, the wretched prisoner fell into a natural
decline, and his mental faculties completely forsook him. In the course
of a short time his hair, which had been previously nearly jet black,
became a silver gray, and at length he died in the county jail of
Edinburgh on the 22nd day of December 1820, and was decently interred
at the expense of his wife, in the Calton burying ground.

Thus terminated the mortal existence of a man who seemed destined by
Nature for a better fate. That he possessed abilities which, with
honest and industrious application, might have rendered him a useful
member of society, cannot be denied: but it is difficult to overcome
the effect of early impressions -- he was reared and nurtured in a
hot-bed of vice. He felt no spur, no incentive, to virtue; and he
implicitly followed the impulse of a polluted conception. His whole
life may thus be considered as one uninterrupted career of villainy,
almost without a parallel. That he did not expiate his crimes on a
gibbet, was merely owing to circumstances which are not worth
explaining; but, during the period of his imprisonment, he suffered
many deaths. Of the fatal tree he spoke without fear; but the dread of
a future tribunal paralyzed his understanding. He saw and trembled at
the approach of that unerring shaft which no earthly ruler could
control; while the horrors of his mind, by affecting the nervous
system, accelerated his dissolution. The retrospect of his life often
obtruded itself with new modifications of insupportable reflection --
the prospect of futurity he could only contemplate with fearful
apprehension. He felt the wakening of a seared conscience, from which
there was no retreat. He crawled about, grinding his teeth; his
intervals of slumber were broken and interrupted with the most
frightful visions, and he saw the hairs of his head become grey with
anguish! The picture is too horrible to finish. To Religion he was a
stranger, a total stranger, in this hour of need: he felt not her
soothing influence -- he cherished not the hope of forgiveness or
mercy. Unhappy man! he looked to God as to a cruel and vindictive
ruler, at whose hands he could only expect the full punishment of his
crimes: his resignation was despair!


FREDERICK WHITE
Wrongly Convicted of Highway Robbery, but Pardoned.

The extraordinary escape of this young man from an ignominious death
demands a notice, of which the circumstances of his conviction would
otherwise be unworthy. It appeared on his trial that he was present at
a fire in Wardour Street, Soho, on the 30th of November, 1820, when a
gang of pickpockets, the usual attendants at such scenes, among other
depredations made an attack upon an individual in the crowd, and
succeeded in robbing him of his chain and seals. White, who was near
enough to witness the transaction, was seized by the person robbed,
charged with the theft, and taken in custody to the watch-house. As he
was entirely alone, he could do no more than declare his innocence,
which was attested at the time by a stranger, who followed him to the
watch-house. The complainant and the guardians of the night naturally
enough suspected this voluntary witness for an accomplice, and
discredited his testimony: White, however, who knew its truth, begged
of him 'to come to-morrow for him.' He accordingly attended at the
police-office in the morning, and obtained precisely the same credit he
had gained the previous evening. White was, therefore, fully committed:
the grand jury found the bill against him on Wednesday, December the
5th; and on the Friday following he was brought to his trial, and
capitally convicted. The only evidence of importance against him was
that of the prosecutor, who swore to his person, and that he kept
pulling, and made a screw to get the watch out at the time he (the
prosecutor) had hold of him. Two persons who had accompanied the
prosecutor to the fire did not see the robbery, being then at some
distance, but assisted in securing and conveying the prisoner to the
watch-house. The stranger who had previously appeared as the prisoner's
witness, made it his business to examine the list at the Old Bailey;
and without any communication with, or solicitation from, White or his
friends, again tendered his evidence on his behalf. His testimony was,
that the prosecutor, after declaring his loss, seemed much confused,
and stood two minutes or more before he laid hold of any body: that
presently after there was a great rush of all the mob; the prisoner was
seized, and he followed him to the watch-house to say he did not think
the prosecutor could swear to the man, as he was greatly confused, and
appeared much intoxicated. The prosecutor being again called, declared
he was sober at the time; and this testimony being corroborated by his
two companions, who both declared he was perfectly sober, the stranger
of course was discredited, and the conviction of the prisoner
necessarily followed.

The unhappy youth concealed his actual situation from his friends, in
the delusive hope that some chance would save both him and them the
exposure, till it was too late; for, strange as it may appear, his
first communication to his mother of his awful situation was not made
until the morning on which the grand jury found the bill against him;
and so little acquainted were his friends and himself of his danger, or
the common means of averting it, that a learned gentleman, a relation
of the family, and who might have rendered him great assistance, was
left wholly unacquainted with the facts of the case till the trial was
over.

Such was the situation of the youth when his unhappy fate attracted the
attention of Mr. Sheriff Waithman, who ascertained, from undoubted
testimony, the previous good character and conduct of the prisoner
himself, and the respectability of his parents, with whom he resided,
in the neighbourhood of the fire, to which his curiosity unfortunately
led him.

That he was unconnected with the gang by whom the robbery was committed
is obvious, from the circumstance that, although there were ten or
twelve of them together, the prisoner used no endeavours to escape; not
the slightest attempt was made to rescue him; nor had he been visited
during the whole of his imprisonment by any persons but those of his
family, or their immediate friends. The fact, however, was put beyond
doubt by the affidavit of a respectable gentleman, who was wholly
ignorant of White's unfortunate situation, but who, when referred to,
deposed (in corroboration of a statement previously made by the
prisoner) that he was passing near the spot on the night of the fire,
and within a few minutes of the time of the robbery; that he there saw
and spoke to White; that he was entirely alone, and no person whatever
in company or conversation with him.

The stranger, who so perseveringly appeared on the prisoner's behalf
was proved, by evidence most satisfactory, to be a young man of
character residing with his mother, and in no way acquainted with White
or any of his family; and the veracity of his testimony was established
by the voluntary declarations of eight or ten respectable individuals,
all of whom agreed as to the intoxication of the prosecutor on the
evening in question; which, added to the state of confusion such an
attack was likely to occasion, left no doubt but that he must have been
mistaken in the person of the prisoner.

In the prosecution of his inquiries Sheriff Waithman judged it
important to ascertain the grounds upon which the verdict of the jury
was as founded; and in answer to a letter on that subject, addressed by
him to the foreman, he received a declaration, signed by all the jury,
that their verdict was given upon the conviction that the prosecutor
and his companions were sober at the time of the robbery, and their
disbelief of the evidence of the witness to the contrary, whom they
viewed in the light of an accomplice rather than a disinterested
person, as he stated himself to be.

These concurrent testimonies in the youth's favour were communicated to
Lord Sidmouth as they were obtained; but, to the great surprise of the
sheriff, an obstacle of a serious nature presented itself at the outset
of his exertions. A petition had been delivered at the office of the
secretary of state for the home department, purporting to be signed by
the prisoner, in which he confessed his guilt, and acknowledged the
justice of his sentence. It has, however, been subsequently
established, by the most indubitable testimony, that, although this
petition had been drawn up under an impression generally entertained in
the prison that a denial of guilt would be considered as an imputation
upon the court and the jury, and render all applications for mercy
unavailing, the prisoner, fully aware of this circumstance, could by no
entreaty be prevailed upon to acknowledge guilt, even for the chance of
saving his life. A pious fraud was therefore committed, and the
prisoner's name affixed to the petition by his brother, without his
knowledge or consent.

Lord Sidmouth, the home secretary, received these communications with
caution, not giving the sheriff any hope of a pardon, but determined to
submit the whole to the consideration of Mr. Baron Garrow, before whom
the prisoner was tried; who gave it as his decided opinion that if such
evidence had been brought forward at the trial, the jury would have
found the prisoner not guilty. Lord Sidmouth had now no hesitation in
recommending him as a fit object for the royal clemency, and he was of
course discharged.

At the same time with White a youth named Harley, was liberated from
Newgate on his majesty's free pardon. The circumstances of his case are
singular and remarkable.

Harley was convicted at the January sessions, 1821, of a street robbery
near Northumberland House, on Monday, the 11th of December, 1820. The
prosecutor was surrounded and hustled by fifteen or twenty fellows, and
had his watch forcibly taken from him. He seized one of the gang. but
the others fell upon him directly, rescued their companion, and then
beat the prosecutor unmercifully.

He subsequently described the dress and person of the man who robbed
him; and, upon that description, Harley was taken into custody. He was
put into a room with ten or twelve others, and the prosecutor, when
sent by the officers, recognized him immediately.

The evidence of the prosecutor, on the trial, was positive and direct.
He saw the prisoner pull the watch from him, and hand it to another.
When asked if he was sure of his person, he replied, 'If he was tarred
and feathered all over, except his face, I could swear to him.'

Harley, in his defence, attempted to prove an alibi; but as his
witnesses were the inmates of a brothel, where he had actually been at
the time, they received no credit, and he was found Guilty, and
received sentence of death.

Fortunately for him the prosecutor swore that he knew his person
previous to the time of the robbery, having had Harley pointed out to
him as a notorious thief on a certain Saturday; on which day, it
afterwards appeared, Harley had been in custody on another charge. This
fact was brought under the cognizance of the secretary of state, and it
appeared that another person, exactly resembling Harley, both in person
and dress, was known as a hustler, a respite followed of course; and
the prosecutor stating that he swore to him on the presumption of his
being the person so pointed out, a free pardon was obtained.

Between White and Harley there was no similarity, further than their
innocence of the crime for which they had been convicted. White was a
youth of correct morals and virtuous habits, but Harley was known as a
bad character; and, on his hair-breadth escape, he returned to his
former vicious companions.


JOHN THOMPSON AND JOHN BARNICOAT
Executed for the Murder of William Hancock.

THERE is every reason to believe that the latter of these unfortunate
men died innocent of the crime for which he suffered. In proof of this
opinion we have, in addition to his own dying declaration, the
testimony of his guilty companion on the fatal gallows. Jurymen should
always bear in mind that the accused is entitled to the benefit of
every possible doubt which the case admits of, and we do not know why
the witnesses for this unhappy man, who proved a complete alibi, were
considered unworthy of credit. They differed certainly from each other
in immaterial facts; but when have two men, without previous
communication, given precisely the same account of a trivial
occurrence?

On the night of the 12th of August, 1820, several robberies, and one
murder took place, on the highway, near Helston, in Cornwall. A man
named Jose, and his wife, were robbed and wounded, and another man,
named William Hancock, was shot, and treated so unmercifully that he
died a few days after. Previous to his death, however, Barnicoat was
brought before him, when he declared that he was one of the men who
robbed him, and identified him as the man who struck him with a long
pole after he had been shot. Barnicoat denied this, upon which the
dying man asked him, 'How he could say so, as he stood over him, and
threatened to knock his brains out.' Hancock also identified John
Thompson as one of the villains who had attacked him.

In consequence of Hancock's dying declaration, Barnicoat, John
Thompson, and his brother, Thomas Thompson, were committed to gaol, and
brought to trial, March the 30th, 1821. Barnicoat produced witnesses to
prove an alibi, but as they contradicted each other in parts of their
testimony, they were disbelieved, and a verdict of guilty was
pronounced against Barnicoat and John Thompson. Thomas Thompson was
acquitted, the declaration of the murdered Hancock not having included
him. Barnicoat was in his twenty-fourth year, and Thompson only in his
seventeenth.

On Monday, April 2, 1821, these two miserable youths underwent the
awful sentence of the law at Launceston. About half past nine they were
lead to the scaffold, which was erected in the Castle Green, adjoining
to the gaol. Barnicoat manifested a considerable degree of firmness;
but it was found necessary to support Thompson, who was placed on a
chair on the drop. Whilst standing on the fatal platform, the chaplain
asked Barnicoat if he still persisted in his declaration of being
innocent of the offences for which he was about to suffer. He replied,
with much earnestness, that he did; adding, that he knew so more about
the attack on Jose, or the murder of Hancock, except what he had heard
of them, than the child unborn, and that he was at home in bed during
the whole of the night on which the attacks took place. For the truth
of his assertions respecting his innocence he solemnly appealed to
Thompson, who was now beside him, and about to suffer with him.
Thompson confirmed the declaration of Barnicoat, as far as came under
his own knowledge. He declared that Barnicoat was not present at either
the attack on Jose or the murder of Hancock, nor did he know any thing
of them; the persons concerned were himself, his brother William and
Thomas Dawe; that Dawe was the person who shot both Mrs. Jose and
Hancock; and that it was he himself who carried the pole, and who beat
Hancock after he fell: the pole he had was the handle of a pike. The
necessary preparations being completed, the chaplain spent a few
minutes in prayer with the culprits, and then withdrew; almost
immediately after, Barnicoat gave the signal previously agreed we and
with his companion was launched eternity, in presence of a great
concourse of spectators.


BRIDGET BUTTERLY AND BRIDGET ENNIS
Executed for the Murder of Miss Thompson.

MURDER becomes doubly revolting when perpetrated by a female, and
receives its last hue of enormity when committed without provocation.
These malefactors were natives of Dublin, and Butterly had been servant
with Captain Peck, who resided at Portland Place on the banks of the
canal, north of the city. The captain's wife, Mrs. Peck, author of
several novels, did not live with her husband, but he kept under his
protection a young lady named Thompson, alias Bailis, a native of
England. Butterly states that while in Captain Peck's service she had
improper connexion with her master, and on being turned out of his
service she became jealous of Miss Thompson, and consequently wished to
do her some harm.

It is but justice to state that Captain Peck denied having had any
improper connexion with Butterly, but she declared to the contrary a
few minutes before her execution, and it is not likely that on the
verge of the grave she would persist in a falsehood, which served no
purpose but to add to the infamy of her own memory.

After leaving the service of Captain Peck she went to lodge with one
O'Brien, in Summer Place, where she had Ennis for a fellow lodger. The
latter, after some time, proposed visiting England -- the common
resource of all the vagabond Irish, from the Giants' Causeway to Cape
Clear. Butterly consented, and offered to provide funds for the journey
by robbing the house of Captain Peck. This was agreed to, and on the
28th of March, 1821, they watched the house until they saw the captain
go into town, when Butterly went up and knocked at the door. Miss
Thompson received her with great kindness, shook her by the hand, and
took her into the parlour, where Butterly took up a child of two years
old, and began to caress it. In a few minutes Ennis knocked at the
door, and on gaining admission she desired Butterly to put a
handkerchief round Miss Thompson's mouth, to prevent her from giving
alarm. Butterly immediately did as desired, and dragged the poor young
lady down stairs into the kitchen, where she kept her until Ennis had
procured the trunk and writing desk, in which was money to a
considerable amount.

Ennis on going away cried out from the top of the kitchen stairs,
'Butterly, don't injure the young lady on your life.' But she had no
sooner closed the door after her, than jealous fury took possession of
the atrocious wretch, and she took up the poker, with which she struck
Miss Thompson on the head, and repeated her blow until life was
extinguished. The sight of death seems to have softened the savage
barbarity of her heart; for, with an unaccountable impulse, she took up
the mangled body in her arms, and wished that she could again infuse
life into that once beauteous form. But as this was now impossible she
thought of her own safety, and ran up stairs. In the hall she met Miss
Thompson's child; kissed it, and carried it into the parlour, after
which she took her departure. On going to her lodgings she was alarmed
by not finding Ennis at home, and suspecting that all was not right she
became dreadfully agitated.

In the mean time, Captain Peck's servant, who had followed her master
to the market, returned, and not gaining immediate admission looked
down the kitchen window, where she saw her mistress lying on the floor.
Giving the alarm, the door was forced open, when the robbery and murder
were quickly made known, and thousands flocked to Portland Place, to
inform themselves of a fact which at first appeared too atrocious for
belief without ocular demonstration.

The sensation produced in Dublin by this mid-day murder was intense;
the youth and beauty of the deceased deeply affected all who saw her
mangled remains; and, fortunately for the ends of justice, the culprits
did not long enjoy their ill-acquired wealth. Ennis went to a grocer in
Great Britain Street, and having ordered some tea tendered a note,
which she called a pound-note, for payment. The grocer, whose name was
M'Gloin, seeing that it was a ten pound-note, questioned her, and
finding that she became alarmed he sent for a peace-officer, and had
her taken into custody. The note was soon identified by Captain Peck,
and Ennis having mentioned her lodgings, the officers proceeded
thither, when they found Butterly, with part of the money, as well as
the trunk and writing-desk; for Ennis had returned soon after Butterly,
and deposited these things in her room.

These wretched women were no sooner committed to prison than they
acknowledged their guilt, and, through the influence of the priest who
attended them, Captain Peck was put in possession of the remainder of
his money. On the first of the following May they were tried and
convicted, and on Monday the 4th were executed in front of Kilmainham
gaol, amidst an immense concourse of spectators. Soon after they had
been turned off, a butcher's dog got into the circle kept clear about
the fatal drop by the dragoons, who attended for that purpose. One of
these now made a cut of his sword at the dog, who immediately attacked
his horse, and in the confusion which ensued the people imagined that
the soldiers had charged the people. The consequence was a simultaneous
movement to get away, and in the hurry a young man was trampled to
death, and several persons were dangerously hurt. The wretched culprits
on the morning of execution confessed the crime for which they were
about to die, and appeared truly penitent.


DAVID HAGGART, ALIAS JOHN WILSON, ALIAS JOHN MORRISON, ALIAS BARNEY
M'COUL, ALIAS JOHN M'COLGAN ALIAS DANIEL O'BRIEN, ALIAS THE SWITCHER
Executed for the Murder of a Warder in a Jail-break.

DAVID HAGGART was born at a farm-town called the Golden Acre, near
Cannon Mills, in the county of Edinburgh, on the 24th of June, 1801.
His father was a gamekeeper; but as his family increased, he followed
the occupation of a dog-trainer, and was much taken up in accompanying
gentlemen on shooting and coursing excursions. On these occasions David
was employed to assist in keeping the kennel, and the gentlemen who had
their dogs in training took great notice of him, and never failed
giving him a few shillings for paying particular attention to their
dogs

He was also, when very young, taken to the Highlands for two seasons to
carry the bag during the shooting time, and as be was always a merry
boy, the sportsmen took a liking to him, and sent him home with plenty,
so that he never wanted the means of indulging himself in childish
follies.-- In these habits and these indulgencies an intelligent
observer of human nature at once discovers, not the seeds of his vices,
for they had their deep-rooted origin in human depravity, but the soil
that pushed them forward to such an early and awful maturity. Perhaps
there is nothing in every point of view more injurious to young
persons, than a profuse supply of pocket money in proportion to their
circumstances and stations in life. It takes off every stimulus to
industry, and every incentive to frugality; promotes a spirit of
selfishness, pride, and contempt of authority; exposes to the snares of
evil company; multiplies the wants, and consequently enhances the
privations of future life, or leads to unjust means of avoiding them.

David Haggart acknowledged, that although he was so much employed in
assisting his father in his business, his education was not neglected.
His father early instructed him in religion;-- but while pursuing a
course of life so replete with temptations to vice, it seemed only like
building with one hand and pulling down with the other. Children are
not merely to be told the way in which they should go -- but 'trained
up' to go in it;-- they should not only be brought up in the nurture,
but in the admonition of the Lord. Discipline must be carefully
exercised, as well as instruction diligently imparted. In addition to
domestic instruction, David was sent to school, where he acquired
considerable knowledge of English grammar, writing, and arithmetic. He
appears to have been a sharp active lad, and was always the leader of
his schoolmates, both in learning and in sports. He did not recollect
ever losing his place in the class for deficiency in acquiring his
lessons, but was often punished for playing truant.-- This is an
offence which boys at school too seldom look upon in the light of a
crime. Many a boy, who would feel ashamed of being detected in what he
considered a mean dishonourable action, will speak with great
self-approbation of the adroitness with which he managed an enterprise
of this nature; and too often parents are found thoughtless enough to
encourage such conduct by making a laugh of it, and even relating their
own feats of childhood. A little consideration of the bad principles
thus called into exercise, and the exposure of bad company incurred,
would certainly check such erroneous conduct.

At about ten years of age, the subject of this narrative was seized
with a fever, and on his recovery did not return to school, but stayed
to assist his father in his business, and thus terminated his education
for a considerable time. A trifling accident having occurred at home,
through fear of punishment from his father, he came to the resolution
of quitting his house; and from that fatal hour he dated the
commencement of his sinful career. Perhaps he might, with great
propriety, have gone back to that in which he first slyly staid away
from school, and spent the hours with sinful companions in forbidden
sports. A boy who had never been guilty of disobedience and artifice at
school, would scarcely, on account of a small accident at home, have
taken at once the rash step of forsaking a father's house. Young
people!-- the distinction is not unimportant; if you wish always to
shudder, as you now shudder at the thought of the second step in vice,
take care to shrink from the first.

At this time David observes he had formed no wicked acquaintances;
perhaps he confined this epithet to those who had taken the same
flagrant steps in vice to which he afterwards attained. A well-taught
youth will apply it to all who are capable of disobedience to parents,
artfulness, and irreligion. Being of a bold and fearless disposition,
even at this early period of life, he committed several depredations.
The first of these was stealing a bantam cock, the property of a poor
woman: young Haggart took a fancy to it on account of its great beauty,
and offered to buy it, but the owner would not part with it; so he got
another cock, set the two a fighting, and ran off with his ill-gotten
prize. He also tried shop-lifting, and carried off the till of a poor
woman. He knew and felt all this was wrong: but fully employed in vice,
he took no time to be sorry or repent; beside, he falsely and wickedly
argued that it was of no use for him to repent, for he must fulfil his
fate. There is not a more dreadful delusion, nor one perhaps that the
great enemy of souls more frequently imposes upon wicked men, than that
of charging their sins and miseries on fate. Often have these dangerous
sentiment been uttered, and

still oftener indulged:-- 'It was my lot to get among bad companions,
and so fall into wicked ways.' 'If I am doomed to go on to my ruin, it
is in vain to strive against it.' 'If I am to be saved at last,
something will turn up for my conversion.' What can have a stronger
tendency than sentiments like these to harden men in their sins?

Haggart's next adventure was in accompanying a lad, with whom he had
been very intimate, on a visit to a relation, six miles from Edinburgh.
They saw a pony grazing on the road side, when Haggart, feeling himself
tired, proposed to mount the beast, and return home; his companion did
not object, and they set off at full gallop. The animal was very
restive, and threw them several times. On reaching home they lodged him
in a donkey hut, and kept him there several days, until traced by the
owner, who threatened to have them both punished, but was appeased by
the neighbours. Haggart declared that he had no intention of stealing
the pony, but having once taken the notion of getting a ride home, he
was determined to avail himself of the opportunity, and was afterwards
at a loss how to return the beast.

Shortly after this adventure, be went to attend Leith Races, in May,
1813; he had no previous intention of committing depredations, but
merely to idle a few days, and amuse himself. But 'Satan finds some
mischief still for idle hands to do;' and David Haggart was not the
first, who on a race ground was led into vices and follies of which he
had no previous intention or idea. In the close of the week, being in
state of intoxication, he fell in with a recruiting party at the races,
and got enlisted in the Norfolk militia. He soon learnt to beat the
drum; and afterwards to blow the horn; he liked the red coat and the
soldiering well enough for a while, but soon became tired of it; he
found the confinement disagreeable, and the pay too small for his
extravagant ideas. In about a year his regiment was ordered to England
to be disbanded; and having made interest with his commanding he got
his discharge in Edinburgh and returned to the house of his father, who
again kindly put him to school, where he continued almost nine months,
and obtained a further knowledge of arithmetic an, book-keeping. He was
then bound apprentice to Cockburn and Baird, millwrights and engineers,
for the period of six years. 'I had now,' said Haggart, 'reflected on
my past follies, and formed a resolution of following my new business
with honesty and zeal.' He applied himself closely to work for about
two years, and acquired the good opinion of his masters, and perhaps
inspired his afflicted parents with hopes of his permanent reformation.
At this time he was entrusted to pay in and draw considerable sums of
money at the bank, and appears to have acted with fidelity towards his
masters; but at length he contracted an intimacy with several very
loose characters, and was often engaged in disgraceful adventures in
the streets at night; but they were in some degree limited, by his
parents imposing on him the salutary restriction of keeping early
hours, as also by his ignorance of houses for the reception of stolen
goods. The affairs of his employers becoming involved, David was thrown
on his parents; idleness exposed him afresh to temptation, and he
pursued his former ill-habits with wretched proficiency and success. He
was very fond of company, and having now greater opportunities of
gratifying his propensities, he continually frequented dances and
raffles, where he mingled in the society of both sexes of the most
dissolute character. In less than three months from the time that young
Haggart obtained unrestricted liberty to attend his sinful pleasures,
he found himself, at the early age of sixteen, plunged into such a
state of vice and wretchedness, that his mind could not endure
reflection. He spent whole nights in the streets, or in worse places;
every thing he saw, or heard, or did, was wicked; his nights and his
days were evil; he could not bear to look at his relations, and growing
at last impatient of the restraint of living in his father's house, he
formed the resolution of shifting his scene of action. Among his
wretched associates, he had formed a great intimacy with Barney
M'Guire, an Irishman, considerably older than himself; of a bold,
enterprising spirit, of great bodily strength, and a most dexterous
pick-pocket. Instructed by this veteran in the arts of wickedness, they
agreed to travel to England together, and share the fruits of their
unlawful occupation. It was when in company with, and encouraged by the
daring acts of this man, that he first attempted to pick a pocket in
open day-light; and be it observed, this attempt was made on a race
ground, and on the person of a gentleman who had been very successful
in his bets. Haggart was so eager on his prey as to pull out the pocket
along with the money, and nearly upset the gentleman, who turned
quickly round and examined his hands; but the booty was already passed
to his companion in wickedness, and the gentleman appeared satisfied of
his innocence, but said some one had picked his pocket. The produce of
this achievement was eleven pounds.

From Portobello, Haggart and his wicked companion proceeded to
Jedburgh, and thence to Kelso to attend St. James's fair. They repaired
to the ground soon after breakfast, where they continued until dark.
Having observed a man who had some horses for sale, and who had a bulk,
apparently notes, in his breast pocket, Haggart came up to price a good
looking horse, while Barney acted as his assistant. A discussion
arising respecting the animal's age, the jockey, eager to satisfy them,
held the jaws of the animal and shewed his teeth, and while his arms
were raised, Barney contrived to ease him of the contents of his
pocket, which, however, contained only nine pounds. Haggart immediately
requested to see the horse's paces, and on the jockey complying they
made off when his back was turned. During the day they committed other
depredations, particularly on a gentleman whom Haggart watched all day.

Soon after Dumfries fair invited the attention of the young plunderers:
here they remained three weeks; but M'Guire being already known there
as an old offender, kept in close, and the prosecution of their scheme
of plunder was committed to Haggart and a brother of M'Guire, and as he
also was a well-known pickpocket, Haggart kept at a distance from him,
and never spoke to him in the street. What a wretched thing must it be,
that regard to personal safely compels these chosen companions in vice,
these partners in the gains of iniquity, to disavow and avoid each
other in the presence of their fellow-creatures!

Beside collecting about seven pounds in silver, (perhaps much of it
from persons whom the loss might sink into deep distress,) Haggart,
observing a person going about in quest of change for a ten-pound note,
followed him into the shop of a hosier, under pretence of purchasing
goods, but in fact for the purpose of plundering the unsuspecting
stranger. He secured his booty, and decamped; and the day following,
started with his companions to Annan, and thence to Lockerby, where a
fair was about to be held.

Here, at an inn, they got themselves into company with a farmer and
drover, both pretty much in liquor, and in consequence inclined to
quarrel. Of these circumstances the villains took advantage. Haggart
fanned the flame of contention, and urged them on to fight; at length
they rose and stripped;

under pretence of dissuading and separating, irritated them the more,
and involved them in a general scuffle, during which Haggart got from
the farmer's coat a pocket-book, containing twenty-three pounds; then
rang the bell in a violent passion, paid the reckoning, abused the
waiter for putting them into a room with such company, and decamped.
Well did the wise man observe, 'Who hath woe? Who hath sorrow? Who hath
contentions? Who hath babbling? Who hath wounds without cause? Who hath
redness of eyes?-- They that tarry long at the wine -- they that go to
seek mixed wine.'

The plunderers next proceeded on foot to Langholm, again to the fair.
There a gentleman, apparently a dealer in cattle, whom young M'Guire
had seen with a pocket book containing a large quantity of bank-notes,
was fixed on as the object of their attack. They watched an
opportunity, and while Haggart, apparently by accident, turned over the
left breast of his coat on his arm, Barney M'Guire diverted his
attention by a question relative to some sheep just by, and young
M'Guire took from him his pocket-book. This was passed to Barney, who
immediately made off; the others remained a minute or two, and
afterwards walked slowly away to avoid suspicion.

On joining Barney, he showed them the pocket-book, stuffed with cambric
paper, and laughed at his brother for giving them so much trouble about
nothing; but on getting alone with Haggart, he showed him the prize,
which amounted to two hundred and one pounds. This is not the first
instance in which haggard and M'guire conspired to cheat the younger
M'Guire of his share of the booty; such measures and treachery in
persons of their character cannot excite much surprise; but it must be
exceedingly humiliating to these sparks of the earth, thus to be made a
prey to each other, and it is a contradiction of the foolish boast of
'honour among thieves.' Haggart observes, that he never was happier in
his life than when he fingered all this money; but adds, he thought
sore about it afterwards, when he was ill and likely to die.-- Ah, the
pleasures of sin are but for a season!-- at the last they bite like a
serpent and sting like an adder.

About half an hour after the above adventure, they saw, to their great
surprise and terror, a police-officer running about, but he did not see
them. They immediately took a post-chaise, and set forward on the road
to Annan, leaving word with their landlord that they were gone to
Dumfries.

Next day they went on to Carlisle and remained there about a month,
amusing themselves by riding about through the days, and passing the
evenings in gambling houses and dancing rooms. Here Heggart acquired
great proficiency in the use of cards, dice, and billiards, beside a
number of legerdemain tricks. Oh! had this ingenuity and application
been directed to the pursuit of some rational and innocent science, in
all probability a youth of Haggart's abilities would have insured to
himself an honest independence, and become a useful and honourable
member of the community, instead of its pest and disgrace.

During their stay in Carlisle, they attempted to pick a gentleman's
pocket of a gold watch and seals, but the watch being secured in the
pocket, disappointed them; the gentlemen accused them of their
intention, but they overpowered them with abuse, and he left them. He,
however, watched them into their lodging, and the same evening their
trunk and portmanteau were secured by constables. To avoid being taken
themselves, they shifted their abode to the house of one who appears to
have been a comrade in iniquity. Next morning, finding their stock of
clothes reduced to what they had on, they went to a respectable
merchant tailor, and were measured for suits of superfine clothes. He
had them ready in two days, when they called for them; and under
pretence of wanting some other article, while the master left the room
a moment to fetch them, the sharpers took up their new clothes and made
off, taking the next staged for Kendal. At this place is held one of
the finest horse markets in England: here, under pretence of dealing
for horses, they robbed a gentleman of forty-three pounds, and hastened
next day to Morpeth, where a fair was shortly to be held. Here they
fell in company with some others of their own profession, and
strengthened each other's hands in sin; they engaged in two hazardous
adventures -- picking one gentleman's pocket of fifteen pounds, and
snatching seventeen pounds out of the hands of another, who was
bargaining for a horse. It is painful to observe, that at this place
they fell in with a constable or police-officer, who had formerly been
acquainted with Barney; they renewed their acquaintance with a
familiarity and confidence which too clearly proved the connexion that
often subsists between characters of these descriptions. They next
proceeded to Newcastle, where they obtained lodgings in the house of a
respectable private family, and remained there a month, assuming the
false names of Wilson and Arkison, and passing for gentlemen travelling
on pleasure. It appears they were admitted to the intimate society of
this family, and were allowed to attend the young ladies to the
theatre, and other places of public amusement. Who but must shudder at
the perilous situation in which these young females were placed? and
what a lesson of caution is conveyed both to young persons and those
who have the charge of them, against forming habits of intimacy with
persons whose character they are not thoroughly acquainted with! While
their thoughtless companions supposed them intent only on amusement,
these adepts in iniquity, like him to whose service they had devoted
themselves, were in reality 'going about, seeking whom they might
devour.' On one occasion, observing a gentleman whom they supposed
might afford them a considerable booty, Barney, under pretence of
indisposition, left his companions, attacked the stranger, and robbed
him of thirty-three pounds. Other similar adventures put them in
possession of about seventy pounds, yet this sum did not defray their
expenses by fourteen pounds: no, for he that worketh iniquity 'earneth
wages to put into a bag with holes.'

One circumstance that occurred at Newcastle must not be wholly
unnoticed, because it proves that the society of gamblers is often that
of swindlers, cheats, profane and quarrelsome persons; and that
gambling not unfrequently leads to the commission of these crimes.
Haggart and his companions were at a house for receiving stolen goods,
gambling with the bully of the house, from whom they gained about three
pounds; he became enraged, and swore an oath that they should not leave
the house with his money; on which a severe scuffle ensued, which had
well nigh ended in bloodshed and murder.

In January, 1818, on their way to Durham, to attend a fair, they came
to a house in a lonely place, and determined to break into it. They
entered it by a window, and met a strong resistance from the master of
the house; but, having knocked him down, they succeeded in binding him
hand and foot, and gagging him with a handkerchief. The rest of the
family, being females, were too much terrified to interrupt them. and
they proceeded to rifle the property. Having taken about thirty pounds,
they went to Durham, where Haggart was apprehended the next day; but
having changed his clothes, and considerably disguised himself, the man
whose house they entered could not identify him: he was accordingly
liberated, and returned to Newcastle.

In two or three days they were both apprehended, and carried back to
Durham; having on the same clothes in which they had committed the
burglary, the man whom they had robbed immediately recognised them, and
was bound over to prosecute. They were tried under the feigned names of
Morrison and Arkison, and were found guilty, and sent back to prison,
in order to be brought up for sentence of death at the end of the
assizes.

They lost no time in contriving their escape, and after long
deliberation with their fellow-prisoners, resolved on the attempt. They
set to work on the wall of their cell, and got out to the back passage,
when the turnkey made his appearance. They seized him, took his keys,
bound and gagged him: having gained the back yard they scaled the wall,
but Barney and another prisoner fell, after gaining the top: by this
time the alarm was given, and they were both secured.

Haggart having made his escape, returned to Newcastle, in company with
a Yorkshireman (most probably one who had escaped from prison with
him), where he obtained a tool with which to assist M'Guire in making
his escape; and they were returning to Durham when they were pursued by
two officers, who got close to them on a wild part of the road
unobserved. Just as they were springing on Haggart, he laid one of them
low with his pistol, and left him, uncertain whether he had his murder
to answer for, but believing that his aim was but too true; and that
was indeed the case. The Yorkshireman knocked down the other, and they
then proceeded to Durham; where, in the night time, Haggart, by means
of a rope ladder, got over the back wall of the gaol, and conveyed the
spring saw to M'Guire, who made his escape that same night, by cutting
the iron bars of his cell window, and followed Haggart to Newcastle,
and thence accompanied him to Berwick-on-Tweed, Dunse, and Coldstream,
where they lodged at a house for receiving stolen goods; in the evening
they stripped a drover of nine pounds, and removed next day to Kelso.
It is mentioned in this and in several other instances, that the
persons they attacked were more or less in a state of intoxication: let
this be a warning against that common, but disgraceful and ruinous
vice;-- intoxication renders a person an easy prey both to
ill-designing men and to the great tempter, who is ever on the watch to
catch unwary souls.

At Kelso they made a similar attack on the person of a farmer, but he
had his eyes about him, and, detecting Barney in the act of bringing
his money out of his pocket, he seized him by the collar, and a
terrible scuffle ensued. The farmer, who was very powerful, still
retained his grasp; a mob soon gathered; Haggart escaped by flight, but
M'Guire was secured, and imprisoned for three months.

Being now left without an associate, Haggart returned to Newcastle,
where he resided four months, in the house of his old friend, Mrs. A--:
during his stay there, one of the young ladies was married to a
respectable shopkeeper, on which occasion Haggart took the lead in
conducting the festivities of the wedding. About two months of the time
Haggart supported himself by gambling, in the same low and vicious
society he had before frequented. One evening, having accompanied one
of the Miss A--'s to the theatre, on their return, a gentleman much in
liquor attempted to insult the young lady; struggling in her defence,
Haggart contrived to pick the pocket of his antagonist of nineteen
guineas. On another occasion he observed a person at the gambling-house
also much intoxicated, whom he watched out of the house; affected
accidently to jostle him, and stripped him of thirty-three pounds. Soon
after, attempting to take a gentleman's gold watch, he was detected and
pursued, but made his escape by back ways home. He attempted nothing
farther in Newcastle; but in the month of June took leave of his
hostess and her daughters, with much regret on both sides. For the
kindness and friendship manifested towards him by the family, Haggart
expressed great gratitude, and observed, 'Little did they know the
person whom they had so long harboured in their house, and introduced
to most of their acquaintances and relations, under the name of Mr.
John Wilson.'

On returning to Edinburgh Haggart employed himself, in connexion with a
new associate, in shoplifting. The goods thus obtained were disposed of
for a quarter of their value, and the servant of iniquity experienced
the pinchings of poverty -- so expensive is vice, and so insatiable the
desire of forbidden goods. With his new companion (Henry) Haggart next
visited Perth, where they accosted a Highland farmer, already
intoxicated --invited him to take some more liquor, and robbed him of
nine pounds.

A day or two after this Haggart was seized with violent illness, and
returned to Edinburgh: after a few days, finding himself somewhat
recovered, he strolled out at dusk, and assisted some old companions in
their iniquitous pursuits; he was accidentally seen by George M'Conner,
an old apprentice of his father's, who had faithfully promised if ever
he met with him to bring him home. He succeeded in inducing him to
return to his father, by whom he was gladly and kindly received; and he
promised faithfully to remain with his parents, and apply himself to
his old business of a mill-wright; but when asked where he had been, or
how employed, would give no satisfactory answer. He remained at home
two or three days, and then resolving to pass the night at a house of
ill-fame, which he had before frequented, he took two guineas from the
collar of his coat, where he was in the habit of concealing his
ill-gotten treasures, and was proceeding on his guilty purpose, when he
was seized with such a shock of sickness as obliged him to take to his
bed. During his illness, which lasted four weeks, feelings of remorse
operated greatly on him; he trembled at the thought of being cut off in
the midst of such wickedness, and called to give an account of all his
crimes; to use his own words, 'I felt that I was ashamed to ask
forgiveness either from God or man, and such a stranger of late to
religious instruction, that I had no words for prayer; I was altogether
without hope.' Oh! that these feelings had been deep and abiding enough
to drive the sinner to seek mercy, pardon, and purity from the blessed
Jesus, who is exalted at God's right hand, a Prince and a Saviour, to
give repentance and remission of sins! but without his grace softening
and changing the heart, terrors alone will not prevail to work an
abiding change in the character. 'Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or
the leopard his spots? No more can they that are accustomed to do evil,
learn to do good' When Haggart recovered, the thoughts of repentance
soon left his mind, and even while in a weak and feeble state he
recommenced shop-lifting. Let sinners beware of stifling their
convictions and breaking off their purposes of repentance, lest
(according to our Lord's awful and expressive words) the evil spirit
that seemed to withdraw for a while should return, bringing with him
other spirits more wicked than himself; and so the last state of that
man should be worse than the first.

Though Haggart returned to his old practices, he so far kept up
appearances at home, by never being out after eight o'clock in the
evening, and seldom more than half an hour at a time, that his parents
thought he could not be doing any thing wrong, and pleased themselves
with the hope of his reformation.

One evening he accompanied a lad, named John Steel, to Leith, and went
into a shop to buy some tobacco, not intending at that time to practise
his profession; when, to his surprise, Steel snatched the roll of
tobacco from the woman's hand who was serving it, and ran off. Haggart
was taken so unawares by this trick, that he made no attempt to run
away till seized by the woman's son, to whom he dealt a violent blow,
sent him reeling on the ground, and ran off. The pursuit soon became
general; he was overtaken, and conveyed to the police-office; he was
examined for this and for some other offences before the sheriff; there
was not sufficient proof against him, but he was detained in gaol till
he could obtain bail for his appearance at any time within six months.
On being released he went to his father's, where he was kindly
received; he put such a good face upon his projects, that his too
partial parents could not credit his guilty intentions. His next
adventure was at shop-lifting, in company with two infamous female
companions; he disposed of his booty at the house of an acquaintance,
and hastened home to bed soon after seven o'clock in the evening. His
father and mother, who had been out, came in shortly afterwards, and
asked of his sister where he was, and whether he had been out? She
replied that he had not, and that he was in bed. This was very
mistaken, as well as sinful kindness: she was indeed quite ignorant of
what he had been about, and concealed what she did know to prevent any
reproof from his parents for going out contrary to their orders; but
the watchfulness and reproofs of kind and careful parents were far
rather to be desired than a continuance in sin undetected and
unreproved. However, he was next morning taken up, and one of those
hardened wretches who invited him to the commission of the crime,
appeared as evidence against him. He stoutly denied any knowledge of
the affair, and offered to prove an alibi; his parents were called, who
proved his being in bed at a quarter past seven, and who believed he
had not been out all the preceding evening: thus was their veracity
exposed to be called in question by the improper means used by their
daughter to conceal her brother's disobedience. The magistrates
released him on the word of his father, whom they knew to be an honest
man, but expressed their fear that his son was a rogue.

He remained very quietly at his father's for about three weeks, when he
was again taken up; his other female companion, having been secured,
had divulged everything. However, on cross-questioning her, he so
puzzled her that the judge put no faith in her evidence, and he was
only ordered to find bail. He then remained at his father's till
February, 1819, when one night he met a former companion in vice, who
enticed him to his old trade of a pick-pocket. Next day they started in
company for Musselburgh, and the same evening plundered the shop of a
merchant tailor of two pieces of superfine cloth, and some other
articles; this valuable prize they exchanged, when in liquor, for a
small sum.

Having now again deserted his father's house, and involved himself in
the society of the most vicious and abandoned of both sexes, Haggart
became very careless and shabby in, his dress and appearance, and was
engaged in various petty, disgraceful scuffles: at length he was taken
up, and brought before the same magistrates from whom, in the former
instance, he had escaped so easily. One of them thus addressed
him--'Haggart, you are a great scoundrel, and the best thing I can do
for you, to make a good boy, is to send you to Bridewell for sixty
days:--bread and water, and solitary confinement.' He was immediately
removed from the bar, and conducted to his doleful cell; whence, about
ten days after, he was again brought before the magistrates on another
charge. For this he was sentenced to other sixty days' imprisonment.
Although fully conscious of his guilt, he stiffly denied the charge;
and, with the most hardened impudence, told the judge, that if he died
in Bridewell they would be at the expense of burying him.

After four months' imprisonment he was released, in July, and returned
to his father's, where he lived quietly a few weeks, and recruited his
strength. The time of his confinement had been spent, not in penitent
reflections on his past sinful course, and humble resolutions of
amendment, but in projecting new schemes of vice with an associate in
prison. In .the month of September they set out together on their
unlawful enterprises, and were soon joined by two more abandoned
characters of each sex, and pursued their trade in company. At Aberdeen
races, among other offences, Haggart stole a watch, and passed it to
one of his companions (Graham), who took it to his lodgings, and hid it
in the draught hole at the back of the grate. That very night a mason
was employed to put in another grate, when the watch was discovered,
and taken to an officer of justice, who went immediately in search of
them. They were all sentenced to imprisonments of different lengths;
the magistrate expressing his regret at seeing so many good-looking
lads going on in the ways of vice and ruin.

After two months, Haggart and one of his companions, named (or
nick-named) Doctor Black, were released, when they immediately
recommenced their courses of vice, especially in the shop-lifting way.
Having stolen a pedlar's pack, and several other articles of linen
drapery and hosiery, Haggart assumed the character of a pedlar, and
travelled the country to dispose of his ill-gotten goods. After this he
returned to Edinburgh, where he remained till January, 1820, committing
depredations of every description, both there and at Leith; especially
robbing private houses of large quantities of plate. On the 1st of
March he was arrested at Leith, in company with an accomplice named
Forest. The offenders made a desperate resistance, but were at length
secured and committed for trial. On the evening of the 27th of March,
having obtained a small file, Haggart cut the irons from his legs, then
forced up the door of his cell, and got into the passage. He then set
to work upon a very thick stone wall, through which he at length made a
hole, and got on the staircase just as the clock struck twelve. He had
still the outer wall to penetrate, on which he fell to work with great
caution, lest he should be heard by the person who was appointed to
watch him all night. Whilst he was working at the wall this person came
several times to the door of his cell, which was just below. Having
made considerable progress, he returned to the room where his companion
Forest was, and brought him to his assistance; he also awoke one of the
debtors whom he knew, and obtained his assistance in removing his
hand-cuffs, having all along been working with them upon him. After
great labour and violent pain they succeeded in wrenching the chain in
two pieces, He then renewed his operations on the outer wall, and,
having removed a large stone, got out a few minutes before five o'clock
in the morning. When he gained the outside stair he saw a man coming
towards him, and, supposing him to be an officer in pursuit of him, he
leaped over the back of the stair; but recollecting that Forest had yet
to get out, he prepared to give the man battle, lest he should attempt
to seize Forest; but the man said to him, 'Run, Haggart, run; I won't
touch you.' Forest came out, he took hold of his hand, and ran off at
full speed, pulling him along with him. Here one cannot but pause, to
regret that such abilities, industry, perseverance, and self-denial,
had not been exerted in obtaining an honest livelihood, rather than in
escaping a just punishment.

It is distressing to relate, that the very evening of their escape,
they returned to their detestable trade. But indeed they had reduced
themselves to a sort of wilful necessity, having no other means of
subsistence. Let no one flatter himself that in the ways of vice, he ,
may say to himself, 'Thus far shalt thou go, and no farther;' no! the
first step in vice almost necessarily draws on an hundred more, and
impels the sinner on to destruction. At Dumfries they were joined by
two Irishmen of their own guilty profession, T. M'Colgan, and Felix
Donnelly, the former of whom suffered the awful sentence of the law at
Glasgow, for housebreaking, a few months before Haggart. How short is
the course of vice! and how truly has it been said, 'Vice has had more
martyrs than godliness.'

These companions in guilt attended at Dalbeattie fair, where they
gained fourteen pounds, and on their return to Dumfries took several
purses and watches from the door of the circuit court, which was then
sitting; and one evening about eight o'clock, Haggart entered the house
of a Mrs. Graham, and took thence a very large quantity of plate, which
he disposed of to a wretch of the same name (though of course not
connected) with the lady from whom they were stolen. At Dumfries he met
with his old associate, Barney M'Guire, whom he had not seen for two
years. The remainder of the party were taken a few days afterward; so
Haggart and M'Guire resolved to leave Dumfries for Carlisle; but going
into a shop, M'Guire was seized by an officer in mistake for Haggart,
whose great coat he had on: by this mistake he escaped for a short
time, but had not gone above six miles on the road, when he was pursued
and taken, after a stout resistance. Haggart was brought back to Leith,
where he was fully committed to the gaol, and indicted to stand trial
before the High Court of Justiciary on the 12th of July, for one act of
housebreaking, eleven acts of theft, and one act of prison-breaking. Of
the house-breaking he was acquitted, it appearing that he got in at an
open window; but was brought in guilty of theft, and remanded to gaol
without getting any sentence. After lying there some time, he was
indicted to stand his trial at Dumfries, for the affair in which he had
been there concerned with Graham.

M'Guire was sentenced to fourteen years transportation, and they parted
with great regret.

On the 6th of September, Haggart was removed in a chaise, attended by
two officers, from Edinburgh to Peebles, where he was kept two days in
the gaol: this was long enough for him to form a plan of escape; which
had nearly succeeded. The iron frame of his window was only fixed with
lime; he tore up one of his blankets, tied one end to the window bars,
and the other to the door of his cell; he then got a short wooden spoke
off part of his bedstead, and began twisting the centre of the blanket;
by this means he would soon have pulled out the window, but the blanket
was so rotten, that it broke as soon as he laid any stress upon it.
Being disappointed in his plan, he plastered up the lime which he had
removed so neatly, that it was not observed by the turnkey. A part of
the torn blanket he wrapped round his body for future use, little
anticipating the awful purpose it would be afterwards turned to. He
proceeded to Dumfries, and on the 11th of September was taken into
court for trial. For some cause his trial did not go on, and he was
sent back to prison; there he became acquainted with a youth named John
Dunbar, who was just sentenced to seven years' transportation, and
after some caution they entered into a scheme for making their escape.

During the short time that Haggart was in the gaol at Dumfries, several
respectable persons noticed him, and kindly interested themselves in
his behalf. One of these amiable and excellent females, who delight to
mitigate the horrors of imprisonment, and to attempt the instruction
and reformation of the guilty, frequently called at the prison, and
behaved very kindly to him; but her kindness appears to have had no
beneficial effect on his callous heart.

With one person, whom he styles 'a very respectable man,' Haggart was
allowed to tamper in order to his escape; he gave him the plans of four
keys, as there were four doors between him and his liberty, and
expected from him such assistance as should enable him to regain it.
Certainly the epithet was grossly misapplied; no one can be respectable
who does not honour justice; and no one who respects the laws of God,
can wilfully violate, or aid another to violate, those of his country.
Having also a spring-saw, by means of which he could cutaway any iron
that opposed his progress, Haggart felt himself secure of liberty, but
was drawn into another scheme with Dunbar, careless whether or not it
succeeded; the prosecution of which however led to the horrid deed for
which he suffered.

His cell was opposite to that of Edward M'Grory, who was then under
sentence of death for robbery, and was afterwards executed; another
prisoner, named Laurie, under sentence of transportation, was in the
cell adjoining. One night he asked Haggart through the wall, 'You that
have been at gaol-breaking before, how do you think this could be
broke?' Unwilling to trust him, Haggart replied, 'I don't think it
could be broke at all;' although at the same time he knew to the
contrary. Laurie then stated his plan of getting a stone tied in a
handkerchief, and some morning when they were all in the passage
together, to knock down Hunter, the head-gaoler, and take the keys from
him. To this Haggart objected, saying, if he never should get his
liberty, he never should strike the serjeant for it, because he thought
he could accomplish it in a better and easier way:-- this was, in the
absence of Hunter, to gag Thomas Morrin the turnkey, in a closet, at
the head of the stairs, just opposite the cage door, take the keys from
him, and let all the prisoners out. Laurie still insisted on getting a
stone, saying that although they could gag Morrin, they had still all
the debtors to get through. Haggart refused to get the stone, but told
him to try Dunbar, who agreed; and next day when John Reid, a prisoner,
was passing along the yard, he asked him for a stone to break a flint.
As soon as Dunbar got the stone, he gave it to Laurie, who fixed it at
the bottom of a bag, made for pulling up things out of the yard, out of
the piece of blanket that Haggart had brought from Peebles. The next
thing was to cut off the irons of M'Grory and Laurie; the spring-saw
would soon have accomplished this, but Haggart was determined to keep
it secret for his own purposes, in case of failure. He, therefore, with
the assistance of a file, made a small saw out of a table-knife, which
he had procured from a prisoner lately released. This he passed to
Laurie, and then to M'Grory, and on the morning of the 10th of October,
which Haggart denominated the blackest day of his life, he spoke
through to both of them, and the attempt was agreed upon. About ten
o'clock, Robert Simpson, another prisoner, was put into the cage with
Dunbar and Haggart; they told him their plans, and although he was to
be dismissed the next day, he said he would join them, and accompany
Haggart; who however, made no reply, determining, if he escaped, to be
off alone. He afterwards observed Simpson and Dunbar whispering in a
corner of the cage, and suspected some plan to betray him. About twelve
o'clock they saw Hunter leave the prison, and heard that he was gone to
the races. Soon after, Morrin brought in two ministers to visit
M'Grory, and they were locked into the cell with him. When one o'clock
came, although the ministers were not gone away, the culprits resolved
to delay no longer, but proceed in their criminal enterprise. Haggart
concealed himself in the closet at the head of the stairs, where he had
previously placed the bag with the stone. Dunbar then called Morrin to
come up, and let out the ministers; he came up the stairs with a plate
of soup for M'Grory. When he got to the top, he shut the cage door, and
Haggart burst upon him from the closet; the pushing open of the door
knocked the plate out of his hand. Haggart struck him one blow with the
stone, dashed him down stairs, and without the loss of a moment, took
the key of the outer door from his pocket. Haggart declares that he
gave but one blow with the stone, and immediately threw it down; Dunbar
picked it up, but it appears that no more blows were given, and that
Morrin must have received his other wounds in falling.

Dunbar was standing over him, apparently rifling for the key which
Haggart had already secured. Simpson had hold of Morrin's shoulders,
and was beating his back upon the stairs, when Haggart rushed past
them, crossed the yard as steadily as he could, took out the key, and
opened the door. On getting out he ran round great part of the town;
Dunbar overtook him, and at that moment they saw an officer coming
directly up to them. They wheeled round, and ran, but in a moment
Haggart had the mortification of seeing his fellow adventurer secured.
He at first thought of rushing in among them to rescue him, but the
crowd was too great to make the attempt; so he consulted only his own
safety, and ran nearly ten miles in less than an hour. He then got on
the high road to Annan, when he saw a post-chaise at full gallop almost
within twenty yards of him; upon this he threw off his coat, and leaped
a hedge into a field where some persons were employed in digging
potatoes. They all joined the officers who had got out of the chaise in
pursuit of him; he fled across the field with amazing speed, and made
for Cumlangan wood. The pursuers followed him into the wood, but he
kept concealed close to the edge, and although they were very near him,
he thus eluded their pursuit.

He then made for Annan, got through it before the alarm spread. and
concealed himself in a hay stack a mile or two on the Carlisle road.
There he remained all night, and most of the day following, when he
heard a woman ask a boy if the lad was taken that had broken out of
Dumfries gaol. He replied, 'No; but the gaoler died at ten o'clock last
night.' These words struck him to the soul -- his heart died within
him, and he lay a good while in a state of insensibility. On coming to
himself, he could scarcely believe that he had heard them, for the
possibility of poor Morrin's death had never entered into his mind. He
came out of the stack, and resolved to proceed, whatever should be the
consequence. Seeing a scare-crow in the field, he stripped it, put on
the clothes, and thus proceeded. That night he slept in a hay-loft; in
the morning a man came in to fill the horserack, and was within a foot
of him, but did not observe him, he being concealed amongst the hay. He
overheard the man converse with another in the stable about him,
observing that he was one of the most awful characters that ever lived;
he had before broken all the gaols in Scotland except Dumfries, and had
broken that at last; the other replied, he wished he might keep away,
for it would not bring back the poor man's life, and he felt much for
Haggart's father, whom he knew.

About eight o'clock he started unnoticed from his place of confinement,
and pursued his weary way to Carlisle, where he found the whole town in
an uproar about him. He assumed the name of Barney M'Coul, by which he
had formerly been known there, and obtained a lodging and some food,
the first he had tasted since leaving Dumfries; next day he procured a
change of dress, and some women's garments, in which he determined to
prosecute his journey. He travelled by night, lurking in wild places or
in plantations during the day time, till he arrived at Newcastle, where
he remained about twelve days, dressed in woman's clothes, and fell in
with a former associate, whom he joined in new acts of robbery.

One evening he came out for the purpose of going to the theatre -- and
was it possible that a guilty wretch like him, his conscience corroded
with blood, should feel any disposition or power to seek amusement?--
Oh, yes!-- diversion is the world's universal recipe for drowning both
remorse and apprehension; it is recommended in every case of mental
distress and depression. Under the slighter wounds of conscience, the
sinner resorts to amusement, and cannot do without its delusive
exhilaration; and when at the borders of despair, he still flies to his
old remedy, which seldom fails to stupefy the feelings, and harden the
heart, though it can never, never effect a cure.

As Haggart came out, he espied John Richardson, the police-officer
before mentioned; and so close was he upon him, that the cape of
Haggart's coat touched his shoulder; however, he passed on without
observing him. He had no hesitation in telling his companion how
closely he was pursued, for he himself had several times escaped from
prison, and was one whom Haggart had assisted in releasing from the
Lock-up-house in Edinburgh. He immediately determined to return to
Scotland, as he knew they would not suspect him of going where he was
so well known. He walked out of the town with a bundle containing his
different suits of clothes. The Berwick coach soon overtook him; he got
outside, and arrived at Berwick without molestation; there he remained
about a week, watching the arrival of the coaches, both to observe the
movements of the police respecting himself, and also occasionally to
pick the pockets of the passengers. After this he returned to Edinburgh
in the coach, with another inside passenger, whom he intended to rob,
but falling into conversation, they became so intimate that he had not
the heart to do it.

Haggart professed himself quite a stranger to Edinburgh, and at a loss
where to put up. His new friend recommended him to a tavern, at the
door of which he had stolen many a watch. There they remained together
several days. Haggart, under pretence of indisposition, declined to
accompany his friend in walking out, or to places of public amusement;
in private visits to houses of disgrace and iniquity, he was less
scrupulous. After a few days, he said he was obliged to proceed to
Glasgow, and took leave of his friend, who had known him by the name of
Mr. John Wilson. He took his portmanteau, and marched along the street
in open day-light, and remained some days longer concealed in the city
with an acquaintance, keeping close within doors all day, and walking
out at dusk disguised in woman's clothes. He visited several of his
acquaintance, and among the rest saw his poor father, but did not let
him know his plans or his residence. One night, venturing out in his
own clothes, he saw an officer of the police, their eyes met each
other; Haggart's heart shrunk for a moment, and but a moment. He
plunged his hand into his breast pocket as if for a pistol. The
officer, who knew him too well to engage him alone, ran away, as did
also Haggart, but in another direction. He then got some plate and
other articles which he had concealed in a garret where he formerly
lodged, and having exchanged them into money, determined first to go to
the north of Scotland, then take a tour to the west, and to go to
Ireland. During his stay in and about Edinburgh, he picked up an
acquaintance, with whom he went in company to Anstruther, St. Andrews,
Cupar-Fife, and Dundee. There he gave Thomson the slip, took lodgings,
and procured a suit of sailor's clothes, determining to do something in
the way of his business.

Passing by a jeweller's shop, he observed two gold watches hanging
among many other metal ones; he thrust his hand and took them. He soon
outran the crowd that pursued him, threw on his white great coat over
his sailor's clothes, and returned to the spot, where several persons
who came together to lament the jeweller's loss, soon had good reason
to lament their own; for in a few minutes he picked their pockets to
the amount of eighteen pounds, besides a watch, &c. After this he took
a circuitous return to Edinburgh: There he began to reflect why he had
come back again to a place which was the scene of all his earliest bad
habits, and where also danger was most to be apprehended, as he knew
there was a price upon his head; he resolved to pursue his guilty
traffic that night, and leave the town for ever, early the next
morning. Accordingly, he went back to Newhaven, and stopped within
doors all day; but still hankering after the scene of his vices, his
gains, and his pleasures, he returned to Edinburgh in the afternoon.
The first thing that struck his eye was a bill posted up, offering a
reward of seventy guineas for his apprehension. The folly of haunting a
place where he was so well known, struck him afresh; he walked to
Leith, and got into a boat which was setting sail for Kinghorn; then
went on to Perth. During his stay there, the illuminations and other
rejoicings for the Queen's acquittal, afforded him an opportunity of
exercising his trade. He got four silver watches, and a gold one,
besides a considerable sum of money. Next day he started for Dunkeld,
to attend a fair with two associates, where he robbed a farmer of about
nine pounds. At Dundee he stole from a gentleman's house three dozen of
table spoons; and at Kenmore fair, thirty-nine pounds from a Highland
farmer. After practising also at Cupar-Fife fair, he parted with his
companion, and went alone to Arbroath fair, where he took a purse
containing twenty-two guineas, but having seen an Edinburgh officer, he
did not think it safe to remain in Arbroath all night, so started
inside the first coach to Perth; cheated the guard of his fare, and
joined an old acquaintance, James Edgy, at his lodgings. Next evening,
as he was sitting in his lodgings with Edgy and a female companion, two
constables came in upon them; 'Gentlemen,' said Haggart, you are in a
mistake,' and ringing the bell, desired the landlord to show the
gentlemen into a room. One of them said, 'Oh no, it is you we want;' he
then very unconcernedly asked them their business; they in reply asked
his name, and he theirs, which they refused to give. The landlord
observed to Haggart that they were police men; on which he told them he
would call and acquaint the magistrate of their conduct, and in the
mean time if they did not make off, threatened them with a
horse-whipping; thus intimidated, they left the room: Haggart conveyed
his female companion out of the house, and in a few minutes the
officers returned with their staves of office, which they presented,
and required Haggart and Edgy to go before a magistrate. To this
Haggart made no objection, and rang for his great coat; but just as the
landlord was retiring to fetch it, he bounced up, saying, Oh, I believe
it is in my own bedroom, I'll get it myself;' and retiring by the back
door, he made off as fast as he could, to the mortification of the
policemen, and the astonishment of his landlord, who had often trusted
him with the keys of his drawers, and everything in his house. Being
thus deprived of his lodgings, he went to one of the most profligate
houses in the town, where he remained a day or two, and then went with
Edgy and another to Glanmis fair. Seeing a farmer with a considerable
sum of money about him, they determined on attacking him; but as two
other persons joined him, Edgy and Smith shrunk off, and persuaded
Haggart also to relinquish the attempt; but he was determined to
persevere, and ultimately succeeded in his design. He took twenty-eight
pounds from the farmer, for which two other persons were taken up and
lodged in Forfar gaol, whom Haggart declared were truly innocent of it.
He then returned to Perth, paid his reckoning to Mr. Taylor, his
unsuspecting landlord, whom he found with his wife in tears on his
account. He told them he was immediately going to leave town, but
remained some days, during which he got forty-five pounds at one
adventure in the market, and saw several pickpockets taken close by his
side. Next day he went with Edgy to Glasgow; they made up their minds
to go to Ireland; and went on board, when Haggart saw a person who had
been confined for debt in Edinburgh gaol when he was there. However, he
concealed himself in one of the sailor's cribs, and passed unnoticed.
On one occasion, when he was sitting in the fore cabin, a gentleman
came below, looked closely at all the passengers, and fixed his eye
particularly on Haggart. He soon after went on shore at Lamlash.
Haggart suspected something bad, and was inclined to leap overboard, it
being a dark night, thinking that the best way of escape. The gentleman
was left behind at Lamlash, and Heggart afterwards learned who he was,
and that he wrote about him to Dumfries. 'It was well,'

he observed, 'that his suspicions were, unknown to him at the time, for
he went on shore at black night, and he could but too easily have put
him overboard.' On landing in Ireland, Haggart and Edgy rambled over
the town of Belfast for two days in one continued state of
intoxication. Edgy being well known in Belfast, was soon taken for some
old offence, but Haggart pursued his guilty trade from place to place.
When he first arrived at Belfast from Scotland, he saw Robert Platt,
who had been confined in Dumfries gaol while he was there. Platt was
taken for stealing in Drunmore market, on a day that Haggart also was
there, and with a view of getting his liberty, gave information that he
had seen Haggart the murderer there. The officers, dazzled with the
information of reward for taking him, seized every one of whom they had
the slightest suspicion; while he was in a public-house, two lads were
taken sitting close beside him. Little did he suspect what they were
after, when in a few minutes Plait peeped in at the door, and instantly
four officers sprang in, seized him, and carried him before a
magistrate. On being asked his name, he replied in a rich brogue, 'Why
sure, and it's John M'Colgun.' The officers began to suspect themselves
mistaken. Haggart kept up the deception by his broad Irish brogue,
professing himself a native of Armagh, and as never having been in
Scotland. However, the magistrate ordered three yeomen to sit up with
him all night, together with the officers, in the court room; and
retired, having witnessed a strict search of his person, on which
nothing was found but a thirty-shilling note, and some silver.

He now thought it was all over with him, and determined to make a
desperate struggle to gain his liberty, or perish in the attempt. He
plied his attendants with plenty of drink, and they were very civil to
him. About eleven o'clock, he prevailed upon them to allow an
acquaintance to bring him some supper. When the person came, he asked
leave to speak to her a minute behind the boxes in the court, where
there was a large window. They granted his request, and taking a sudden
leap, he sprang through the window, and alighted upon the street,
without being either cut by the glass, or hurt by the fall. He crossed
the street to an opposite entry, and immediately saw the whole of his
keepers below the window staring at each other, not knowing what to do.
They all went off to follow him; he took the road for Belfast, and soon
got there, having run fifteen Irish miles in two hours and a quarter.
He travelled from place to place, taxing each as he went for his
dishonourable and unjust maintenance. After remaining a week or two in
Dublin, he paid three pounds ten shillings for his passage to America,
but afterwards changed his mind, and lost his passage, rather than
cross the Atlantic. Soon after this he fell in with a pick-pocket,
named O'Brien, and they agreed to go in company. On the quay of Dublin
they saw some persons looking at a number of horses just arrived in a
vessel from England. Among others, a man very singular in his dress and
appearance, which bespoke poverty and meanness. Haggart was not a
little surprised to hear him offer eighteen guineas for a horse, and
immediately began speculating on what part of his person this sum might
be deposited. After some experiment, he found it in a greasy coat
pocket, which hung behind unprotected; the frail duffle of his coat
having given way to the rough band of time. It proved to contain
ninety-five guineas in gold, beside bank-notes. A few days afterwards,
they took fifty-four pounds at the theatre door; after which they
changed their dress, and, in company with two girls, hired a jaunting
car, and a boy to drive them, and took a tour through the counties of
Fermanagh, Cavan, and Derry. They were a mouth on their excursion, and
spent upwards of a hundred and ninety pounds. On their return, being
much reduced, Haggart started for King's county on foot, leaving his
clothes in Dublin.

At Mullingar market he picked a farmer's pocket, and would have been
apprehended, but for the connivance of a constable. At Tullamore fair
he picked the pocket of a pig-drover, who afterwards accused him of the
fact, but Haggart having concealed the property very securely, took a
high ground, and insisted on his going before a magistrate for the
accusation and assault. The judge heard the case, and said that the
pig-drover was liable to punishment, but recommended Haggart to
withdraw his complaint, as it was evident his ill usage had arisen from
mistake, that he knew him to be an honest man, and he had been a great
loser already. The poor man therefore was severely reprimanded,
apologized to Haggart, who declared himself satisfied, and withdrew.
After fresh acts of dishonesty and riot, Haggart at length left Newry
with an intention to take a shipping for France. He got as far as
Castle William, when he heard of a fair about six or eight miles
distance, where he resolved to attend and practise his profession for
the last time in the British dominions. It was indeed the last time:
for the measure of his iniquities was well nigh full, and his
long-delayed punishment was about to overtake him.

At this place he picked the pocket of a pig-drover, and had just time
to conceal the money in the collar of his coat, when he was seized by
the drover and two of his companions. Having been strictly searched,
none of the property was found upon him, but the drover persisted in
his accusation, and made oath before a magistrate; consequently Haggart
was committed to Downpatrick gaol to stand trial at the next assizes.
The society and practices of this place were horrible beyond
description. Having received their supply of provisions for three days,
the male prisoners blocked out the gaolers, by digging up the stones of
the floor, and placing them against the door, and broke their way to
the wretched women in confinement, with whom they remained two days,
giving way to every kind of wickedness. After spending this time in the
most riotous manner, they were secured. Haggart was locked up closely
in his cell, and kept in confinement till the day of his trial. His
reflections on this scene shall be given in his own striking words:--

'Of all the scenes of my short and evil life, none ever came up to the
gaol of Downpatrick. A prison is the blackest and wickedest place in
the world. Many a poor boy is brought to the gallows at last, because
his first offence is punished by imprisonment. This teaches him evil
ways; whereas if he had been well flogged and sent home to his parents,
he might have turned out a good man. I cannot say that my bad habits
were learned in a gaol, but I am sure they were confirmed there.'
During his imprisonment he sent for the drover, and made up the matter
with him, by returning his money and two guineas additional, to engage
him to say nothing against him on his trial. Haggart's account of his
trial is so singular, that it will be the best given in his own words:-

'On the 29th of March I was put to the bar, and the indictment being
read over, I said I was not guilty, and demanded a copy of my
indictment, but it was refused me. The drover and another man were
brought against me in evidence. The drover kept his word, and swore he
did not know whether I was the boy or not who took the money. The other
witness was sure that I was the person that was taken up for it. This
closed the evidence; and, while the judge was addressing the jury, the
gaoler prompted me to speak for myself. I immediately rose, and asked
liberty to speak a word for myself. The judge replied, "Surely."

I then addressed the jury nearly as follows:--"Gentlemen, I hope you
will look well into this case, and not return a thoughtless verdict,
which would involve an innocent man, by ruining his character, and
depriving him of his liberty. Gentlemen, I acknowledge that I have been
perfectly proved to be the person who was apprehended at Clough, on
suspicion of picking this man's pocket; but you see clearly that none
of his property was found upon me, and more than that, the man himself
has sworn in your presence that he is not certain whether I was the
person or not. Taking this simple statement into your deliberate
consideration, I feel perfectly confident of receiving a verdict of
acquittal from you.'

The judge then asked me, "Don't you come from Armagh, sir? and have you
not a father and a brother?"'

     I answered that I had both.

     "All of your own profession -- pick-pockets?" replied the judge.

'I said he was perfectly mistaken, for neither they nor I were ever
guilty of such a thing. I was right as to them, but I will leave the
world to judge with what truth I spoke of myself. The judge, in an
angry tone, said, "Will you hold up your face and tell me that, sir?
Was you not tried before me ten days ago at Dundalk, and about four
years ago at Carrickfergus? I know you well, and all your family."

I declared that I never was before in a court in my life till then; and
sure enough I never was before him.

He then addressed the jury. He said that it did not signify whether
they were clear of my being guilty of the present crime, for he could
assure them that I was an old offender; and, at all events, to return a
verdict of guilty of felony at large. I sprung up, and declared I was
getting no justice, and said there was no proof of my being a felon;
and added, How can I be brought in as a felon, when not a single
witness has made oath to it?"

The judge, in a violent rage, said that he would make oath, if
necessary; and the jury in a moment returned a verdict of "Guilty of
felony at large." I was then sentenced to seven years' transportation;
but the judge at the same time telling me, that if I would produce my
father, and show to him that he had mistaken me, he would change the
sentence to twelve months' imprisonment. I told him I would rather go
abroad than let my friends know any thing about the matter; that he was
sending me among pick-pockets, where I would likely learn the art
myself; and the first man's pocket I would pick on my return would be
his.

'I have been twice tried for my life in Scotland. The first time I got
more than justice, for I was acquitted; the second time I got justice;
for I was convicted. But in Ireland I got no justice at all; for at
Downpatrick there was none to speak for me but the judge, and he spoke
against me.'

If this statement be correct, it is a striking and singular
circumstance, that he who had by his own artifices, or by the mistakes
of others, escaped his just punishment, should at last be reserved to
it by a sentence which bore the appearance of mistake, if not of
injustice. However man may be mistaken or deceived, 'verily there is a
God that judgeth in the earth -- and though hand join in hand, the
wicked shall not always go unpunished.'

Haggart was removed to the gaol, and in the afternoon the magistrate of
Drunmore, who had formerly examined him, came into the press yard,
where he was walking among the other prisoners. He instantly
distinguished him, and asked him if he ever was in Drunmore? Haggart
replied, 'Yes, twenty times;' he then asked if he recollected him, or
bribing a constable, and breaking away? 'No!' replied the hardened
liar, 'I have never seen you, or been in custody in Drunmore in my
life.' 'Did you ever take the name of John M'Colgan?' 'No, nor do I
know what you mean,' was the reply. The gentleman then told the turnkey
that if they did not iron him, he would be off in half an hour. He was
accordingly loaded with irons, and remained in that state three days,
when he was removed to Kilmainham gaol, where he was put among the
convicts of every description.

He soon thought of making his escape by digging through the back wall,
with the assistance of several others, having first secured the
entrance of their apartment; but some of the prisoners gave
information, and Haggart being the first man who made his appearance
through the hole, got a severe blow; the others rushed after him, but
having still a high wall to get over. they were all secured by a party
of soldiers, and locked up in their cells. A few hours after this,
Haggart called out of his cell window to two young women accused of
murder, in Dublin. [Bridget Butterly and Bridget Ennis.] He felt much
for their situation, and shivered when he looked at them, his own hands
having been stained with blood. He gave them (as he expresses it) such
serious advice, as a poor guilty wretch could. They were afterwards
condemned and executed. While in conversation with them, the cell door
opened, and the turnkey found fault with him for interfering with them,
and bade him be silent. Haggart replied he would not be silent, as he
was saying nothing improper, and he felt much interested for these poor
creatures, whose situation was so much like his own. Some insolence
succeeded on the one part, and perhaps some ill-nature on the other,
and it resulted in his being handcuffed and confined with a horrible
iron instrument fitted on his head, from the front bar of which an iron
tongue entered his mouth and prevented his speaking. This, which
Haggart considered an arbitrary and cruel exercise of power, excited
only opposition, and the moment it was removed, he resumed his seat on
the window of his cell, and remained there the rest of the day, singing
the most profane songs he could think of. Even the fear of the iron
helmet of Kilmainham could not keep him quiet.

But something awaited him far worse, and which, had he known, would
have made his heart tremble, hard and wicked as it was. Next morning
the prisoners, consisting of some hundreds, were taken down into a
yard, and ranked in companies of twenty each. In a few minutes, John
Richardson, the police-officer from Scotland, made his appearance,
accompanied by the two gaolers and turnkey; a terrific sight to
Haggart! He passed through all the ranks, and the second time stopped,
and, taking Haggart's hand, said, Do you know me, David?' 'What does
the man say?' asked Haggart, in a master-piece of Irish brogue, turning
at the same time to the gaoler, who said 'Don't you know him?' 'Troth
and by my sowl,' replied Haggart, 'I know nothing at all, at all, about
him.' The officer persisted that he knew him; and he was conveyed to
the condemned yard; the gaoler telling him, if he was a Scotchman, he
was greatly mistaken; for that he had the brogue as well as any boy in
Ireland. He was then taken to the police-office, and heavily loaded
with irons. An iron belt was fixed round his waist, with his wrists
pinioned to each side of it; a chain passed from the front of the belt
and joined the centre of a chain, each end of which was padlocked round
his ankles, and a chain passed from each wrist to each ankle. In this
dreadful (but by his own hardened and daring conduct necessary) state
of torture and confinement, he was conducted to Dumfries. The officers
treated him with the utmost tenderness and humanity, but he obstinately
kept up his pretended ignorance for a considerable time.

On their approach towards Dumfries, which was in the dark, there were
many thousands of people on the road, many of them with torches in
their hands, waiting his arrival; and at the gaol it was scarcely
possible to get him out of the coach for the multitude, all crowding
for a sight of HAGGART THE MURDERER.-- Some discovered sorrow, and some
terror; but whose could equal his own? He plunged through them all,
rattling his chains, and making a great show of courage, but owned that
his heart was shaken at the thought of poor Morrin. As he went up the
stairs to the cells, he had to pass the very spot where he struck him;
and oh! confessed the guilty murderer, 'it was like fire to my feet!'
Oh! that sinners would remember this when tempted to commit sin; though
at the moment it may be sweet and pleasant, yet at the last it shall
sting as a serpent, and bite like an adder. It has been well observed,
'if we had as much fore-sight as we have after-wit, we should not
easily be drawn into sin.' And why have we not? Because the love of sin
blinds our eyes and hearts, that they should not discern its natural
tendency.

After remaining at Dumfries three weeks, where the greater part of his
Irish irons were removed, and he was twice examined by the sheriff, he
was removed to Edinburgh, and indicted to stand his trial for the
murder of Thomas Morrin. His trial came on June 11th: many witnesses
were examined against him; some of them gave an incorrect testimony,
but Haggart freely allowed that perhaps they were only mistaken, and
that he was fully as wicked as they represented him; but there was one
witness by whom he felt himself injured. This man knew the whole of
their plans, and ought to have testified that their object was liberty,
not murder. 'However,' said Haggart, this would have made no
difference, for it was the pleasure of God Almighty that I should come
to an end.' We will again use his own words:

All that man could do, was done for me at my trial, and I had good
hopes till the judge began to speak; but then my spirits fell, for his
speaking was sore against me. I did not altogether despair when I saw
the jury talking together; but, oh! when they said GUILTY, my very
heart broke; but I was even then too proud to show my feelings, and I
almost bit my lip through in hiding them. When the judge was passing
the awful sentence, I turned dizzy, and gasped for breath. They say I
looked careless; but they could not see within me. I did not know what
happened or where I was. I thought of every thing in a minute; I
thought of my father -- I thought of my mother, who had died of a
broken heart;-- I thought of escape, and very near made a plunge over
the heads of the crowd; then I could have cried out.'

The judge adverted to some particular circumstances in his case, which
pointed out especially for a most severe sentence. Not only, he
observed, was it impossible he should escape the common penalty due to
the unnatural crime of murder; but that all Scotland might know that
the law would most decidedly avenge the violence done to keepers of his
Majesty's prisons, the Court had doomed the prisoner to expiate the
crime in the city of Edinburgh. His lordship earnestly exhorted him to
call in the assistance of the ministers of religion: solemnly warning
hint that if he did not seek pardon at the footstool of divine mercy,
in deep repentance for all his sins, there was another and more
terrible day of reckoning reserved for him, in that state upon which he
was about to enter. It is most distressing to add, that, under warnings
so solemn, and in circumstances so awful, he still discovered the most
depraved insensibility and contempt. He adds, 'When the sentence was
over, I gathered my thoughts, and my heart was as hard as ever, for I
said, "Well! the man that is born to be hanged, will not be drowned;"
this was very wicked' -- wicked indeed, but, alas ! too common, and
little thought of; as though his destiny impelled him to a course of
life that should terminate in this dreadful end. Such a necessity, the
God of Justice, Holiness, and Mercy, never put on any of his creatures.
No; the voice of his word and of his dispensations ever is -- (oh, that
sinners would regard it!)--'As I live, saith the Lord, I have no
pleasure in the death of a sinner, but rather that he should turn from
his wickedness and live; turn ye, turn ye, for why will ye die?'

But to return to Haggart's account of his feelings. After being brought
back to the gaol, the wickedness of his heart was still great, and he
had so little thought of his awful situation, that he made the
following foolish verses, expressive of his hardened and unsubdued
spirit:--


'ABLE and willing, you will find,

Though bound in chains, still free in mind;
For with these things I will never be grieved,
Although of freedom I am bereaved.


'In this vain world there is no rest,
And life is but a span at best;

The rich, the poor, the old, the young,

Shall all lie low before its long.


'I am a rogue. I don't deny.
But never lived by treachery;
And to rob a poor man, I disown,
But them that are of high renown.


'Now, for the crime that I am condemned,
The same I never did intend;
Only my liberty to take,
As I thought my life did lie at stake.


'My life, by perjury was sworn away,
I will say that to my dying day.

Oh, treacherous S----, you did me betray,

For all I wanted was liberty.


'No malice in my heart is found,

To any man above the ground.

Now, all good people, that speak of me,

You may say, I died for liberty.


'Although in chains you see me fast,
No frown upon my friends you'll cast,
For my relations were not to blame,
And I brought my parents to grief and shame.


'Now, all you ramblers in mourning go,
For the prince of ramblers is lying low;
And all you maidens, who love the game,
Put on your mourning veils again.


'And all your powers of music chaunt
To the memory of my dying rant;
A song of melancholy sing,

Till you make the very rafters ring.


'Farewell, relations, and friends also,
The time is nigh that I must go;
As for foes, I have but one,
But to the same I have done no wrong.'

'These wild and wicked thoughts,' he afterwards said, soon left me.
Everybody was kind to me. How this happens I cannot tell, for from my
infancy my hand has been against every man, and I never saw a human
being without trying to do them a harm. This kindness is an awful
lesson to me now; but it has done me great good, for it is the sorest
punishment I have met with yet in this world I have been visited by
several clergymen; they have prayed much with me and for me. I told
them I had no words to pray, but they taught me, made me read my Bible,
and gave me hopes of mercy in heaven -- at least such hopes as a poor
miserable wretch like me can have, for my sins stick close to me.

A clergyman, who visited him says --'For nearly a fortnight after his
condemnation he appeared to be in the most hardened and unfeeling state
of mind; but the pious admonitions he received roused him at last from
his insensibility. When asked how he felt with respect to his soul and
eternity, the answer he gave was, that he was sure he did not feel as
he ought to feel, and he complained that his heart was like a stone. He
then inquired if there were any instances in the Scripture of persons
who had committed a crime similar to his; and he was directed to the
case of David, of Manasseh, of Peter who denied Christ, of the dying
thief, and the persecuting Saul, who thought that, by putting people to
death, he was verily doing God service. That passage in Ezekiel was
also mentioned to him, "I will take away the heart of stones and give
him a heart of flesh." These passages had a wonderful effect on him,
and seemed to make a deep impression. He began to consult his Bible,
and from that time his conviction became powerful, strong, and
permanent, and his mind was very evidently much enlightened.

'He was particularly exhorted to examine himself whether his repentance
was sincere, and not to rely on false hopes; or suppose, because the
thief was pardoned in his dying moments, that therefore he might expect
the same. When he was asked whether his repentance did not arise more
from the unhappy circumstances in which he was placed, than from a
sense of having offended God, and transgressed his holy law, he
candidly acknowledged that he was afraid he was more influenced by the
former than the latter.

'He desired a friend to go to his father, and to tell him that he died
in the faith of Christ, his Redeemer. Indeed, he frequently exclaimed,
"Why should I complain of my sufferings when I consider what Christ has
undergone for me?" And he declared on the morning of his execution that
he would not wish to escape, if the prison doors were open, as his
death was the only atonement he could make in this world for the
violated laws of God and man.

'Early on the morning of his execution, David Haggart joined earnestly
in devotional exercise with his ministerial attendant. After the
chaplain of the gaol had prayed, one of the officers of justice
appeared, and requested all the persons present to retire, as he had
something to communicate to the unhappy prisoner. Haggart immediately
exclaimed, in a hurried tone, "Oh! I suppose it is the executioner."
His firmness for a moment abandoned him, and he walked rapidly across
the cell, with his arms folded, and with deep despair strongly painted
on his countenance. He speedily, however, regained his composure; and
when the executioner did appear, at once allowed his arms to be bound.
He was then removed to a hall in the lower part of the lock-up-house,
where he was received by two of the clergymen of Edinburgh and the
magistrates. After prayers the procession proceeded to the scaffold.
The conduct of the unfortunate youth there was in the highest degree
becoming. While the beneficial influence of religion was apparent in
his whole demeanour, his natural firmness of character never for a
moment forsook him. He kneeled down, and uttered an earnest prayer;
and, after addressing a few words of deep and anxious exhortation to
the great multitude by whom he was surrounded, he met his fate with the
same intrepidity which distinguished all the actions of his short, but
guilty and eventful life, having just completed his twentieth year.' He
was executed at Edinburgh, July the 18th, 1821.

Haggart, after his condemnation, wrote the history of his short and
wicked life, which was subsequently published for the benefit of his
father, who he requested might receive any profit arising from it, for
the purpose of educating his younger brothers and sisters. The
foregoing particulars are taken from this singular piece of
autobiography, which evinced a strong, though uncultivated mind; which,
if it had been directed to laudable pursuits, could not fail to have
placed the writer in an honourable station in society.


JOHN M'NAMARA AND THOMAS MALONY 
Executed for the Murder of Mrs. Torrins.

IN 1821, and for one or two years before it the south of Ireland .
Bands of lawless banditti roved through the country by night, dictating
laws to the peaceable inhabitants, and inflicting summary vengeance on
all who refused obedience to their arbitrary mandates. Among those who
opposed their proceedings was a gentleman named Torrens, who resided at
Mondella, in the county of Limerick, not far from the city. In March,
1821, his house was attacked by a band of nocturnal marauders, whom he
beat off in a most gallant manner, killing several of the party.

Mr. Torrens's bravery on this occasion made him obnoxious to the
Whiteboys; and apprehending danger from their known vindictive spirit,
he removed to Adare, where he held a farm, which, after his removal, he
frequently visited. On Sunday, the 10th of June, 1821, Mr. Torrens and
his amiable and heroic wife dined at the farm-house, and were returning
in the evening to Limerick, by a well-known and frequented path, but
had not proceeded far, when a. man crossed a stile and presented a
letter to Mr. Torrens, who was about to read it, when he received a
blow of a stone, and at the instant another ruffian leaped over the
wall and attacked him. Mr. Torrens was unarmed, and must have fallen
under the ruffians, had not Mrs. Torrens rushed to his assistance and
extricated him, exclaiming, 'Come off my husband's body, you villains!'
Mr. Torrens was for a while stunned; and on, looking about he saw his
heroic wife engaged in a personal contest with, one of the assassins,
who had a stick which she rescued from him, and ran with it to her
husband. The battle was then renewed, and Mr. Torrens was immediately
engaged with the man who first attacked his wife, and both came to the
ground, Mr. Torrens making such good use of the stick that it broke
with the force of his blows. At this time Mr. Torrens saw the other
assassin engaged with his wife, and heard him cry out to his comrade,
'Tom, come away.' Tom obeyed with some difficulty; and as the other
fellow was going from Mrs. Torrens, her husband saw him wipe something
like a knife or dagger.

The unfortunate lady immediately ran to her husband, but said little;
her bosom was streaming with blood; and, in a few minutes she became
convulsed and expired, for the cowardly assassin had stabbed her to the
heart. Mr. Torrens, though bathed in blood, from the effect of fifteen
wounds, contrived to crawl to a cottage, where he fell senseless on a
bed; so dreadful was one of the wounds in his neck, that his breath
came through the incision it made.

The cottager, whose name was Switzer, found Mrs. Torrens a corpse; and,
by strict medical care, her surviving husband was gradually restored to
partial health; but his constitution was seriously affected by the
wounds he had received.

To discover and apprehend the assassins was now the business of
justice, and in a short time, Malony and M'Namara were taken into
custody. These men were labourers, and perpetrated the foul deed in
conformity with that baneful system of confederacy which had, at this
time, bound the deluded peasantry together. Against Mr. or Mrs. Torrens
these assassins had no individual cause of enmity, but had, in
obedience to their bandit laws, attempted the life of both, and had too
fatally succeeded as to one of them. The fate of Mrs. Torrens excited
universal regret. Her amiable conduct in private life had endeared to
her a number of friends, while her heroic fidelity to her husband, and
the manner of her death, secured respect for her memory

When Malony and M'Namara were brought before Mr. Torrens, that
gentleman immediately recognized M'Namara as the man who had handed him
the letter, and Malony as the murderer. They were consequently
committed to prison, and, a short time before the assizes, Maloney made
a full confession of his guilt. Their trial came on at Limerick,
December the 17th, 1821, when they were convicted by an impartial jury;
and on the next day but one, were executed, when they behaved as became
their awful situation.


SAMUEL DENMORE HAYWARD,
Executed for Burglary.

Illustration: Hayward Waltzing with a Lady of Quality

FEW men better deserved the appellation of the 'Modern Mac-heath' than
the unfortunate Hayward, the Incidents of whose short life deserve to
be recorded, as affording not only a view of his own character, but a
powerful lesson to youth.

Samuel Denmore Hayward was born in October, 1797. His father was an
industrious journeyman currier, who resided in the Borough of
Southwark; and, being very poor, he allowed his son to deliver messages
for the prisoners in the King's Bench, who regarded him as a boy of
great promise. Indeed, it was a general remark in the whole
neighbourhood that Samuel had all the appearance of 'a gentleman's
child.'

Flattered by the early notice thus shown him, he indulged higher
notions than could possibly be gratified by following the humble
business of h is father, and, accordingly, he procured himself to be
bound an apprentice to a tailor. But business was not his forte; he
disliked the confined ideas of trade, and aspired to a higher station
in society than that usually attained by a tailor. At the expiration of
the first year his master was glad to cancel his indentures; and, thus
freed from further restraint, young Hayward became waiter in the New
York Coffee House, near the Royal Exchange.

This situation did not exactly accord with his ambition, but it
answered his purpose; it afforded him an opportunity of exhibiting his
fine person and mixing with gentlemen, though in the humble capacity of
an attendant. In dress, too, he could partially indulge his vanity, and
this was not the least inducement to his entering this menial
occupation. While here his address and pleasing deportment gained him
universal esteem, and attracted the observation of Dr. Hughson, who was
then compiling his celebrated 'History of London,' and residing in
Furnival's Inn. The doctor admired his politeness and attention, and,
convinced that he was a lad of parts, took him home to assist him in
collecting materials for works on which he was then engaged.

The road to an honourable career in life was now opened to his
ambition, and he seems to have laudably availed himself of the
opportunity; for he not only acquitted himself reputably in his new
engagement, but applied industriously to the cultivation of his mind.
He acquired a complete knowledge of the French and Italian languages,
both of which he spoke with great fluency; and also became a proficient
in music, for which he had a natural taste. He played on several
instruments with elegance and skill, and, in short, was deficient in
none of those polite accomplishments so necessary to a man of fashion.
He remained with the doctor about five years, and then entered the
service of Captain Blanchard, with whom he travelled over the greater
part of Europe. His new master was too indulgent, looking upon Hayward
rather in the light of a companion, until the genteel lacquey, tired of
being an attendant, sighed to exhibit himself as a principal in the gay
and frivolous scenes he had witnessed at a respectful distance.

Buoyed up with inflated notions of his own personal importance, he
quitted the service of Captain Blanchard, and made his first step
towards ruin, by returning to London, where he assumed the character of
a gentleman, and trusted to his wit and abilities for the means of
supporting his apparent rank in society. Apprehensive that his origin
might be discovered, he entirely cast off all his former acquaintances
and relatives, and pretended to be a young man of family and
consequence. The better to disguise himself, he assumed a military
appearance, and having the air of a dashing young officer, easily
imposed himself on fashionable society as belonging to the Commissariat
Department.

Hayward, though now only twenty-one years of age, had read much, and
was an acute observer of character. He had remarked that very
superficial qualifications, when aided by appearance, were sufficient
passports to the fashionable world, who are 'still deceived by
ornament,' and determined to make a progress in the fluttering and
heartless scene, he set about the necessary preparations. Nature had
been prodigal to this vain young man; his person was elegant; his
features animated, intelligent, and handsome; and his dress, being in
the first style, fully accorded with the form it clothed.

Thus qualified by nature and art. he had only to present himself at the
door of the Temple of Fashion to secure a ready admission. His polished
manners, superior address, and handsome person, soon secured him the
esteem of the ladies, while his military air, sporting phrases, and
unblushing confidence, procured him the friendship of the gentlemen. In
a very short period he was regarded as one whose society was worth
courting, and whose presence could add to the attractions of
drawingroom. The 'voluptuous melodies of Moore' he sang with rich and
tasteful sweetness, while his execution on the flute was little, if at
all, inferior to the performance of the celebrated Drouet. Such an
addition to a fashionable party was not to be dispensed with. Hayward
was invited by the dowager and the duke, the lord and the baronet, the
dissipated and the wealthy, and, in a few months, he had run the
complete circuit of fashionable life. In the morning he was to be seen
paying a visit to one of the. squares in the west end; in the middle of
the day escorting ladies, of the first distinction, to the Exhibition;
and, in the evening, encompassed by elegance and beauty at the Opera.

The doors of respectable families were thrown open to him; and it is a
melancholy truth that innocent and lovely females were introduced to
this unprincipled scoundrel by their unsuspecting fathers and brothers.
Is it, therefore, to be wondered at, that so many distressing and
immoral scenes take place in high life, since so little caution is
shown? Whatever is most estimable mankind guards with most care; but
fashion reverses this, as well as most other things, and thoughtlessly
exposes the purity and innocence of unthinking females to the polluting
contact of every villain who has art enough to worm himself into what
is called polished society.

The amatory epistles received by Hayward from the fair sex, during his
short career, amounted to upwards of three hundred. These were found in
his trunk on his apprehension, but, from a proper feeling of delicacy,
were not made public. The frail writers, no doubt, on hearing of the
circumstance, were sufficiently punished for their indiscretion and
credulity. We shall give one of these billets-doux, which 'wafts a sigh
from Indus to the pole,' as a specimen; and we can assure the reader it
is one of the least objectionable:

'Mrs. ---'s compliments to Mr. Hayward, and if he will have the
politeness to accompany her to the Royal Academy, it will not only
prove his attention and kindness, but she will possess the advantages
resulting from his good taste and knowledge of the works of the first
artists of the day. A corner of her carriage is also at his service,
Mr. H. must not refuse.
     'S. HAYWARD, Esq.'

But Hayward was a general lover -- a perfect man of gallantry. The
lady, the courtesan, and the servant maid, by turns, claimed his
attention, as his roving eye fastened on their charms. He was to be
seen at Almack's joining in the voluptuous waltz with some honourable
miss of the West end, or sporting a toe in a quadrille with a woman of
the town at places of inferior note. Hayward danced with ease and
elegance, and wherever he exhibited himself was sure to elicit
applause; and, as the man was egregiously vain, most probably he did
not care much whether the commendations came from elegant females or
vicious prostitutes.

To support this gay and dissipated life required means, and as Hayward
was without any, he had resource to the gaming table. The profits of
play proving inadequate to his necessities, he made the gambling-house
subservient to his wants by imposing forged notes on the frequenters of
those scenes of vice. He was soon, however, detected and literally
kicked out; when, finding himself excluded, he became the visitor of
smaller hells, where less notorious wretches play for shillings instead
of pounds. The gradations of the vicious are regular and rapid; from
the gaming table to the brothel, and from the brothel to the gallows.
Hayward, in less than a twelvemonth, found himself obliged to resort to
the basest means for support; and as his character began to develop
itself, he found himself shut out from families which he had lately
visited. In his best day he was a passer of forged notes, was known to
have stolen the money out of several tills, having insinuated himself
into the bars for that purpose; and was suspected of having picked
pockets! To what base means will not the man resort who sets out in
life with an assumed character!

Hayward, whilst running his career of fashionable life, attracted the
notice of a beautiful young creature, who was the mistress of a
superannuated, but wealthy, general. Such an opportunity was not to be
lost. He paid her the most marked attention, and she acknowledged his
gallantry; he became a petticoat pensioner; indeed, he might be said to
be in keeping, as he lived for several months upon the purse of this
woman, who evinced for him the most extravagant affection. By her he
had one child, unknown, of course, to the amorous veteran; but,
neglecting her charms for some other unfortunate woman, she became
jealous, and banished him from her presence.

It is a melancholy truth that, in this modern Babylon, thousands are
found, in the shape of men, who subsist on the prostitution of
unfortunate females, whose nocturnal and vile earnings are spent by
these wretches, known by the name of 'fancy-men.' Hayward became one of
these, and shared the sinful gains of more than one prostitute. What a
degradation! A young man of such talents and acquirements as those
possessed by Hayward, need never descend to vice or meanness. In this
country, abilities like his are sure to be appreciated, and fair
industry is certain of reward. Laudable endeavours seldom fail to
procure, at least, the necessaries of life, while all the arts and
schemes of the swindler are insufficient to keep him from starving. He
may, indeed, be momentarily successful; but his career is always short.
Hayward, with all his address, was driven, in less than three years, to
the utmost distress; and a little before he committed the crime for
which he suffered, he had no means of raising the price of his bed but
by forcibly snatching the shawl from off a girl of the town, and
running away with it.

A sharper is compelled to be always on the alert, and avail himself of
every opportunity to augment his finances. While Hayward was immersed
in pleasure, he did not omit to profit by the consequence derived from
his associating with men of rank; and tradesmen, seeing him in company
with their wealthy customers, could not refuse him credit. Jewellers
supplied him with trinkets for his girls, and tailors dressed him out
in the first style of fashion. It is needless to say that he owed
hundreds and never paid a halfpenny. An anecdote or two will illustrate
at once his address and assurance.

Passing one day by the shop of a Mr. Spurling, jeweller, 42. Judd
Street, Brunswick Square, Hayward's eye was attracted by a flute with
silver keys. He went in and asked the price; finding it six guineas, he
lamented that he had only four pounds and ten shillings in change about
him, which he laid on the counter, and desired the instrument to be
sent to his lodgings, when he would pay the remainder. Before taking
his leave, he astonished the jeweller by producing on the flute some of
the finest notes he ever heard; and, having thus secured his ear, he
took occasion to mention some noblemen whom he should recommend to Mr.
Spurling's shop. The jeweller, believing him to he a man of fashion,
was flattered by his patronage, and instantly sent home the flute; and,
when Hayward called the next day, let him have a gold watch worth forty
guineas.

At another time Hayward was detected in attempting to pass a forged ten
pound note. The shopkeeper took him before the sitting alderman at
Guildhall, when he expressed himself hurt at the suspicion, and
assuring the magistrate that being a gentleman a little addicted to
play, the note in question came into his possession that way the
preceding night, at one of the gambling-houses in St. James's, where
the worthy alderman must know such notes are sometimes improperly and
dishonourably imposed upon gentlemen, he told this plausible story with
so much polished ease and unembarrassed countenance, that the
magistrate dismissed the complaint, and the shopkeeper, thinking
himself wrong, apologised for his conduct.

Hayward had not been on the town more than a twelvemonth when he found
a short absence from London necessary, as his character had got wind.
On learning that some of his acquaintance, in the neighbourhood of
Russell Square, had gone to the Isle of Wight on en excursion of
pleasure, he resolved to follow them. The difficulty of an introduction
was no obstacle to one whose life was artifice, and who rather depended
on accident than design. He started for the Isle of Wight in the style
of a first rate man of fashion, and was received with warmth on his
arrival, as one who could contribute to the amusement and pleasure of
those circles in which he had been before the delight. He was now upon
a new scene, which afforded ample scope for the exercise of his
talents, and he did not allow them to lie dormant. He entered with
spirit into every party; was esteemed the best shot among the
sportsmen; and acknowledged the most accomplished suitor by the ladies.
His talents astonished the islanders; for he seemed as much at home in
remarking on the scenery of the place as in commenting on a piece of
Mozart's music.

Such an agreeable and accomplished companion as Hayward must have been
interesting, had he possessed true notions of honour and integrity; and
if he had not been led away by his vanity and dissipation, he might now
ban formed an advantageous connexion among the circles he visited But
pleasure and dissipation left him no time for reflection; and thus his
want of thought prevented him from securing his own independence, and
saved some elegant female from having to deplore an unfortunate
alliance.

While he remained here he became the intimate friend of a gentleman
who, with his son and daughter, were making a tour of the island.
Hayward's conversation was so agreeable, that they solicited his
company on the excursion. He agreed, and during their progress the
young lady gave him marked encouragement, which he probably might have
availed himself of, were it not for one of those fortunate
circumstances which sometimes preserves innocence and discomfits the
wicked. While he was one day engaged in pointing out the beauties of
the local scenery, several strangers passed by, and among them Hayward
espied one of the gamblers who had formerly detected him in the act of
imposing forged notes on the blacklegs of St. James's. The unexpected
appearance of this person, at such a moment and in such a place, acted
on Hayward like an electric shock, and completely overpowered him.
Dreading exposure, he became much agitated, made a hasty apology, and,
abruptly quitting his companions, returned to London. The upright man
is never surprised; but the guilty one is, like the timorous hare,
alarmed at even the 'rustling of the brake.'

On his return to the metropolis he entered once more on his vicious
course, and was to he seen nightly in the saloons of the theatres
accompanied by dashing cyprians, or found at some free-and-easy,
surrounded by dishonest characters, with whom he now began to
associate. He was no longer a welcome visitor at the fashionable
squares, as his deceptions had been in most instances discovered, and
in one or two places he was treated rather unceremoniously.

Soon after his return from the Isle of Wight he became acquainted with
a lady, who, living separately from her husband, had an allowance of
twelve hundred pounds a year. Hayward soon insinuated himself into her
favour, and for a time found her a most convenient banker. This absurd
woman had long passed the 'hey-day of her youth.' yet she was so vain
that her purse was at Hayward's command in return for the encomiums he
bestowed on her person; for no further impropriety took place between
them than a kind of ridiculous coquetry. This lady recommended her
sentimental admirer to lodgings in her neighbourhood; but his landlady
not getting her rent in due time, she took the advantage of Hayward's
absence to inspect his wardrobe. Not meeting with any thing but a few
collars, a pair of false ankles, and some paint for his cheeks, she
concluded that all was not right, and that if her lodger was a captain,
as he pretended to he, he must have been long on half pay, for he
appeared nearly as distressed as the lieutenant who so much interested
my uncle Toby and Corporal Trim. Accordingly on his return, she
intimated a wish to be paid her rent; but the mock captain replied in
terms so disagreeable that she locked him out that night, and refused
him further admission into her house. His friend, the liquorish old
lady, paid the rent next morning, to avoid an application to her
husband on the business.

His landlady had more causes than one for lamenting having let Hayward
into her house, for he endeavoured to seduce her daughter; and, failing
in his object, he spread reports so injurious to the young lady's
character, that a gentleman who had been paying his addresses to her
declined to persevere in his suit. Hayward was but too successful in
deluding young women. At this time he seduced a girl of a respectable
family, who had some money in the funds, and when her little property
had been spent he abandoned her, leaving her pregnant and penniless; an
act which, in a moral point of view, deserved death more than the crime
for which he suffered. This transaction coming to the ears of his
female friend, she, either from jealousy or indignation, shut the door
in his face, and desired her servants to admit him no more.

Hayward had by this time beware too well known at all the places of
fashionable resort to attempt practising his impositions there any
more, and, in consequence, he was obliged to resort to the lowest and
basest means of procuring the means of subsistence. At one time he ran
away with a bundle of gloves off the counter of a hosier, and subsisted
for some time by disposing of articles, made of a newly-discovered
metal, for gold. Some hinted, after his death, that they suspected him
of a crime of disgusting atrocity; but of this there appears no proof.

Disowned and degraded, his career was rapidly drawing to a close, and,
as he began to descend, he became more vile and infamous. One night he
took a dashing cyprian to one of the hotels which abound near Leicester
Fields, and having treated her to supper, wine, &c. she considered him
a perfect gentleman, until the next morning, when, under pretence of
stepping out to his agent, he forgot to return, and left the
unfortunate creature in pawn for the bill, which she discharged by
pledging her watch, &c. A few nights after she met him in the saloon
.of Covent Garden Theatre, and among other reproaches told him he was
well known as a passer of forged notes, and that she would have the
pleasure of seeing him hanged,-- a prognostication which even then
deeply affected him.

In the spring of 1821, Hayward accidentally fell into company with a
young lady, to whom he represented himself as a young man of family and
fortune; and the credulous girl believing him, he obtained permission
to visit her, at the house of her mother, in Somers' Town. This lady,
whose name was Stebbings, imprudently admitted Hayward to pay his
addresses to her daughter; and while he affected the utmost attachment,
he was only making his observation on her house and premises, that he
might give information to a desperate gang of housebreakers, with whom
he had now connected himself.

Having observed where the valuables and money were placed, Hayward and
his companions met and concerted the plan of operation. In addition to
the regular organized housebreakers, there was a young man, named
Elkins, an artist, who had become acquainted with Hayward, and who at
the time lodged with him.

On the night of the robbery they met at a public-house, in Somers'
Town, and after twelve o'clock proceeded to the back of Mrs.
Stebbings's house. Hayward then gave the housebreakers, five in number,
the necessary directions; and he and Elkins remained in the brick-field
behind, while die others went to work. The robbers succeeded but too
well, and brought out their booty without having excited any alarm; but
Hayward discovering that they had left a valuable article behind them,
he re-entered the house with them, and brought it away. His avarice on
this occasion was the cause of his apprehension; for, by the time they
had returned, after the second visit, a watchman had, in his rounds,
come near the place where they were, and, seeing bundles with them,
resolved to bring them to an account. On his approach they fled, and
Hayward threw away a parcel, in which several articles of plate were
tied up; but the watchman being nearer to him than the others, he
succeeded in apprehending him. On being taken to the watch-house,
several articles of Mrs. Stebbings's property were found on his person.
Next morning this lady identified the property, and went away without
knowing who was the robber -- a circumstance which seemed to disappoint
Hayward; as he expected, had she seen him, she would have declined to
prosecute.

A female, named Mary, who lived with Hayward as mistress, having called
at the lock-up-house, was traced back to her lodgings, where Elkins was
found sitting at the fire, and he was immediately taken into custody.
This young man soon turned king's evidence to save himself, but as he
only knew Hayward, an offer of pardon was held out also to the latter,
if he would deliver up his more guilty companions to justice; this he
indignantly refused, and was accordingly fully committed; Mrs.
Stebbings resolving to prosecute, though two hundred pounds had been
offered, by a secret agent, if she would forbear.

A report of the transaction having appeared in the newspapers, the
young lady who lived with the general, commiserating Hayward's
unfortunate situation, applied for permission to see him; but being in
the first instance refused, she contrived to let him know that she
forgave him, and, during the remainder of his short life, supplied him
with money to meet all his demands.

In prison he manifested the same minute regard to his appearance that
he had done through life, and dressed every day with as touch exactness
as if he was about to figure in Bond-street. Again he was advised to
deliver up his guilty companions to justice, but he positively refused.
In Newgate, he assumed all his former consequence; and, lest his origin
should be known, he told Mr. Brown, the governor, that he had no
relation living. His composure never for a moment forsook him; and,
though he knew he had a very narrow chance of escape, he seemed but
little affected.

Various endeavours were made to induce Mrs. Stebbings to forbear
prosecuting, but all was unavailing; and the indictment having been
found, Hayward was put upon his trial at the Old Bailey. His appearance
in court excited the greatest surprise; his dress was rich and elegant,
and he appeared more like a man about to enter the drawing-room than
one going to be tried for his life. He affected all the ease and grace
of a polished gentleman, and every thing about him bespoke inordinate
vanity and self-love, which predominated over the terrors of
approaching infamy and destruction. He seemed, during the trial, to
have but one apprehension -- lest it should come out that he was of
mean origin; and took an indirect way to establish a belief that he was
the character he had assumed, by lamenting, on his defence, that he did
not then see in court some of the officers who had known him in the
Commissariat department. He had subpoenaed several characters of
distinction; but knowing how little they could say in his behalf, he
had not the assurance to call them.

The principal witness against him was Elkins. This young man was a
sculptor, and possessed great intelligence. He gave a clear account of
the burglary, and of course established Hayward's guilt, against whom a
verdict was delivered. A coachman was tried along with him, on the
charge of having aided the robbers in removing the goods, the
housebreakers having got into his coach and drove off, leaving Elkins
to shift for himself. This man was acquitted, as the uncorroborated
evidence of an accomplice is not sufficient to convict.

The verdict, when first pronounced, appeared to have affected Hayward
very much; but he immediately recovered his self-possession, and on
retiring from the bar made a graceful bow to the court.

On being brought up, at the end of the sessions, to receive sentence,
his appearance and demeanour rendered him peculiarly distinguishable
from his fellow-culprits; and by the attention he paid to the unhappy
females who were among the number, he seemed to forget his own wretched
situation.

After condemnation, this unfortunate young man laboured to keep up the
delusion as to his respectability and high connexions, but he was
stripped of his borrowed plumage; for his poor father, having seen the
name of his son in the public papers, became alarmed, and repaired to
Newgate to ascertain whether his fears 'forebode him right.' He sent in
his name, but Hayward refused to see him, saying that he must be under
a mistake, as his father was not living. The governor of Newgate,
however, was struck with the anguish of the miserable parent; and
desiring him and his wife to come on a certain day, he introduced them
into the press-room, where Hayward was walking, without communicating
his intention to either party. On catching each other's view, they, for
a moment, stood transfixed with surprise and horror; then wild
exclamations of emotion burst from each, as they rushed to embrace;
while convulsive sobs expressed the anguish of their feelings. Hayward
beat his forehead, exclaiming. 'Oh father, forgive your wicked and
undutiful son. I have abandoned and disowned you, but you have not
forgotten me in my afflictions;' and he repeatedly prayed to God to
spare his life, to afford him the opportunity of showing his gratitude
to his father, and atone for his past transgressions.

The interview lasted for a considerable time, and it was with
difficulty they were separated; when the wretched father set about
making every possible exertion to save the life of his unhappy son.
Indeed Hayward, from the strong solicitations in his favour, indulged
in the hope of a commutation of his sentence to transportation until
the Saturday before his execution, when he learned the dreadful fact
that he was included in the number that was doomed to suffer, every
application in his behalf having failed.

From the moment of his awful fate being communicated to him he evinced
a proper spirit of resignation, and attended the chapel on Sunday, to
hear his condemned sermon, in a suit of full mourning; his hair was
tastefully arranged, and his irons were kept up by a black leather belt
and buckle. He received the sacrament with great devotion, after which
he returned to his cell. The next day he was visited by about forty
gentlemen, whose houses he had been in the habit of frequenting, and
who could not believe, without ocular demonstration, that it was Sam
Hayward who was about to suffer the ignominious sentence of the law. On
Tuesday morning, November the 27th, 1821, he entered the press-yard in
the most gentlemanly manner; and, though he looked pale and feverish,
advanced to the block to have his irons knocked off with a firm step.
During this operation he was supported by the sheriff and the ordinary,
to the former of whom he returned thanks for the interest he expressed
in his fate. On being asked how he felt, he replied, 'As a man ought to
feel who had violated the laws of God and his country.' Hayward evinced
a sincere spirit of contrition, and appeared grateful for the pious
attention of the ordinary. In a few minutes the prison bell announced
that he had but a few minutes to live, when, casting his eyes around,
he asked, 'Is there not a poor female to suffer?' Being answered in the
affirmative, he exclaimed, Oh! gracious God, have mercy upon her!' He
then advanced towards the place of execution with a firm tread, and,
while his miserable companions were tying up, he leaned his head upon
his hand. From the dreadful agony of this moment he was aroused by the
executioner, when, having bowed to all around, he mounted the scaffold
with astonishing firmness: his youth and gentlemanly appearance excited
universal commiseration from an immense crowd of spectators. His
dreadful situation seemed to penetrate his soul, and, as if willing to
escape from the anxious gaze of the multitude, he requested the
executioner to pull the cap over his eyes. He prayed most fervently
until the drop descended, when he was launched into eternity.

Joseph South, for uttering a forged ten pound note, and Anne Norris,
for robbing a man at a house of ill-fame, suffered with Hayward.

     Such was, and ever will be, the termination of an ill-spent life.

Hayward possessed talents that might, with laudable exertion, have
placed him in a situation of honourable independence; but, as all the
gifts of nature were perverted by him, he reaped the consequence -- a
short and miserable life, which ended ignominiously, but without
securing oblivion; for the infamy of his memory has survived his
breath, and casts back its stigma upon his name and family. Let not
unthinking youth be led from the even and peaceable paths of integrity
and virtue by the alluring invitations of the vicious, who draw so
pleasing a picture of gay and fashionable life; for be it remembered
that, according to Mr. Colquhoun, twenty thousand individuals awake
every morning in this vast metropolis, without knowing where they shall
lay their heads at night, or where they are to procure the necessaries
of the day. These are not the children of virtuous poverty, whose
misfortunes arise from circumstances beyond their own control, but
deluded and mistaken beings, most of whom probably are the victims of
vanity and dissipation; and who, rejected by society, have no means of
supporting an infamous and miserable existence, but by preying upon the
honest and industrious part of the community.

We must here repeat, what we have frequently said before, that virtue
and rectitude have the advantage of deceit and villainy, even as
regards the happiness of this world; and, in support of this remark, we
can refer to the case before us. The reader may estimate the abilities
of Hayward, and can picture the miseries of his short career of vice;
and then say what would have been the reverse had he followed an
opposite line of conduct. We have no doubt but the conclusion will be
in accordance with the old adage, which says, 'Honesty is the best
policy.' In that vile pursuit, where the talents of Hayward failed to
prosper, let no unthinking young man flatter himself that he shall
succeed.


WILLIAM WELSH, EDWARD DOOHERTY, LAURENCE WELSH, AND WILLIAM MARTIN.
Executed for the Murder of Mr. Hoskins.

Tn. trial of these atrocious offenders disclosed such a scene of
unparalleled iniquity, that we shall give it in full. Thomas Hoskins,
Esq., for whose murder these malefactors suffered, was a young man, of
a most respectable family in the county of Limerick. In resisting a
party of Whiteboys, in 1821, who had beset his father's house, he
brought upon himself the vengeance of these illegal banditti; and on
the 27th of July, in the same year, he was barbarously murdered, in the
face of day-light, on his return from Newcastle, in the county of
Limerick.

For twelve months, the savage assassins escaped the pursuit of justice;
and some of them never have been apprehended. The two Welshes,
Dooherty, and Martin were taken into custody in the summer of 1822, and
brought to trial at Limerick, on the 1st day of August. The case for
the prosecution being stated, Patrick Dillane, an informer, was called
and examined:--

Witness saw Mr. Thomas Hoskins once; believes that he is now dead; saw
him this time twelvemonth at the west of Barna-Hill; he was on
horseback; knows where Mr. Patrick Hayles lives at Cragg, right well;
he rode a mule, and a little boy accompanied him, who ran away when he
heard the shots fired; heard the boy's name was Crowly; William Welsh,
Laurence Welsh, Edward Dooherty, Patrick Neil, not as yet taken, James
Welsh, not taken, and William Martin, were with the witness; on seeing
Mr. Hoskins the party divided; Martin, Dooherty, William Welsh, and
witness, stationed themselves at the sand-pit; the others were under
the bridge, which was forty paces from his party; Mr. Thomas Hoskins
was coming in the direction of Newcastle; Drohedeena Solus is the Irish
name of the bridge; Mr. Hoskins was near the bridge when first the
witness saw him, and from where witness was stationed he heard the
shots fired from under the bridge; two shots were fired, but they did
not take place; James and Laurence Welsh fired first at Mr Hoskins;
witness was in front of him.

     Mr. O' Connell.--Did you see them fire; how do you know that?

Witness.---No other men were at the bridge, but those spoken of; Mr.
Hoskins was half way in the direction of the sand-pit, when witness ran
out with his gun when he heard the shots from the bridge: witness then
fired at young Mr. Hoskins, and desired a man named Hartnett to be off;
witness's shot took place when he fired at Mr Hoskins; Hartnett made
off; he shot Mr. Hoskins in the arm and breast; they were small slugs
in the gun, and the mule fled; the slugs were lead; he had beat into a
rod, and then cut it with a chisel into small slugs; Mr. Hoskins fell;
after which he ran up a mountain at the right hand side, in the
direction of Newcastle; he then went on his knees to where there was
gravel, and begged his life.

     Court.-- Who was it pursued him?-- All of us.

Witness and party then overtook Mr. Hoskins; he was on his knees
begging his life; there was a hole with gravel near it; that precise
spot he showed to Mr. Percy, chief constable, and to Mr. Vokes; it was
on this spot that Bill Welsh struck him with the butt-end of a gun,
which was broke near the head from the blow.

[Mr. Hoskins, father to the late unhappy young gentleman, placed his
head on his hands, and seemed to be in the most acute agony -- an awful
stillness pervaded the Court.]

The gun was a peculiar one; witness lent the gun to one Jack Murphy,
which, when he saw it with Welsh on the mountain, he asked him where he
got the gun; it was a left-handed gun, as the lock was at this side.
Edward Dooherty, one of the prisoners, fired a pistol down through the
body of Mr. Hoskins as he lay on his face and hands; it was about the
loins he shot him; he had received no other wound but the one witness
fired; it was the third shot; witness then took his watch and five
tenpennies from his pocket; thinks he would know the watch; saw chains,
&c., belonging to it; a ring was on the seals.

[Here the watch was handed to the witness. It was a small watch, chased
on the back, gold, a plain curved chain, one seal and a ring. The
witness viewed the watch closely.]

Witness.-- To the best of his belief it is the same watch he took from
Mr. Hoskins; sold it about a month afterwards to one Hanlon for ten
shillings; showed it first to Daniel Doody, who was also present when
it was sold; the ring was not to it when sold; gave the ring to Peggy
Clifford, wife to George Reidy; shewed her the watch; the party
separated after the murder, and went towards Fournavulla; after
separating, Bill and Laurence Welsh went with the witness: the others
faced to Rathcahill; Martin Dooherty, otherwise Sladdy, and James
Welsh, not on his trial, Neill, not on his trial, went to Fournavulla;
witness and family went to Kelly's to drink whiskey; witness heard the
police and army; went off, and no one with him; but met William Welsh
before break of day, and they both went into one Curtin's house.

     To the Court.--Curtin was in bed when he went there.

Witness put his gun into a rick of turf on the mountain; saw no one
else hide his arms; Laurence Welsh lives near Fournavulla; Kelly lives
near the Strand; the distance between the two houses is twenty paces
only; witness never since saw the left-handed gun; left Curtin's house
after breakfast, and left the house first; it was about four o'clock in
the evening when first he saw Mr. Hoskins; knows one James Fitzmaurice;
knows Martin Sheehan; saw Sheehan the same day of the murder; Sheehan's
wife and children were within; no one else was along with witness at
the interview; left the party on the hill while he was at Sheehan's;
Laurence Welsh told witness that Sheehan would direct him to
Fitzmaurice; the latter could tell whether Mr. Hoskins was coming on or
returning to Newcastle that day; he could not see the prisoners from
Sheehan's house, but could by going about forty yards from, the house
see the men on the hill; saw Fitzmaurice; was at Sheehan's about an
hour and a half before the murder took place; Fitzmaurice lived round
the hill; went back again to the party; they questioned him as to his
seeing Fitzmaurice and what he said; witness said he saw him, and Mr.
Hoskins was returning home; saw Mr. Hoskins coming along; he was a mile
and a half distant; as soon as witness met him, he fired on him from
the sand-pit, heard Mr. Haye's son was along with Mr. Hoskins; saw the
white trowsers; ran down to meet him; saw a boy with a bundle of rushes
facing Sullivan's house before he fired the shot; whistled to a man
digging to go in quickly -- he did so, and was working in his shirt,
and left his spade; don't know the man's name, and never saw him; a
rick of turf was between him and his view before the shot was fired:
witness showed the place, but did not go to the spot; it was to Mr.
Percy and Mr. Vokes he showed the situation where he called out to the
man; heard the horsemen coming in the direction of Furnavulla a little
after nightfall, when he threw himself into a ditch.

Cross-examined by Mr. O' Connell.-- Did you live three or four years
with Walter Fitzmaurice, Captain Rock? I was the first that was called
Captain Rock at that time. I was christened so by a schoolmaster.

I should be glad to know who that worthy disciple is?-- His name is
Morgan: it was he christened me; was once or twice examined about the
murder; was not examined yesterday, nor the day before; it was Mr.
Vokes who brought him into court.

Was he hander and feeder? Witness swears he don't know whether he told
it yesterday or the day before, nor the last week, nor the last
fortnight, nor the last month, nor the last two months, but told it
when he gave his information; told it within the last three months; did
a month ago, when giving information: knew Walter Fitzmaurice was in
the house where he was; witness was carried to Newcastle in a hack; he
showed the spot where the murder was committed; on the way he told
every word of it; it is not a fortnight ago since he told every word of
it.

Mr. O' Connell.-- What harm did the young gentleman you murdered ever
do you?-- He was a nice young gentleman, and he never owed him any
rent.

     Was it not you that set him? Yes.

Was it not you that went in order to find when he was coming home, when
you coolly and deliberately murdered him?-- I was at the murdering him.

Would you not have fired at the man in the garden whom you desired to
go in, if he refused doing so?-- I might fire at him, and would make
him go in if he did not.

Were you not the first who shed the blood of this young gentleman?--
Yes.

Did you then believe that there was a God?-- I am sure of it: sorry for
it. Sorry for it?-- Sorry that there is a God.

Witness was brought up the last assizes to be arraigned at the dock
behind him, and postponed his trial.

Don't you think if you were tried for the offence you were arraigned
for last assizes, that you deserved to be hanged for it? How long after
you postponed your trial was it you gave information?-- Two months. So
then you gave information with the rope about your neck?-- I did it
with a pious view for what I had done -- I love piety. Didn't you know
Galvin, who was tried for Mr. Hoskins's murder, was innocent?-- I did.
And Mr. Vokes fed the witness, and paid them for that prosecution;
didn't you hear he had a narrow escape, and that one Anglim swore also
against him?-- I heard he had a narrow escape. Didn't you hear that
Galvin was sworn to particularly, by having a mark on his cheek?-- Knew
Galvin was innocent. Witness gave the gun to Murphy; had often two
guns, but had only one that time; forced these guns from other people.
Did Mr. Vokes tell you would be examined?-- He told me to tell nothing
but the truth. And if you didn't swear, Vokes would hang you?-- I
deserved to be hanged. Is there a greater villain in the creation than
you are; were you not the first to draw his blood? didn't grant him
mercy, when he implored it from your hands! Yet you knew Galvin was
innocent, why not come forward then? Did you think, if Galvin was
hanged, it would be murder?-- At that time he intended to give himself
up. But you let the trial go on; and only for Mr. Ashe's testimony, he
would have been hanged, notwithstanding the cross-examination that
gentleman underwent. It was after Galvin's trial he was christened
Captain Rock; and never at that period told Mr. Yokes he had a notion
of giving information; he thought nothing of spilling blood! Heard
there was a large reward for giving information. About how many times
did you deserve to be hanged? Several times. You are a pious man! Now
give me in a lump how many times?-- Often; don't know how often; if
that which he fired at Mr. Hoskins was the shot, did not take effect so
as to kill him. Give me no if or and -- give me yes or no -- do you
think you are a murderer? If you stop there until midnight, you must
give an answer: I ask you, in your own mind, don't you think you are a
murderer?-- I went there with that intent-- the shot I fired didn't
kill. Well, that is one answer. Remember you are sworn -- sworn with
blood upon your hands! Do you think you are a murderer?

Court.-- Do you think or not whether you are a murderer?-- I think I
am.

Mr O'Connell.--I should not have got the answer had the Court not
interfered.

     How much money did you get?-- I got fifty shillings.

     What for?-- I was hired to commit the murder! -- was put up!

Mr O'Connell.-- Oh, go down, go down; I'll not ask you another
question.

The indignation and awful feeling which pervaded the court lasted a
considerable time.

Alexander Hoskins, Esq. examined by Mr. White.-- The watch was handed
him, and asked whether he ever saw it; said the last time he saw it was
in his son's possession; his son occasionally wore a ring, which
sometimes he attached to the seal.

Several other witnesses were examined, whose evidence was conclusive
against the prisoners. For the defence two witnesses vainly endeavoured
to prove an alibi in favour of Martin. The other three had no evidence
to offer.

His lordship charged the jury in this important case at very great
length. The jury retired for half an hour, when they returned and
brought in a verdict of Guilty against all the prisoners.

After the clerk of the crown asked the prisoners, in the usual way, why
judgment of death should not be pronounced, &c. Martin declared to God
he was not guilty.-- Laurence Welsh, in an emphatic manner, and lifting
his bands in a declamatory style, said, 'he who swore against them
committed the murder, and brought them into it.'

His lordship, in a most feeling and impressive manner, passed the awful
sentence of death. In his charge he particularly alluded to the
enormity of the offence. and trusted that the prisoners would occupy
the few hours they had to live in prayer and devotion. His lordship
ordered them for execution on Saturday, their bodies to be given for
dissection.

The awful sentence of the law was carried into effect on the appointed
day; and it is to be lamented that justice could not be administered
without releasing the wretch Dillane from a similar fate, which he
appears to have richly merited.


ROBERT HARTLEY
Executed for Wilfully Stabbing.

THE ruthless deeds of this young offender almost rival those of the
notorious Avershaw. Robert Hartley was convicted at the Maidstone
Assizes, on the 16th of December, 1822, of wilfully stabbing Captain
Owen, of the Bellerophon convict ship, lying at Sheerness, on the 29th
of the preceding August, where Hartley was confined as a transport.

Some days before his execution he confessed to the Rev. Mr. Winter that
he had been concerned in upwards of two hundred burglaries in Kent,
Essex, Surrey, Middlesex, Hampshire, Hertfordshire, Yorkshire,
Westmorland, Durham, Lincoln, and Norfolk. He had been confined in
sixteen different prisons, besides undergoing several examinations at
the different police-offices; and had gone by the following names:--
Robt. Stainton, Alexander Rombollen, George Grimes, Robert Wood,
William Smith, George Croggington, and Robert Hartley.

Hartley's father formerly kept an inn (the Sir John Falstaff) at Hull,
in Yorkshire. He was put to school in that neighbourhood; but his
conduct there was so marked with depravity, and so frequently did he
play the truant, that he was dismissed as unmanageable. He then,
although only nine years of age, began with pilfering and robbing
gardens and orchards, till at length his friends were obliged to send
him to sea. He soon contrived to run away from the vessel in which he
had been placed, and, having regained the land, pursued his old habits,
and got connected with many of the principal thieves in London, with
whom he commenced business regularly as a housebreaker, which was
almost always his line of robbery.

Hartley acknowledged that, from his earliest days, he was of a most
vindictive and revengeful spirit. He had been punished when at school,
and in revenge contrived to get from his bed in the night, and destroy
the whole of the fruit trees, and every plant and shrub in his master's
garden. At another time, having robbed a neighbour's garden, he was
detected and punished, when, in order to wreak his vengeance, he set
fire to the house in the night, which was nearly destroyed, together
with its inmates. He had adopted a plan to escape from his father's
house in the night time without detection, which was done by means of a
rope ladder that he let down from his bed-room window; and, after
effecting his robberies, he used to return to his room in the same way.

Hartley had once before received sentence of death, and was not
respited till within a few hours of the usual time of execution; he was
then sent to Botany Bay, from whence he contrived to make his escape,
and afterwards entered on board one of his Majesty's ships in the East
Indies. Whilst at this station he was removed to the hospital on shore
at Bombay, on account of sickness; but even in this state he could not
refrain from thieving. His practice was to scale the walls of the
hospital in the evening, and waylay the natives, whom he contrived to
rob by knocking them down with a short stick, and then seizing their
turbans, in which their wealth was usually deposited.

While on this station a gentleman on board the ship missed a box of
pearls, and suspicion falling on a native Indian, he was put on shore
and dreadfully tortured, his fingers and toe-nails being torn out to
make him confess. A few days before Hartley's execution he confessed
that he stole the pearls and secreted them in a crevice in the ship's
side, whence they had slipped to the bottom, and he could not recover
them. He wrote an account of this circumstance to the commander of the
ship, who came to Maidstone immediately, and recognised him as having
been engaged as an officer's servant on board, and Hartley assured him
that the pearls still remained in the place where he had secreted them.

Hartley acknowledged that he was an accomplice in the murder of Mr.
Bird and his housekeeper, at Greenwich, for which murder Hussey was
executed in 1818, but that neither himself nor Hussey were the actual
murderers. Hartley obtained admission into the house by presenting a
note at the door, when himself, with Hussey and another person, whom he
named, rushed into the house and shut the door. Hartley instantly ran
up stairs to plunder the drawers, and whilst there he heard a loud cry
for mercy. He went to the top of the stairs, and saw Hussey pull Mr.
Bird's housekeeper to the floor, whilst struck her repeatedly with a
hammer. Hartley ran down stairs, and saw Mr. Bird lying dead on his
back. The sight so affected him, that he immediately threw on the table
two watches which he had secured, and ran out of the house, and never
saw Hussey afterwards, nor had he any share in the plunder.

Happy would it have been had his hands always been as free from blood,
as he confessed that he afterwards met a gentleman on the highway, and
shot him dead; after which he took from his person a watch and
seventy-five pounds.

Hartley was also witness to another scene of murder which occurred in
one of his midnight robberies. Himself and a companion had entered the
house of a gentleman, who, being alarmed, seized the poker, and made
towards Hartley, who snapped a pistol, which missed fire. The gentleman
seized him by the collar, and dragged him to the floor, when Hartley's
companion plunged a knife into his heart, and he fell dead upon
Hartley. Two ladies had followed the gentleman into the room, and, at
the horrid sight, they instantly fainted, whilst Hartley and his
companion made their escape. He has also frequently confessed that the
murderer of Mrs. Donatty was the abovementioned ----, whom he
represented to be a most blood-thirsty villain.

In one of his midnight excursions with two of his companions, he had a
narrow escape of his life. They had packed up the principal part of the
plate in the lower rooms, when one of his companions with horrid oaths,
declared that he would proceed up stairs; in attempting which he was
shot dead at the side of Hartley, who, with his other companion, made a
hasty retreat. This circumstance only served to harden him in iniquity,
as he acknowledged that he was totally devoid of fear or natural
affection. Feelings of remorse were, however, awakened a few days
before his trial, by an affectionate letter from his sister, imprisoned
for debt, whom he had robbed of two hundred pounds, by forging a power
of attorney; by which he obtained possession of a legacy of that
amount, which had been bequeathed to her by a distant relation.

He looked forward to the time of his execution with astonishing
coolness; and, in order that he might have the day continually before
him, he had drawn a circle on paper, to form a kind of dial, with an
index pointing to the number of days yet remaining; and this index he
moved daily, as the days of life decreased. This monitor he fastened
against the wall of his cell, where it was constantly in view. He was
twenty-five years of age and about five feet six inches high.

On Thursday morning, January the 2d, 1823, this hardened offender
underwent the awful sentence of the law, on Pennenden Heath, rear
Maidstone. From the time of his condemnation to the evening preceding
his execution he behaved in the most impenitent manner, stating his
disbelief in a future state, and disregarding the pious exhortations of
the chaplain. He was wont to speak of his wicked deeds with exultation,
and appeared to be totally lost to all sense of moral rectitude and
religious feeling.


JOHN KEYS
Executed for Parricide.

HAPPILY a crime of this enormity occurs but seldom; too many are
wicked, but few, thank God, are found unnatural enough to destroy the
source of their own being, by imbruing their hands in the blood of a
parent.

John Keys lived with his father, a poor farmer, in Enniskillen,
Ireland. His eldest brother was absent in the army, and John had
received a part of the little farm as his inheritance, it being a
common thing there to divide the land among the children. On the 23d of
April, 1822, John and his father went out in the fields to make a
ditch. They appeared in great harmony; came home, dined together, and
afterwards went again to their work.

In the evening John returned without his father, and being asked where
he was, said he had gone to the mountain to look after the goats. The
old man not having appeared that night, the same question was repeated
by his sister next morning, when he prevaricated, and said that his
father had gone to look for his brother, who was in the army.

Suspicion was now excited. A brother of the deceased came and commenced
a search, when the body was found buried in a ditch. The skull
exhibited marks of violence, and no doubt remained but the son had
murdered his father with the spade, and afterwards buried him. The
parricide was at this moment seen walking by the side of a neighbouring
lake, and the people ran to apprehend him. With conscious guilt, when
he saw them approach he ran into the water up to his neck, saying, 'You
want to accuse me of murdering my father -- I will not endure to he
pointed at as the murderer of my father.' At this time no one had
accused him. His uncle entreated him to come out of the water, and
surrender himself, but he refused. When the people would withdraw a
little he came out, but the moment they attempted to close upon him he
ran in again, leaving nothing visible but his head. In this posture he
was proceeding to make his will, determined to drown himself sooner
than surrender, when a man arrived who could swim, and who quickly
brought him out of his watery position. Being taken to the house of a
magistrate, he told the constable that his brother had come to him the
day before the parricide, and persuaded him to join him in murdering
their father, that they might share the farm between them.

Keys was brought to trial at Enniskillen on the 21st of March, 1823,
and found guilty on the clearest evidence. After sentence had been
pronounced he acknowledged his guilt, and completely exonerated his
brother, and all other persons, from any participation in his crime. He
committed the dreadful act in consequence of a trifling dispute with
his father, and had accused his brother in the vain hope of being
admitted as king's evidence.

At the place of execution he repeated the confession of his guilt, and
exculpated all others from any participation. He was little more than
twenty years of age, and had been brought up in total ignorance of all
religious duties. During his confinement he had profited by the school
opened in the gaol, and had listened attentively to the pious
instructions of the chaplain. Keys, being a Protestant, was attended by
a minister of the established church.


JOHN NEWTON
Executed for the Murder of his Wife.

'Bs master of thy anger,' said the sage of Corinth; and certainly a
more important advice was never given to individuals; for how much of
domestic misery is attributable to the violent and brutal passions of
masters of families, who exercise in their own houses the most despotic
and cruel conduct. It is a melancholy truth, that too many females have
their lives made miserable by the unfeeling conduct of those who had
pledged themselves, in the eyes of Heaven, to 'love, cherish, and
protect,' these sweeteners of life. But humanity is not to be outraged
with impunity; she avenges herself on her insulters, by making their
homes miserable; and that which would otherwise be the scene of
gladness and affection, becomes the seat of anger and unremitted
contention.

John Newton was an opulent farmer, who resided at Severn Hall, near
Bridgenorth. He had been married for several years to an amiable woman,
who had brought him a smiling and youthful progeny. His unfortunate
consort was in the habit of experiencing great violence from her
unfeeling husband; and, if we may judge from his last act, he was a
mere brute in a human form.

On the 12th of January, 1823, a man named Edwards, a tinman at
Bridgenorth, brought in his account to Mr. Newton, for whom he was in
the habit of working. There was an article charged for which Mrs.
Newton had received money to pay, and being called into the parlour by
her husband, she did not deny the fact, but stated having disposed of
the money in the purchase of something else for the use of the house.
He got into a great passion, blustered, and swore that he would give
her a complete threshing. Mr. Edwards, with a view of pacifying him,
offered to erase the item, which was for a mere trifle, sooner than
have any thing unpleasant occur about it; but he still persisted in his
determination of beating his unfortunate wife, who had been all day
busied in baking and brewing, and who was at the time five months gone
with child.

About eight o'clock in the evening Mr. Edwards went away: before doing
so he passed through the kitchen and shook hands with Mrs. Newton, who
appeared dejected, but not ill. Newton stopped him for a few minutes at
the door, and as he was about to depart he turned round to bid her good
night, but she had quitted the kitchen. 'Oh! she's gone to hide
herself,' said the husband, 'as she knows what she has to expect.' On
this Edwards remonstrated with him, and told him that, if he beat his
wife, he would never speak to him again.

The counsel of his friend had no effect on the brutal wretch; for
immediately on Edwards leaving the house, he proceeded to put his
threats into execution, and beat and kicked the unfortunate woman in an
unmerciful manner. The children made such a dreadful outcry, that the
servant-maid heard them, at four fields distance, exclaiming, 'Oh!
dear, dad, do not!' This girl then hastened home, and found her
mistress lying in her blood across the hearth-stone. The carter came in
about the same time, and the poor woman took him by the hand, saying,
'God bless you! I take my leave of you!' Newton all this time did not
attempt to send for a doctor, but kept teasing his miserable wife, by
asking her, 'Who is the greater rogue, you or I?'

The wretched woman was then carried to bed, and the carter went to
fetch a doctor, who, on arriving, gave her some laudanum, and then went
away, without having clearly, ascertained the extent of her injuries.
This man's conduct was really very culpable, as physicians afterwards
gave it as their opinion that, with proper treatment, she might have
recovered.

Newton, before he went to bed, came into his wife's room, and began to
tease her anew; when the woman, who was taking care of her, very
properly desired him to go to bed, and defer what he had to say until a
fitter opportunity. At one o'clock the wretched woman expired; and on
this being communicated to her husband he jumped out of bed, and set
off for a doctor. The suddenness of his wife's death seems to have
brought him to a proper feeling, for he was heard to exclaim that he
would give the whole world to have her back again.

In a few days a coroner's inquest was held on the body; and, as he
dreaded inquiry, he manifested great anxiety to suppress the most
material evidence. The coroner, whose name was Whitcomb, seems to have
culpably entered into his views, and corruptly endeavoured to procure a
verdict which would acquit Newton of the murder. But the jury were
dissatisfied with the coroner's explanation; and being unjustly
prevented from seeing the body. returned the following verdict:-- 'Died
by bleeding; but how caused is to us unknown.' 'That is,' said the
coroner, 'by the visitation of God.' 'No,' replied the jury, 'that is
not what we mean;' and the verdict was recorded as given in.

The neighbours were, however, dissatisfied with this verdict; they
applied to a magistrate, and Newton was committed. His trial came on at
Shrewsbury on the 22d of March, 1823, and the foregoing facts being
substantiated, he was found Guilty.

Newton, who was a robust man, about forty, seemed little affected
during his trial: but when the judge proceeded to pass on him the awful
sentence of the law, he appeared bewildered -- looked wildly about --
moved, as if involuntarily, up and down the dock, and once or twice
attempted to turn away. When the learned judge had concluded, he
remained at the bar, as if in expectation of something being done for
him, and resisted the attempts to take him away. When they began to
force him away, he cried out wildly; and after being carried out, it
was some time before his lamentations ceased to appal the court.

He suffered at Shrewsbury next day but one, and manifested on the
platform a proper feeling of piety and resignation.

The conduct of Whitcomb on this important occasion was so glaring a
dereliction of duty, that the county determined to prosecute him; and
accordingly, on the 29th of the ensuing July, he was found Guilty, at
the Shrewsbury Assizes. of the following charges:--'That, disregarding
the duties of his office, and seeking to pervert the course of justice
for his private gain, he did, before the swearing of the jury, take a
secret examination of several witnesses -- that he had an interview
with Newton, whom he knew to be suspected of the murder of his wife,
and corruptly agreed with him to persuade the jury that he was not the
cause of his wife's death -- that, contrary to the evidence of the
surgeon, he endeavoured to persuade the jury that Mrs. Newton's death
proceeded from a natural cause -- that he dismissed, in furtherance of
his design, thirteen of the jurors -- that he corruptly returned an
erroneous verdict -- and, finally, that he neglected calling certain
witnesses, whose evidence he knew was of the utmost importance; at the
same time refused to let the jurors see the body of the deceased, well
knowing that it exhibited great marks of violence.' These charges were
fully proved, and Whitcomb was dismissed from his office, fined, and
imprisoned.


JONATHAN COOK
Executed for a Rape on a Child.

We are a loss to reconcile the credulity of a great bulk of the people
with the dissemination of knowledge which is admitted to have latterly
taken place. Every ignorant empiric who proclaims the virtue of his
nostrums through the country seems to procure abundant customers, alias
dupes; for, to the disgrace of modern times, the sale of quack
medicines has increased, as appears from the return of stamp duties in
1823, to the House of Commons. In London, we have hundreds of these
base men, called quacks; but every village in the country is cursed
with one of these wretches, who publishes, with unblushing effrontery,
forged testimonials of his healing powers. The harm done by these vile
impostors is incalculable; they kill hundreds of their miserable
patients through absolute ignorance, and corrupt others by the
scandalous debauchery of their lives. To the credulous who have been
duped, and the incredulous who think these remarks overstrained, we
recommend the perusal of the following case.

Jonathan Cook lived at Calne, near Salisbury, and practised among the
country people as a quack doctor. On the 14th of May, 1823, he went to
the house of a labouring man named Lawrence, who had a son under his
care. After inquiring about his patient, Lawrence's wife showed him a
swelling under the chin of her little girl, aged nine years. Cook said
he could cure it, but it was necessary that he should provide some
herbs, and requested to have the assistance of the little girls, the
eldest of whom was only twelve years old. The unsuspecting mother
readily gave her consent, and the villain led the poor children to a
solitary field, at a mile distance, where he forcibly violated the
person of the eldest, having first made a similar attempt, which proved
abortive, on the youngest.

The poor children on their return appeared agitated and ill, and being
questioned by their mother, communicated what had taken place. What
added to the diabolical crime was the circumstance of the wretch having
communicated to his victim certain abominable disease, of which she had
not been cured when she gave evidence against her violator.

With the greatest effrontery the villain called next day on the
distracted mother, and being accused of the fact, flatly denied it; but
on the poor woman going out to call her husband, he made off, and was
not apprehended for a month after.

Cook was brought to trial at Salisbury on the 15th of July. 1823, when
the victim of his abominable passion appeared against him. She seemed
an intelligent modest child, and excited a general sympathy throughout
the court. The wretch had the impudence to cross-examine her, with a
view to show that she consented, but her evidence was direct and
conclusive, and the jury found him Guilty, on which the judge
immediately passed on him the awful sentence of the law, advising him
to apply for mercy in another world, for none could be extended to him
here.

He was a man of about twenty-eight years of age, of robust make, and
dressed like a creditable farmer. He heard his sentence with composure,
and bowed to the court on leaving the bar. He underwent, in a few days,
the awful sentence of the law.


JAMES WILSON
Convicted of an Attempt to Commit Incest.

IT was a maxim amongst the Romans, that no law should exist against
persons guilty of parricide, upon the principle that such a crime could
not exist. It might also be a maxim in the English law that no
punishment should be assigned to those who were guilty of incest, upon
the presumption that nature could not be so grievously violated. Some
persons, however, in the shape of human beings, have been found so
depraved and infamous as to trample upon the laws of God and nature.
But we don't know if the long catalogue of crime exhibits a more
abominable wretch than James Wilson, who, at the age of sixty, was
convicted of attempting to commit a rape on his own daughter.

This hoary sinner was a watchcase maker, and resided in Northampton
Row, Clerkenwell. In 1819 his wife died, leaving two daughters and a
son; the age of the eldest girl, named Sarah, not being, at the time,
more than fifteen years. She was a most interesting girl, and was
serving her apprenticeship to the dress-making business. The unnatural
father, abandoning the powerful suggestions of nature, began, soon
after his wife's death, to take indecent liberties with his daughters,
but particularly the eldest, who was four years older than her sister.
In the room where they slept were two beds, and it was the constant
practice of the incestuous brute to get into the bed of his children
and strive to accomplish his revolting purpose. Happily they were
successful in resisting the base attack; and he only desisted from
persecuting them when they threatened to expose him. At such times he
would protest most solemnly to annoy them no more; but,
notwithstanding, in a few days he would repeat the offence, soliciting
Sarah, like a lover, to submit to his embraces. The villain seemed as
anxious to pervert their minds as to debase their bodies; for when his
eldest girl used to reproach him for his unnatural conduct, he told her
it was the tyrant laws of custom, and not those of nature, which bound
her to resist. When repelled, as he always was, his conduct was most
cruel. Sometimes, in resisting his violence, she had swooned away; but
always succeeded in thwarting his revolting designs. Frequently did the
poor girl implore him on her knees, to desist, remonstrating with him,
that his conduct was unnatural, but he only laughed, telling her the
Almighty saw no harm in it, and to obey his inclinations was no crime.

As the eldest girl grew up, not liking to ruin her father by an
exposure, she quitted him and went to service, leaving him ignorant of
her place of residence. He found her out, however, and prevailed on her
to return home, invoking Heaven that his arms might drop off if ever he
would attempt to molest her again. The poor girl suffered herself to be
prevailed on, and she went home, but had not been long there, when he
renewed his base attempts. On the 17th of December, 1823, he threw her
on the floor, and was proceeding to the most indecent liberties, when
she resisted, scratched his face, and cried out for help, on which he
desisted for that time; but in a day or two resorted again to the same
offence.

By this time Mr. and Mrs. Smith, in whose house Wilson lodged, became
acquainted with his conduct; they questioned the poor girls, for both
had been similarly prosecuted; and, having heard the tale of their
sufferings, took lodgings for them, unknown to their father, and when
they got Wilson out of their house brought them back, and treated them
with the utmost kindness; for their situation and virtues had endeared
them to all who knew them.

The enraged monster of a parent, dreading the consequence of exposure,
which it was natural for him now to expect, issued the following
hand-bill, evidently for the purpose of cloaking his infamy:

'Left their home, two girls, the eldest between eighteen and nineteen,
and the youngest about fourteen. There is little doubt but that they
have been enticed away from their home and duty by wicked advisers, the
eldest having absented herself once before to associate with the basest
of mankind, who spend their time in wickedness and drunkenness. She is
capable of the basest insinuations, even to disgrace her father, who
has from her infancy worked hard to support her.' The bill then went on
to describe the dress of the fugitives, and threatened to punish
whoever should harbour them after this notification.

Mr. Smith, under whose protection the girls were, now recommended an
application to the magistrates. Wilson was accordingly brought up to
Hatton Garden police-office, where his two daughters exhibited charges
against him. Being asked what he had to say to the appalling narrative
delivered by his indignant children, he threw himself into a theatrical
posture, and exclaimed, 'It's as false as hell -- that elder girl is a
felon and a prostitute, and capable of the worst action.'-- Finding
that these accusations availed him nothing, he turned round with an air
of defiance, and said, with great emphasis, 'They are not my daughters,
they are only my children by adoption.'

The magistrates, apprized that this assertion was as false as the other
part of his defence, rose from their seats with disgust, and declared
that they had heard enough to satisfy them of the infamy of his
disposition. He was accordingly ordered to find bail.

Wilson was indicted at the Middlesex sessions, September the 18th,
1823, charged with having repeatedly attempted to ravish his own
daughter. The prosecutrix was greatly affected during the trial; she
sobbed aloud frequently, and appeared an object of general compassion.
She was an interesting looking girl, and gave her evidence with natural
and becoming modesty. Her revolting narrative was substantiated by
several other witnesses, who had long been aware of Wilson's conduct,
some of whom had seen the poor girl struggling in the embraces of her
father.

Wilson, being called on for his defence, said the whole was a base
story to ruin him; that his daughter had robbed him, and that she had
been turned away from her situation for being a thief and a whore.

This accusation was instantly repelled. Her master came forward and
gave her the highest possible character, saying that neither himself or
her mistress would ever have parted with her, had she not gone away
herself on the suggestion of her father. Several other persons gave her
the highest character for modesty and proper deportment. It was proved
that she was Wilson's daughter.

The jury instantly found the wretch Guilty, and he was sentenced to
twelve months' imprisonment -- a punishment by no means proportioned to
his crime. By our laws an attempt to commit murder is punished in the
same manner as it the deed had been perpetrated; surely, then, by
analogy, an attempt to commit a rape should he visited in the same way
as if the offence had been actually committed.


THOMAS CHARLES FITZHUE SANDON, ESQ.
Transported for Fraud.

HAD this offender possessed as many virtues as he claimed Christian
names, we should not have to state his villainies in the 'Newgate
Calendar.' We are at a loss which to estimate most, the extreme
credulity of the prosecutor or the impudent frauds of Sandon.

In April, 1822, Edward Putland, who had been a timber and coal
merchant, was committed to the King's Bench prison, being indebted to
sundry creditors in the sum of five or six hundred pounds. In the same
prison was kept, 'in durance vile,' Mr. Sandon, whose polite address
and easy confidence procured him a speedy admission to the friendship
of Mr. Putland, who, 'good easy man,' quickly unbosomed himself to his
new acquaintance. Sandon affected the utmost kindness, and frequently
conversed with Mr. Putland respecting the hardships of his confinement.
Seeing him so desirous of being restored to his family, Sandon called
him into his room, on the 13th of June, and said, that, commiserating
his situation, he had applied, in his behalf, to a worthy friend named
Green, who had such influence in the commercial world that he could get
his, Putland's, business immediately settled for thirty pounds, and
added, that he expected Green that very evening to call on him.

Mr. Putland expressed his surprise that Mr. Green could get his
business settled for so trifling a sum.

'Aye,' replied Sandon, 'if it were as many thousands it would make no
difference, so peculiar and extensive is his influence' Putland having
no money, Sandon said his acceptance would do, and a bill of exchange
was soon after drawn for the thirty pounds.

Under various pretences Sandon artfully contrived, from time to time,
to defraud his credulous dupe of different sums of six pounds, nine
pounds, fourteen pounds, and seventeen pounds, which were chiefly
furnished by Mrs. Putland, who, anxious for her husband's discharge,
put herself to the greatest distress to raise the money.

On the full disclosure of Sandon's villainy he was tried at the Surrey
Sessions, and found guilty on the 29th of July, 1823. The chairman
declared it the most atrocious fraud he had ever met with, and
sentenced him to seven years' transportation.

Sandon was a man of education and polished address, but such was his
propensity to wickedness, that he had been frequently tried for the
most petty frauds, and had once stood in the pillory.


JOHN THURTELL AND JOSEPH HUNT.
Convicted of Murder.

Illustration: Thurtell, when nearly overpowered, cutting Weare's throat.

For cold-blooded villainy in its conception, its planning, and its
perpetration, this murder must be allowed to stand unparalleled. The
sensation which it created throughout the country was such, as was
probably never exceeded in any previous case.

John Thurtell, the principal actor in the affair, was the son of a
respectable and worthy man, Alderman Thurtell of Norwich, who twice
filled the office of mayor of that city. Early in life he went to sea,
and on his return obtained a lieutenant's commission in the German
Legion, then serving in Portugal. He also served in Spain, and was at
the storming of St. Sebastian. In 1821 he was residing at Norwich as a
bombasin manufacturer, and in that year, he came to London to receive
400l. for goods which he had sold to a respectable house, and which, on
his return, he was to pay among his creditors. Instead of doing so,
however, he fabricated a story that, as he was walking along a lonely
spot, near Norwich, he was stopped by footpads, and robbed of it; but
his creditors did not hesitate to tell him that he had invented this
tale for the purpose of defrauding them; and, to avoid their
importunities, he set off for London, in company with a girl, with whom
he had lived for some time. Here he commenced business, in conjunction
with his brother Thomas, but soon failed. On the 26th of January, 1823,
their premises in Watling-street were burnt down, and very strong
suspicions were entertained that the fire was wilful, and that the
object of the Thurtells was to defraud the insurance-office.

About two years before this event, by which the brothers were thrown
out of the immediate means of subsistence, John Thurtell had become a
frequenter of a public-house in Bow-street, called the Brown Bear,
which has since been removed, but which was then well known, as the
resort of sporting men, and as a house much frequented by persons
addicted to gaming. There was a room at the back of the premises, where
high play was frequently countenanced among the customers, and where
Thurtell, almost on his first introduction to the society, lost 300l.
at blind hookey in the course of a very short time. Mad at his loss, he
appears to have almost formed a resolution to quit a house for ever,
where he firmly believed that unfair play was resorted to; but at the
persuasion of his new friends, he became reconciled, and seemed to
enter into the sporting circles, with somewhat of a determination to
endeavour, by any means, to retrieve his own losses, and to profit by
the inexperience and indiscretion of any, who might come in his way. He
was doomed to be again disappointed, however, and to be again taught a
somewhat severe lesson. The fights between Hickman, the Gasman, and
Oliver, and between Jack Randall, and Martin "the master of the Rolls,"
were at this time on the tapis, and Hickman and Martin were in training
at Wade's Mill, Herts. Thurtell was too good a flat to be given up yet,
and on his exhibiting some anxiety to become acquainted with the men,
he was conducted to them and introduced to them; the object being to
deprive him of any little money, which he might still possess. Weare,
who was his subsequent victim, was no less a frequenter of the Brown
Bear, and no less an admirer of all the sports of the ring, and of the
field; and having by a pretty long acquaintance with the "flash" world
obtained a good knowledge of its members, and of its habits and
proceedings, he was selected as the "plant," to be put upon the pigeon,
who was to be plucked; or in other words, he was to be introduced to
Thurtell as a new hand, and by pretending little acquaintance with the
ways of the sporting world, was to draw him out, and then, bringing his
real knowledge of all the habits of playmen into operation, was to
fleece him of all he possessed. The plan being agreed upon was soon
carried out, and another 300l. being eventually won from Thurtell, he
swore vengeance against those who, he now clearly found, had conspired
to rob him. They saw, however, that it was useless to proceed further
against their dupe with any chance of getting anything from him, and in
order to conciliate him, they determined to let him into a secret,
which cost them nothing, and by which he might be able to secure some
return for the losses, which he had sustained, by their
instrumentality. He was therefore informed of a "cross," which was
about to take place, that is, an unfair fight, which was to be fought,
and by introducing him among their acquaintance, they procured for him
a bet, by which he secured a sum of 600l. Thus successful, no effort
could induce him to quit a circle, for which he appeared to have formed
a strong partiality; and he soon became known as one of a gang of the
most unprincipled and successful gamblers. In his rounds, he frequently
met Mr. Weare, and it appears that that gentleman had originally
possessed a very considerable property, but, unfortunately, from his
being a dupe, had himself become a gambler. It was not until Thurtell
had been for some time acquainted with this person, however, as will be
seen by the evidence, that the plan was laid for his murder; and the
inducement for the commission of this diabolical offence is now well
known to have been a "private bank," which Mr. Weare carried about him,
in a pocket in an under waistcoat, and to which he had been frequently
seen to convey money, when any "chance" turned up in his favour; and
from which he had also been seen to take the necessary funds for
carrying on any game, when he saw the likelihood of winning by the
hazard of a large stake.

The circumstances immediately attending the murder are so fully and so
well detailed in the opening speech of Mr. Gurney, (now Mr. Baron
Gurney,) who was employed to conduct the prosecution, on the trial,
which took place at Hertford, on the 6th January 1824, that it is
almost unnecessary to do more than to give it at length.

The prisoners, who stood indicted, were John Thurtell and Joseph Hunt.
The former has been already described; the latter was at that time well
known as a public singer, and was somewhat celebrated for the talent
which he possessed.

Mr. Gurney, in opening the case to the jury, stated that the deceased,
Mr. William Weare, was known to be addicted to play, and to be in the
habit of frequenting gaming-houses, and that the prisoner, Thurtell,
was acquainted with him, and, as it was said, had been wronged by him,
in respect to some play, in which they had been engaged, and had been
deprived by him of a large sum of money. The prisoner Hunt, was also
known to Mr. Weare, but was not in habits of friendship or intimacy
with him. He would next describe a person, whom he should have to call
in evidence against the prisoners. He alluded to Probert, who was a
party to the murder, after its commission, although it did not appear
that he had any hand in its actual perpetration. He was engaged in
trade as a spirit-dealer, and he rented a cottage in a secluded spot,
called Gill's Hill Lane, situated about three miles from Elstree. He
was himself usually engaged in London, in his business, during the day,
and his wife lived at the cottage, which was a small one, and was fully
occupied by his wife, her sister, (Miss Noyes,) some children of
Thurtell's brother, Thomas, a maid-servant, and a boy. The vicinity of
this cottage was selected by the prisoners as a fit spot for the
perpetration of the murder, which had been already determined upon; and
the mode of the commission of which, he should now proceed to describe.
Thurtell and the deceased met at a billiard-room, kept by one
Rexworthy, on the evening of Thursday, the 23rd of October, and being
joined there by Hunt, Mr. Weare was invited by Thurtell to go to
Probert's cottage, for the purpose of enjoying some shooting in the
neighbourhood, for two or three days. He accepted the invitation, and
the following day was fixed for him to meet Thurtell, who promised to
drive him down to the place. On the forenoon of the Friday, the
deceased called at Rexworthy's, saying, that he was going out shooting
with Thurtell, and at about three o'clock he went home, to the
chambers, which he occupied in Lyon's Inn, and having partaken of a
chop dinner, he packed up some clothes in a green carpet bag, and the
laundress having called a coach, he went away in it, carrying with him
the carpet bag, a double-barrelled gun, in a case, together with a
back-gammon board, containing dice, &c. He left his chambers in this
manner before four o'clock, and drove first to Charing Cross, and
afterwards to Maddox-street, Hanover square; thence he proceeded to the
New Road, where he got out of the coach, but returned after some time,
accompanied by another person, and took his things away. At this time,
Thomas and John Thurtell had need of temporary concealment, owing to
their inability to provide the bail requisite to meet a charge of
misdemeanour; and Probert had procured for them a retreat at Tetsall's,
at the sign of the Coach and Horses, in Conduit-street, where they
remained for two or three weeks previous to the murder. On the morning
of Friday, the 24th of October, two men, answering in every respect to
the description of John Thurtell and Hunt, went to a pawnbroker's in
Mary-le-bone, and purchased a pair of pocket-pistols. In the middle of
the same day Hunt hired a gig, and afterwards a horse, under the
pretence of going to Dartford, in Kent: and he inquired at the stables
where he could purchase a sack and a rope, and was directed to a place
over Westminster Bridge, which, he was told, was on his road into Kent.
Somewhere, however, it would be found that he did procure a sack and
cord; and, on the same afternoon, he met at Tetsall's Probert, the two
Thurtells, and Noyes. Some conversation took place at the time between
the parties, and Hunt was heard to ask Probert if he, "would be in
it,"-- meaning what they (Hunt and John Thurtell) were about. Thurtell
drove off from Tetsall's between four and five o'clock, to take up a
friend, as he said to Probert, "to be killed as he travelled with him:"
and he requested Probert to bring down Hunt in his own gig. In the
course of that evening the prisoner, Thurtell, was seen in a gig, with
a horse of an iron-grey colour, with a white face and white legs. He
was first seen by a patrol, near Edgeware; beyond that part of the road
he was seen by the landlord of a public-house; but from that time,
until his arrival at Probert's cottage, on the same night, there was no
direct evidence to trace him. Probert, according to Thurtell's request,
drove Hunt down in his gig, and, having a better horse, on the road
they overtook Thurtell and Weare, in the gig, and passed them without
notice. They stopped afterwards at a public-house on the road, to drink
grog, where they believed Thurtell must have passed them unperceived.
Probert afterwards drove Hunt until they reached Phillimore Lodge,
where he (Hunt) got out, as he said, by Thurtell's desire to wait for
him. Probert from thence drove alone to Gill's Hill cottage, in the
lane near which he met Thurtell on foot, and alone. Thurtell inquired
-- Where was Hunt, had he been left behind? and added, that he had done
the business without his assistance, and had killed his man. At his
desire, Probert then returned to bring Hunt to the spot, and went to
Hunt for that purpose. When they met, he told Hunt what had happened.
"Why, it was to be done here!" said Hunt, (pointing to a spot nearer
Phillimore Lodge,) admitting his privity, and that he had got out to
assist in the commission of the deed. When Thurtell rebuked Hunt for
his absence, "Why," said the latter, "you had the tools." "They were no
good," replied Thurtell, "the pistols were no better than pop-guns: I
fired at his cheek, and it glanced off". He then proceeded to detail to
them the mode, in which he had committed the murder. He said that when
he fired, Weare jumped out of the gig, cried for mercy, and offered to
give up his money; but that he had pursued him up the lane, and finding
the pistol useless, had knocked him down; that they then struggled
together, and he tried to cut his throat with a pen-knife; but that
eventually he had killed him, by driving the barrel of the pistol into
his forehead, and then turning it in his brains. Mr. Gurney then
continued to state, that a few minutes before the time at which the
murder must have been committed, a gig was heard to pass Probert's
cottage at a rapid pace, and the servant boy, who was in momentary
expectation of his master's return, imagined that it was he. He found,
however, that he did not arrive at the cottage, and he proceeded about
the work on which he was before engaged. In about five minutes after
this, some persons who were near the road distinctly heard the report
of a gun or pistol, and then voices, as if in contention. Groans were
next distinguished; but they became fainter and fainter, and at length
they altogether died away. The spot from which these noises proceeded,
was Gill's Hill Lane, near the cottage of Probert. At about nine
o'clock Thurtell arrived at the cottage, and although he had started
from town accompanied by a friend, he now was alone; but he had with
him the double-barrelled gun, the carpet bag, and the backgammon board,
which Mr. Weare had taken with him from his chambers. He gave his horse
to the boy, and it had the appearance of having been sweated; but it
was now cool, and it appeared as if, after having been driven fast, it
had been allowed to stand. The boy inquired after his master, and was
told that he would soon arrive, and then Thurtell went out again. His
meeting with Probert had been already described; and Hunt having been
again taken into the gig by the latter, from Phillimore's Lodge, they
all returned to Probert's cottage together; Thurtell walking by the
side of the gig. Probert on his arrival immediately went into the
parlour, and acquainted his wife with the circumstance of Thurtell and
Hunt having come down, as they were not expected; and presently on
their joining him, Hunt, who was a stranger to Mrs. Probert, was
formally introduced to her. They then supped on some pork-chops, which
Hunt had carried down in the gig from London; and afterwards they all
three went out together, professedly with the intention of calling on
Mr. Nicholas, a neighbour, but in reality to visit the body of the
murdered man. Thurtell conducted his two companions down the lane, and
having led them to the spot where the murder was com mitted, they
dragged the body through a hedge into an adjoining field, and there
rifled the pockets of his clothes. Thurtell had already taken away his
purse and watch, and they now secured a pocket-book, and any other
valuables which he had in his possession. They then went back to the
cottage, and Thurtell, with a sponge which was in the gig, endeavoured
to remove some marks of blood which were on his clothes, many of which
were distinctly seen by Probert's boy; and having been partially
successful, they all proceeded again into the parlour. In the course of
the evening Thurtell produced a gold watch and seals, but without a
chain; and he also displayed a gold curb chain, which when single might
be used for a lady's neck, or when joined, was fit to be used for a
watch. Opening the chain, he remarked, that it was more fit for a lady
than a gentleman; and he pressed it on Mrs. Probert, and eventually
made her accept it. Some conversation then took place, and Hunt sang
two or three songs, and then an offer was made, that Miss Noyes' bed
should be prepared for the two visitors, and that Miss Noyes should
sleep with the children. This, however, was declined, and Thurtell and
Hunt declared that they would rather sit up all night in the parlour.
Mrs. Probert and Miss Noyes at length retired to rest, leaving the
three men down stairs; but something had raised suspicion in the mind
of Mrs. Probert, in consequence of which she did not go to bed, nor
undress herself. She went to the window, and, looking out, saw that
Probert, Hunt, and Thurtell were in the garden. It would be proved that
they went down to the body, and finding it too heavy to be removed, one
of the horses was taken from the stable. The body, enclosed in a sack,
was then placed across the horse; and stones having been put into the
sack, the body, with the sack, was thrown into the pond. Mrs. Probert
distinctly saw something heavy drawn across the garden. The parties
then returned to the house; and Mrs. Probert, whose fears and
suspicions were now most powerfully excited, went downstairs, and
listened behind the parlour door. The parties proceeded to share the
booty; and Thurtell divided with the rest, money to the amount of six
pounds each. The purse, the pocket-book, and certain papers which might
lead to detection, were carefully burned. They remained up late; and
Probert, when he went to bed, was surprised to find that his wife was
not asleep. Hunt and Thurtell still continued to sit up in the parlour.
The next morning, as early as six o'clock, Hunt and Thurtell were seen
in the lane together. Some men who were at work there observed them, as
they called it, "grabbling" for something in the hedge; and being
spoken to by these men, Thurtell observed, "that it was a very bad
road, and that he had nearly been capsized there last night." The men
said, "I hope you were not hurt." To which Thurtell answered, "Oh! no,
the gig was not upset," and then went away. These men, thinking
something might have been lost on the spot, searched, after Thurtell
and Hunt were gone. In one place they found a quantity of blood,
further on they discovered a bloody knife, and next they found a bloody
pistol --- one of the pair which were purchased by Hunt. That pistol
bore upon it the marks of blood and of human brains. The spot was
afterwards still further examined, and more blood was discovered, which
had been concealed by branches and leaves; so that no doubt could be
entertained that the murder had been committed in this particular
place. On the following morning, Saturday, the 25th of October,
Thurtell and Hunt left Probert's cottage in the gig, carrying away with
them the gun, the carpet bag, and the backgammon board, belonging to
Mr. Weare. These articles were taken to Hunt's lodgings, where they
were afterwards found. When Hunt arrived in town on Saturday he
appeared to be unusually gay: he said, "We Turpin lads can do the
trick. I am able to drink wine now, and I will drink nothing but wine;"
and he seemed to be very much elated at the recollection of some
successful exploit. It was observed that Thurtell's hands were very
much scratched; and some remark having been made on the subject, he
stated "that they had been out netting partridges, and that his hands
got scratched in that occupation." On some other points he gave
similarly evasive answers. On the Saturday, Hunt had a new spade sent
to his lodgings, which he took down to the cottage on Sunday, when he
again accompanied Probert in his gig. When he got near Probert's
garden, he told him that it was to dig a hole to bury the body in; and
soon after their reaching the house, Thurtell joined them. On that
night Probert visited Mr. Nicholls; and in the course of a conversation
which took place between them, that gentleman remarked that some
persons had heard the report of a gun or pistol in the lane on Friday
night, and that he supposed that it was a joke of some of his friends.
He denied all knowledge of the circumstance to him, but on his return
home he communicated what had passed to Thurtell and Hunt. They were
much alarmed at it, and the former declared that "he was baked;" and
they all became extremely desirous to conceal the body effectually,
more especially as Probert considered that he should be in danger, in
the event of its being discovered in his garden. Thurtell and Hunt
promised to go down to do it on the next evening; and in order that
Probert's boy should be out of the way, they took him to town with them
on the next day, and lodged him at Tetsall's in Conduit-street. They
returned, in obedience to their promise; and while Hunt engaged Mrs.
Probert in conversation, Thurtell and Probert went into the garden, and
having drawn the body from the pond, placed it in Thurtell's gig to be
carried away. Hunt was then apprised that all was ready; and he and
Thurtell drove away with the body, refusing to tell Probert the place
in which they intended to conceal it. He should now describe the
circumstances under which this fearful and cold-blooded crime had been
discovered, and its perpetrators brought to justice. The discharge of
the pistol in Gill's Hill Lane, and the subsequent suspicious finding
of the blood-marks, and of the knife and pistol, were circumstances
which had induced great alarm in the minds of the inhabitants and
magistracy of the surrounding neighbourhood; and although at first
there was little to prove the absolute fact of murder having been
committed, the whole of the appearances of the case were such as to
leave little doubt that the two prisoners and Probert could explain, if
they would, the real cause of the events which had produced so much
confusion and suspicion. They were all, in consequence, taken into
custody; and although Hunt had shaved off his whiskers, which had been
previously very large, and had otherwise disfigured himself, he was
proved to have hired the horse and gig which Thurtell had taken to
Gill's Hill, and in which it was known that a person who was now
nowhere to be found had accompanied him. Strict inquiries were made,
and the most active investigation carried on by the magistrates, but
nothing could be elicited which could in the slightest degree lead to
the discovery of who was in reality the murdered man, for that murder
had been committed was now presumed to be beyond a doubt; but at
length, on the Thursday morning, Hunt, upon a species of understanding
with the magistrates, pointed out a pond near Elstree, at a
considerable distance from Probert's house, and there, sunk to the
bottom by means of stones, in a state of nudity and covered only by a
sack, were discovered the murdered remains of a man, who afterwards
proved to be the unfortunate Mr. Weare, the former friend and companion
of the prisoner Thurtell. The learned counsel having stated these
circumstances, declared that in order to prove them all, he should be
compelled to call before the jury Probert as a witness, who was
confessedly privy to the concealment of the body, if not to the actual
murder; but he should so build up and corroborate his testimony by that
of other witnesses, that he conceived that no doubt could be
entertained of its veracity. With regard to the prisoner Hunt: he was
charged as an accomplice before the fact. He hired the gig, and he
procured the sack. The gun, travelling-bag, and backgammon board, were
found in his lodgings. These constituted a part of the plunder of Mr.
Weare, and could be possessed only by a person participating in this
crime. Besides, there was placed about the neck of Probert's wife, a
chain, which had belonged to Mr. Weare; and round the neck of the
murdered man there was found a shawl, which belonged to Thurtell, but
which had been seen in the hands of Hunt.

The collateral circumstances were then proved by a variety of
witnesses, whose examination occupied the court during several hours.

Ruthven, the officer, deposited on the table a pistol and a pistol-key,
a knife, a muslin handkerchief spotted with blood, a shirt similarly
stained, and a waistcoat, into the pockets of which bloody hands had
been thrust. A coat and a hat marked with blood were also produced, all
of which belonged to Thurtell. Ruthven then produced several articles
belonging to the deceased -- the gun, the carpet bag, and his clothes.

Symmonds the constable, when sworn, took from his pocket a white paper,
which he carefully unfolded, and produced to the court the pistol with
which the murder had been committed. It was a blue steel-barrelled
pistol, with brass about the handle; the pan was open, as the firing
had left it, and was smeared with the black of gunpowder and the dingy
stain of blood. The barrel was bloody; and in the muzzle a piece of tow
was thrust, to keep in the horrid contents, the murdered man's brains.
Against the back of the pan were the short curled hairs, of a silver
hue, which had been dug from the dead man's head, and were glued to the
pan firmly with crusted blood.

We shall now give the evidence of Probert and his wife, who were
called, and which discloses the circumstances attending the murder, and
the disposition of the property of the deceased, with more exact
minuteness than the statement of the learned counsel. Probert's
evidence was as follows:

"I occupied a cottage in Gill's Hill Lane for six months before October
last; my family consisted of Mrs. Probert, a servant maid, and a boy.
In the month of October, Miss Noyes lived with us, and two children of
Thomas Thurtell, a brother of the prisoner's. I have been for some time
past acquainted with the prisoner John Thurtell; and he had often been
down to my cottage sporting with me: he knew the road to my cottage,
and all the roads thereabouts well. Gill's Hill Lane, in which my
cottage stood, is out of the high road to St. Alban's, at Radlett; my
cottage was about a quarter of a mile from the high road, and fourteen
miles and a quarter from Tyburn turnpike. In the latter end of October,
the prisoner, John Thurtell, lodged at Tetsall's, the Coach and Horses,
in Conduit-street; Thomas Thurtell lodged there also. On Friday the
24th of that month, I dined at Tetsall's with John Thurtell and Hunt;
and Thomas Thurtell and Noyes were also there. After dinner, Thurtell
said something to me about money, and I paid him 5l. which I had
borrowed of him four days before. He then said, 'I think I shall go
down to your cottage tonight; are you going down?' I said that I was,
and he asked me to drive Hunt down with me, which I promised to do.
Some further conversation took place, and he said, 'I expect a friend
to meet me this evening a little after five; and if he comes, I shall
go down. If I have an opportunity, I mean to do him; for he is a man
that has robbed me of several hundreds. I have told Hunt where to stop;
I shall want him about a mile and a half beyond Elstree.' He then
desired me to give Hunt, who had just come in, a pound, and I did so;
and Thurtell told him, in case I should not go, to hire a horse and to
go to Elstree, saying, 'You know where to stop for me.' Hunt made no
answer. At a little after five o'clock, Thurtell started from the Coach
and Horses in a gig. He drove a dark grey horse; and I went away some
time afterwards with Hunt in my vehicle. In Oxford-street Hunt got out
and bought a loin of pork for supper; and at the end of Oxford-street
he remarked, 'This is the place where Jack is to take up his friend.'
We then drove on, and about four miles from London we overtook
Thurtell, who was driving, accompanied by another man. Hunt said,
'There they are; drive by and take no notice. It's all right; Jack has
got him.' We, in consequence, passed on; and when we got to the
Bald-faced Stag, about seven miles from London, and two miles short of
Edgware, we stopped. It was then about a quarter before seven o'clock.
On our way I asked Hunt who the man was who was in the gig with
Thurtell; but he answered, 'You are not to know his name; you never saw
him; you know nothing of him.' I went into the Bald-faced Stag, as I
supplied the house with liquor; but Hunt walked on, saying, 'I won't go
in, because I have not returned those horse-cloths I borrowed.' I
stopped about twenty minutes; and then I drove on, and overtook Hunt at
about a quarter of a mile from Edgeware. I took him up, and we drove on
to Mr. Clarke's at Edgeware, and there we had a glass of brandy and
water. A little further on we bought half a bushel of corn for the
horse, and put it in the gig; and then we went on to the Artichoke,
kept by Mr. Field. It wanted now only about eight minutes of eight; and
Hunt said, 'I wonder where Thurtell is; he can't have passed us.' We
pulled up at the Artichoke, and had four or five glasses of brandy and
water; and we stayed there more than three quarters of an hour, waiting
for Thurtell to come up with us. We then drove on; and at Mr.
Phillimore's Lodge, which is about a mile and a half further on, Hunt
said that 'he should remain there for John Thurtell;' and he got out on
the road. I drove through Radlett, towards my own cottage; and when I
was within about a hundred yards of it, I met Thurtell on foot. He
cried out, 'Hallo! where is Hunt?' and I answered that I had left him
at Phillimore's Lodge, waiting for him. He replied, 'I don't want him
now; for I have done the trick.' He said that 'he had killed his friend
that he had brought down with him; he had ridded the country of a,
villain, who had robbed him of three or four hundred pounds!' I said,
'Good God! I hope you have not killed the man?' and he said, 'It's of
no consequence to you, you don't know him; you never saw him: do you go
back and fetch Hunt -- you know best where you left him!' I returned to
the place where I left Hunt, and found him near the same spot. Thurtell
did not go. I said to Hunt when I took him up, 'John Thurtell is at my
house -- he has killed his friend;' and Hunt said, 'Thank God, I am out
of it; I am glad he has done it without me: I can't think where the
devil he could pass; I never saw him pass anywhere, but I'm glad I'm
out of it.' He said, 'This is the place where we were to have done it'
(meaning near Phillimore's Lodge). I asked him who the man was, and he
said, 'You don't know him, and I shall not tell you.' He said it was a
man that had robbed Jack of several hundred pounds, and they meant to
have it back again. By that time I had reached my own house; John
Thurtell stood at the gate as we drove into the yard. Hunt said,
'Thurtell, where could you pass me?' Thurtell replied, 'It don't matter
where I passed you; I've done the trick -- I have done it. But what the
devil did you let Probert stop drinking at his d--d public-houses for,
when you knew what was to be done?' Hunt said, 'I made sure you were
behind, or else we should not have stopped.' Having taken the loin of
pork in the kitchen, and given it to the servant to cook for supper, I
went into the parlour and introduced Hunt to Mrs. Probert; he had never
been there before. Thurtell followed immediately; we had stopped in the
yard a short time before we went in, and when I spoke to my wife, I
told her that we were going to Mr. Nicholls's to ask for a day's
shooting. We then went out together, Thurtell carrying a sack and a
cord with him, which he had taken from the gig. We went down the lane,
and I carried the lantern. As we went along, Thurtell said, 'I began to
think, Hunt, you would not come;' when Hunt answered, 'We made sure you
were behind.' I walked foremost; and Thurtell said, 'Probert, he is
just beyond the second turning;' When he came to the second turning, he
said, 'It's a little further on,' and he at length said, 'This is the
place.' We then looked about for a pistol and knife, but could not find
either; we got over the hedge and there found the body lying; the head
was bound up in a shawl, I think a red one. Thurtell searched the
deceased's pockets, and found a pocket-book containing three five-pound
notes, a memorandum-book, and some silver. He said, 'This is all he has
got; I took the watch and purse when I killed him.' The body was then
put into the sack head foremost; the sack came to the knees, and was
tied with a cord; we left the body there, and went towards home. On our
way Thurtell explained how he had killed him. He said, 'When I first
shot him, he jumped out of the gig and ran like the devil, singing out
that "he would deliver all he had, if I'd only spare his life." I
jumped out of the gig and ran after him: I got him down, and began to
cut his throat, as I thought, close to the jugular vein; but I could
not stop his singing out: I then jammed the pistol into his head; I
gave it a turn round; and then I knew I had done him.' Turning to Hunt,
he said, 'Joe, you ought to have been with me, for I thought at one
time he would have got the better of me. Those d -- d pistols are like
spits, they are of no use.' Hunt remarked, that he should have thought
one of the pistols would have killed him dead, but that at all events
he had plenty of 'tools' with him; and then we entered the house and
had our supper. In the course of the evening Thurtell produced a
handsome gold watch and seals, and a gold chain. He offered the chain
to Mrs. Probert, saying, that it was more fit for a lady than a
gentleman: but she at first refused it, although after a time she
consented to accept it as a present. He then put the watch and seals
into his pocket. A proposal was then made, that Hunt and Thurtell
should sleep in Miss Noyes' bed, and that Miss Noyes should sleep with
Thomas Thurtell's children; but they refused to consent to such a
course, and declared that they would rather sit up and take a turn on
the sofa. Hunt then sang two or three songs, and Mrs. Probert and Miss
Noyes went to bed between twelve and one o'clock. When they had
retired, Thurtell produced a pocket-book, a purse, and a memorandum
-book. The purse contained sovereigns, but I cannot say how many. He
took three five-pound notes from the pocket-book, and giving a note and
sovereign to Hunt, and a similar sum to me, said, 'That's your share of
the blunt.' The papers and books were burned, to avoid any discovery,
and then the carpet bag was examined. Its contents were replaced, and,
as well as the backgammon board and the gun, were taken away on the
ensuing day, by Hunt and Thurtell, in a gig. When this examination was
completed, Thurtell said, 'I mean to have Barber Beaumont after this,
and Woods.' The former is a director to an insurance company, with whom
Thurtell had had some dispute; and the latter kept company with Miss
Noyes. A general conversation then took place, the particulars of which
I cannot recollect; and he may have mentioned other names, but I do not
now remember them. At length Thurtell said, 'Well, Joe, we must go and
get the body, and put it in the pond, meaning the pond in my garden. I
said, 'By G--d, you shan't put it in my pond, or you will be my ruin;'
but at length they induced me to consent, Thurtell saying, 'Had it not
been for Hunt's mistake, I should have killed him in the other lane,
and then returned to town and inquired of his friends why he had not
come.' The two prisoners then went out together, and I waited for their
coming back; but in a short time they returned, and Hunt said,
'Probert, he's too heavy; we cannot carry him; we have only brought him
a little way.' Thurtell invited me to accompany them, and said, that he
would put the bridle on his horse to fetch the body; and then we all
went out together. We took the horse from the stable, and Thurtell and
I went and fetched the body, while Hunt remained at the gate. The horse
having been put into the stable again, we dragged the body down the
garden, and putting some stones into the sack, we threw it into the
pond. The man's feet were then found to be, perhaps, half a foot above
the water; and Thurtell got a cord, threw it over the legs, and giving
me one end, while he held the other, we drew the body into the centre
of the pond, where it sunk out of sight. We all three then returned to
the cottage, and I went to bed almost immediately. I found my wife up.
Next morning I came down about nine o'clock. Thurtell said, in presence
of Hunt, that they had been down the lane, to look for the pistol and
knife, but neither could be found. They asked me to go down the lane
and seek them, in the course of the day; which I promised to do; but
when I went down the lane, I saw a man at work near the spot. That
morning they went away after breakfast. On Sunday they came down again;
and Thomas Thurtell and Mr. Noyes came also. Hunt brought a new spade
with him. He said it was to dig a grave for the deceased. Hunt returned
with the gig after setting down Thomas Thurtell, and brought out John
Thurtell and Noyes. Hunt was very dirtily dressed when he came down,
and went up stairs to change. When he came down, he was well dressed --
in almost new clothes; and he said the clothes belonged to the
deceased: he told me he had thrown a new spade over the hedge into my
garden, and I found it there afterwards. John Thurtell and I walked to
the pond. He asked me, if the body had risen? I said no; ,and he said
it would lie there for a month. In the afternoon Hewart called, and I
went with him to Mr. Nicholls's. On my return, I told Thurtell and Hunt
that Mr. Nicholls had told me, that someone had fired a pistol or gun
off, in Gill's Hill Lane, on Friday night, and that there were cries of
murder, as though some one had been killed. He said it was about eight
o'clock, and added, 'I suppose it was done by some of your friends, to
frighten each other' John Thurtell said, 'Then I am booked.' I said, 'I
am afraid it's a bad job, as Mr. Nicholls seems to know all about it; I
am very sorry it ever happened here, as I fear it will be my ruin.'
Thurtell said, 'Never mind, Probert, they can do nothing with you:' and
I declared that the body must be immediately taken out of my pond
again. Thurtell answered, 'I'll tell you what I'll do, Probert: after
you are all gone to bed, Joe and I will take the body up and bury it.'
But I told them that would be just as bad, if they buried it in the
garden. John Thurtell said, 'I'll bury him where you nor no one else
can find him.' As John Thurtell was going into the parlour, Hunt said,
'Probert, they can do nothing with you or me, even if they do find it
out, as we were neither of us at the murder.' Thurtell and Hunt sat up
all that night: I, Noyes, and Thomas Thurtell went to bed. Thomas
Thurtell slept with his children. In the morning, John Thurtell and
Hunt said that they had gone to dig a grave, but the dogs were barking
all night, and they thought some one was about the ground; and he
added, 'Joe and I will come down to-night and take him quite away, and
that will be better for you altogether.' Thomas Thurtell and Hunt, and
my boy, Addis, went away in the chaise after breakfast and John
Thurtell, Thomas Noyes, and Miss Noyes in another. The boy was sent to
town to be out of the way. That evening John Thurtell and Hunt came
again in a gig about nine: they took supper; after supper, John
Thurtell and I went to the stable, leaving Hunt talking to Mrs.
Probert. Thurtell said, 'Come, let's get the body up; while Hunt is
talking to Mrs. Probert, she will not suspect.' We went to the pond,
and got the body up; we took it out of the sack, and cut all the
clothes from it, and then we returned to the house, leaving the body
naked on the grass. After a short time we all three went into the
stables and took out Thurtell's gig; and Thurtell having produced from
it a new sack and a cord, we put the body into the former, and then
Hunt and Thurtell put it into the gig; but I refused to have anything
more to do with it: they then drove away with it. On the ensuing
morning I destroyed the clothes which we had cut from the body, and
subsequently on the same day I was taken into custody."

Mrs. Probert, on being examined, corroborated the testimony of her
husband with regard to all the circumstances which occurred in the
cottage up to the time of her going to bed on the Friday night. She
then went on to say -- On my going up stairs, I did not go to bed
directly, and my curiosity being aroused at my husband remaining below,
I went to the head of the stairs to listen. I leaned over the
banisters, and I heard a whispering going on, and what I took to be a
trying on of clothes. The first words which I could distinguish were,
'This, I think, will fit you very well.' There was then a sound as of
the rustling of papers on the table; and then they seemed to be thrown
on the fire and burned. I afterwards went into my own chamber, and
subsequently hearing something in the garden, I looked out. I saw two
men go from the parlour to the stable; and then they led a horse out,
and opening the yard gate, they took the horse into the lane. Some time
after that, I again heard them in the garden; and there seemed to be
something heavy dragged along the path. It appeared to be dragged in a
direction from the stable to the garden, along the dark walk. I looked
out, and had a view of it as they took it out of the dark walk, and it
looked to be in a sack. After this I heard a noise, which sounded to me
like a heap of stones thrown into a pit -- I can describe it in no
other way. In addition to the conversation which I have already
detailed as having taken place in the parlour, I also heard a voice,
which I think was Hunt's, say, 'Let us take a five-pound note each.' I
did not hear Thurtell say anything; but then I heard my husband bay,
'We must say that there was a hare thrown up in the gig, on the cushion
-- we must tell the boy so in the morning.' I next heard a voice, I
can't exactly tell whose say, 'We had better be off to town by four or
five o'clock in the morning;' and then, I think, John Thurtell it was,
who said, 'We had better not go before eight or nine o'clock;' and the
parlour door then shut. I heard John Thurtell say also (I think it was
his voice), 'Holding shall be next.' I rather think it was Hunt who
next spoke; he asked, 'Has he (Holding) got money?' John Thurtell
replied, 'It is not money I want, it is revenge; it is Holding who has
ruined my friend here.' I did not at first understand who this friend
was; I believe it meant Mr. Probert, my husband. I cannot say whether
Holding had anything to do in the transactions of my husband's
bankruptcy. 'It was Holding,' said John Thurtell, 'who ruined my friend
here, and destroyed my peace of mind.' My husband came to bed about
half-past one or two o'clock; I believe it was; I did not know the hour
exactly."

The whole of the evidence in support of the case for the prosecution
having now been adduced, the learned judge inquired of the jury,
whether they conceived that it would be better at once to proceed to
the conclusion of the case; or whether they would prefer that the
defence of the prisoners should be postponed until the morning. The
jury expressed their wish that the case should be at once concluded;
but at the desire of the prisoner Thurtell, who respectfully pressed on
their attention the long and harassing time he had stood at that bar,
and begged for a night's cessation to recruit his strength, previous to
making his defence, the court adjourned, the jury being locked up until
the following morning.

The trial then proceeded, and Ruthven and Thomas Thurtell being
recalled to be examined on some trifling points, in a short time Mr.
Justice Park informed John Thurtell, that he was ready to hear any
observations he had to make.

The prisoner then commenced his defence;-- speaking in a deep,
measured, and unshaken tone, and using a studied and theatrical action.

"My Lord, and Gentlemen of the Jury -- Under greater difficulties than
ever man encountered, I now rise to vindicate my character and defend
my life. I have been supported in this hour of trial, by the knowledge
that my cause is heard before an enlightened tribunal, and that the
free institutions of my country have placed my destiny in the hands of
twelve men, who are uninfluenced by prejudice, and unawed by power. I
have been represented by the press, which carries its benefits or
curses on rapid wings from one extremity of the kingdom to the other,
as a man more depraved, more gratuitously and habitually profligate and
cruel, than has ever appeared in modern times. I have been held up to
the world as the perpetrator of a murder, under circumstances of
greater aggravation, of more cruel and premeditated atrocity, than it
ever before fell to the lot of man to have seen or heard of. I have
been held forth to the world as a depraved, heartless, remorseless,
prayerless villain, who had seduced my friend into a sequestered path,
merely in order to despatch him with the greater security -- as a snake
who had crept into his bosom only to strike a sure blow -- as a
monster, who, after the perpetration of a deed from which the hardest
heart recoils with horror, and at which humanity stands aghast, washed
away the remembrance of my guilt in the midst of riot and debauchery.
You, gentlemen, must have read the details, which have been daily, I
may say, hourly published regarding me. It would be requiring more than
the usual virtue of our nature to expect that you should entirely
divest your minds of those feelings which such relations must have
excited; but I am satisfied, that as far as it is possible for men to
enter into a grave investigation with minds unbiassed, and judgments
unimpaired, after the calumnies with which the public has been deluged
-- I say, I am satisfied, that with such minds and such judgments, you
have this day assumed your sacred office. The horrible guilt which has
been attributed to me is such as could not have resulted from custom,
but must have been the innate principle of my infant mind, and must
have 'grown with my growth, and strengthened with my strength.' But I
will call before you gentlemen whose characters are unimpeachable, and
whose testimony must be above suspicion, who will tell you, that the
time was, when my bosom overflowed with all the kindly feelings; and
that even my failings were those of an improvident generosity, and an
unsuspecting friendship. Beware then, gentlemen, of an anticipated
verdict. Do not suffer the reports which you have heard to influence
your judgment. Do not believe that a few short years can have reversed
the course of nature, and converted the good feelings which I
possessed, into that spirit of malignant cruelty, to which only demons
can attain. A kind, affectionate, and a religious mother, directed the
tender steps of my infancy in the paths of piety and virtue. My rising
youth was guided in 'the way that it should go,' by a father, whose
piety was universally known and believed -- whose kindness and charity
extended to all who came within the sphere of its influence. After
leaving my paternal roof, I entered into the service of our late
revered monarch, who was justly entitled the 'Father of his people.'
You will learn from some of my honourable companions, that while I
served under his colours, I never tarnished their lustre. The country
which is dear to me I have served; I have fought for her; I have shed
my blood for her; I feared not in the open field to shed the blood of
her declared foes. But oh! to suppose that on that account I was ready
to raise the assassin's arm against my friend, and with that view to
draw him into secret places for his destruction -- it is monstrous,
horrible, incredible. I have been represented to you as a man who was
given to gambling, and the constant companion of gamblers. To this
accusation, in some part, my heart with feeling penitence pleads
guilty. I have gambled. I have been a gambler, but not for the last
three years. During that time I have not attended or betted upon a
horse-race, or a fight, or any public exhibition of that nature. If I
have erred in these things, half the nobility of the land have been my
examples: some of the most enlightened statesmen of the country have
been my companions in them. I have indeed been a gambler. I have been
an unfortunate one. But whose fortune have I ruined?-- whom undone?--
My own family have I ruined, undone myself! At this moment I feel the
distress of my situation. But, gentlemen, let not this misfortune
entice your verdict against me. Beware of your own feelings, when you
are told by the highest authority, that the heart of a man is deceitful
above all things. Beware, gentlemen, of an anticipated verdict. It is
the remark of a very sage and experienced writer of antiquity, that no
man becomes wicked all at once. And with this, which I earnestly
request you to bear in mind, I proceed to lay before you the whole
career of my life. I will not tire you with tedious repetitions, but I
will disclose enough of my past life to inform your judgments; leaving
it to your clemency to supply whatever little defects you may observe.
You will consider my misfortunes, and the situation in which I stand --
the deep anxiety that I must feel -- the object for which I have to
strive. You may suppose something of all this; but oh! no pencil,
though dipped in the lines of heaven, can portray my feelings at this
crisis. Recollect, I again entreat you, my situation, and allow
something for the workings of a mind little at ease; and pity and
forgive the faults of my address. The conclusion of the late war, which
threw its lustre upon the fortunes of the nation generally, threw a
gloomy shadow over mine. I entered into a mercantile life with feelings
as kind, and with a heart as warm, as I had carried with me in the
service. I took the commercial world as if it had been governed by the
same regulations as the army. I looked upon merchants as if they had
been my mess companions. In the transactions I had with them, my purse
was as open, my heart as warm to answer their demands, as they had been
to my former associates. I need not say that any fortune, however
ample, would have been insufficient to meet such a course of conduct.
I, of course, became the subject of a commission of bankruptcy. My
solicitor, in whom I had foolishly confided as my most particular
friend, I discovered, too late, to have been a traitor -- a man who was
foremost in the ranks of my bitterest enemies. But for that man, I
should still have been enabled to regain a station in society, and I
should have yet preserved the esteem of my friends, and, above all, my
own self-respect. But how often is it seen that the avarice of one
creditor destroys the clemency of all the rest, and for ever dissipates
the fair prospects of the unfortunate debtor! With the kind assistance
of Mr. Thomas Oliver Springfield, I obtained the signature of all my
creditors to a petition for superseding my bankruptcy. But just then,
when I flattered myself that my ill fortune was about to close -- that
my blossoms were ripening -- there came "a frost -- a nipping frost."
My chief creditor refused to sign, unless he was paid a bonus of 300l.
upon his debt beyond all the other creditors. This demand was backed by
the man who was at the time his and my solicitor. I spurned the offer
-- I awakened his resentment. I was cast upon the world -- my all
disposed of -- in the deepest distress. My brother afterwards availed
himself of my misfortune, and entered into business. His warehouses
were destroyed by the accident of a fire, as has been proved by the
verdict of a jury on a trial at which the venerable judge now present
presided. But that accident, unfortunate as it was, has been taken
advantage of in order to insinuate that he was guilty of crime, because
his property was destroyed by it, as will be proved by the verdict of
an honest and upright jury in an action for conspiracy, which will be
tried ere long before the Chief Justice of the King's Bench. A
conspiracy that was, but where? Why, in the acts of the prosecutor
himself, Mr. Barber Beaumont, who was guilty of suborning witnesses,
and who will be proved to have paid for false testimony. Yes; this
professed friend of the aggrieved,-- this pretended prosecutor of
public abuses -- this self-appointed supporter of the laws, who panders
to rebellion, and has had the audacity to raise its standard in the
front of the royal palace -- this man, who has just head enough to
continue crime, but not heart enough to feel its consequences,-- this
is the real author of the conspiracy, which will shortly undergo legal
investigation. To these particulars I have thought it necessary to call
your attention, in language which you may think perhaps too warm -- in
terms not so measured, but that they may incur your reproof. But


"The flesh will quiver where the pincers tear,
The blood will follow where the knife is driven."

When, before this, did it ever fall to the lot of any subject to be
borne down by the weight of calumny and obloquy, which now oppresses
me. The press, which ought to be the shield of public liberty, the
avenger of public wrongs -- which above all should have exerted itself
to preserve the purity of its favourite institution, the trial by jury
-- has directed its whole force to my injury and prejudice: it has
heaped slander upon slander, and whetted the public appetite for
slanders more atrocious: nay more, what in other men would serve to
refute and repel the shaft of calumny, is made to stain with a deeper
dye the villainies ascribed to me. One would have thought, that some
time spent in the service of my country would have entitled me to some
favour from the public under a charge of this nature. But no; in my
case the order of things is changed -- nature is reversed. The acts of
times long since past have been made to cast a deeper shadow over the
acts attributed to me within the last few days; and the pursuit of a
profession hitherto held honourable among honourable men has been
turned to the advantage of the accusation against me. You have been
told that after the battle, I boasted of my inhumanity to a vanquished,
yielding, wounded enemy -- that I made a wanton sacrifice of my
bleeding and supplicating foe, by striking him to the earth with my
cowardly steel; and that after this deed of blood, I sat down to
plunder my unhappy victim: nay more, that, with folly indescribable and
incredible, I boasted of my barbarity as of a victory. Is there an
English officer, is there an English soldier or an Englishman, whose
heart would not have revolted with hatred against such baseness and
folly? Far better, gentlemen, would it have been for me, rather than
have seen this day, to have fallen with my honourable companions,
stemming and opposing the tide of battle upon the field of my country's
glory. Then my father and my family, though they would have mourned my
loss, would have blessed my name, and shame would not have rolled its
burning fires over my memory!-- Before I recur to the evidence brought
against my life, I wish to return my most sincere thanks to the high
sheriff and the magistrates for their kindness shown to me. I cannot
but express my unfeigned regret at a slight misunderstanding which has
occurred between the Reverend Mr. Lloyd, the visiting magistrate, and
my solicitor. As it was nothing more than a misunderstanding, I trust
the bonds of friendship are again ratified between us all. My most
particular gratitude is due to the Reverend Mr. Franklin, whose kind
visits and pious consolations have inspired me with a deeper sense of
the awful truths of religion, and have trebly armed my breast with
fortitude to serve me on this day. Though last, not least -- let me not
forget Mr. Wilson, the governor of the prison, and the fatherly
treatment which he has shown me throughout. My memory must perish ere I
can forget his kindness. My heart must be cold ere it can cease to beat
with gratitude to him, and wishes for the prosperity of his family."

The prisoner then proceeded to read first a long written comment on the
weaker parts of the evidence which had been produced against him, and
then a number of instances from the Percy Anecdotes, exhibiting the
fallibility of circumstantial evidence; but either the paper was so
ill-written, or he was so imperfect a reader, that the effect was quite
fatal to the flowery appeal which he had just before delivered to the
jury. After having exhibited the utmost confusion, and stammered and
blundered in a most extraordinary manner, he concluded his address in
the following terms: "And now, gentlemen, having read those cases to
you, am not I justified in saying, that unless you are thoroughly
convinced that the circumstances before you are absolutely inconsistent
with my innocence, I have a claim to your verdict of acquittal? Am I
not justified in saying, that you might come to the conclusion that all
the circumstances stated might be true, and yet I be innocent? I am
sure, gentlemen, you will banish from your minds any prejudice which
may have been excited against me, and act upon the principle that every
man is to be deemed innocent until he is proved guilty. Judge of my
case, gentlemen, with mature consideration, and remember that my
existence depends upon your breath. If you bring in a verdict of
guilty, the law afterwards allows no mercy. If upon a due consideration
of all the circumstances you shall have a doubt, the law orders, and
your own consciences will teach you to give me the benefit of it. Cut
me not off in the summer of my life! I implore you, gentlemen, to give
my case your utmost attention. I ask not so much for myself as for
those respectable parents whose name I bear, and who must suffer in my
fate. I ask it for the sake of that home which will be rendered
cheerless and desolate by my death. Gentlemen, I am incapable of any
dishonourable action. Those who know me best, know that I am utterly
incapable of an unjust and dishonourable action, much less of the
horrid crime with which I am now charged. There is not, I think, one in
this court who does not think me innocent of the charge. If there be,
to him or them I say, in the language of the apostle, 'Would to God ye
were altogether such as I am, save these bonds.' Gentlemen, I have now
done. I look with confidence to your decision. I repose in your hands
all that is dear to the gentleman and the man. I have poured out my
heart before you, as to my God. I hope your verdict this day will be
such as you may ever after be able to think upon with a composed
conscience; and that you will reflect upon the solemn declaration which
I now make -- I am innocent! so help me God!"

Hunt was next called upon, but his feeble voice and shrinking manner
were strongly contrasted with the overwrought energy which had been
displayed by his fellow-prisoner. He spoke of his agitation and
fatigue, and desired that a paper, which he handed in, might be read by
the clerk of the arraigns. It was accordingly read in a very feeling
manner, but it contained little in reference to the charge against him,
and insisted strongly upon the promise held out by the magistrate, on
his first giving information upon the subject of the murder. The
prisoner subsequently read a few words of comment upon Probert's
evidence, but in a very dejected voice; and at its conclusion, he hung
down his head, evidently completely overcome by his situation. Mr.
Justice Park then summed up the case to the jury at very great length,
and in a manner which brought the whole of the material facts of the
case under their attention in the clearest and most impartial manner.
After an address of several hours' duration, the jury retired to
consider their verdict. In about twenty minutes they returned into
court, and declared both prisoners guilty.

They were then immediately called up to receive judgment in the
customary manner, when Thurtell addressed the court in the following
terms: --

"My Lord, before you pass sentence, I pray you to take into your
serious consideration what I am about to say: I now for the last time
assert that I am innocent. I entreat a short delay in the execution of
the sentence you may pass, as I have friends now at a distance, with
whom it is necessary that I should transact some business. It is for
the sake of some friends who are dear to me, that I ask this
indulgence; not for myself, for I am at this moment ready. My request I
hope your lordship will take into consideration; and beyond Sunday is
all I ask."

The learned judge, at the conclusion of this address, which was once or
twice interrupted by the ebullition of the prisoner's feelings,
announced that it was impossible that the request which had been made
could be complied with, and immediately passed sentence of death upon
both convicts. They then shook hands and quitted the bar, from whence
they were at once conducted to their respective cells. Hunt, however,
received an intimation that in consequence of the representations made
with respect to the promise given by the magistrates, his punishment
would, in all probability, be commuted to transportation for life.

The extraordinary interest and excitement which had been produced by
this most remarkable case, from the first discovery of the perpetration
of the murder, through the disclosure of the whole of the circumstances
attending it, and up to the committal, trial and conviction of the
prisoners, was now increased to an extent which may be pronounced to
have been quite unparalleled. During the whole of Thursday, the day
succeeding the termination of the trial, persons of all ranks and
appearances were seen driving from every quarter into Hertford, in
order, if possible, to obtain a sight of the execution of the
malefactor, many being influenced in a very great degree by the
anticipation that Thurtell would make some extraordinary disclosure in
his dying moments. All the inns of the town were completely filled; and
in many private houses beds were let at an enormous price. The most
active preparations were made in the course of the day by the
magistrates to prevent accident, and at the same time to afford as
great a portion of the assembled multitude an opportunity to obtain a
view of the scaffold and the execution; and arrangements were made, by
which the space ordinarily occupied by the public in such instances
should be very materially increased.

Meanwhile the proceedings in the jail on the part of the prisoners was
of a nature to be most interesting. At ten o'clock on Thursday night,
Thurtell expressed an anxious desire that Hunt might be permitted to
pass the night in his room. His wish was immediately granted, and Hunt
was introduced and was received with a strong manifestation of
cordiality. Thurtell took him by the hand, and said, "Joe, the past is
forgotten. I am on the brink of eternity, and we now meet only as
friends. It may be your fate to lose your life as ignominiously as
myself; but I hope the royal mercy will be extended to you, and that
you will live to repent of your past errors. Although you have been my
enemy, I freely forgive you." Hunt, who had entered the room with
feelings bordering on apprehension that some unfortunate turn had taken
place in his affairs, and that he was himself to suffer, was suddenly
relieved by this address, and, squeezing Thurtell's hand most
vehemently, burst into tears; he then sat down by the fire, and
Thurtell and he continued to pray and to read until one o'clock. Soon
after one the former showed symptoms of fatigue, and lying on the bed,
in a few moments afterwards he dropped into a profound sleep.

On Friday morning, at daybreak, every road leading to Hertford was
thronged with travellers. At half-past six, Mr. Wilson, the jailor,
entered Thurtell's room and found him fast asleep. The prisoner Hunt
was also in a deep slumber. Mr. Wilson, unwilling to disturb their
repose, retired, and at seven o'clock returned again; but the wretched
men were still asleep. Mr. Wilson now approached the bed of Thurtell,
and called him by name, when he started up, and for a moment seemed
lost to his situation, not even knowing where he was, but his
recollection quickly returned. His breakfast was then brought in: it
consisted of some tea and bread and butter; but he partook only of the
former, and that but slightly.

At half-past eleven Thurtell and Hunt were conducted into the chapel,
where the Rev. Mr. Franklin administered the sacrament to them.
Thurtell read the appropriate prayers in a distinct and audible voice,
and seemed fully impressed with the importance of this solemn rite. At
its conclusion, Thurtell turned round to Hunt, and grasped his hand
repeatedly, and renewed, in the most forcible terms, the assurance of
his perfect forgiveness of the past, and of his being about to die in
peace and charity with all the world. The chaplain and Mr. Nicholson,
the under sheriff, then retired from the chapel, leaving Mr. Wilson and
the prisoner Thurtell alone. Hunt having previously been reconducted to
his cell overpowered by his feelings. Mr. Wilson, turning to Thurtell,
said, "Now, Thurtell, as there is no eye to witness what is passing
between us but that of God, you must not be surprised if I ask you a
question." Thurtell turned round, and regarded him with a look of
surprise. Mr. Wilson continued -- "If you intend to make any
confession, I think you cannot do it at a better period than the
present." Thurtell paused for a few moments, when Mr. Wilson went on to
say, "I ask you if you acknowledge the justice of your sentence."
Thurtell immediately seized both Mr. Wilson's hands, and pressed them
with great fervour within his own, and said, "I am quite satisfied. I
forgive the world; I, die in peace and charity with all mankind, and
that is all I wish to go forth upon this occasion."

The chaplain then returned to the prisoner, and offered him some
further words of comfort, asking him, whether there was anything he
could do to ease his mind with respect to his family and friends?
Thurtell replied that he was anxious that the reverend gentleman should
write to his father, and inform him of his extreme contrition,
resignation and penitence, which Mr. Franklin promised faithfully to
do. The unfortunate man uttered a short prayer, that the minds of his
family might be strengthened under the deep affliction they must feel,
and of which Ire had been the unhappy author.

At twelve o'clock precisely, Mr. Nicholson tapped at the door with his
wand, as the signal that the hour of execution had arrived. Thurtell
immediately seized Mr. Franklin's hands, and thanked him, not alone for
all the personal kindnesses for which he was indebted to him, but for
that Christian spirit with which he had inspired him, and with which he
was about to depart this world; and the chapel door being thrown open,
the prisoner went forth with a steady and assured step. He looked round
with perfect calmness. The distance from the chapel door to that
leading to the scaffold was not more than ten yards, and thither he was
accompanied by the chaplain, the under-sheriff, Mr. Wilson, an
assistant of Mr. Wilson's, and the upper turnkey. The church bell
tolled as he advanced. On their arrival at the door, Thurtell again
squeezed Mr. Franklin's hand, and again exclaimed, 'God bless you, sir;
God bless you.' He then mounted the steps, preceded by the under
sheriff and the executioner, and followed by Mr. Wilson and the head
turnkey.

Thurtell, on taking his station under the gallows, looked round with a
countenance unchanged by the awfulness of his situation. His manner was
firm and undaunted, at the same time that it betrayed no unbecoming
levity. After regarding the crowd for a moment, he appeared to
recognise an individual beneath him, to whom he bowed in a friendly
manner. Previously to his mounting the scaffold, he had begged that as
little delay as possible might take place in his execution, after his
appearance upon the platform, and he now repeated the request to the
executioner. His hands, instead of their being confined in the
customary manner with cord, were held together by handcuffs, and his
arms were not pinioned. He was still ironed, as he had been since his
conviction, his shackles consisting merely of a moderate-sized chain,
which was confined at his ankles, and held up to his waist by a Belcher
handkerchief, tied round his middle. He was respectably attired in
mourning, and wore a pair of black gloves on his hands. The moment he
placed himself under the fatal beam, the executioner commenced the
performance of his office, by taking off his cravat. He stood perfectly
calm and collected while this was going on, and held up his head, in
order that it might be the more easily removed. A white cap was then
put on his head, and drawn over his eyes; but it was so thin as still
to enable him to look about him; and he appeared anxiously to avail
himself of the opportunity afforded him, by quickly looking round in
all directions. As the clock sounded the last stroke of twelve, the
rope was placed round the neck of the unhappy convict, and while the
executioner was attaching the other end to the beam above, he looked
up, and turning to him, begged him to "give him fall enough." The
hangman replied, "that he might be assured he should have plenty of
fall, and that all would be right." Thurtell next turned to Mr. Wilson,
and repeated the same request; and that gentleman assured him, that his
wishes had been fully attended to. All being now in readiness, Mr.
Wilson drew close to the prisoner, and, squeezing his hands, exclaimed,
"Thurtell, God Almighty bless you:" the prisoner pressing his hands in
return, responded, "God bless you, sir."

Mr. Wilson then stood back upon some boards placed immediately behind
the drop, and the executioner having previously retired, the under
sheriff, with his wand, gave the last fatal signal, the drop suddenly
fell, and the unhappy man was in an instant dead. His sufferings were
but momentary, for, with the exception of a few convulsive motions of
his hands and legs, he seemed to be deprived of all sensation. Thus
perished, in an untimely manner, a man, who, but for untoward
circumstances and the violence of his passions, might have been the
pride of his family.

During the whole of this appalling ceremony there was not the slightest
symptom of emotion discernible in his features; his demeanour was
perfectly calm and tranquil, but though his fortitude was thus
conspicuous, it was evident, from the alteration in his appearance,
that in the interval between his conviction and his execution he must
have suffered much. He looked careworn; his countenance had assumed a
cadaverous hue; and there was a haggardness and lankness about his
cheeks and mouth, which could not fail to attract the notice of every
spectator.

There were many in the crowd who looked upon him with an eye of the
greatest commiseration for his youth and manly appearance; but it
cannot but be obvious that such a feeling must be considered to have
been thrown away, upon a wretch capable of a crime like that of which
he was guilty.

We cannot close our notice of this case, without bringing under the
attention of the reader a report which was in circulation for a
considerable period after the last sentence of the law had been carried
out on this unhappy man, and which obtained almost universal credit. We
have already alluded to Thurtell's connexion with the sporting world,
and especially with that portion of it which patronised the manly
exercises of the "Ring." Admirable as we shall ever hold that custom to
be, which has been so often cried down, but which has always had for
its object the maintenance of those principles, by which the courage of
the British nation has been in no small degree supported, in opposition
to that frightful and un-English alternative, "the knife," we cannot
but admit that some of the members of the body, through whose
instrumentality those principles have been sought to be upheld, have at
times exhibited themselves to be unworthy the notice and patronage
which they have received. It would appear that Thurtell, in his
acquaintance with fighting men, had so far obtained their esteem, that
even after his commission of a crime which should have been most
detestable in their eyes, and in the sight of every man of honest
principles, some of them volunteered to assist to perform an act which
would certainly have been unprecedented, had it been carried into
effect. It was neither more nor less than to bear him away from the
scaffold, before his execution, in defiance of the law, and in the face
of the vast mob, which, it was known, would be collected on the
occasion of his execution, the confusion produced by which, however,
they well knew would aid rather than oppose their object. The
volunteers from a body so limited as the members of the prize ring, it
must be obvious, would be too few to put this design into execution
without the assistance of others; and the means of procuring that
assistance was yet to be obtained. With this object a communication was
opened with the friends of the prisoner, before his trial; but the sum
demanded, which was said to be 500l., not being forthcoming, the plan
was given up; although not until the very morning of the day, on which
the execution took place, for up to that time it was believed probable
that the demand would be complied with. It was reported, also, that the
scheme proposed was communicated to Thurtell by a confidential friend,
and that he, knowing the facility with which the few javelin-men, who
were mostly aged and decrepit, in whose care the preservation of the
peace and of the limits without the scaffold was reposed, could be
overpowered, fully believed, up to the moment of his execution, that it
would be carried into effect. The extreme calmness of demeanour of the
unfortunate prisoner at the place of execution, and the confidence
which he displayed, added to the anxiety which he exhibited when the
ceremony approached its fatal termination, favour this belief; and
although his conduct in the gaol was of a character to lead to the
supposition that he was in reality prepared to meet that death which he
was doomed so soon to receive, it is by no means unlikely that he was
at the same time treasuring up in his own mind the possibilities of his
escape from the fate which awaited him.

With regard to the inducement which we have already noticed as having
been generally believed to have led the wretched man on to the
commission of so foul a crime, namely, the hope of procuring a large
booty; for the supposed "bank "of Mr. Weare was generally believed to
amount to nearly 1,000l.; from the testimony of the witness Probert, it
would appear that he was unsuccessful in his object, while at the same
time the observation made by Thurtell, on their going to search the
body, (itself a corroborative fact,) that he had got all except the
pocket-book, clearly exhibits that the anticipation was that which we
have pointed out. Where or how the "bank" was disposed of, has never
been shown; but there were not wanting those among the companions of
Probert and Hunt, who suggested that it had been in reality found, and
hidden by Thurtell, until an opportunity was afforded for its removal,
unknown to his companions in the plot. It is a well ascertained fact,
that he was not previously in possession of means sufficient to defray
the expenses of a defence, which was known to have cost a very large
sum of money; and it was very generally believed that the produce of
the double robbery of Mr. Weare, and of the prisoner's companions, from
whom he kept their share of the booty, (if the suggestion thrown out be
well founded,) was applied to the payment of his attorney's bill.

We have only to add that Hunt was reprieved, and was subsequently
ordered to be transported for life. It was for some time reported that
he had died on his voyage to Australia; but he in fact arrived in
Sydney in good health; and by his excellent conduct while there
procured for himself a ticket of leave, by which he was exempted from
all the immediate consequences of his conviction, although he was not
absolutely restored to freedom. He was subsequently appointed chief
constable at Paramatta, a large town in the interior, when he became
generally well liked from his quiet manners; and it has been reported
that he died in the colony, within the last few years, but the truth of
the rumour cannot be ascertained by reference to any document in this
country. Probert met the fate which he so justly deserved within a
short time of his escaping from punishment for his connexion with this
case, in a manner and for an offence which we shall hereafter in due
course describe.


JOHN HILL WAGSTAFF,
Executed for Forgery.

THIS young man belonged to a highly respectable family, and for some
years carried on an extensive trade, as a carpet-dealer, in Skinner
Street, Snow Hill. Being young, thoughtless, and extravagant, he soon
dissipated property to same amount, and in the beginning of 1823 his
name appeared in the Gazette. At the same time it was discovered that
he had endeavoured to sustain his sinking credit by fictitious bills,
and apprehending a prosecution for forgery, he sought concealment. Not
having surrendered as a bankrupt, before the commissioners, he was
outlawed, and one hundred pounds offered as a reward for his
apprehension.

For eighteen months he remained undetected; but, such was his
desperation and folly, that he again repeated his first offence, and
deliberately forged a draft for two hundred and fifty pounds. On Friday
night, March the 19th, 1824, Wagstaff slept at the Old Hummums, in
Covent Garden, and on Saturday morning sent for a ticket porter, who
was accordingly brought him. He first sent the porter for a
two-shilling stamp to a shop in Long Acre, and on his return gave him a
check for two hundred and fifty pounds, purporting to be drawn by
William Ridley upon John Bond, Sons, and Pattisall, bankers, in 'Change
Alley, Cornhill, together with a piece of paper, on which were written
directions for the porter to go to the Bull Inn, in Aldgate, and secure
an inside place for him, in the two o'clock coach, for Brighton.

Mr. Ridley, the supposed drawer of the check, was the head of the firm
of Ridley and Co. carpet manufacturers, in Castle Street, Holborn; and
these gentlemen had a private mark on their checks, known only to
themselves and their bankers; consequently, when the porter presented
the check received from Wagstaff, the forgery was discovered, though
the signature was an extremely close imitation.

Mr. Pattisall, one of the partners in the bank, now proceeded to the
Old Hummums, but found Wagstaff had gone out. An explanation took place
with the proprietor, and proper directions were given throughout the
house, respecting Wagstaff, if he should return.

In the evening a hackney coachman called at the hotel, and inquired if
the porter had brought back any message. He was answered in the
affirmative, and that the parcel was in the possession of the
proprietor until the gentleman should call for it. In about half an
hour afterwards Wagstaff drove up in a coach to the door, and, as had
been previously arranged. was shown into a room where Bishop, the
officer, was waiting for him. The latter asked him his name as soon as
he entered, and the other replied, Samuel Tomkins, and said he lived
next door to the White Hart, at Reigate. Bishop then informed him of
his situation, and took him into custody. When secured, the officer saw
him endeavouring to put something into his glove, which, upon
examination, proved to be a parcel of oxalic acid., A phial filled with
a solution of the same destructive poison was taken out of his pocket,
from which it would appear that the wretched man had meditated suicide
in case of detection. To guard against such an event proper precaution
was taken.

Although several other charges of forgery were made against him, he was
indicted only for this one, it being deemed sufficient for the ends of
justice. On the 12th of the following April he was arraigned at the Old
Bailey, and the fact of the forgery being proved, he was found Guilty
-- Death.

On Tuesday morning, June the 1st, 1824, this unfortunate man underwent
the awful sentence of the law in the Old Bailey, in the presence of an
unusual concourse of spectators, by whom his fate appeared to be
universally commiserated.


AMY GEORGE
Indicted for the Murder of her Brother.

RELIGIOUS fanaticism has led, in all ages, to much mischief both
private and public. In the early times of Christianity there arose a
sect, the members of which went about murdering children, who had not
obtained the age of seven years, believing it meritorious to send them
to Heaven before they became responsible for their own actions.
Doctrines so repugnant to human nature did not long find supporters;
though fanaticism ever since has caused, in various ways, the shedding
of blood. There seldom has occurred, however, an instance of religions
delusion more gloomy than the one we are about to narrate.

Amy George, a young woman, nineteen years of age, resided in the house
of her parents, at Redruth, in Cornwall. They were in humble
circumstances, and of a religious turn. They belonged to the Methodist
persuasion; and Amy, having attended one of their meetings called
'Revivals,' became considerably disturbed, and under the idea of
securing the eternal happiness of her little brother, a boy under seven
years of age, hanged him behind the door with a silk handkerchief, on
the 4th of March, 1824. She did not attempt to conceal her crime; but
went up stairs to the apartment of a fellow-lodger, and disclosed what
she had done. She was instantly taken into custody, and brought to
trial at the ensuing assizes, which took place at Launceston on the 1st
of April. Several witnesses having deposed to the fact of the
strangulation of the child, John Cocking, the constable of Redruth,
gave the following testimony: I sat up with the prisoner at the bar on
the night of the 4th of March. She told me her mind had been impressed,
for some time, that she ought to commit a murder; and that on the
Monday and Tuesday before she committed the act, her intention was to
have murdered her mother, but she endeavoured to banish that idea from
her mind, and prayed to the Lord to take the temptation from her; but
that on the Thursday morning, while she was at work at the mine, the
idea came upon her again with greater force than before. In the middle
of the day, she went to get her dinner at the boiling house, where the
girls generally dine. After she got to the boiling house, she
recollected that she had seen a boy, a stranger, standing by the
engine-house, near the shaft, or mouth of a pit, and she then regretted
that she had not pushed that boy into the shaft. Returning home in the
evening, a little before she came to a Methodist meeting, which stood
in a back lane she saw two children before her at play, near another
shaft alongside the road, but she could not get an opportunity of
throwing one of them into the mine, as she had designed. She went to
her own house, and found her mother was going to the meeting. On going
in, her mother said, "Your supper is ready for you, Amy; you can take
it, for I am going to the meeting, and little Benny will remain at home
with you." The prisoner then told me she felt glad that she was going
to be left alone with her brother, as she would thus be able to do the
deed. She gave the child part of her supper, and said to him. "Should
you like to go to heaven, dear?" She then rose from the place where she
was . sitting, and went to a line that was hanging across the room, and
took from it a black silk handkerchief, and coming towards the child,
put it round his neck, tying it, as she thought, in a running knot. She
said to her brother "Is it too tight, dear?" The child looked up in her
face and smiled, and said "No." She left the handkerchief round his
neck, and said, "Go for a drop of water for me, dear!" intending, while
the child was gone to a pail in the room, and while his back was
towards her, to take him up and hang him to a crook behind the door.
The boy was rather quicker than she expected, and she meeting him took
the water from him, drank a little of it, and put the cup on the table.
She then took her brother up with one arm, and with the other hand put
the handkerchief over the crook, looked him full in the face, and left
the room. I know there are the several shafts which the prisoner spoke
of. I am not a member of the Methodist Society, but I have attended a
Revival meeting at Redruth, which commenced about three months since. A
Revival is termed an "out-pouring of the spirit," and causes the
congregation to cry aloud to the Lord for mercy. The Revival continued
at Redruth for a month or six weeks. The Revivals are held in the
stated places of worship of particular congregations, and sometimes
continue open for three nights and days in succession. I have been at
Revival; those who are "convinced of sin," as it is called, fall on
their knees, and with uplifted hands, and their bodies working to and
fro, call as loud as they are able to the Lord for help. Their
ejaculations are such as, "Oh! Christ, pardon me my sins  Oh! Lord,
give me grace!" and a variety of other expressions, adopted as the zeal
of the moment may suggest. Their conduct was wild and extravagant, and
altogether out of the mild and decent course of addressing the
Almighty, usually observed in places of worship. It is generally called
screeching for mercy. There was usually a preacher at the meetings, but
not always. The Revival is open by night as well as day. There is no
appointment when the Revival is to he held; a congregation may be met,
and at prayers, when, perhaps, some member will fall on his knees and
call aloud to heaven for mercy; when this happens, the other members
are generally moved by the same spirit, and the Revival commences. This
is called the "outpouring of the spirit," and continues till the
preacher pronounces a benediction, and tells his flock, "the moment of
conversion" is come, and they may expect "a ray of hope, of comfort,
and joy." The moment of the coming of the "ray of hope" is uncertain,
and the congregation continue their extravagant devotions till they are
"convinced" or "converted." It is about ten years since there was a
Revival at Redruth before the late one. The prisoner, in speaking of
the child, generally called him the dear little Benny.

The unfortunate girl said nothing in her defence, but in proof of the
aberration of her mind at the time she committed the miserable deed for
which she stood indicted; her unhappy mother was called, and gave the
following evidence:--

'My daughter attended a Methodist meeting at Redruth for about seven
weeks before the death of my boy; she also attended the Revival. I went
for her one night, about half-past ten o'clock, she having been there
from two o'clock in the day. On going into the chapel, I found it
extremely crowded. My daughter caught a sight of me, and immediately
she lifted up both her arms, and called on her dear mother and father
to pray to the Lord to help them, for that they could not see the
danger they were in. I got her out of the meeting as soon as I could,
but she had lost her cloak, bonnet, handkerchief, and pattens, and was
extremely disordered in her dress. She had been moving from one part of
the meeting to the other, and, in her unbounded zeal, had dropped her
clothes, and they were trodden under foot. My daughter's conduct, after
attending the Revival, was quite different to what it had usually been.
This was about seven weeks before the dreadful act was done. On another
occasion, she came home praying in a horrible manner for the conversion
of her father and mother. She was then violently agitated. From the
commencement of the Revival she never missed but one meeting. See also
attended prayer meetings and class meetings before the death of my son,
I apprehended my daughter would do me some violence. On the Monday
preceding, she came home and sat by the fire, in a melancholy way, and
said "Mother, I am going out of my mind." I spoke a few words to pacify
her, and she went to bed. The next night she said she was better, but
she appeared very low. On Wednesday night, on coming home, she said to
me, "I am tempted to murder my mother!" I said I was surprised she
should think of murdering me; and she said, "I do." After she had said
this, she went to the Revival, and returned between nine and ten. From
w hat she had said, I took the knives and hid them, to prevent her
doing mischief to herself, me, or the family.

"These symptoms I observed on Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, and on
the Thursday the child was killed."

At the close of the evidence the prisoner fainted, and was removed into
the air. Being in strong convulsions her screams were heard for nearly
a quarter of an hour. When she was re-conducted into court, the judge
charged the jury, who immediately returned a verdict of -- Not Guilty,
believing her to have been insane at the time of the murder. The Court
ordered her to be detained in custody, but assured her friends that she
would not be kept long from them.


THE REV. JOHN CARROLL
Indicted for the Murder of a Child, but Found Insane.

THE Roman Catholic Clergy among other absurdities, arrogate to
themselves the power of working miracles; and about the period at which
we are now arrived, there appeared in Germany a Reverend prince
Hohonlohe, who, it was said, had performed some astonishing wonders by
the force of his prayers. In England a Miss O'Connor, a nun, had been
cured of a swelling in her arms, by the spiritual assistance of the
prince, and some enthusiastic women in Ireland fancied that they were
relieved by a similar process. One young lady was restored to her
speech, having been previously dumb; and another literally took up her
bed and walked.

This German prince was either a fanatic or an impostor, but the Irish
Catholics regarded him as a saint, and accordingly solicited the aid of
his prayers on all possible occasions. Hundreds, who imagined
themselves ill, were cured, and many even swore to the truth of the
pretended miracles. The effect of all this might have been more
deplorable, had not a melancholy event helped to open the eyes of the
people. A priest named Carroll, who resided in the barony of Forth,
County of Wexford, undertook to rival Hohenlohe, and was supposed to be
endowed with the power of working miracles. The delusive doctrine of
his church, operating on a predisposition to insanity, produced a
diseased mind, and when in this state he killed a child named Catherine
Sinnott, on the 9th of July, 1824, while performing what he called a
miracle. For this offence he was indicted, at the Wexford assizes, on
the 4th of the following August. A Catholic barrister, who acted as his
counsel on the occasion, has inserted the following particulars of this
man's case in one of the periodicals.

'This unfortunate man (Carroll), for he deserves no harsher
appellation, had from his childhood a strong predisposition to
insanity. It was with great difficulty that he succeeded in obtaining
ordination. His aberrations from reason, before they amounted to actual
madness, were connected with the subject of exorcism; and although
every person to whom he addressed his arguments in favour of the
expulsion of devils, smiled at his extravagance, they still could not
help acknowledging that he argued with subtlety upon wrong premises,
and confessed that his applications on various passages in the holy
writings were ingenious, however mistaken. It was in vain that Father
Carroll was told that the power of Satan to possess himself of human
bodies ceased with the revelation of Christian truth. He appealed to
the Acts of the Apostles, and to incidents subsequent to the death of
our Saviour, to establish his favourite speculation. A medical man,
with whom he was intimate, perceived that the subject had laid such a
hold upon his naturally excitable imagination, that he resorted to
sedative medicines to avert the progress of an incipient malady, to
which he had an organical predisposition. As long as he followed his
physician's advice, he abstained from any acts of a very extravagant
nature; but unhappily before the events took place, which formed the
ground of a capital prosecution, he neglected to take his usual
preventatives, and became utterly deranged. He suddenly fancied himself
endowed with supernatural authority. This fantastic notion seized upon
him in the midst of divine service; after the wild performance of
which, he rushed into the public road that led from the chapel to his
house, in search of an object for the manifestation of his miraculous
powers. he was informed that a labourer of the name of Neill was
confined by illness to his bed; and being convinced that he was
possessed by an evil spirit, proceeded to effect the removal of the
enemy. His singular demeanour attracted the attention of the
passengers, who followed him to Neill's cottage; which he had no sooner
entered, than he precipitated himself upon the sick man, and began his
miraculous operations with marvellous vigour. A severe pommelling was
the process of exorcism, which he regarded as most effectual. This he
put into immediate and effectual practice. Neill did not attempt to
resist this athletic antagonist of the devil. The unhappy gentleman had
determined to take Beelzebub by storm. After a long assault, he
succeeded in this strange achievement, and having informed the
astonished by-standers that he had taken the enemy prisoner, announced
that he should give him no quarter, but plunge him into the Red Sea.
The manner of this aquatic ceremony was described by one of the
witnesses, who endeavoured to illustrate it by his gesture. After
uttering various cabalistic words, he whirled himself in a rapid
rotation, with his arms outstretched, and then, suddenly pausing and
raising himself into an attitude of importance befitting his new
authority, advanced with one arm akimbo, and with the other extended,
looking, as the witness expressed it, "as if he held the devil by the
tail," and marched with a measured. pace and a mysterious aspect to a
bridge upon the river Slaney, where he buried the captive demon in what
he took for the Red Sea.

'Not contented with this exploit, he exclaimed that Neill had seven
more devils, which he was determined to expel from this peculiar object
of diabolical predilection. The operation was accordingly repeated with
such success, that Neill, after much strenuous expostulation, leaped
out of his bed, and exclaimed that he was quite well. This circumstance
produced a deep impression upon the crowd, amongst whom there were some
Protestants; and two of the latter, a Mrs. Winter and her daughter,
knelt down and called upon the Lord to assist Father Carroll in the
perpetration of the next miracle, which, encouraged by their pious
sympathies, he almost immediately proceeded to commit. A poor woman
happened to pass along the road, whom he had no sooner observed, than
he knocked her down, and pursued a mode of exorcism similar to that
which I have described, with such effect, that one of the spectators
cried out for the people to make way, "as he saw the devil coming out."
This achievement only served to excite the wretched maniac, and impel
him to another undertaking of the same kind. He insisted "that the
devil had taken possession of Sinnott's child." The circumstances which
I have detailed, and by no means endeavoured to exaggerate, would be
merely ridiculous if they were not the result of a malady which humbles
human nature: the incident by which they were succeeded ought to make
Democritus shed tears. Sinnott had a child who had been affected by
fits, and over whom the priest had been requested by its mother to say
prayers. This was not only a natural, but I will add a reasonable
application. It is not supposed by Roman Catholics that the prayers of
a clergyman are endowed with any preternatural efficacy; but it is
considered that praying over the sick is a pious and religious act. The
recollection of this fatal request passed across the distempered mind
of the madman, who hurried with an insane alacrity to Sinnott's cabin.
It was composed of two rooms upon the ground-floor, in the smaller of
which lay the little victim. It was indeed so contracted that it could
not contain more than two or three persons. The crowd who followed the
priest remained outside, and were utterly unconscious of what he was
about to do. The father of the child was not in the house when Father
Carroll entered it, and was prevented by the pressure in the exterior
room from approaching him; and for some time after the death of the
child was wholly unconscious of what had taken place.

'No efforts whatever were made to prevent his interference. He was
produced as a witness upon the trial, and swore that it did not enter
his thoughts that Father Carroll intended to do the child the least
harm. He could not, he said, even see the priest. It is enough to say,
that after uttering a few feeble cries, and calling upon its "mammy,"
every sound became extinct. The madman had placed the child under a
tub, and life was extinguished. It may well be imagined that the trial
of this case excited a strong sensation in the county where the
rebellion had raged with its most dangerous fury, and from which it
will be long before its recollections will have entirely passed away.
The Protestant party, forgetting that many of their own sect had taken
a partial share in the proceedings, of which they had been at all
events the passive witnesses, exhibited a proud and disdainful
exultation, and effected a deep scorn for the intellectual debasement
of which they alleged this event to be a manifest proof; while the
Catholics disclosed a festered soreness upon an incident which, they
could not fail to tell, was likely to expose them to much plausible
imputation.'

As these particulars, though somewhat extenuated, are pretty accurate,
we shall only give the evidence of two of the witnesses on the trial.

Philip Walsh, examined by Mr. Fox.-- Knows Sinnott; knew Catherine
Sinnott the child; recollects seeing Father Carroll at Sinnott's house;
went to the house after night-fall; thinks it might have been eleven
o'clock when he went; went there and heard a noise inside, and then
went in; the house was full of people; saw Father Carroll in the bed;
did not see the child at that time; Carroll was sitting in the bed and
was saying something; he then got up on his feet, and stood on the tub;
heard the child cry, 'Mammy, mammy, save me;' saw the child, for the
first time, next morning; the child was then dead; saw a tub in the
room; was there before the tub was brought in; could not at that time
get near the bed, the crowd was so great, but heard the people say the
child was in it; heard Father Carroll call for some water; a bowl of
water was then brought in, but the priest desired it to be taken away,
and a tub of water to be brought. The tub was brought in by witness and
James Devereux, one of the prisoners at the bar. Witness carried the
tub close to where Father Carroll was, when the priest desired him to
lift it on the bed. The priest was at this time standing on the bed;
when the tub was settled on the bed, Father Carroll said some words
over it, and threw some salt into the water; the priest then put his
foot on the near handle of the tub, and upset the water, some part of
it on his own feet, and the rest on the bed; the tub was turned upside
down; the priest then said with a loud voice, 'Bury him, Jesus, in the
depth of the Red Sea,' meaning, as witness believed, the devil; he said
this, while he was overturning the tub; then the priest sat upon it,
and afterwards stood and danced on it; the child all this time was
under it; the priest stayed in the house till day-light. The priest
ordered the people out of the room, and he, the witness, immediately
went out; the priest desiring them in a loud voice not to touch his
clothes, on which the people rushed out frightened, as they thought the
devil was then escaping; saw the child s leg, and supposes the body was
under the tub: saw the child dead in the morning; it was Sinnott's
child; looked into the room after the priest turned the people out, and
saw the priest sitting on the bed.

Thomas Sinnott, the father of the child.-- Had a daughter named
Catherine; she is dead; cannot recollect precisely the day on which she
died; it was on the night that Father Carroll came to the house; the
child was alive when Father Carroll arrived. When witness came into the
house, he heard an unusual noise; he stopped and listened for a while,
and heard the child crying. He made up to the child but was stopped;
cannot say by whom he was stopped. Saw Father Carroll at the time; saw
the head of the child; does not know at what hour the child's decease
took place; did not see it but once; saw it dead in the bed. When he
first came into the room, he saw the head of the child; thought the
child was frightened by the noise. Some people desired him to kneel
down, which he did; all the people knelt down and prayed; saw the
priest in the room after the people had departed. The child was then
dead; he took the child in his arms and showed it to the priest. Father
Carroll desired him to lay it down on the bed. Did not ask the priest
why he killed his child, as he thought he would return and bring it to
life. At four o'clock in the morning the priest called him into the
room, and he remained sitting with him on the bed for about five
minutes. Father Carroll made no observation to him on the death of the
child; but, said the witness, when I asked him what I was to do, he
said, resign it to the will of God.

Two physicians were examined for the defence, and it appearing that
Carroll was insane at the time he committed the direful act, he was of
course acquitted.

Carroll's figure was tall and dignified. A large black cloak with a
scarlet collar was fastened with a clasp round his neck, but not so
closely as to conceal the ample chest, across which his arms were
loosely and resignedly folded. His strong black hair was bound with a
velvet band, to conceal the recent incisions made by the surgeon in his
head. His countenance was smooth and finely chiselled; and it was
observed by many that his features, which, though small, were marked,
bore a miniature resemblance to Napoleon. His colour was dead and
chalky, and it was impossible to perceive the least play or variety of
emotion about the mouth, which continued open, and of the colour of
ashes. On being called to plead, he remained silent. The Court was
about to make an inquiry whether he was 'mute of malice,' when it was
seen by a glance of his eye, that he was conscious of the purport of
the question; and by the directions of his counsel he pleaded Not
guilty. During the trial, which was conducted with the most exemplary
moderation by the counsel for the crown, he retained his petrified and
statute-like demeanour; and although the heat was most intense, the hue
of his face and lips did not undergo the slightest change.


HENRY SAVARY,
Convicted of Forgery.

THIS case, which was tried at Bristol before Lord Gifford on the 4th of
April, 1825, had excited great attention in consequence of the
respectability of the prisoner's connexions, his father having been for
many years a banker of some consequence in that city. He was committed
on the 23rd of December, and all who knew him declared that he was
appallingly altered since his imprisonment. He looked pale and was
evidently most feverishly agitated. His age was thirty-three.

The offence was, that he had affixed the name of William Pearson to a
note for 500l. dated Birmingham, 7th of October, 1824, with intent to
defraud the Bristol-Copper Company, no such person as William Pearson
being in existence.

When asked by the Clerk of the Arraigns,' Henry Savary, how say you;
are you guilty or not guilty?' the prisoner replied, 'Guilty.'

This answer was wholly unexpected by the Court, and it was delivered in
a firm and deliberate tone.

Lord Gifford paused for some moments, appearing to be taken more by
surprise than any body else. He changed colour, and was evidently much
affected by the painful duty he had to perform. His lordship at last
said, earnestly looking at the prisoner, 'Have you well considered your
answer?'

     Prisoner-- I have.

Lord Gifford.-- I trust no false hopes have induced you to give that
answer?

Prisoner replied something about having deliberately pleaded as he had;
but he was not distinctly heard.

Lord Gifford again paused a few minutes, and then said, 'Prisoner, you
had better consider a short time before you resolve to persevere in
pleading guilty.'

The prisoner shook his head, reclined on his hand, and again covered
his face, agitated by grief, It was intimated to the Court, that the
prisoner had no other answer to give than what he had given.

     Clerk of the Arraigns-- Shall I enter the verdict, my Lord?

     The Recorder.-- Wait a short time.

The prisoner was taken from the dock, and in about five minutes he was
brought back by direction of the judge. The prisoner appeared to be
much more collected, and looked partially round the Court.

Lord Gifford. -- I understand, Henry Savary, you persist in pleading
guilty.

Prisoner.-- I do, my Lord(He then again looked round the Court somewhat
collectedly, as if he had relieved his mind.)

Lord Gifford, having put on the fatal black cap, then addressed the
prisoner:-- Henry Savary, you have pleaded guilty to the crime of
forgery charged against you,-- the forgery of a bill of exchange for
5001. and purporting to be the note of W. Pearson, of Birmingham, and
with the intent to defraud the prosecutors in this case. You have, I
trust, well considered the consequences of pleading guilty. I trust no
false hopes or expectations, that by so pleading you should avert the
dreadful sentence which it will be my painful duty to pronounce on you,
have induced you to plead guilty. You were brought up in commercial
pursuits, and you followed them for a considerable period in this
respectable city, so that you must have been intimately acquainted with
them; you therefore could not but know the calamitous consequences to
commerce which the crime of forgery is calculated to produce, as well
as the magnitude of the penal results to yourself. So essential is it
to give security to the circulation of bills of exchange, so important
is it in this country to give ground for confidence in such
transactions, that it must have been impossible for you, in your own
experience, not to have known and felt the importance of ouch matters,
and the extent of injury calculated to be produced by the circulation
of forged instruments, whether the names forged were those of existing
or non-existing persons.

Prisoner.-- My lord, I was not aware that to forge the names of persons
not in existence was criminal.

Mr. Smith, the prosecutor, who was standing near the witness box, most
agitatedly attempted to address the Court. 'My lord.'

Mr. Palmer, one of the counsel,-- My lord, I believe evidence can be
adduced of some circumstances --.

Lord Gifford.-- All these interruptions are really very irregular. I
must proceed, painful as is the duty. It was impossible that you should
not know you were circulating fictitious and fraudulent paper, and that
the intention was to deceive and defraud. You could not be ignorant of
those facts. It is melancholy to think that you should have so
destroyed your own character, and wounded the feelings of others; it is
not, however, my wish to add anything to the grief that they must feel.
But let me renew my entreaty that you suffer not yourself to be led
away by any delusive hopes or expectations. The scene of this life must
shortly close upon you. Let me implore you, then, to endeavour -- not
to atone to society, for that, I fear, is impossible, but -- to secure
your peace with your Maker. And let me again say to you, that this
Court can hold out no expectations that the sentence which it is now my
painful duty to pronounce on you will not be carried into effect. The
sentence is -- that you, Henry Savory, be taken from hence to the place
from whence you came, and thence to the place of execution, and there
be hanged by the neck till you are dead.

The prisoner, on hearing the latter words, seemed to lose all power of
breathing, and dropped down his head.

Mr. Smith, one of the prosecutors, who had before attempted to address
the Court, made way through the crowd by the witness-box towards the
Bench, and very agitatedly exclaimed --'My lord, as the prosecutor, I
recommend him to mercy. I, the prosecutor, my lord, recommend him to
mercy, if mercy can be shown. The consequences of his crime were
limited, the public have suffered nothing -- hardly any thing.'

Lord Gifford leant back on his seat, greatly affected; but made no
reply.

The prisoner was then removed from the dock, and his sentence was
afterwards commuted into transportation for life.


WILLIAM PROBERT
Executed for Horse-Stealing.

The reader will recognise in this criminal the participator with Hunt
and Thurtell in the murder of Mr. Weare, and the witness who was
examined on the trial of those offenders, who impeached his
accomplices.

He was apprehended on the night of Friday the 18th of February, 1825,
and conveyed to Bow-street office, on a charge of stealing a horse, the
property of a man named Meredith, a miller, living near Ruarden in
Gloucestershire. It appeared that the guilty wretch, after his
discharge from Hertford jail, where he had been confined as an approver
in order that his evidence might be secured at the trial of his
companions in crime, wandered through the country without an object or
a name, and followed by public execration. Reduced to the most abject
state of misery, he at length found an asylum in the house of his aged
mother at Ruarden. Meredith, the miller, was distantly related to him
by marriage; and while paying him a visit, the unprincipled villain
having seen and admired a mare which was in his possession, marked it
for his own. Seizing a favourable opportunity, he carried the animal
off with him to London, and there he disposed of her for 20l., having
assumed a fictitious name. He was, however, traced by the miller, and
at length on the 18th February was taken into custody.

For this offence he was put on his trial at the Old Bailey on the 7th
of the following month of April, and the evidence for the prosecution,
which was clear and conclusive, having been gone into, the prisoner
read the following defence from a written paper:--

"My lord and gentlemen of the jury,-- If I have this day pleaded not
guilty to the indictment preferred against me, it is not that I wish by
subtleties to evade, or screen myself from the verdict and sentence
which my country may award against me, but that I may have an
opportunity to say something in this court, to evince to the public,
that whatever may have been the unhappy circumstances of the latter
days of my life, I was not driven into my present crime from depravity
of disposition, but from a species of fatal necessity, which had placed
me far beyond the reach of all human assistance and charity. The appeal
I now make is not with a view to lessen my past error that I
unfortunately fell into, as there is a God on whom I alone rely for
mercy; but I do beg of the jury to banish all former unfortunate
circumstances from their minds. It cannot have escaped your notice,
that immediately after and ever since my discharge from Hertford, the
public animosity has been kept alive against me by the public press,
which has reached every part of England. Wherever I went, even to the
remotest village throughout the kingdom, I was spurned as an outcast of
society; and the chief instrument which prevented my obtaining
employment, or indeed effecting a reformation, was the public press,
which has not slackened to follow me, and portray me to the world. As
the victim of prejudice, I could scarcely move from one place to
another without seeing myself noticed in the daily papers. Those of my
former friends, who might otherwise have wished to continue their
services towards me, shrunk back from an apprehension of public
reprobation for being connected with one such as myself. Every door was
shut against me, every hope of future support blasted. My country had
spared my life, but individuals rendered that life of no value or
utility to me. I was hunted down like a wild beast of the forest. With
this desolation around me, and with these dreary prospects before me, I
felt my fortitude forsaking me, and I knew not what course to pursue.
Heaven and myself only know what I suffered. I was a prey to the most
heart-rending care -- I was a prey to a deep and intense feeling, the
cause of which, I trust, it will not be necessary to refer to. I appeal
to you, my lord and gentlemen, whether my situation was not most
deplorable. Perhaps you will weigh in your own humane breasts the
miseries which surrounded me, and what you would have done under
similar circumstances. If you, gentlemen of the jury, should observe
any features in my case deserving commiseration, then I trust you will
express a sense of it to his lordship, and recommend me to mercy; and
should you, my lord, concur in the same sentiments, then I humbly pray
that your lordship will recommend me to the clemency of my gracious
sovereign, as no former conviction appears on the record against me. On
my way from the police-office to Newgate, my ears were stunned with the
horrid yells of the populace, and my life threatened. Indeed, my lord
and gentlemen of the jury, since the calamitous event that took place
at Hertford, I have been a lost man, and at times on the eve of
self-destruction. But the Almighty God has sustained me under my
heaviest afflictions, and should his wisdom direct that my life is to
be spared, the remainder of my days will be spent in atonement for past
errors that I have fallen into. I hope I have not intruded too long
upon your lordship's time. I felt it my duty to state to your lordship
and the gentlemen of the jury, how miserable my life has been and the
severe trials I have undergone since my discharge from Hertford: and
likewise my innocent wife has suffered all privations, without comfort
and without a friend to assist her, and even on the point of
starvation, she having lately been brought to bed with an increase to
the family, and no one to assist her in that trying moment or to render
her any way comfortable; but, on the contrary, nothing but distress and
trouble, and even at the present time destitute of friends and home.
Such, gentlemen of the jury, has been, and is now, the situation of my
wife. Indeed, my lord and gentlemen of the jury, I have endeavoured to
leave the country, and several times offered to work my passage over.
But all my endeavours to accomplish my wishes have been unsuccessful.
For the indulgence you have this day shown to me, by attending to the
address I have now made, I feel greatly obliged; therefore, I cannot
help reminding you, my lord and gentlemen of the jury, of the happiness
I once possessed, and was ever ready to alleviate the distresses of my
fellow-creatures, and to contribute to the support of charitable
institutions. I hope I am more the object of commiseration than that of
severe censure. I am aware, my lord and gentlemen of the jury, the
whole country is against me; but that, I trust, will not bias your
minds; as a trial by jurymen of my country does credit to the wise laws
of the realm, and does not less reflect the same sensible feelings on
my own mind. I therefore trust, if there should be any marks favourable
in my case, you will give me the benefit."

He read the address with great composure, but in a low tone of voice.
The judge having charged the jury, a verdict of Guilty was instantly
returned.

On the 13th of the same month the prisoner was brought up to receive
sentence, when he protested his innocence (so far as guilty intention
went), stated that he was driven to the commission of the offence for
which he was about to receive judgment by the greatest distress, and
alluded in a feeling manner to the misery in which his wife and
children were placed. The recorder, after observing that these topics
should be reserved for another place, proceeded to pass the fatal
sentence.

The convict continued in prison till the 14th of June, before the
recorder's report was made to the king; and during this long period he
had indulged the most sanguine hopes that his life would be spared. On
being informed that he was ordered for execution on the following
Monday, he felt satisfied, he said, that the public voice was in his
favour, and that every one was surprised at the decision of the privy
council. When told by a gentleman, who visited him, that he sustained
his fate with less fortitude than any of his companions in affliction,
(eight being left for execution out of thirty-seven reported,) he
replied that that was not to be wondered at, for they were conscious of
their guilt, and knew they could have supported themselves by other
means than theft; but that he was absolutely impelled by dire necessity
to commit the act for which he was about to suffer death -- he must
have done it or starved. He solemnly declared that he was completely
ignorant of any circumstances connected with the murder of Weare, until
after it had been effected, and that the confession of Hunt was in many
of its points utterly false, particularly those which related to his
(Probert's) wife. It was thought that he could have made some
disclosure relative to some persons who were said to have been missing
a short time before Weare's murder; but in justice to the memory of the
wretched man, it must be stated that there are no grounds for believing
him to have been concerned in any transaction of a murderous nature,
but that in which his own evidence at Hertford proves him to have been
implicated.

When he ascended the platform on the fatal morning, the 20th of June,
1825, his limbs were completely palsied, and his agitation dreadful.
After the noose was tied, he moved as far as he was able, and turning
himself, raised his hands in quick and tremulous motion, and so
continued till the ordinary had taken his final leave, and the falling
of the platform closed the scene.

His fellow-sufferers were two men, named Sargeant and Harper, for the
same offence of horse-stealing, and another, named Smith, for burglary.
The four others who were at the same time ordered for execution met
their fate on the Monday following.

On this occasion the concourse of spectators was immense, the windows
opposite being crowded as early as three o'clock in the morning, and
chiefly with females.


ALEXANDER PIERCE
Executed for Murder and Cannibalism.

Although the offence for which this person was executed did not occur
within the district of our own country, yet as the malefactor was a
British subject, the particulars of the horrid deed of which he was
guilty, and which was of a nature most disgustingly appalling, may not
be considered out of place in our catalogue.

In the month of November 1823, the prisoner surrendered himself at a
place called Macquarrie Harbour, in Van Diemen's Land -- of which place
it was the penal settlement, and which was therefore inhabited only by
persons twice transported, and the guards necessary to keep them in
subordination -- and charged himself with having been guilty of the
murder of one Cox, a convict, who had escaped with him from the same
settlement only a short time before, and whom he had despatched, for
the purpose of preserving himself from starvation by devouring his
flesh. It would be useless for us to go into a detail of the
circumstances proved on his trial at Hobart Town on the 21st June 1824,
which were of a nature far less horrible than those which he confessed
immediately before his execution for the offence with which he charged
himself.

This confession was in the following terms. "I was born in the county
of Fermanagh, in the north of Ireland, where in the 26th year of my age
I was convicted on a charge of stealing six pairs of shoes, and
received sentence to be transported for seven years. I arrived at
Hobart Town, in the ship Castle Forbes, and was assigned to Mr. John
Bellenger, with whom I remained about nine months, at the expiration of
which time I was returned to the government superintendant, in
consequence of some misconduct of which I had been guilty. In a few
months afterwards, I was assigned to a constable named Cane; but I had
stayed with him only sixteen weeks, when being carried before a
magistrate for some offence, of which I had been guilty, I was ordered
to receive fifty lashes, and to be returned again to Crown labour. I
was subsequently again assigned to a Mr. Scattergood, at New Norfolk,
but I absconded from his service into the woods, where I joined
Laughton, Saunders, Latton, and Atkinson, who were at large in the
bush. After about three months spent in 'ranging,' I surrendered upon a
proclamation issued by the Governor, and was pardoned; but I shortly
afterwards forged some orders, upon which I obtained property. On
learning that the fraud was discovered, I was induced once more to make
off, and I did so; but after a stay of about three months in the woods,
I was taken by a party of the 48th regiment, and being tried for the
forgery, was found guilty, and ordered to be transported to the Penal
Settlement at Macquarrie Harbour, for the remainder of my original
sentence, I was not there more than a month before I made my escape
with seven others, named Dalton, Traverse, Badman, Matthews, Greenhill,
Brown, and Cornelius. We all kept together for about ten days, during
which we ate nothing but our kangaroo-skin jackets, and then we were
nearly exhausted with hunger and fatigue. On the eleventh night, we
began to consult what was best to be done for our preservation, and we
made up our minds to a dreadful result. In the morning we missed three
of our company, Dalton, Brown, and Cornelius, who, we concluded, had
left us with an intention of returning, if possible. We then drew lots,
which of us should die; and the chance fell on Badman . I went with one
of the others to collect dry wood, to make a fire, during which time
Traverse had succeeded in killing Badman, and when we returned, he had
begun to cut him up. We dressed part of the flesh immediately, and
continued to use it as long as it lasted. We then drew lots again, and
it fell to the fate of Matthews. Traverse and Greenhill killed him with
an axe; we cut the flesh from his bones, carried it on, and lived upon
it as long as it lasted. By the time it was all eaten. Traverse,
through fatigue, fell lame in his knee -- so much so, that he could not
proceed; Greenhill proposed that I should kill him, which I agreed to.
We then made the best of our way, carrying the flesh of Traverse
between us, in the hope of reaching the Eastern settlements while it
lasted. We did not however, succeed, and I perceived Greenhill always
carried the axe, and thought he watched an opportunity to kill me. I
was always on my guard, and succeeded, when he fell asleep, in getting
the axe, with which I immediately despatched him, made a meal, and
carried all the remaining flesh with me to feed upon. To my great
disappointment, I was afterwards many days without food, and subsisted
solely upon grass and nettle-tops, which I boiled in a tin pot that I
brought with me from the settlement. At length I fell in with some
natives' huts, from which apparently the inmates had just retired; and
there I collected some entrails, and bits of kangaroo, which afforded
me a meal. Two days afterwards, when nearly exhausted, I came in sight
of a hut, which proved to be M'Guire's near the High Plains. I staid
there a fortnight, and made up my mind to surrender myself to Captain
Wood, a magistrate on the river Clyde; but on my way thither, I met
Davis and Churton, who were then desperadoes, and living at the Shannon
hut. They wished me to join them, to which I agreed. In a few weeks we
were all taken, near Jericho, by a party of the 48th regiment, and
brought into Hobart town jail; Churton and Davis were tried, found
guilty of capital offences, and suffered death. It was my fate to be
returned to the Penal Settlement. I again made my escape with Thomas
Cox, who eagerly pressed my departure. I had irons on at the time; and
when we had proceeded some distance, Cox knocked them off with an axe
he had brought with him, and we made the best of our way through a
thicket, which was very wet. At night we tried to make a fire, but
could not. We travelled on several days without food, except the tops
of trees and shrubs, until we came upon King's River; I asked Cox, if
he could swim; he replied he could not; and I remarked, that had I been
aware of that, he should not have been my companion. The arrangements
for crossing the river created words, and I killed Cox with the axe: I
ate part of him that night, and cut the greatest part of his flesh up
in order to take on with me. I swam the river with the intention of
keeping the coast round to Port Dalrymple, but my heart failed me, and
I resolved to return and give myself up to the commandant. I threw most
of the flesh away; one piece I carried in my pocket, to show the
commandant that Cox was dead. I confessed that I had killed him, and
accompanied a party in a boat to bring up his remains, which was done."

The prisoner underwent the extreme penalty of the law on the following
morning, for the detestable crimes of which he had been guilty. We
regret to say, however, that this is not a solitary instance of persons
in the situation of Pierce resorting to similar means for the
preservation of their lives.


CHARLES LYNN.
Tried for Murder.

The following are the circumstances attending a murder committed at
Whaddon Chase, Buckinghamshire, in the month of January 1825, which at
the time of its perpetration attracted a considerable portion of the
public attention.

The information which was first published of this remarkable case, was
that on the evening of Wednesday, the 5th of January, two young men
took outside places by the Express coach, from London for Brick-hill,
which is situated about nine miles from Stoney Stratford; and that
having arrived at that place, they slept at the White Lion Inn, and on
the following morning walked on towards Fenny Stratford, one of them
carrying a gun in a green baize bag, while the other had a box on his
shoulder. On their being overtaken by the Eclipse coach, they mounted
it, and rode as far as Whaddon Chase, where they both suddenly jumped
down, and one of them, carrying the gun, ran into the Chase, which is a
wild, unfrequented spot, intersected by many roads, whither the other
followed him. In a short time after, a labouring man named Meechan, who
was employed in mending a hedge, heard a sound which appeared to him
like a cry of murder. He listened, and distinctly heard the cry
repeated in the direction of a place called Snell's Copse; and on his
looking towards that spot, he saw two men whom he had before observed
walking in the neighbourhood, one of them with an upraised gun, with
which he suddenly felled his companion to the ground. The stock of the
gun appeared to be broken by the blow, and then he saw the same person
repeatedly strike the fallen man with the barrel. He was so alarmed as
to be unable to render any assistance to repel the murderous attack;
and he presently saw the man who, as he supposed, had killed his
companion, change his coat, which was a blue body-coat, for a fustian
shooting-jacket, and walk away. He felt totally unable to follow him;
but as soon as his alarm had in some degree subsided, he ran to his
master's house, which was situated about two hundred yards off, and
gave information of what he had seen. Mr. Clarke, his employer, and his
three sons, instantly accompanied him in pursuit of the murderer; and
after an unavailing search of nearly two hours' duration, they at
length saw him emerge from a thick copse, when they instantly seized
and secured him. They conveyed him to the Haunch of Venison
public-house at Whaddon, where he underwent an examination before Mr.
Lowndes, Mr. Smith, and Major Mansel, magistrates of the county, to
whom he stated that his name was Charles Lynn, and that that of his
late companion was Abraham Hogg. A coroner's inquest was held on the
body of the deceased on the following day; and then it appeared that
the prisoner was the son of a respectable woman residing at No.4,
Morehall-place, Vauxhall, where she kept a confectioner's shop, and
that he, as well as the deceased, had been employed in the vinegar
manufactory of Sir Robert Burnett, at Vauxhall, as coopers. Since his
apprehension he had conducted himself in a most violent and
extraordinary manner. He had repeatedly attempted to destroy himself by
dashing his head against the walls and furniture of the room in which
he was confined; and on his being informed that his late companion was
dead, he answered, "I am glad of it, for he should not have had any of
the money." He afterwards attempted to kill himself by drinking boiling
water from a tea-kettle, and was only prevented from attaining his
horrid purpose by the vigilance of the constables in whose charge he
had been placed. He then begged to be permitted to write a letter to
his mother; but having written "Dear mother, I have committed murder,"
he appeared dreadfully agitated, threw down the pen, and exclaiming, "O
that I could kill myself!" attempted to strangle himself with his
neckcloth. He was now handcuffed, in order to prevent his making any
fresh attempt; but in spite of the utmost exertions of the officers, he
obtained possession of the snuffers, with which he tried to stab
himself in the throat; and having been disappointed in this project, he
swallowed two half-crowns, hoping to choke himself. The evidence which
was taken before the coroner went to prove the circumstances which we
have stated; and witnesses having also deposed as to the finding of the
body, and to the injuries which appeared to have been inflicted, and
which were obviously the cause of death, a verdict of "Wilful murder
against Charles Lynn" was returned.

The prisoner was then removed to Aylesbury jail, but not until he had
made repeated new attempts to destroy his own life. He viewed the body
of his murdered victim without the smallest degree of agitation or
excitement; and on his arrival in the prison, he dictated a letter to
King, the jailer, for his mother. He was subsequently visited by Mr.
Ashfield, the chaplain of the jail, by whom he was brought to a proper
sense of his situation. His mother, sister, and a clerk in Sir B.
Burnett's establishment, subsequently reached Aylesbury jail from
London, and at the entreaty of the first-named individual, the wretched
prisoner made the following singular statement as to his inducement to
commit the horrid crime of which he had been guilty. He said, "I and
Abraham went to the Saracen's Head, Snowhill, and got upon the
Liverpool coach: I saw two men in deep conversation with him, and two
gentlemen were on the coach; the two men who spoke with Abraham I knew
to be resurrection-men; and I was convinced that Abraham was agreeing
to sell my body to them for the surgeons, two of whom were on the
coach. Just before the coach started, one of the resurrection-men, who
was dressed like a sailor, got a bottle of gin, and on the road they
wanted me to drink two glasses for their one. The men afterwards threw
the bottle away, but purchased another on the road. I and Abraham got
down at the White Lion, Brick-hill, and the landlord and others were
talking about robberies and murders: I did not like the conversation,
and I went and slept at the public-house opposite. On the following
morning I went to the White Lion, and the landlord said to me,--'It's
lucky for you that you were not up sooner, or your body would have been
half way to London by this time.' I got on another coach with Abraham,
and passing by a common, I jumped down and ran away; Abraham followed
with my gun. When I got near a wood I. heard the sound of horns and
trumpets, and I thought the resurrection-men were after me, and that
Abraham intended to kill me, and I am sure if I had not killed him he
would have killed me." This remarkable statement was reduced to
writing, and was produced at the trial of the unfortunate prisoner,
which took place at Aylesbury, on Tuesday, the 8th of March, in the
same year.

The evidence, which was then adduced, was precisely similar in its
details to that which we have stated in substance; and the prisoner in
his defence addressed the jury in an unconnected strain, repeating his
belief that an intention existed to murder him. Witnesses were then
called, who swore that they believed that the prisoner was insane, and
the jury returned a verdict, finding the prisoner guilty of killing the
deceased, but declared that he was of unsound intellect at the time.

The prisoner was thereupon ordered to be detained during His Majesty's
pleasure, and was subsequently confined in an asylum for lunatics.

It appears that the prisoner had been employed by Sir Robert Burnett
from a very early age, and that he was always considered there to bear
an excellent character. Hogg was also engaged in the same
establishment, and was a constant companion of the young man, by whom
he was eventually killed. A considerable degree of suspicion was
excited against them on the discovery of the murder, in consequence of
the sudden disappearance of one Mangan, alias "Long Dan," who was their
fellow workman, and who having been seen last with Lynn, on Sunday the
2nd of January, at Manor-place, Walworth, had become suddenly missing.
Every inquiry was made for him, and at length Lynn was questioned upon
the subject, but he most solemnly declared his ignorance of the cause
of his quitting his friends, as well as of his hiding-place; but the
observation which he had made, that "Hogg should not have any of the
money," for a considerable time favoured the suspicions which were
entertained. At length, however, Mangan came forward, and stated that
he had enlisted in the East India Company's service, for a reason which
he refused to disclose; and Lynn's statement explained the meaning of
the expression which he had used. The reason for Hogg and Lynn quitting
their work, and going out of town by the Liverpool coach, however, yet
remains concealed.


JAMES EVANS
Tried for the Murder of Thomas Price.

The scene of the mysterious death of Mr. Thomas Price was Manchester,
where he carried on an extensive business, as a fustian manufacturer;
the accused James Evans being in his employment, as warehouseman.

It would appear that on Friday, the 3rd February 1826, at about
noon-time, the attention of some persons passing through
Marsden-square, Manchester, was attracted to the premises occupied by
Mr. Price, in consequence of its being discovered that smoke was
issuing in considerable quantities from the window of a room on the
first floor, occupied as a counting-house. The greater part of the men
employed on the premises were at this time absent, it being their
dinner hour; but the alarm being spread some assistance was obtained,
and several persons, having procured admittance to the house, attempted
to force their way to the point at which the fire was burning. Their
efforts were rendered for a considerable time unavailing, in
consequence of the density of the smoke; but the windows on the stairs
having been opened, the air became gradually cleared, and at length the
door of the counting-house was reached. Upon it being pushed open, it
was found that a number of pieces of fustian had fallen against it
inside, and then through the dense clouds of vapour, in which the
apartment was enveloped, the indistinct outline of burning goods was
perceived. It was some time before any person could venture to explore
the room, but the engines having arrived, any fire that existed was
extinguished, and the vapour was by degrees dispelled. By this time, a
report had become prevalent that Mr. Price had perished in the flames,
and several persons, in consequence, now proceeded to ascertain how far
it was justified. They had not searched long, before they found that
the suggestion of the death of Mr. Price was well founded; although
there was reason to believe, that it had been caused by other means
than those of burning or suffocation. The removal of a half-consumed
piece of fustian exposed the body of the unfortunate gentleman to view,
his clothes being burnt, and his person blackened and scorched. He was
quite dead, his head resting upon a piece of fustian, and his left arm
being raised as if to ward off a blow. On his body being removed,
appearances were perceived which induced a belief that he had been
murdered, and that his premises had been set on fire to conceal the
bloody deed. It was found that he had received a dreadful fracture on
the left side of the skull, through which the brain protruded; and in
the immediate vicinity of the spot where he lay, several small portions
of the brain were observable, as if they had flown from his head, on
his receiving the blow, by which injury was inflicted. A most minute
examination of the room took place, but all search for the weapon with
which the wound was given proved ineffectual. A supposition was raised
that the deceased might have put an end to his existence by shooting
himself, and that the wadding might have set fire to the goods, but the
impossibility of such a circumstance became apparent. Mr. Price was a
man of cheerful disposition, and unlikely therefore to commit suicide;
besides which no pistol was found, and the wound was discovered to be
of a nature which could not have been caused by a shot. The only
remaining solution of the mystery therefore was, that which had been
first suggested, that the unfortunate man had been murdered, however
improbable it might appear that such a deed would be committed at
noonday, in a building, in which there must have been other persons at
the time, and which was situated in one of the most crowded places of
public business.

At the coroner's inquest, which was held on the next day on the body of
the deceased gentleman, Mr. Gresswell, a surgeon, gave evidence as to
the cause of death of the deceased. He stated that there were two
severe wounds on the head, one on the left side, and one on the right
side, and that they appeared to have been given with some blunt
instrument. This gentleman was of opinion, that it was possible that
the wounds might have been produced by a blow from one of the axes
carried by the firemen, on their proceeding to search the room, and
that they might have been given as well after as before death; but Mr.
Jordan, another medical man, was of a contrary opinion, and thought
that they had been given before death, and that a hammer was the
instrument with which they had been inflicted. The other evidence which
was adduced, and by which it was sought to implicate Evans, was that he
was last seen with the deceased, at about one o'clock; and that at the
time of the fire being discovered he exhibited the utmost apathy. It
was proved also, that the deceased had purchased a hammer, a day or two
before his death, which could not now be found; and that on the collar,
neck-handkerchief, and shirt of the prisoner marks of blood were found,
for the existence of which he did not attempt to account. A coat
belonging to him, which was found in the counting-house, was also
discovered to be similarly stained; and it was besides proved, that no
axes were used by the firemen, on their being called to Mr. Price's
premises, a fact which negatived the suggestion thrown out by Mr.
Gresswell, and upon this evidence the jury returned a verdict of wilful
murder against James Evans.

The prisoner was firm in his protestations of innocence, but he was
immediately committed for trial to Lancaster Castle. The case
subsequently excited a great degree of interest and the most anxious
curiosity was exhibited by the public to procure admittance to the
court during the trial. The trial came on at the ensuing assizes at
Lancaster, held in the month of March, when a verdict of Not Guilty was
returned, and the prisoner was discharged out of custody.

The prisoner appears to have been respectably connected in Manchester,
but we are unable to give any minute history of his life. The real
circumstances attending the death of Mr. Price have since continued,
and doubtless ever will remain, a mystery.


SAMUEL GILBERT,
Indicted for Robbery.

The case of this detestable villain is extraordinary in many respects,
but particularly on account of the determined and effectual resistance
offered by a young woman to the savage attacks of the prisoner, whose
original intention was to violate her person, an object which he
subsequently changed to that of robbery. The circumstances of the case
as they were detailed by the prosecutrix, whose name is Charlotte
Smith, exhibit a wonderful degree of perseverance on the part of the
prisoner to secure his desires, and on the part of the young woman in
resisting his foul attempt.

The case came on at the Taunton assizes, held on the 30th of March
1826, when the prisoner was indicted in the usual form for a robbery.
It appeared that the prosecutrix was twenty-three years of age, and was
the daughter of a decent clothier, living at about a mile out of Frome,
and that the prisoner was a labourer, aged eighteen years, residing at
no great distance from the same place, but that they were unacquainted
with each other. On the second day of the fair at Frome (26th November
1825), the prosecutrix accompanied one of her brothers to that place,
in search of some other relations. They went into the Castle,
public-house, and there found the persons whom they sought with the
prisoner. They remained a short time, and then the prosecutrix got up
to go home alone. She had not gone far before the prisoner came up with
her, and addressed some conversation to her in a civil manner, and he
accompanied her home to her father's house. They sat there together for
a short time, her younger brother only being present, and then the
prisoner asked her to return to the fair. She consented, and they
walked together arm-in-arm, and while at the fair, he invited her to
accompany him to the house of his aunt at Coalashwalk. She at first
refused, but was subsequently induced to consent to his proposal, on
his assuring her that he would see her safe home again. They proceeded
on their walk together, but they had not gone far beyond the
termination of the houses of the town, when the prisoner took her by
the shoulders, and threw her down, accompanying this action with a very
improper expression. She demanded to know whether he knew who she was,
and he answered, "Yes; -- Mr. Smith's daughter, and if you don't submit
I'll murder you." Her answer was, that "she would die first;" and he
then proceeded to take liberties. She screamed out, on which he thrust
his fist into her mouth, and grasped her throat until he had almost
choked her; but being convinced of the baseness of his intentions, she
resisted him for three quarters of an hour, during which she still lay
on the ground. At this period a man approached them, and having
disengaged herself for a moment from the prisoner's grasp, she screamed
for help. The man said, "Why, you murderous villain, you have got a
woman there; are you going to kill her?" upon which the prisoner jumped
up, and threatened to murder him if he did not go away. The prosecutrix
now got up, but the prisoner threw her down again, and, in the presence
of the man, continued his brutal liberties. The latter endeavoured to
force him away, on which the prisoner flew at him with his fists. The
girl ran to the man for protection, but he pushed her away from him,
and then, thinking he would afford her no assistance she ran off as
fast as she could. She had gone more than a mile, but in her alarm
towards Warminster, instead of Frome, when the prisoner overtook her.
He said that she was going wrong, but she thought the contrary, and
said so, and then he repeated his determination to do what he pleased
with her, saying, that if she did not give up, he would throw her into
the river. She, however, again resisted him, and he took her towards
the river in his arms. When they reached the bank, she cried for mercy,
and he put her down, but immediately dragged her up a lane, and threw
her over a gate. He there pulled her through some brambles, and into a
ditch of mire, and swore what he would do to her. Having detained the
wretched girl here for upwards of three hours, during which he beat her
in an unmanly and brutal manner, she at length found herself becoming
insensible, and taking some of the blood from her mouth, she showed it
to him, and asked him how he could have the heart to do it. He said
that he would be d--d if he cared, and that he would murder her if she
did not give up. She said that she had a shilling in her pocket, and
that she would give it to him if he would let her go, to which he
replied that he would be d- d if he would not have it then, and without
waiting for her to get it, he tore off" her pocket, jumped upon her,
and tore off her clothes. He dragged off her gown first, and then her
under clothes, and there was no shape of clothes left. He then
continued his barbarous treatment to her, by forcing her head under
water, and keeping it there until she was nearly drowned; and while she
was so defenceless, he took away one of her ear-rings. On her raising
her head, she heard a dog bark, and she exclaimed, to intimidate him,
"The Lord be praised, here's my father!" and he then ran off. She
followed in the same direction, because she did not know her way home,
and at length, at three in the morning, she reached her father's house
in a pitiable plight. In consequence of the injuries which she
received, she remained bedridden during three weeks; and it was much
longer before she recovered her health.

This detail of the frightful barbarity employed towards her by the
prisoner produced a strong impression in court, and a verdict of Guilty
was returned by the jury.

The prisoner subsequently escaped the capital punishment, which he
richly deserved for this offence on a point of form, but upon being
indicted for the assault with intent to commit a rape, he was again
found Guilty, and sentenced to two years' imprisonment.


ALEXANDER AND MICHAEL M'KEAND
Executed for Murder.

Illustration: Michael M'Keand Arrested after a Fierce Struggle

Few cases have occurred, in which more deliberate and cold-blooded
cruelty has been exhibited by the murderers, than in that which we are
now about to detail, and for their participation in which these unhappy
malefactors underwent the dreadful sentence of the law.

The victim of their crime was a defenceless and unoffending servant,
named Elizabeth Bates, and the circumstances under which they deprived
her of life are as follows: --

On the evening of Monday, the 22nd of May 1826, Alexander M'Keand
entered the Jolly Carters, public-house, which was situated at Winton,
near Worsley, in Lancashire, and was kept by a person named Joseph
Blears; and being known to Mrs. Blears, the landlady, took a seat in
the bar, and called for a glass of ale. Having been served, he placed
it before him, but he drank none of it for half an hour, at the
expiration of which time his brother Michael entered, and sat opposite
to him. They appeared from their manner to be strangers to each other,
and Michael was unknown to Mrs. Blears. The new-comer, almost
immediately on his entry, called for some bread and cheese and ale; and
then his brother Alexander also had some bread and cheese. For a time
they sat together, but did not appear to be in conversation; but then
Mrs. Blears having quitted the bar for a moment, on her return she
found that they had shifted their seats to a sofa, and that they were
closely engaged in whispering to each other. Her suspicions were
alarmed, but she made no remark; and then Michael asked where her
husband was. She answered, that he had gone to Manchester; and, in
reply to a further inquiry, said that he would be back at about eight
o'clock. They remained until his return, and then Michael invited him
to drink. He at first declined, but on the man pressing him, he drank a
glass of whiskey, and subsequently a second. The two M'Keands also
drank whiskey, and then they called for some cider, and entered into
conversation. In the mean time Blears, who had doubtless been hocussed,
became quite overcome with the liquor he had drunk, and lay down on the
sofa, where he went to sleep. After about half an hour spent in
whispering together, Michael inquired of Mrs. Blears, whether he could
have a bed, as it was too late then to go to Manchester; and she
answered, that he and his companion were welcome to the accommodation
which her house afforded. They made some observations in reference to
her husband being intoxicated, and then they desired to be conducted to
their rooms. Betty Bates, the servant, was called to bring a candle,
and she accompanied them up stairs. The circumstances immediately
attending the murder of this poor girl were learned from a boy named
Higgins, fourteen years of age, who was permitted, from motives of
humanity, to live in Blears' house, and who slept in the room in which
the bed intended for the two M'Keands was placed. It would appear that
on their reaching the top of the stairs, the two men separated; and
while Alexander went on with the servant, the other returned down
stairs. The former was conducted to the room where Higgins was
sleeping; and the boy, being awoke by the noise, looked from under the
bedclothes, and saw the man put his arm round the girl's waist. She
resisted, and said, "Be quiet!" upon which, with great force, he threw
her back on the floor, and did something which the boy could not see.
The girl cried "Murder!" and succeeded in rising; but the fellow threw
her back again, and then again did something under her ear, with his
right-hand, in consequence of which, as it appeared to the boy, blood
flowed over her bosom. The woman struggled very much, and cried out
that she would mark him; but the boy being dreadfully alarmed, looked
to see no more, but concealed his head beneath the bed-clothes. The
murderer was doubtless disturbed by the movement of the boy, and
directly approached the bed in which he lay, pressed his hand upon his
mouth, as if intending to despatch him also. The servant at this
moment, however, managed to rise, and stagger towards the door, and the
villain instantly quitted the boy, and went in pursuit of her. Higgins
at this moment, taking advantage of the diversion of the man's
attention, succeeded in passing him, and jumped over the banisters, but
in his doing so, the man grasped at his shoulder. He, however, escaped
and ran out of the house, and hiding himself in a ditch, was not
further pursued.

In the mean time the second villain had attacked Mrs. Blears. The
latter, it appears, hearing the cries of the servant from the upper
room, was on the point of rushing up stairs to ascertain the cause,
when Andrew M'Keand seized her, and made a cut at her throat with a
knife, which she saw him produce from beneath his coat. The wound was
not serious, but she attempted to cry out, and then he took her by the
throat, and drove the knife in under her left ear. He attempted to
withdraw it, but could not; and having pulled several times, the handle
at length came away, and he ran off, leaving the blade still remaining
in the wound. Blears during the whole of this time had remained asleep
on the sofa, suffering from the effects of the narcotic with which he
had been plied; but now, awoke by the outcry, he started up, and found
his wife wounded as we have described. The alarm was given to the
neighbours, and the boy Higgins having returned, the body of the girl
Betty was found lying on the landing, outside the bed-room door.
Several persons attempted to pull the knife from the wound in Mrs.
Blears' neck, but unsuccessfully; and Mr. Garthside, a surgeon, having
been called in, he at length succeeded in extracting it. It was a
whittle knife, and was sharp-pointed; and upon subsequent inquiry, it
turned out that one of the murderers had obtained it on the morning of
the murder, and had sharpened it on the hearth-stone of a Mrs. Stewart,
living near Blears' house.

Notwithstanding the immediate alarm given of this diabolical murder,
the villains, for the time, succeeded in escaping detection; but their
persons being known, it was not long before they were secured and
brought to justice.

The particulars of their apprehension are rather curious. It appears,
that a butcher residing at Kirkby Steven, having got up about five in
the morning, saw passing his house, two strangers, who appeared to have
walked a great distance, as they were evidently fatigued and foot-sore;
and on that account he took more notice of their persons than he would
otherwise have done. About two hours afterwards he went to a barber's
shop, and whilst he was there, the constable of Kirkby Steven came in
with a hand-bill which had been sent from Worsley, containing a
description of the persons of the M'Keands, which he read to the people
in the barber's shop. On hearing it, the butcher immediately said, that
it corresponded exactly with the men he had seen passing his house some
time before; and as those persons appeared to have come a long way, he
had no doubt they were the men. Some conversation ensued about
following them; and at length the constable, and a publican named
Farraday, a very stout and resolute man, set out on horseback in
pursuit of them, about three hours after they had passed the butcher's
shop. Monday being the market-day at Kirkby-Steven, a number of people
were coming towards the town, and from them the constable and his
companion learnt that the objects of their pursuit were before them, on
the road to Appleby. After they had gone some miles, the horse which
the publican rode became unable to proceed, and he exchanged horses
with the constable, who did not appear quite so anxious to come in
contact with the men. The publican, however, pushed on, and when he got
within about three miles of Appleby, saw them before him on the road;
Alexander, the taller, walking first, and Michael about fifty yards
behind him. After scrutinising their persons a little, and satisfying
himself that they answered the description in the hand-bill, he rode
forward to the next public-house, which was a short distance, where he
dismounted, and waited the coming of Alexander, whom he immediately
accosted, "You seem to have walked a long way, sir. Will you take a
glass of ale?" Alexander unsuspectingly accepted the invitation, and
walked into the house, followed by Farraday, who immediately seized
him, saying, "You are my prisoner;" and at the same time he was laid
hold of by two men who were in attendance. Farraday then went to the
door to apprehend Michael, who was outside, when Alexander having
recovered from the momentary surprise which at first overpowered him,
broke loose by a desperate effort from the two men, and came rushing
from the house. Farraday, on hearing the two men in the house call out,
"He is off," immediately turned round, when he met Alexander coming out
of the door, and instantly felled him to the ground with a blow of his
fist; and fortunate it was for himself, that he was so prompt and
decisive; for Alexander had, at that time, a loaded pistol in his
pocket; and there is little doubt that he would have used it if he had
had an opportunity. As soon as he was secured a second time, and again
handed over to the men, with an injunction to be more careful of him,
the publican again went out, to wait for Michael, who came up
immediately. With him, the publican did not make use of any stratagem,
but seized him at once by the collar. Michael raised a stick which he
carried, as if for the purpose of striking him; but before he could
execute his purpose, Farraday tripped up his heels, and threw him upon
the ground. A violent struggle then ensued, in which Michael repeatedly
kicked Farraday, and bit him severely upon the hand. He was, however,
finally overpowered, and being forced into the house, the two brothers
were tied together with a rope, and a chaise being sent for, they were
conveyed to Appleby.

The prisoners having been subsequently examined in the presence of
Blears, appeared to be greatly dejected and agitated, and they were
eventually committed to Lancaster Castle for trial.

It was not until the 17th August that they took their trial, and then
the facts which we have detailed having been stated in evidence, a
verdict of Guilty was returned. The defence set up was that the
prisoners were intoxicated, and that they never contemplated the
commission of murder; but the plea was unavailing, and sentence of
death was immediately passed.

During Friday night and Saturday morning after the trial, the Reverend
R. Rowley, the chaplain of the Castle, visited them, and found Michael
much altered in appearance. He persisted in his statement, that he was
not the man who stabbed Mrs. Blears, and declared that he knew nothing
of his brother's murderous intention until all was over. He requested
pens, ink, and paper, and wrote several letters to females of his
acquaintance, and during the forenoon he had interviews with two women.
After this the Reverend Divine exhorted him to prayer, but he seemed
reckless, and declared again that he was perfectly innocent, and ought
not to suffer, insinuating that his brother had alone perpetrated the
foul crime. In consequence of this some inquiries were made, and Mrs.
Blears was again questioned as to the identity of Michael; but she
persisted in declaring that he was the man that she met on the stairs
(while running to the assistance of the murdered woman), and that his
was the hand that wounded her.

Alexander M'Keand had long since prepared himself for the worst, and
had fixed his attention entirely upon religious exercises. Upon being
informed of the statements of his unhappy brother, he exclaimed, "Oh,
God, forgive him! he is guilty, and well he knows it; it was he who
stabbed Mrs. Blears below stairs, while I murdered the woman above in
the room, for which I hope God will forgive me -- I was drunk when I
did it." He declined stating anything as to his motives, and it was
judged prudent not to disturb him by further questions. The wretched
man appeared to possess much determination and firmness of nerve, and
throughout the whole of the last awful scene was calm and penitent. He
declined seeing any person, and expressed a wish not to be disturbed by
any visitor whatsoever; and begged the reverend chaplain to have it
made known that it was his first crime, as it had been circulated that
he had been concerned in a murder and robberies before. On Sunday the
unhappy brothers met in the chapel for the first time since their
condemnation, but Michael averted his head, and seemed desirous of
avoiding any conversation or notice of Alexander. They were placed in a
pew by themselves.

At six o'clock on Monday morning the criminals were led to the chapel
and received the sacrament, and remained at prayer for above an hour
Alexander exclaimed, "Oh, God. have mercy on me," almost incessantly.
Michael was quite sullen, and seemed scarcely able to stand or walk. A
few minutes after seven o'clock, they were pinioned, and the under
sheriff and his officers entered the chapel and demanded the culprits.
Mr. Thomas Higgins, the governor, caused the M'Keands to advance to the
chapel door, and withdrew a few paces; the procession then moved from
the chapel to the place of execution, at the exterior of the
north-western part of the castle. Michael walked with a hesitating
step, and appeared dreadfully dismayed. Alexander was more collected,
and his lips appeared as if moving in silent prayer.

At half-past seven o'clock precisely, a window which opens on hinges as
a door, and which led immediately to the scaffold, opened, and the
moment of expiation had arrived -- no bell tolled, nor was there any
other funeral rite to mark the approach of the murderers' death; all
was conducted with imposing silence, and not a murmur of pity appeared
to escape from the crowd. Everything being arranged, the caps were
drawn over the culprits eyes; the chaplain read a part of the burial
service, the drop fell, and the wretched men were launched into
eternity. After their bodies had hung the usual time, they were cut
down and delivered over to the surgeons for dissection.

It would appear that these unfortunate brothers were born of poor
parents, and that they pursued the occupation of hawkers as affording a
means of procuring a living. Alexander was a hawker of tea, and was
well known in the neighbourhood of the place where the murder was
committed. His brother's district lay in another part of the county.
Their mother and sister lived at Byromplace, Winton, and received a
communication from the culprits on the morning of the murder, through
the medium of a Mrs. Stewart, with whom they were all acquainted,
informing them that they were quite safe and had secured their escape,
and accounting for the murder by declaring that they had only acted in
their own defence, and that they had been attacked by Blears, the
landlord.

A circumstance occurred about a week before the murder which may,
perhaps, throw some light upon the motives which dictated it. An action
had been brought against Alexander M'Keand some time before, for a debt
due to a man named Claworth, a farmer, residing near Eccles; in
consequence of which, he called upon the attorney who had brought it,
and offered to pay the debt if it could be proved to be due. The
attorney told him, that if he would call upon him on Saturday, he would
produce a witness who would prove the debt. He did call; and they
produced Blears, who distinctly stated that he had heard Alexander
admit that he owed the money. Alexander denied that he had made any
such admission, and, as we are informed, uttered some violent and
threatening language towards Blears.

It appears to be impossible to ascribe any other motive for the
commission of the murder than this; and even this anecdote can afford
no solution of the mystery why the servant-woman was first attacked,
unless their object was to dispose of the whole of the family, in order
that their identification as the murderers might be concealed.


CHARLES THOMAS WHITE
Executed for Arson.

This unfortunate young man, who was executed at the early age of
twenty-three for the heinous crime of arson, was born of respectable
parents, and having received a good education, was brought up to the
business followed by his father -- that of a bookseller. His father
died when he was yet young, but his mother continued to carry on the
shop which her late husband had opened at No.265, High Holborn, near
Red Lion-street, with a view to its future occupation by his son. Young
White was respectably married at the early age of twenty-two, and then
he received a sum of 800l. to commence business on his own account,
besides a settlement on his wife of 1000l., producing 65l. a year, and
a further interest in 4000l., which would fall to him on the death of
his wife's mother. Although thus comfortably situated, however, he was
guilty of a crime of the most diabolical nature, which cost him his
life, and which had for its object the destruction of his own premises,
and a consequent fraud upon the Insurance Office.

It appears that the unhappy young man made three attempts to secure his
object; but although considerable injury was done on each occasion, he
failed in attaining the end which he had in view to the full extent of
his intention. The house in which he resided was too large for his
purposes, and a portion of it was therefore let off to a Mr. Lazarus,
whose family consisted of his grandmother, his sister, and a servant.
The prisoner also had a servant named Catherine Taylor, but he had no
family except his wife.

In the month of September 1823, a policy of insurance was effected by
the prisoner's mother in the British Fire Insurance Company, upon the
furniture and stock in the house, respectively for the sums of 400l.
and 600l.; but on the 30th of May 1826, young White, without any
assignable cause, increased the amount of the policy to 3500l. Within
two months after this, the house was discovered to be on fire; but Mr.
Lazarus having been alarmed, he jumped up, and on proceeding down
stairs, he found his servant in a position which induced him to suppose
that she was in some way a party to the wilful firing of the house. He
for the time concealed his suspicions, but on the morning of the 5th of
August the house was again discovered to be in flames. The girl was on
this occasion found by her master near the place where the fire had
commenced, almost entirely dressed; and his fears being now much
excited, Mr. Lazarus caused her to be taken into custody. She underwent
several examinations before the magistrates of Marlborough-street
Police-office; but the evidence adduced against her was of a nature so
inconclusive as to leave great doubts as to her guilt, and she was
discharged. Evidence was soon after this obtained which proved her
innocence, and the guilt of one of the persons at whose instance she
was conveyed before the magistrates, namely, Mr. White. The fire on
this occasion, it appears, happened between one and two o'clock in the
morning. Mr. Lazarus was at that time aroused from his sleep by a
strong sense of suffocation, and on rising from his bed, he ran down
stairs, and found that flames were issuing from a cupboard situated
under the stairs leading to the first floor. An alarm had already been
given outside the house, and some watchmen had assembled, and by their
aid the fire was extinguished. When tranquillity had been in some
degree restored, a search was made with a view to ascertain the cause
of the conflagration, and the remains of two links, partly consumed,
were discovered. White, on this, expressed his belief to Lazarus that
the servant of the latter had wilfully set the house on fire, and she
was, as we have already mentioned, given into custody. After her first
examination, Mr. White suggested that it would be useless to follow up
the prosecution, as he did not believe the girl had had the links; but
on his being questioned, he denied all knowledge of them himself. The
investigation of the case was intrusted to a very active and
meritorious officer named Furzeman, and after the examination of the
girl, the affair having been much talked of, it was at length
discovered that a person very like White himself had purchased some
links at the house of a Mr. Bradford, in Broadstreet, St. Giles. While
the inquiry was still proceeding, on Wednesday the 4th of October 1825,
a third fire broke out on the same premises. At this time the only
persons sleeping in the house were Mr. White and his wife, and their
servant Catherine Taylor. Mrs. White had retired to bed early in
consequence of indisposition, and the servant went to sleep in her
mistress's room at eleven o'clock at night, Mr. White then going to
another apartment. At about one o'clock, an alarm of fire was raised,
and the stairs were found to be in flames. Mrs. White suggested that
some assistance should be demanded from the street; but her husband
refused to consent to such a course, and conducted the two females to a
trapdoor in the roof of the garret, through which they made their
escape, abandoning the house to its fate. The watch in the mean time
had discovered the fire, and bursting open the street-door, they
succeeded in extinguishing the flames. Further inquiries were now made,
and upon the examination of the girl Taylor, it was ascertained that
she had found a considerable quantity of turpentine, which was kept for
her use, thrown over a hearth-rug in the parlour a day or two before
the fire; and other facts were elicited, from which it became perfectly
evident that the fire was the effect of design and not of accident, and
that very great pains had been taken, by the distribution of
combustibles in various parts of the lower rooms of the house, to
secure the complete destruction of the premises. White was subsequently
seen by Mr. Bradford, the oilman, in a dress similar to that worn by
the man by whom the links had been purchased at his house, and then he
immediately identified him as the person to whom he had sold them. Mr.
White was on this taken into custody, and the circumstances above
related having been proved in evidence before the magistrates, he was
committed to Newgate.

At the sessions held at the Old Bailey on the 31st of October, the
prisoner was indicted for the offence with which he stood charged, and
the jury returned a verdict that he was guilty. His defence consisted
only of a denial of the facts alleged against him, and he heard the
finding of the jury delivered without much emotion. At the conclusion
of the session he received sentence of death, in common with the other
capital convicts; and he then urged upon the court the improbability of
the charge, and suggested that his condition was such as to render it
most unlikely that for the profit which he should derive, he should
commit so diabolical an offence.

The unfortunate man subsequently made representations to government,
with a view to procure a commutation of his sentence; but although
considerable exertions were made in his favour, an order for his
execution on the 2nd of January 1827 was received at Newgate on the
20th of December. The wretched man, who had been constantly attended in
jail by his young wife, was dreadfully affected at receiving the fatal
intelligence.

The subsequent conduct of the convict was such as ill befitted his
awful situation. The bare contemplation of the moment of execution
completely unmanned him, and instead of applying himself to religious
exercises, he sat day after day brooding over his past life, and
occasionally starting upon his feet, bitterly inveighed against his
sentence. He had from the time of his trial persisted in denying his
guilt; but at length he confessed that he was rightly charged and
convicted, pleading in excuse that he was of unsound mind at the time.
On his finding that his execution was inevitable, he had recourse to
many ingenious measures to procure his escape, and it was discovered
that he had some powerful auxiliaries, both among his fellow-prisoners,
and his friends without the jail. Ground for suspicion of the design
was first given by an intercepted letter; and at this time the prisoner
occupied a cell which, from its position, was most favourable for his
project. It was situated close to the outer wall of the prison, and
could he but have removed the iron bars of the window, he might easily
have reached the parapet, by means of a rope ladder, and descended into
Newgate-street. A ladder was actually made of black sewing-thread,
firmly and curiously wattled, which must have been the work of very
considerable time: but the difficulty of removing the window-bars was
found by the prisoner to be insurmountable without the aid of
instruments. It is almost needless to say, that on the discovery of the
scheme, the most minute watch was kept over the movements of the
prisoner and his coadjutors. Frequent and anxious inquiries were
observed to be made by White for a pair of shoes, which did not appear
to be wanted; and when they arrived, they were examined; and spring
saws, capable of cutting through iron bars without making any noise,
were found sewed up between the upper and lower soles. The wretched man
was now made acquainted with the frustration of his plans, and he at
once admitted his intention, and spoke of the practicability of his
scheme with much pride and satisfaction.

On the fatal morning the prisoner was conducted from his cell to the
press-room by the sheriffs' assistants, when he declared that he was
quite prepared, and had but one request to make before he died. Some
hesitation was exhibited in answering him, when he said, that he had a
wish that his arms should not be bound with ropes, but with a
handkerchief, which he had prepared for that purpose. A short
conference took place between the sheriff (Winchester) and the governor
of the jail, and his request was acceded to; but he soon exhibited the
design with which he had made it. Upon the executioner proceeding to
pinion his hands, he made an effort, by keeping his wrists asunder, and
by raising his left hand on a level with his right wrist, to procure
the cord to be as slack as possible; but his object being seen, some
assistance was procured, and his hands were firmly tied together,
notwithstanding his struggling. The worthy ordinary remonstrated with
him upon the impropriety of such conduct; but his only answer was, that
he was hurt by the cords with which he was bound. Upon the
handkerchief, which he had produced, being placed round his arms, it
was found to be too small, and a second was taken from his pocket, to
add to it. He complained that his eyes would be uncovered, if this were
used for the purpose proposed; and his intention to procure the
liberation of his arms being at length clearly visible, he was pinioned
with a cord in the customary manner. On this he became much affected,
and wept bitterly. At length the procession moved on to the scaffold,
and the wretched man mounted the platform at twenty minutes past eight,
with a faltering and unsteady step. On the executioner and his
assistant now approaching him in such a way as to convince him of their
firmness, he became dreadfully agitated, and he raised his arms and
extended his chest, as if desirous to burst the cords. In the attempt
he loosened the bandages round his wrists; and on the cap being drawn
over his face, his terror seemed to increase. No sooner had the
executioner left him, than he suddenly raised his arms, and by a
violent movement pushed off the cap; and accompanying this act with a
motion of the body, he made a strong effort to liberate his neck from
the halter. Two assistant executioners were now called; and having
approached the unhappy man, they held him, while the cap was again
placed over his face and tied with a handkerchief. The miserable wretch
during the whole of this time was struggling with the most determined
violence, and the scene excited the strongest expressions of horror
among the crowd. Upon his being again left, he advanced from the spot
on which he had been placed, until he had got his feet nearly off the
drop, and had rested them on the firm part of the platform; and almost
at the same moment he succeeded in tearing the handkerchief from his
eyes. The outraged feelings of the assembled populace were still to be
excited by a more frightful exhibition than they had yet witnessed. The
accustomed signal having been given, the drop sunk; but the wretched
man, instead of falling with it, suddenly jumped upon the platform, and
seizing the cord round his throat with his hands, which he had
sufficiently loosened by the violence of his struggles, he made an
effort to prolong that life to which he seemed to be so strongly
attached. At this moment the spectacle was horrifying in the extreme.
The convict was partly suspended, and partly resting on the platform.
During his exertions, his tongue had been forced from his mouth, and
the convulsions of his body and the contortions of his face were truly
appalling. The cries from the crowd were of a frightful description,
and they continued until the executioner had forced the wretched man's
hand from the cord, and having removed his feet from the platform, had
suffered his whole weight to be sustained by the rope. The distortions
of his countenance could even now be seen by the crowd, and as he
remained suspended with his face uncovered, the spectacle was terrific.
The hangman at length terminated his sufferings by hanging to his legs,
and the unhappy wretch was seen to struggle no more.

A woman named Amelia Roberts was executed with White, and her conduct
and demeanour formed a striking contrast to that of her
fellow-sufferer.


WILLIAM BURT
Executed for the Murder of his Infant Son.

The trial of this melancholy case took place at Lewes on the Home
Circuit, on Friday the 5th January 1827.

The prisoner at this time was only twenty-eight years of age, and the
indictment alleged that he had been guilty of the wilful murder of his
son, Isaac Burt, by stabbing him with a shoemaker's knife, at Brighton,
on the 22nd of August, in the preceding year.

From the evidence adduced to sustain the prosecution, it appeared that
the prisoner was married to his wife, a fine young woman, in July 1825.
He then became a toll-collector at Long Ditton; but his wife and he did
not live happily together, and at Christmas in the same year he
quarrelled with her and cruelly beat her with a poker. From that time
she did not live with him, although repeatedly solicited by him so to
do. At the end of May, the child whose murder led to the present
indictment was born, and the mother went to Ditchelling workhouse,
taking the infant with her. On the 20th of August the poor woman went
to live at the house of Mrs. Young at Brighton. Two days subsequently
the prisoner called to see her; he was refused admission, but forced
his way to the room in which she was with her child, and in a paroxysm
of rage stabbed her repeatedly with a knife, and also inflicted several
mortal wounds on the child which was in her arms. She rushed out of the
house with her murdered babe, and the prisoner was secured.

The prisoner, in his defence, stated that his marriage with his wife
was one arising from pure love. Shortly afterwards, however, she became
cool in her demeanour, and admitted that she did not like him, but that
her affections were fixed on another object, a naval officer, whom she
had known before. She subsequently left him; and tortured by jealousy,
which was confirmed by a letter he detected her writing, commencing
with the words "My dear," he determined to wound her in such a way as
to render her disagreeable in the eyes of her lover. For this purpose
he went to her on the 22nd of August, but he declared that he had not
the slightest intention to kill his child.

The jury nevertheless returned a verdict of Guilty, and the wretched
prisoner was sentenced to be executed at Horsham on the following
Monday.

A second indictment, charging him with stabbing his wife, was
withdrawn.

From the time of his condemnation, the wretched prisoner exhibited the
greatest contrition, and appeared deeply impressed with the dreadful
situation in which he was placed. He took leave of his wife on the
morning of his execution, and both of them appeared to be much
affected.

At ten minutes before twelve o'clock, the unfortunate man was conducted
to the scaffold by the persons belonging to the prison, attended by the
Reverend Mr. Witherby, the chaplain of the jail. He then advanced to
the front of the railing, and addressed the people to the following
effect:-- "My friends, I hope you'll all take warning from me, and let
not your passion get the better of your reason, as mine has done. I own
my fault and am ready and prepared to die; and I hope the Lord stands
ready to receive my soul." The last preparations having been made, the
drop fell from beneath his feet, and he was launched into eternity.

The following letter was sent by Burt to his wife on Saturday, the day
after his condemnation:--

     "Horsham, the 6th day of January, A.D. 1827.
"My dear wife -- I have now sent you my last letter that ever you will
receive from me. I hope you are in good health and happy in your mind
-- as I am myself at present much happier than what any person would
suppose. I seem not to fear, nor to dread death. I comfort myself by
saying in mine heart, I shall probably in a few hours have the pleasure
of seeing my own dear little baby and your two sisters. I do not make
the least doubt but what the Lord will make me amends for all my
trouble and great losses which I have had in this world. I do not mean
to say that I would choose this disgraceful death rather than life, if
I were to have my choice. My dear Harriet, I am very sorry that you did
not come in to shake hands and bid me farewell. Let me prevail with
you, my dear, to come, if possible, to see me, and let us depart
without bearing malice, or having any hatred towards each other.
Remember, the time will come when you will die as well as me; and,
perhaps, when you are on your death-bed, it may be a great trouble to
your mind because you did not shake hands with your poor unfortunate
husband, when you had it in your power of so doing. If you can, reach
Horsham jail before twelve o'clock on Monday -- after that time is
past, if you would give ten thousand worlds, it would not be granted
unto you. If you should come only one minute before I die, I shall be
very glad to embrace the pleasure of seeing once more her whom my heart
dearly loveth. I willingly, with all my heart, forgive you and your
mother, likewise all other persons who have in any way tried to
persuade you to never have made up matters -- to be reconciled -- and
to have lived with me again. Pray come and see me before I die.
     "Farewell, farewell, farewell, my dear and precious wife.
     "William Burt."

The wish of the wretched convict, as will have been already seen, was
gratified.


JOHN PEELE, alias GEORGE WATSON
Executed for Forgery.

The history and remarkable successes of this bold forger render his
name well worthy a place in our list of criminals.

It appears that he was most respectably connected, and that he had the
advantage of a good education and much general acquaintance with the
world. He served his apprenticeship with Messrs. Cowley and Sancton, in
Cateaton-street, and he remained in the employment of those gentlemen
until about six or seven years before his execution, when he went into
business jointly with a Mr. Henry, under the firm of Henry and Peele,
in Mark-lane. He soon availed himself of the opportunities which his
new condition presented to him, and began to send forgeries round the
country. He succeeded to an amazing extent; but his father, whose
fortune had been some time sinking under the extravagance of this
profligate, ascertained the extent of the plunder, paid all the bills,
and in the hope that his son was still corrigible, sent him to America
and the West Indies, and supplied him with the means of obtaining a
comfortable livelihood. From the inquiries which were made before his
apprehension, it was ascertained, beyond all doubt, that for two years
he had subsisted in a most dashing and extravagant style by forgeries
alone; he fancied detection was impossible, and he used to say, with a
laugh, to a prostitute who was the companion of his pleasures, that
there was not a county in England in which he had not "left his mark."
He had assumed the name of George Watson, and travelled sometimes in a
handsome stanhope, and at other times in an elegant double-bodied
phaeton, accompanied by a female whom he had picked up at Portsmouth,
and used to call Mrs. Watson, and to whom he had at first represented
himself as a man possessed of immense wealth in America and the West
Indies. He ingeniously drew and circulated as foreign, bills, most of
which he forged, and dated them as either from the East India Islands,
or some part of the United States of America; so that he not only
evaded the stamp-duties, but totally destroyed one clue to a discovery
which might have taken place, had he been obliged to purchase stamps at
each place where he found it convenient or necessary to raise money.

It may appear singular how Peele could so long and so successfully,
under any circumstances, have proceeded in this course without
impediment; but the surprise will abate when it is mentioned that he
always had hundreds of blank bills about him, and that he very seldom
issued any for a large amount; so that the sufferers preferred the
course of leaving him to take his "dangerous chance," to the expensive
and unprofitable labour of bringing him to justice. When, at length, at
the instance of the committee of bankers associated for mutual
protection against forgery, the police followed him through England,
they found that in almost every place of any consequence at which they
inquired about him, he had "left his mark" upon the bankers or the
innkeepers, or both.

The circumstances which led to the prosecution which succeeded against
him are remarkable.-- In the latter end of May 1825, Peele visited
Tunbridge Wells, and presenting himself at the banking-house of Messrs.
Beeching and Son, he said he had taken a house at the Wells for five
months, and wished to know whether they had any objection to open an
account for him during that period. They consented, and he presented
two bills of exchange for 30l. and 35l. purporting to be accepted by
Coutts and Co. in London. The bills were immediately discounted by
Messrs. Beeching, through their clerk, and Peele endorsed the name
"George Watson" upon them, and received the amount in cash. As a
further inducement to Messrs. Beeching and Son to open an account with
him, and to give colour to his practices, he gave to them a
deposit-note of the Carlisle bank in his favour for 275l. 11s. 6d.,
which he wished them to present to that bank through Masterman and Co.,
who were their London agents as well as the agents of the Carlisle
bank. The deposit-note was accordingly sent down to Messrs. Connell and
Co, at Carlisle; but they in due course apprised Messrs. Masterman that
it had been obtained from them for a bill of exchange, for which Peele
had got besides a considerable sum of money, but which, on its
maturity, was discovered to be a forgery.

It was wondered how the prisoner could get acquainted with the
signatures and mode of business of the different parties whose names he
used; but, upon inquiry, it was found that he had invariably presented
himself to the notice of the bankers in the places where he negotiated
the bills, by taking to them bank-notes, and getting in exchange bills
on some London house; and he took care to select those bills which had
many names upon them, the whole of which he would immediately copy in
twenty different ways on various bills, and having done so, he would
take the genuine bills, and others of his own manufacture, to the
banking house, where the good bills never failed to be a passport to
those which were spurious. Thus he sometimes made the genuine paper
subservient to his plans of passing off counterfeit, and sometimes the
latter, as in the case of the Carlisle Bank, subservient to the
procuring of genuine bills, and both with uninterrupted success. In
addition to the bills on Connell and Co., Peele also deposited with
Messrs. Beeching two other bills,-- one for 30l., purporting to be
drawn by Alexander and James Liddell, of Dundee, and accepted by
Messrs. Robinson and Brown, of Glasgow; and the other for 81l. 11s. 0d.
dated Antigua, 5th of February; and purporting to be drawn by Nathaniel
Underwood, upon and accepted by Messrs. J. Bell and sons, of Leith, His
professed object in this deposit, was merely that the bills should be
in safe custody, but he contrived to get upon them an advance of 20l.,
for which he drew a check in his assumed name of "George Watson," and
on their arriving at maturity, it was ascertained that no one of the
persons mentioned in them had any existence, except in the brain of the
prisoner. Having succeeded in realising so much cash, however, he
thought it high time to decamp; and accompanied by his woman, he drove
to London, by Maidstone and Rochester. At the former place he put up at
Widdish's hotel, and succeeded in getting cash for a check for 20l., on
Messrs. Beeching and Son, by whom it was afterwards paid, on the faith
of the securities which had been left with them. A day or two after his
departure, however, the note was returned from Carlisle, and it was
discovered that the whole of the bills and securities were forgeries.
Instant search was then made for Peele, but he flew from place to
place. At length Mr. Gates, the solicitor to the Bankers' Committee,
received intelligence that he was at Newark, in Nottinghamshire, and
started from London, attended by an officer, for that place.

Adversity had already begun its work with the wretched man. A
Derbyshire publican, upon whom he had passed a forged bill, spied him
at his wine, and never left him till his body was under lock and key in
Derby jail. Peele was committed for trial for uttering this bill, which
was for 45l., and Mr. Gates went to Derby prepared to lodge detainers
against him, or have him taken into custody, in the event of an
acquittal there; but on his arrival at Derby, he found that it was
Peele's intention to plead guilty to the charge of uttering the bill;
that the prosecutor would, in all probability, be paid his debt as an
inducement to join in a recommendation of the prisoner to mercy, and
that Peele might escape if the remaining charges against him were
permitted to sleep.

He, therefore, applied to the Lord Chief Baron, who was in commission
at Derby, to have the prisoner removed to Maidstone, previously to his
trial at Derby, and under the circumstances of so many charges existing
in Kent, and after consultation as to the most eligible course, it was
arranged that no bill should be preferred at Derby, but that upon
Peele's discharge by proclamation, he should be handed over to a police
officer in attendance, with a warrant from Sir Richard Birnie. This was
done, and Peele was committed to Maidstone jail.

At the ensuing assizes, he was indicted for the forgeries upon Messrs.
Beeching, and a verdict of Guilty having been returned, he was
sentenced to death.

On the 26th of January 1827, the sentence was carried out upon the
unhappy man, at Pennenden Heath, near Maidstone. Up to within a short
time of his death, he is reported to have entertained sanguine hopes of
his life being saved, and he exhibited the utmost cheerfulness. As the
day of execution approached, however, he became sensible of his
situation, and applied himself strenuously to his religious duties.

He met his fate with becoming resignation, and his body was afterwards
delivered over to his friends for interment.

Amongst his letters, which were found, in the possession of the woman
with whom he lived, were the following, which are curious: --

     "Brighton, Friday night, eight o'clock.
"My dear Martha -- Jane is now with me, and we have just left the Chain
Pier, which runs with an alarming tremor at this moment into the sea.
We are going to cast an eye at Cook, in the Monster, at the Circus.
This monster is not a Caliban; it is a less delicate monster; it has no
genius about it. I cannot leave this 'dearest chuck,' until to-morrow,
mid-day; and I trust I shall twine my arms round you before five
o'clock.
     "Yours ever truly,
     "G. Watson."
     "(Drunk.) "Liverpool.

"My dear Martha -- By the failure in Liverpool I have lost 500l. Why,
let it go. Be you happy, Martha. I have been some hundreds of miles
since I saw thee; but what is travelling in labour or anxiety, compared
to the fear that thou shalt suffer? No, no, Martha, never suspect that
I can ever forget or forsake thee. My dear, dear girl, take care of
thyself. Despair not; my exactions shall have thy image to give them
pleasure and success.
     "Thine for ever,
     "George Watson."

It appears from his letters, that he had moved with extraordinary
rapidity from place to place. A variety of blank bills of exchange,
ready for use, together with some bills partly filled up, and others
with endorsements, were found upon the person of the unfortunate man at
the time of his apprehension.


WILLIAM SHEEN.
Tried for the Murder of his Child.

The case of this man has always attracted a considerable portion of
public attention.

The facts of the dreadful affair which we have been enabled to obtain,
are as follows:-- The alleged perpetrator of the horrid act is a native
of Radnorshire, South Wales, and was born about the year 1803. He
obtained his livelihood by chopping wood, and selling it in bundles
about the streets of the metropolis, as also did his father and
youngest brother, who lived in White's-yard, Rosemary-lane, near
Tower-hill. The wretched man himself lived, with his wife and infant,
at the house of John Pomeroy, No.2, Caroline-court, Lambeth-street.
About February 1827, he was married to the mother of the unfortunate
child, previously to which she had given it birth, which reaching the
ears of the parish officers of St. Katherine, the parochial officers,
upon condition that he would marry her, presented him with 5l. From the
moment the little creature was born the wretched father seemed to have
the greatest hatred towards it, and frequently he would wantonly,
whilst it lay in its mother's lap, strike it on its head with his fist,
or anything that first came to hand; and whenever the mother offered
the child to him to kiss, he always turned his head away in great
anger. Yet not the slightest thought ever entered the mind of any
person that he premeditated its destruction. On the Sunday before the
murder, while the mother was dressing the little creature, he took up a
piece of wood that lay on the table, and struck it over the head with
such force, that a large bump was raised. About half-past seven o'clock
on a Thursday evening in the month of May he came home, and the child
was then asleep at the breast in its mother's lap. He gave her money to
procure the necessaries for tea, and desired her to leave the child on
the bed, as it was in a sound sleep. She did so, and the wretch lay
down by the side of it. She left the room, and was gone about a quarter
of an hour, but, on her return, and opening the room-door, her feelings
of horror can be more easily conceived than described, when she beheld
the head of her offspring weltering in blood on the table, with its
eyes fixed towards the door. The poor creature, half mad, ran down
stairs and called out, "Murder, murder! "and meeting Mrs. Pomeroy, she
exclaimed, "Oh, my God! Mrs. Pomeroy, come up stairs, and see what my
Bill has done; he has cut my poor child's head off!" The woman and
several of the neighbours ran up stairs, and found proof of the horrid
deed. The head of the child was lying as above described, and the
bleeding body was placed on the bed. Information was directly given at
the Police-office, and Dalton and Davis, the officers, proceeded to the
room, which they searched, but the weapon with which the murderer
committed the deed could not be found; but in one corner of the room
they found his fustian coat and hat, both of them covered with blood.
Several persons went in pursuit of the wretched man; but the only trace
they could obtain of him was, that directly the murder was committed,
he was observed running, in his shirtsleeves, towards his father's
house, in White's-yard, Rosemary-lane, where he was seen to beckon his
father out, who was also in his shirtsleeves, and they both went away
together.

From subsequent inquiries it was discovered that Sheen had borrowed a
coat and 10s. from a man named Pugh, who lived in Carnaby Market,
pretending that he had had a fight with an Irishman, and was obliged in
consequence to abscond; and it was further found, that he had made off,
in order to avoid being taken into custody.

Davis, the officer of Lambeth-street, was in consequence directed by
the magistrates to endeavour to procure the apprehension of the
supposed offender; and we shall give his statement of the means which
he employed to secure this object, exhibiting as they do the most
praiseworthy ingenuity and perseverance, on his part, in securing the
object which he had in view. The officer was examined at Worship-street
Police-office, and his evidence was as follows:--

"I left town last Friday night, (May the 18th,) by the Birmingham
coach, understanding that the prisoner had gone in that direction.
While on my way thither, at about a mile beyond Stratford-on-Avon, a
person got on the coach, having the appearance of a discharged soldier,
who, in the course of conversation, told me he had exchanged a hat on
that morning with a man who said he was going to Birmingham, whom, from
the description he gave me of his clothing, I believed to be Sheen. On
my arrival at Birmingham, on Saturday, about four o'clock, I without
delay commenced a most diligent search, which I continued, but without
success, until half-past twelve at night. I resumed it on Sunday, and
found the person spoken of, about two o'clock, in the Lamb
public-house, in Edgestonstreet: he, however, proved not to be the man
I wanted. On Monday morning I proceeded through Worcester to Kington,
Herefordshire, having reason, from the information I had received, to
believe that the prisoner had taken that direction. From circumstances
that occurred it struck me that I was in advance of him, and, under
this impression, I waited on the bridge, at the entrance of the town,
for five hours. While there, considering the best plan I should adopt,
I came to the conclusion of going to the remotest inn in the town, to
evade publicity, and conceal the object of my journey. While remaining
in the town, I deemed it prudent to communicate with one of the county
magistrates, and inform him who I was, and what I came down about. I in
consequence called on Edward Cheese, Esq., a. magistrate and banker,
residing in Kington, and from him received every assistance. From the
number of Sheen's relatives living in the neighbourhood, and for twenty
miles round Kington, I was kept constantly on the move, and traversed
and searched a number of places and houses where I thought it likely he
might be concealed.

"While traversing the country, I, from the fear of being recognised,
assumed the dress of a countryman, and, with a smock-frock on, I
casually went into a public-house, where there were a number of
Cardigan drovers, and here I thought my labours would be unsuccessful,
for one of them having read from a London paper an account of the
murder, and a description of the murderer, who was at once known, I
concluded that such warning would be conveyed to him as would defeat my
object, particularly as they were going among all his friends. I
returned on the same night to Kington; and on the following day a
circumstance occurred which enabled me to secure Sheen. On the morning
of that day, while cleaning myself, I left my coat (in the side-pocket
of which I generally carry my handcuffs and pistols) in the kitchen,
and on my return was surprised at finding that the handcuffs had been
removed, and were lying on the seat. This was accounted for afterwards
by its being told me that they had dropped out, a circumstance that
alarmed me a good deal, as they had my name on them, and would lead, as
I supposed, to the discovery of who I was and what was my business. I
was not much mistaken, for while in my bedroom the person called on me
who picked up the handcuffs, and said, "I know who you are, and guess
what your business here is -- I can give you some information which I
think will be of service." I then collected from him such facts, and so
distinct a trace of Sheen, as induced me to go to Penny Bont, taking
with me an active constable, of Kington, named Yates. On my arrival
there I stopped at the Severn Arras Inn, and in the after part of the
evening a man came in and asked for the London paper; this he read
carefully, and when he had concluded, first looking inquisitively round
the room, he hastily departed in a very agitated manner. His appearance
and conduct excited my suspicions, and I inquired from the landlady who
he was, and where he lived. I heard that his name was James -- that he
was married to Sheen's aunt, and that he lived at about two miles'
distance from the village. I at once followed him, and saw him enter a
house, called the Lane House, in Llanbadenwaur, in Radnorshire; and
having ascertained where he resided, I returned to the inn, and
accompanied by Yates, went back with the intention of searching the
house, but thought it prudent not then to do so, as in the event of his
not being there, he would be put on his guard. On second consideration
I went back again to the Lane House, and having placed Yates at the
rear of the premises, I burst in the door, first giving Yates
directions, should he see any one coming out answering the description
of Sheen, to secure him, and should he attempt to make his escape, to
fire at him without hesitation. On going in I found several people in
the house, but not the person I wanted, and a third time I returned to
my lodgings. In about three hours afterwards, accompanied as before,
and making similar arrangements, having received further information, I
returned to the same house, and there secured Sheen; he was sitting at
breakfast in the chimney corner, and on examining his person, I found
on him a shirt spotted with blood, particularly on the neck and right
wristband. He came with me very quietly and when I apprehended him,
said, 'Oh, Mr. Davis, is it you? -- I shall go with you without any
resistance.'" Thus terminated Davis's account, and to some questions
from the magistrate, Mr. Wyatt, he said, that Sheen had made no
confession to him directly, but that he heard him make one indirectly
to the landlady of a public-house in Radnor, to whom he was known, and
who asked him, 'How, in the name of God, came you to do such a cruel
thing? 'and he replied, 'It was not God, but the devil.'"

During the time occupied in this search by Davis, a coroner's inquest
had been held upon the body of the deceased child, and circumstances
having been proved implicating the father of the infant, a verdict of
Wilful Murder was returned against him.

On Friday the 1st of June following, the prisoner was put upon his
trial at the Old Bailey, charged upon the indictment with the wilful
murder of "William Sheen."

The circumstances which we have detailed were then proved in evidence,
but an objection being taken by the prisoner's counsel as to the
sufficiency of the description of the deceased, who had been baptised
"William Charles Beadle Sheen," it was held to be fatal to the
indictment, and a verdict of Not Guilty was, in consequence, returned.

Application was, however, made to the court that the prisoner should be
kept in custody, with a view to the presentment of a new indictment to
the grand jury.

At the ensuing sessions a second bill of indictment, in which the
formal error which we have pointed out was corrected, was presented,
and the prisoner was put on his trial on the 13th July. A plea of autre
fois acquit was then pleaded in bar, and evidence having been given
that the real name of the deceased was sufficiently well known to have
enabled the prosecutors to have stated it properly in the first
indictment, Mr. Justice Burrough, declared that the prisoner could not
be again put upon his trial.

Sheen was then discharged, but not until he had received a proper and
most affecting admonition from the learned judge as to his past life,
and a warning to let his future conduct wipe off the stain, which his
position had cast upon his character.

The wretched man is, we believe, still alive, and residing in the
vicinity of the spot which was the scene of his unhappy child's death;
and we regret to add that he has not unfrequently been the subject of
charges before the police magistrates of the district, upon allegations
of riot and intoxication.


RICHARD BOWERS
Transported for "Duffing."

This offender was one of the most notorious of the class of thieves of
which he was a member.

The particulars of his trial do not reach us in any very perfect form;
but the following is the report of his examination before the
magistrates at Marylebone police-office, upon the charge, upon which
conviction finally ensued, as it appeared in one of the newspapers of
the time. The circumstances detailed well describe the artifices to
which a person following the practices of "Dick Bowers," as he was
familiarly called, had recourse. Dick was perfectly notorious
throughout London; and we believe that there was scarcely a
police-office in the metropolis at which he had not been in custody. It
may be remarked that he had but one leg, the deficiency being supplied
with what he usually denominated a "timber toe."

"Dick Bowers, who has been several times in custody for duffing, was
charged with having robbed Mr. Philips, of Bryanstone-street. The
complainant said, that on the 6th July, (1827,) he was accosted, in
Duke-street, by a person who said he had a quantity of kid gloves,
shawls, &c., which he could afford to sell cheap. He accompanied the
person to a public-house in Robert-street, Oxford-street, and on
entering the room he was introduced to another person, and they
produced from a bag a pair of gloves as a sample; and it was agreed
upon that he should have two dozen pairs for a sovereign, the price
demanded being ten pence a pair. One of the men wrapped up the pair of
gloves, and produced a small silk shawl and a piece of cloth, and
delivered them into his hands, saying, that he was only an agent, and,
therefore, could not let him have the two dozen pairs at that time, but
he might take the piece of cloth as a security; and on furnishing him
with his address, he (Mr. Philips) might rely on receiving the gloves
in a few days. He, accordingly, gave the man a sovereign and took up
the parcel. Both the men then left the room, and the prisoner entered,
who pushed rudely against him and seized the parcel out of his hands.
He told the prisoner that the parcel was his property, having just paid
a sovereign for it; but the prisoner insisted on retaining it unless he
consented to give him more money. He of course refused to pay anything
more, and attempted to take it away by force, but not succeeding, he
quitted the house."

It subsequently turned out that Bowers was a member of the gang of
"duffers," by whom Mr. Philips had been accosted, and that his violent
effort to procure the return of the property to himself was only a part
of the scheme intended to be put in operation.

At the ensuing Old Bailey sessions. Bowers was convicted of the offence
imputed to him, and on Tuesday, 17th July 1827, he received sentence of
transportation for fourteen years.


JOSHUA SLADE
Executed for the Murder of the Rev. J. Waterhouse.

The circumstances attending this atrocious case will be best described
and understood by the repetition of the confession of the murderer,
while lying in the jail at Huntingdon after his conviction of the
offence for which he was executed.

It would appear that the unfortunate gentleman who was the victim of
his crime was a person of most eccentric habits. He was possessed of a
rectory, at Stukeley, near Huntingdon, of the value of about 400l. a
year; and attached to the land which he held was an elegant
rectory-house. His habits of parsimony had induced him to give up the
occupation of the greater portion of this dwelling as a residence; and
he had stored many of the best rooms, furnished as they were, with
grain, the produce of his farm. A like feeling had excited in his mind
an indisposition to pay taxes for more windows than were absolutely
necessary to give light to the apartment which he used; and out of
about forty windows in his house, two only were suffered to remain. He
lived constantly in the kitchen, without any regular female domestic,
and performed the office of cook for himself and his workmen. Every
Saturday the reverend gentleman walked to Huntingdon market, a distance
of between three and four miles, frequently driving his pigs before
him; and after having transacted his farming business, he used to carry
home his tea and sugar, and other necessaries for the week, in a
basket. His known parsimony appears to have induced the criminal to
commit the foul crime of which he was guilty.

It seems that Mr. Waterhouse was about fifty-five years of age; and the
house which he occupied was situated nearly in the centre of the
village of Stukeley, but stood alone in the farm-yard about fifty yards
from the street. On the morning of Tuesday, 3rd July, 1827, the
reverend gentleman arose at about five o'clock, and was occupied until
about ten with his farming business. He then gave some instructions to
one of his workmen, and retired to his own house; and between this hour
and eleven o'clock the murder was accomplished. The body was first
discovered by two farmboys, who found it lying in a mash-tub; but in
consequence of the eccentricity of the deceased, they were induced to
suppose that he was only joking, and they took no notice of the
circumstance. The truth, however, was eventually discovered, and it was
found that the unfortunate man had been murdered in a most barbarous
manner. Suspicion at once attached to Slade, who eventually confessed
himself to have been guilty of this most atrocious crime, and he was
taken into custody. Circumstances were then discovered which left
little doubt of his being the guilty person, and upon his trial the
jury returned a verdict to that effect. Considerable anxiety was
entertained in reference to the case by the learned Judge, who deemed
the evidence inconclusive; and the trial having taken place on the 1st
of August, he respited the unhappy prisoner until the 1st of September,
in order that further inquiries might be made. On the 2nd of August,
however, the convict confessed the crime in the following terms: --

"On the morning of the 3rd of July, 1827, I went direct from the Swan
public-house at a quarter past two, and got over the garden-wall. I was
then fresh. I saw Peter Soby at his door. I went to a straw wall near
the dove-house, and laid there till five in the morning. I had a sword
hid in the straw wall about five weeks, which I had stolen from the
Horse and Jockey public-house, Huntingdon. I drew the sword out, and
left the scabbard in the wall, and I put the sword down my trousers by
my thigh. On my going out, I saw Mr. Waterhouse in the yard; but he did
not see me. The garden-door of the house was not fastened, and I went
to it and opened it; and I went up stairs and hid myself in the wool
chamber from five until ten o'clock, intending to rob the house at
night. While lying there, I went to sleep, and I dare say I snored. Mr.
Waterhouse happening to come up stairs, heard me breathe; and coming
into the room, he exclaimed, 'Hollo! who are you? what do you do here?'
I then got up, drew the sword and laid hold of him. He wanted to go
into the room where his blunderbuss was, but I would not let him. I led
him down stairs, but nothing was said. He attempted to get away, but I
would not let him; and when we got to the ground floor, I said, 'Now,
Mr. Waterhouse, if you'll forgive me, I'll forgive you; and if not,
this is your death-warrant' (holding up the sword.) He said, 'No, I
will suffer anything first.' I then let him go, and he went to run by
to the kitchen-door to call somebody; but just as he turned into the
kitchen I caught him a backhanded blow across the jaw, and he reeled
back, caught himself against the tub, and fell backwards into it. While
in this situation, I struck him several times; and he guarded the blows
off with his arm. He laid hold of the sword twice; upon which I drew it
out of his hands and cut his fingers. I also stabbed him in the throat,
which was the last blow; and he then said, 'I'm done,' and died
immediately. There was no blood on me except on my finger, and one spot
on my waistcoat, and that I wiped out directly. I didn't hear the dog
bark all the time; and he wouldn't bark at me, for he knew me. The
kitchen-door leading to the yard was wide open all the time, but no
person came near the house. Having committed the murder, which was all
finished by ten minutes past ten o'clock, I immediately ran out of the
house, and I turned to the right and threw the bloody sword among some
young trees. I ran away, and continued at work until seven at night;
and then I went home, had my supper, and went to bed."

A search was made immediately after the confession for the sword, and
it was discovered in the place pointed out. It was lying within a few
paces of the scene of the murder, and it is strange that it should have
remained so long undiscovered.

The wretched man after this confession applied himself zealously to the
performance of his religious exercises, and underwent the dreadful
sentence of the law at Huntingdon on the 1st of September 1827.


WILLIAM MILLER
Executed for the Violation and Murder of Mary Anne Lane.

This extraordinary and most horrid case, which for a considerable time
excited a very great degree of interest in the county of Warwick, where
it occurred, and which in many respects much resembles that of Abraham
Thornton and Mary Ashford, occurred at a place named Bishop's
Itchington, near Harbury-field. The trial came on at Warwick on Friday,
August 24th, 1827, when the prisoner William Miller, who was a man
thirty-five years of age, was indicted for the wilful murder of Mary
Ann Lane, on the night of the 26th of May, by casting her into a pond
at Harbury. The material facts which were proved in evidence, were that
the prisoner was a labourer, in the service of Mr. Heath, a farmer, at
Harbury; and that the deceased had been formerly a wet-nurse in that
gentleman's family, being married to a labourer in the same employment.
On the 26th of May, Mr. Heath gave an entertainment to all the
servants, labourers, and other persons, who were then, or who had been
previously employed by him. The prisoner, the deceased, and the husband
of the latter were at the entertainment, and some conversation took
place between the two former persons with regard to the return home of
the female. At about a quarter before eight, the deceased started on
her way home, taking the accustomed path into the high-road leading
towards Bishop's Itchington, which was situated at a distance of about
two miles. The prisoner was then talking with a man named Bentley, and
remarking the departure of the woman, he said "he'd be d--d if he
didn't go home with her;" and going away, he took a short cut across
the fields, so as to intercept her in the high road. From this time
nothing was seen of him until ten o'clock at night; and then he was
near his own residence at Harbury, which was about a mile nearer to Mr.
Heath's than Bishop's Itchington, but lay a considerable distance to
the left of the road leading to that place. Mrs. Lane did not return
home that night; but the murder was not discovered until the following
day, when Mr. Abraham Pratt was passing over Harbury-heath, in company
with his brother, and he saw something black in a pond there, and an
umbrella sticking up above the surface. His brother also picked up a
pair of pattens; and then, upon their raking out the black substance
which they had seen, they found it to be the clothes, covering the
murdered body of Mary Anne Lane. Upon their examining the spot, they
observed appearances, as if some struggling had taken place, and they
also saw marks in the clay of a man's boots, and of what seemed to be
knees, covered by corduroy trousers. The body of the deceased was
removed from the pond, and upon an examination taking place, little
doubt was left, that the unhappy woman had been violated, and then
barbarously murdered. In the course of the day, the prisoner was taken
into custody by direction of Mr. Heath, when he admitted having
accompanied the deceased as far as the gate leading to the heath; but
declared that he had there quitted her, and had returned home by the
foot-path. His house was afterwards searched, and a pair of corduroy
trousers was found steeped in a tub of water. Upon the shoes, which he
wore on the previous day, being demanded, he took them from his feet,
and their soles were found to correspond exactly with the footmarks in
the neighbourhood of the pond. The prisoner was then conveyed in
custody to the New Inn, and there a long conversation took place with
regard to his family. He repeatedly admitted that he had "done it," and
expressed some anxiety to know whether, if he pleaded guilty, he should
escape transportation. On his being conveyed to Warwick jail, he
declared, that it was drink that had instigated him to the deed. He
said that on his going from Mr. Heath's house, he met the deceased and
accompanied her as far as Harbury's Poor Piece, that he there offered
some familiarities to her, but that she was very awkward, and would not
consent, on account of his being so drunk; with that he caught hold of
her, and threw her down, and she began to make a noise. He put his hand
upon her neck to prevent her from hooting, and scratched it, and she
fainted away. He was frightened and carried her down to the pit, and
threw her in. She revived and came to the edge of the pit, but he
caught hold of her and threw her in again, falling in with her. He was
up to his middle in water, and he held her head down till she was dead,
and then he came out of the pit very much frightened. Upon this the
prisoner was fully committed for trial.

The circumstances already detailed having been proved in evidence
before the jury, a verdict of Guilty was immediately returned, and the
wretched man received sentence of death.

He was executed in pursuance of his sentence on the 27th of August,
1827, professing sincere repentance of the crime of which he had been
guilty.


WILLIAM JONES
Tried for the Murder of Elizabeth Jeffe.

A MURDER, equal in atrocity, and somewhat similar in its circumstances
to those of Mr. Bird and his housekeeper at Greenwich, was committed on
the night of Monday, 1st January, 1828, upon the body of a woman
seventy-five years old, named Elizabeth Jeffe, who had the care of an
unoccupied house belonging to a respectable gentleman named Lett, and
situated at No.11, Montague-place, Russell-square.

It appears that Mr. Lett resided at Dulwich, and the house in
Montague-place, which he had formerly occupied, being to let, he had
placed the unfortunate Mrs. Jeffe in it to take care of it, and to
exhibit its rooms to any person who might be desirous of renting it. On
the evening of Monday, the 1st January, she was last seen alive by
Gardner, the pot-boy of the Gower Arms public-house, Gower-street, who
delivered a pint of beer to her, and then she was in conversation at
the door with a young man, dressed in a blue coat, and wearing a white
apron. On the following day the house remained closed contrary to
custom, and some suspicion being entertained that something serious had
occurred to cause this unusual circumstance, information was conveyed
to Mr. Justice Holroyd, who resided in the same street, whose butler,
with the porter of Mr. Robinson, an upholsterer, proceeded to the
house. Some difficulty was at first experienced in obtaining
admittance; but the back area door having been forced, the unfortunate
woman was found lying in a front room on the basement story, with her
throat dreadfully cut and quite dead. Mr. Plum, a surgeon of Great
Russell-street, was immediately sent for, and on his arrival, he
proceeded to an examination of the person of the deceased. He found
that she had been dead during several hours, and that her death had
obviously been caused by the loss of blood occasioned by the wound in
her throat, which extended through the windpipe and gullet, and the
large vessels on the right side of the neck. The handkerchief of the
deceased had been thrust into the wound, but from the appearances which
presented themselves, it became obvious that the foot and not the hand
had been employed to place it in the position in which it was found. On
the left collar-bone there were some bruises, as if produced by some
person's knuckles, and upon the thighs there were similar marks, as
well as some drops of blood, but no wound was discovered besides that
in the throat, to which death could be attributable. Upon a further
inspection of the deceased's clothes, it was discovered that her
pockets had been rifled; but although the kitchen drawers were open,
and bore the bloody impress of fingers, and a work-basket was similarly
stained, there was nothing further to show that the object of the
murderer, which was evidently plunder, had been attained. The
neck-handkerchief and cap-ribbon of the wretched woman were cut
through, apparently in the effort to inflict the wound, and
independently of the opinion of Mr. Plum, that the deceased could not
have cut herself to such an extent, the fact of her death being caused
by the hand of another was clearly shown, by the absence of any
instrument with which the wound could have been inflicted, although
part of a razor-case was found lying on the floor. Upon an examination
of the house being made, it was found that the hall door was merely on
the latch, and the furniture in the parlour presented an appearance
which showed that the murderer had gone into that apartment after the
death of his victim. A publication headed "The State of the Nation" was
found there smeared with blood, and a doe-skin glove for the
right-hand, on which marks of blood were also visible, was discovered
lying on the floor.

From circumstances which came to light, the officers who were employed
to endeavour to trace out the perpetrators of this atrocious murder,
were induced to suspect that Charles Knight, the son of the deceased,
was in some measure implicated in its commission. By direction of Mr.
Halls, the magistrate of Bow-street, who throughout the whole case
exhibited the most unremitting desire to secure the ends of justice,
therefore, he was apprehended at his lodgings in Cursitor-street; but
upon his being questioned, he gave a clear and unembarrassed statement
of the manner in which he had been engaged during the night of the
murder, and inquiry having proved this to be true, he was ordered to be
discharged.

The police were now completely at a loss to fix upon any person as
being open to suspicion. The man who had been seen in conversation with
the deceased at the door of her house, however, appeared to be pointed
at by common consent, and an accident soon pointed out a person named
William Jones as the individual suspected. It was learned that he had
been in the habit of calling upon the deceased at her master's
residence, and that he was a seafaring man; but beyond these
circumstances, and that he had been living in Mitre-street, Lambeth,
nothing could be learned of him or his pursuits. On inquiry being made
at his lodgings, it was discovered that he had absconded, and the
suspicion of his guilt, which was already entertained, was greatly
strengthened by this circumstance. A reward of 10l. was offered for his
apprehension, and by a remarkable accident on Monday the 13th January
he was taken into custody by a city officer, on a charge of stealing a
coat. He was then taken to Guildhall office, but Salmon, the Bow-street
officer, having claimed him on this charge, he was delivered over to
his custody, and by him conveyed to Bow-street. He there most
strenuously denied that he was at all implicated in the murder,
although he admitted that "he had done other things" but he was
remanded for the production of further evidence. From subsequent
inquiries, it was learned that he was the son of Mr. Stephen Jones, a
gentleman well known in the literary world as the author of a
dictionary called "Jones' Sheridan Improved," and as the editor of a
journal published in London. This gentleman, who died only a short time
before the Christmas preceding the murder, left two sons, who possessed
considerable talents, but who were too much inclined to habits of
dissipation. William Jones had gone to sea, but latterly, on his
return, being so much straitened in his circumstances as to be
sometimes in actual want, he had occasionally visited Mrs. Jeffe, who
was a kind-hearted woman, and who, from the respect which she bore his
family, had often relieved his necessities. At the time of his
apprehension he was twenty-five years of age, and was dressed in a blue
coat, as described by Gardner, the pot-boy, by whom he was seen talking
to the deceased. Upon his subsequent examinations, the material facts
which were proved against him were, that he had been living with a
young woman, named Mary Parker, who generally went by the name of
Edwards, in Wootton-street, Lambeth; but that on the 27th of December,
he suddenly removed with her to Mitre-street. During the latter part of
his residence in Wootton-street, he was in extremely bad circumstances,
and on the 31st of December, he and his paramour were entirely without
food or money. On that night he quitted Parker in Fleet-street, and
appointed to meet her at the same place at half-past twelve o'clock,
and at that hour he came to her, as she was standing near Serjeants'
Inn, in a direction from Shoe lane. He then had money and treated her
to something to drink; and on the following morning he went out for an
hour, but returned, and now produced a considerable quantity of silver
money, with which they were enabled to redeem some clothes, which had
been pawned, and afterwards to go to the Olympic Theatre. In the course
of the ensuing week, the prisoner was observed to be anxiously
endeavouring to prevent the discovery of his new residence, by going
home by circuitous routes, and other means, and was heard to declare
his apprehension that some officers were in search of him; but the most
important circumstances proved were, first, that of the prisoner having
a severe cut on his left thumb, when he was taken into custody, which
appeared to have been recently inflicted; and secondly, that the
razor-case, which was found lying near the body of the deceased woman,
had been lent to the prisoner, on the Sunday before the murder, with a
razor, by Mrs. Williams, with whom he had formerly lodged. Upon proof
of these facts, the prisoner was fully committed for trial; but strong
as the suspicion was against him, it proved to be insufficient in the
minds of the jury, before whom the case was tried, to warrant them in
returning a verdict of guilty.

The case came on at the Old Bailey sessions, on Friday the 22nd of
February, when considerable curiosity was exhibited by the public. The
court was crowded to excess at an early hour, and its avenues were
thronged until the conclusion of the proceedings. The prisoner was put
to the bar at ten o'clock, and pleaded Not guilty, to the two
indictments preferred against him; the first for the murder, and the
second for stealing a coat, the property of George Holding. Having been
given in charge to the jury in the first case, the evidence which we
have given in substance, was detailed by the various witnesses. The
prisoner on being called on for his defence read a paper, in which he
complained of the prejudices which had been excited against him, and
solemnly asserted his innocence of the crime imputed to him. He entered
into a long argumentative statement, contending that no grounds
whatever existed for believing him guilty of the murder; and witnesses
having been called on his behalf, who swore that his disposition was
both mild and humane, the trial terminated at twelve o'clock at night,
when the jury returned a verdict of Not guilty.

The prisoner was arraigned on the next day upon the second indictment,
when he withdrew the plea which he had put on the record, and confessed
himself guilty. At the following sessions, held in the month of April,
he was sentenced to be transported for seven years; in pursuance of
which, he was sent to Van Diemen's Land. Some surprise was excited at
his having escaped thus easily from the hands of justice, as it was
known that there were charges of forgery to a considerable extent
pending against him; and it was suggested that some persons of
respectability and good standing had interested themselves in his
behalf.

It has been reported, that he has been executed in Hobart Town, for
bush-ranging, and that before his death he confessed himself guilty of
the murder for which he was tried; but although the idea gained
currency at the time of its being thrown out, we have no means of
ascertaining the degree of credit to which the story is entitled.


WILLIAM HOWARD
Convicted of an Assault with Intent to Rob.

Illustration: Howard Murdering Mullay

The case of this prisoner exhibits a degree of profligacy and
bloodthirsty hardihood, scarcely excelled in any instance in the whole
course of the annals of crime. The culprit was a man whose appearance
and conduct showed him to have received a good education, and to have
been in the habit of moving in a respectable sphere of life. Of his
history, however, we are unable to give any distinct account; and there
is great probability that the name under which he was tried, was
assumed for the purpose of concealing his real character.

The prosecutor on the indictment preferred against the prisoner, was a
Mr. Mullay, an Irishman, and it appears that, being desirous to obtain
some mercantile employment, he advertised in the newspapers, offering a
loan of 800l. or 1000l. to any person who should be able to introduce
him to such a situation as he desired. On the 6th of February 1828, he
received an answer in the following terms:--"If J. L. will have the
goodness to call upon Mr. Howard, No.36, Red Lion-square, Holborn,
to-morrow or the next day, between the hours of twelve and four
o'clock, he will no doubt hear of something that will suit him." For
some time Mr, Mullay paid no attention to this note, but at length on
Friday the 15th of February, he called at the house to which he was
directed. It was a house in which a society, called the "London
Co-operative Society," held their meetings; and upon his making known
his errand, he was introduced to Howard. Having mentioned the object of
his call, the latter immediately became very communicative upon the
subject of the advertisement. After a short conversation, in which he
stated that he was a relative of a gentleman who had great interest in
procuring lucrative situations, Mr. Mullay explained that his object
was not to purchase a place, but only to advance money, in
consideration of his receiving an appointment, upon proper security,
but without interest. "Step up stairs then," said Mr. Howard, and they
immediately proceeded to an attic at the back of the house, peculiarly
adapted for the commission and concealment of the sanguinary attack,
which was eventually made. The conversation on the subject of the
required loan was here renewed; and it was at length agreed that Mr.
Mullay should be at the same place at one o'clock on the next day,
prepared to produce the cash, and that Mr. Owen, who was represented as
the party whose interest was to be employed, should then also be in
attendance. On the following day, Mr. Mullay and Mr. Howard were
punctual to their appointment, and again proceeded to the room which we
have already described, but Mr. Owen did not make his appearance, and
two hours were spent in awaiting his arrival. In the course of this
time some conversation took place between Howard and his intended
victim, in which the former managed to discover that Mr. Mullay had
provided himself with 500l. to meet the anticipated demand. The manner
of Howard during the whole of this conference was such as to excite
some degree of suspicion on the part of Mr. Mullay. He observed that he
frequently eyed him, as if to ascertain their comparative strength, and
the presence of a large clasp knife, and of a heavy trap-ball bat in
the room, for which their owner gave no very satisfactory reason, did
not serve to alleviate the apprehension which he entertained. Although
he was considerably alarmed at these circumstances, he felt indisposed
to give credit to the suspicions which flashed across his mind; and at
length he quitted the house, promising to call again on the following
Monday, in the anticipation of then seeing Mr. Owen. On that day that
gentlemen was still not forthcoming, and another appointment for
Tuesday at twelve o'clock was made, Howard cautioning him "to be sure
not to forget the money." At twelve o'clock on Tuesday Mr. Mullay
called, and he was immediately introduced to the same little room at
the back of the house. Howard was there, and appeared to be labouring
under an extraordinary degree of excitement and agitation. A
conversation was commenced, but was sustained with great inequality;
and at length Howard directed Mr. Mullay to write Mr. Owen a note from
a copy which he handed to him. Mr. Mullay acquiesced, and taking off
his great-coat, hung it up in the room; but he had scarcely commenced
writing, when he observed his companion thrust the poker violently into
the fire. Mr. Mullay did not relish this extraordinary proceeding, and
removed the poker; but he had scarcely resumed his seat, when Howard,
as if driven on by some feeling which he could not control, suddenly
locked the door, and seizing the bat and knife, already referred to,
commenced a violent attack upon him. Mr. Mullay at once perceived that
robbery and murder were intended, and rushing at his antagonist, he
determined to make a desperate resistance. Blow followed blow from the
bat upon his head; and he would, doubtless, have been severely injured
with the knife, which his assailant retained in his left hand, had he
not by a violent wrench succeeded in breaking it in two -- an effort,
however, which he did not make without receiving some severe cuts upon
his hands. The struggle meanwhile continued for life or death, the
blood flowing copiously from the wounds which Mr. Mullay had received
from the bat, by which his vision was almost obscured. Cries of
"Murder" were repeated by the unfortunate gentleman, but his assailant,
who seemed determined upon finishing him, declared that it was of no
use, for that he had assistants at hand, who would aid him in "doing
for him," Desperate with the idea that his life would be violently
taken from him, Mr. Mullay redoubled his cries, and rushing from his
assailant, he thrust his hands through the windows to render his voice
audible to the neighbourhood. Seizing the poker, he resolved to make
one final effort, and dashing his assassin antagonist to the ground, he
fell upon him, and a frightful struggle ensued. Mr. Mullay being the
stronger man, however, he got his knee upon the other's chest, when the
approach of footsteps outside the door was heard. He now gave himself
up for lost, supposing that new enemies were come to attack him, but he
had resolved to sell his life as dearly as he could, when, to his
surprise, Howard begged for quarter. Imagining that this might be only
a subterfuge, he determined not to give up the advantage which he had
obtained; but Howard, repeating his anxiety to be allowed to rise, and
declaring that he had no intention of doing him any harm, he at length
permitted him to get up from the floor. The door being then immediately
opened, the people of the house entered the room, and the street keeper
of Red Lion-square being called in, the culprit was secured. The room,
as well as the persons of the prisoner and Mr. Mullay, were found to be
deluged with blood; and the latter gentleman having been attended by a
surgeon, was discovered to have received wounds of a dangerous
character.

The prisoner was immediately conveyed to Hatton Garden police-office,
where he made a vehement appeal to the magistrates, and positively
denied any intention to assassinate the prosecutor. He declared that he
was labouring under extreme ill-health; and that unless he was
immediately supplied with an ounce of opium, his death would be the
consequence. He was committed to Newgate to take his trial, and upon
inquiry being made, it was learned that he was in a state of extreme
want.

On Tuesday the 26th of February, the prisoner took his trial at the Old
Bailey. Mr. Mullay having been examined as to the circumstances already
detailed, the prisoner read the following account of the transaction.
He said that he had resided in Red Lion-square for about three weeks,
at the time of his being taken into custody. His circumstances during
that time were certainly bad; and having consulted with an
acquaintance, who passed by the name of Owen, and who was equally badly
off, as to the best mode of relieving their pecuniary wants, they
adopted the following plan. Perceiving the prosecutor's advertisement,
they determined, if possible, to induce the advertiser to lodge his
money in some banking-house in the joint names of himself and Owen.
They imagined that this deposit would enable them to refer to the
banking-house, as to their respectability, and by that means obtain
credit to a considerable amount. Having answered the advertisement, Mr.
Mullay called upon him, and he intimated to him, that there was a
situation under Government, which was vacant, the value of which was
about 350l. per annum; and that Mr. Owen would be able to procure it
for him, provided he consented to pass as his relative; and that the
return which they expected was the deposit of three years' salary in
the hands of a banker, to be paid over at the end of three months as a
premium. Mr. Mullay appeared to consent to this proposition, and
several appointments were made to carry out the agreement, at which
Owen, it was expected, would attend. On the Tuesday, Mr. Mullay waited
for a considerable time, and having already experienced great
disappointment in not seeing Mr. Owen, in order that the affair might
be finally settled, he expressed himself in no measured terms of the
neglect which had been exhibited towards him. Being in bad health and
of an irritable disposition, he (the prisoner) became enraged at an
offensive epithet which was applied to him, and struck the prosecutor a
blow in the face. A violent scuffle took place, in the course of which,
finding that the prosecutor was superior to him in size and strength,
he admitted having exerted himself to the utmost in his own defence.

The jury, however, notwithstanding this ingenious version of the case,
found the prisoner guilty of an assault with intent to rob, and he was
sentenced to be transported for life.


CAPTAIN JOHN BURGH MONTGOMERY, alias COLONEL WALLACE, alias COLONEL
MORGAN
Convicted of Forgery, but Poisoned Himself the Night before his
Execution.

The circumstances which were proved in evidence against this individual
showed that he was to a very great extent implicated in the uttering of
forged bank-notes. The unfortunate gentleman, who appears to have been
most respectably connected, there can be little doubt had long
subsisted upon the produce of his illegal trade; but it was not until
Monday the 1st of April 1828 that he was apprehended. He was then
charged at Marlborough-street police-office, with having passed a
forged 10l. note at the shop of Mr. William Newby, a silversmith, at
No.3, Southampton-row, Russell-square, in payment for half-a-dozen
silver tea-spoons. The note turned out to be forged after it was paid
to Mr. Newby, and the prisoner, having already subjected himself to
some suspicion, was taken into custody at a house where he lodged in
Great Ormond-street. Subsequent inquiry proved that he had been guilty
of other almost innumerable acts of forgery, and several cases having
been completed against him, he was committed for trial.

At the ensuing Old Bailey sessions, no fewer than six indictments were
preferred and found against him; and upon his being arraigned upon the
29th of May upon the charges, he at once pleaded guilty, declaring that
he had made up his mind to suffer the punishment due to his crimes. At
the conclusion of the session, sentence of death was passed upon the
unhappy man; and, on Saturday the 28th of June, an order arrived at
Newgate that his sentence should be carried into effect. From the time
of his conviction, Montgomery addressed himself with great anxiety to
his religious offices, and, from his general demeanour, it was believed
that he would meet his fate with firmness. Friday the 4th of July was
fixed upon as the day on which the sentence of the law should be
carried into effect; and on the Thursday night he employed himself in
writing several letters, one of which was addressed to Mr. Edward
Gibbon Wakefield, who was his fellow prisoner, and his frequent
companion in jail, Mr. Cotton, the rev. ordinary, afterwards visited
him, and read to him the celebrated sermon of the late Dr. Dodd. At the
hour of locking up, Mr. Harris, the jailor, in whose care he was,
searched him, and there was nothing then perceptible to warrant a
supposition, either that self-destruction was contemplated by the
unhappy man, or that his health was so impaired as to lead to the
possibility of his sufferings being terminated by natural means. The
last thing he said to Mr. Harris was, "Shall I see you in the morning?"
and then, without waiting for a reply, he continued, "If I do not, I
shall leave a letter for you." He then shook hands with the jailor, and
was left apparently quite cheerful.

On Friday morning at six o'clock, the door of his cell was opened, and
on the bed, stretched at full length, was seen the body of John
Montgomery, cold and breathless. The sensation created by this
discovery within the jail was most extraordinary; and the assistance of
Mr Box, the surgeon of the prison, having been immediately procured,
every effort was made to restore suspended animation, and, when that
was found unavailing, to ascertain the cause of death. An investigation
was immediately set on foot by the sheriffs; but they failed to
discover any circumstance from which it could be inferred that the
deceased had been assisted in his design, by any person in or connected
with the jail. All search to discover the means of causing death for
some time proved ineffectual, but at length, in one corner of the cell,
a small phial was found, labelled "Prussic Acid," which at once
unravelled the mystery of the unhappy man's death. It was supposed that
he had carried about his person, ever since he had commenced the
practice of passing forged notes, what he looked upon as an "antidote
against disgrace;" but, to say the least of it, he must have been
exceedingly ingenious to have concealed the poison so long after his
apprehension, as he was frequently searched, supposing that he had
employed the same drug to destroy himself, which he possessed before
his committal to Newgate. Upon an examination of the letters, to which
we have alluded as having been written by him on the night before his
death, it was found that in one, which he had addressed to Mr. Box, he
gave up his body to be dissected, expressing a wish, however, that the
heart should be preserved in spirits and conveyed to a female to whom
he had long been fondly attached. In that which he wrote to Wakefield,
he alluded to their short acquaintance in the jail, and declared that
he was perfectly ready to pass into another world; although his letter
contained no reference to the means by which the transition should take
place. A third letter was found, addressed to the female mentioned in
the communication to Mr. Box; but in neither of them was there any
allusion to the mode by which he intended to terminate his existence.

On the following day a coroner's inquest was held on the body of the
deceased man, when a verdict of felo de se was returned; and his
remains were interred at ten o'clock at night, in the grave-yard
adjoining St. Sepulchre's church.

This unfortunate man, who gave his age in Newgate as only thirty-three,
was, in fact, nearly forty years old; but his appearance bore out the
assertion which he made. He was born in the town of Naas, in the county
of Kildare, about fifteen miles from Dublin. His father had been a corn
and flour merchant, and a considerable holder of land; and having by
dint of industry amassed a large sum of money, he became a magistrate
for the county of Kildare, and was much respected. He had four children
besides the unfortunate subject of this sketch, namely, two females,
who were respectably married, and two sons, one of whom was a
lieutenant-colonel in the British service, while the other was a
solicitor, and the senior partner in a firm of great respectability in
Dublin. The deceased was early in life of a dissipated turn, and
quitted home to take a commission in a foot regiment, which had been
procured for him, in order to keep him out of harm's way, He soon
retired from the army, however, although he retained the title given to
him by his commission. At an early period of his career, he became an
adept at forgery; and counterfeited the signature of the Hon. Mr.
Neville, at that time M.P. for the county of Kildare, who wrote an
extremely cramped and illegible hand, to such a degree of perfection,
that that gentleman himself was only able to detect the imposition by
the fact, that he had never placed his signature to an instrument like
that which had been forged. Young Montgomery escaped prosecution in
this instance, on account of the respectability of his family, and he
shortly after came to London. He there assumed the airs of a person of
fortune; mixed in good society, and for a considerable time lived upon
"his appearance." His cheats and swindling were of daily occurrence;
and in one instance, having been detected in a transaction of no very
honest character, he only escaped punishment by refunding such portion
of the money which he had obtained as he had not spent, and by giving
up his watch and trinkets to make up the deficiency. He was frequently
in prison for debt; first in Newgate, and afterwards in the King's
Bench, and after his discharge from the latter place, where he had
undergone a detention of three years' duration, he was on the point of
marriage with the daughter of a gentleman of respectability, to whom he
had represented himself as his brother. Colonel Montgomery, when the
fraud was discovered, and the match broken off, at the very moment when
it was about to be completed. Being now reduced to the lowest ebb, and
having no longer any chance of living upon credit, he resorted to the
circulation of forged bank-notes as affording him the only means left
of obtaining a livelihood.


ANN HARRIS, JOHN COX THE ELDER, JOHN COX THE YOUNGER, ROBERT COX, AND
JAMES PUGH
Convicted of Murder.

The case of these diabolical criminals, as it was proved at the trial,
which took place at Shrewsbury on the 2nd of August 1828, before Mr.
Justice Gazelee, scarcely finds a parallel in the whole series which we
present to our readers. It exhibits the dreadful features, of a mother
and father-in-law combining to procure the commission of murder, to
save their son from justice; and that son, the object of their
solicitude, procuring the conviction of those by whose means he had
been before saved from an ignominious end, for the offence to which
they had made themselves parties on his behalf, to relieve himself from
the due reward of further crime committed by himself.

It appeared that, in the neighbourhood of Market Drayton, on the
borders of Shropshire and Staffordshire, there existed a dreadfully
depraved set of people; and that a gang, to the amount, it was said, of
from forty to sixty, was confederated for general purposes of plunder.
The nucleus of this gang consisted of several persons, closely knit by
ties of relationship, of connexion, and of neighbourhood, as well as of
guilt; while the general depravity of the district enabled them, as
occasion required, to add to their numbers, to almost any extent. One
of these persons, by name Thomas Ellson, was in 1827 taken up for
stealing potatoes; and, whilst in jail upon that charge, an accusation
of sheep-stealing was brought against him. The chief evidence upon
which this latter charge, a capital one, depended, was that of a man
who had occasionally joined in the proceedings of the gang, named James
Harrison. It became, therefore, the object of the friends of Ellson to
get this man out of the way. First, they determined to poison him; and
Ellson's father-in-law, John Cox, went to an apothecary's shop to buy
arsenic for that purpose. The boy in the shop refused to sell it to
him, unless some one else were by, which, as there was no one else in
the house, could not then be the case; and Cox, probably not liking
such formal proceedings, retired.

The next step was one of the most extraordinary in the whole case. Ann
Harris, Ellson's mother, who had married a second husband of the name
of Harris, went to a woman living in Drayton, whom she knew, and asked
her if her husband were not going to Newcastle. The woman answered that
he was. "I wish then," said Harris, "that he would buy me an ounce of
arsenic." "What do you want it for?" "I want it to poison that damned
scoundrel, James Harrison."-- The woman upon this remonstrated --
assured her it was a very wicked thing to poison James Harrison,-- and,
after some conversation, old Ann Harris went away, promising that she
would not carry out her expressed intention.

Poison having failed, it was determined to have recourse to more direct
means; and Ann Harris and old Cox subscribed fifty shillings apiece, to
hire Cox's two sons, and a young fellow of the name of Pugh, to put
Harrison to death! Harrison lodged in the house of Pugh's father, and,
it was said, occupied the same bed with Pugh himself. On the night of
the murder, Pugh, to use his own expression, "'ticed" Harrison out of
the house, to go and steal some bacon. At a spot previously agreed
upon, they met the two younger Coxes; and proceeding to a remote place,
Pugh seized Harrison by the throat, while John Cox, the younger, took
hold of his legs, and throwing him down, they strangled him. Meanwhile,
Robert Cox was digging the grave!

The wretched man thus disposed of, everything remained perfectly quiet
and unsuspected. It was generally supposed that he had gone out of the
way to avoid giving evidence on Ellson's trial; though it seems very
extraordinary that, after the latter had been acquitted, the non-return
of Harrison excited no suspicion. No supposition of his death, however,
appeared to have arisen, and the murder was discovered only by the
means of Ellson himself. As soon as this fellow came out of jail, the
Coxes, Pugh, and his mother, at various times, sometimes when several
of them were together, and sometimes separately, told him all that had
taken place, vaunting to him how they had saved him. The very night of
his release, old Cox, one of his sons, and Pugh, bragged to him, that
"if it had not been for them, he would not be there,"-- and the next
day, when he was at his mother's, Robert Cox came thither, and said to
her with oaths and abuse, "If thee doesn't give me more money, I will
fetch him, and rear him up against thy door!"-- alluding to the
murdered man!

Nothing, however, transpired till towards the end of June 1828, when
Ellson was taken up for stealing fowls, and then, in order to save
himself from the punishment attending this offence (at the most seven
years' transportation), he told all that the guilty persons had told
him; and on his evidence they were apprehended.

Such are the facts of this revolting case; but we must describe some of
the peculiarities of the trial itself.

The five prisoners were placed at the bar: old Ann Harris stood
first;-- she seemed what would ordinarily be called a smart old woman
-- her features were small and regularly formed, and her countenance
was remarkable only for a pair of exceedingly keen and sparkling black
eyes, the expression of which, however, was certainly in no degree
indicative of ferocity. Old Cox stood next to her, and his countenance
presented a most unpleasing, almost revolting, aspect. It was easy to
believe the current story that he was at the head of the gang at
Drayton -- the very patriarch of all the thieves and scoundrels in that
part of the country. He had, undoubtedly, brought his sons up to
robbery as to a trade, and he had now hired them to commit murder! The
two sons were next to him, and were not remarkable in their aspect.
Pugh was last -- and he was an ill-looking fellow enough, though not
strikingly so.

As the trial proceeded, one of its peculiarities soon became apparent.
This was that a vast proportion of the witnesses were of the closest
kindred to the accused. And what was more horrid, was the fact of the
father of the murdered man being called to speak to the identity of the
body, which, having lain in the earth nearly a year, was so totally
decomposed as to be recognizable only by the clothes; but to this the
father added that "the colour of the hair was that of his son!"

It shocked all present greatly, when the father and mother of Pugh were
called to speak to some minute facts with regard to the night on which
Harrison was murdered, with reference to his leaving their house, where
he lodged. The chief evidence was what the prisoners themselves had
told to Ellson; but he being a person of execrable character, it was
necessary to support his testimony by every corroborative circumstance
that could be proved. Accordingly, in the early part of the trial,
these wretched old people were brought forward to give testimony to
facts bearing against their son's life: they were but very slight, but,
as far as they went, they were confirmatory of the main story; and it
is difficult to say whether the extreme coolness and composure with
which the parents gave their evidence were not still more dreadful than
if they had been violently affected.

Besides Ellson himself, there were also his wife, who was the daughter
of one and the sister of two of the prisoners, and his sister, who was
the daughter of another, called as witnesses! These young women also
gave their evidence without strong emotion, although they certainly
seemed far more impressed with the position in which they stood than
the other witnesses named.

Ellson was calm, decided, and firm, to a degree which gave rise to
unmingled disgust in every one who heard him. It will be recollected
that the crime had been committed to save him -- Pugh certainly
committed the murder for hire; and the Coxes, perhaps, might have had
some interests of their own mixed up with his;-- but, even as regarded
these last, the first object had been his escape; and his mother
undoubtedly had dyed her hands in blood, solely to save her child.

The witness was a fine, well-looking fellow of about five-and twenty
-- and, undoubtedly, until the severe cross-examination he underwent
caused a struggle -- though a perfectly successful one -- to keep down
his temper, his countenance was rather agreeable than otherwise. His
story was clear, consecutive, and, no doubt, true. Each individual
concerned in the transaction had, immediately on his release from jail,
very naturally told to him, for whose sake it had been committed, all
the circumstances regarding the murder. Pugh appears to have been the
most detailed in his account, and to have rather bragged that it was he
who "'ticed un out o' feyther's house, to steal some bacon,"-- and that
it was he who had "gripped un by the throat." In some instances, the
Coxes were present during these recitals, and at others they spoke of
the subject to Ellson themselves. While this part of the evidence was
going forward, the strongest horror was excited against the
perpetrators of the crime -- so treacherous as it was in its
concoction, and so coldly cruel in the manner in which it was carried
into effect. Moreover, the idea that Pugh certainly altogether, and the
two young Coxes in great part, had committed this murder for hire was a
circumstance of a character so new, and so awfully depraved, that the
story carried the auditory along with it, and they forgot altogether
the scoundrel who was telling it. But when he came to speak of his own
mother, what must have been their sensations! Her guilt, dreadful as it
was, almost disappeared; the thought could be only of the unnatural and
ungrateful villain, who, to save himself from a light and temporary
punishment, was thus giving to the gallows the mother who had born him,
for a crime caused by her extravagant affection for him. He repeated
twice or three times, in answer to the questions of the examining
counsel, who felt it necessary to make the matter quite clear, that his
mother had told him that she and old Cox had given fifty shillings a
piece to have Harrison murdered. He said this as calmly as any other
person would narrate any indifferent fact -- and his mother's eyes were
on his face all the time!

Mr. Charles Phillips cross-examined the witness at great length, very
severely, and very skilfully: he drew from him that he had been in jail
repeatedly, almost constantly, for theft of all kinds and descriptions;
and he drove him into attempts to shuffle, very nearly approaching to
prevarication, on several minor points, not connected with the case.
But, regarding the case itself, he was not shaken at all; and although
the universal sensation in the court must have been that of loathing
and disgust for the mercenary cold-bloodedness of the proceedings to
which he had had recourse, no serious doubt could for one moment be
entertained that he was telling the truth.

The jury under these circumstances were compelled to return a verdict,
consigning the wretched prisoners to a violent death.

The extreme sentence of the law was immediately passed upon the
convicts, and their execution was appointed to take place on the
following Monday, the 4th of the same month.

On the next day, a reprieve was granted in the case of Robert Cox, one
of the sons, upon grounds which do not appear to have been well
understood at the time, and he was transported for life. A respite for
a week was also granted in the case of the elder Cox, and Ann Harris,
who had been convicted only as accessories before the fact; but the
awful punishment of death was left to be carried out in its due course
upon Pugh, and John Cox the younger. The former, after his trial,
declared his sense of the justice of his sentence, and that he regarded
the termination of his career as a happy one, for that he constantly
saw Harrison by his side; while the latter, with cold-blooded firmness,
urged him to keep up his spirits, for that "he could die but once."

The execution had been appointed to take place at mid-day; and at a few
minutes before twelve o'clock all the convicts, together with Ellson,
were drawn up in the inner yard of the jail. Pugh and Cox were then
pinioned; and while Ann Harris, old Cox, and his son Robert, were
reconducted to the jail, Ellson was carried to a spot from which he
must witness the conclusion of this dreadful scene. The authority by
which this course was adopted, may well be doubted, for the miserable
wretch was undoubtedly entitled to his discharge, as the indictment
against him had been withdrawn; but it is probable that it was thought
that the example afforded by such a proceeding might tend in some
degree to check the thirst for crime, which appeared to exist in that
district of the county.

The miserable convicts were directly afterwards led to the scaffold,
dreadfully agitated, and uttering ejaculations imploring mercy for
their sins; and all being in readiness, the drop fell, and they were
launched into eternity.

The sentence of the wretched mother of Ellson, and of old Cox, was
subsequently changed for that of transportation; and with this bare
recitation of its facts, we shall close the scene upon this frightful
case.


JONATHAN MARTIN
A Madman who Set Fire to York Minster.

The name of this wretched maniac will long be remembered from the
circumstance of the object of his offence being that of burning down
that venerable monument of antiquity -- York Minster; an effort in
which, happily, he only partially succeeded.

The fire was discovered in a most remarkable manner. On the evening of
Sunday the 1st of February, 1829, one of the choristers, a lad named
Swainbank, was passing through the Minster-yard, when, setting his foot
on a piece of ice, he was thrown on his back, on the ground. Before he
had time to rise, he perceived smoke proceeding from the building
before him. He at once gave the alarm, and assistance was immediately
procured; but it was not until the choir, with its magnificent organ
and its beautiful roof, had been totally destroyed, that the flames
could be conquered. At first this national catastrophe was supposed to
have been the result of accident; but the discovery of one of the
bell-pulls, knotted so as to form a species of ladder, suspended from
one of the windows of the building, and of evidence of a light having
been seen moving about in the belfry after all the officers of the
Minster had retired, on the night of the fire, led to a conclusion that
it was the work of an incendiary. This belief was on the following week
strengthened by the apprehension of a person named Jonathan Martin, at
Leeds, with some portion of the velvet from the reading-desk in his
possession. He was examined before the magistrates, and at once
confessed that he had set fire to the building in obedience to the will
of the Lord communicated to him in two remarkable dreams. He was
committed to York Castle for trial, and it turned out that he had been
already twice in confinement as a madman, and that he had prophesied
the destruction of the Minster.

On Monday, the 30th of March, he took his trial at the York assizes,
and was found by the jury to have been of unsound mind at the time of
his committing the offence charged against him.

The following extracts from his defence at once showed that he was a
religious enthusiast:--

When called upon for his defence, he proceeded to say, in a Northern
dialect and with great energy -- "Well, sir, the first impression that
I had about it was from a dream. And after I had written five letters
to these clergy, the last of which I believe was a very severe one, and
all of which I dated from my lodgings at No.90, Aldwick, I was very
anxious to speak to them by word of mouth; but none of them would come
near me. So I prayed to the Lord, and asked him what was to be done.
And I dreamed that I saw a cloud come over the cathedral -- and it
tolled towards me at my lodgings; it awoke me out of my sleep, and I
asked the Lord what it meant; and he told me it was to warn these
clergymen of England, who were going to plays, and cards, and such
like: and the Lord told me he had chosen me to warn them, and reminded
me of the prophecies -- that there should in the latter days be signs
in the heavens. I felt so impressed with it, that I found the Lord had
destined me to show those people the way to flee from the wrath to
come. Then I bethought me that I could not do that job without being
out all night, and I considered whether I should let my wife know. I
got everything ready, and I took the ring from my wife's finger, and
talked to her about what I have mentioned -- and I told her what I
meant to do: she grieved very much, and I had work to get off. I still
staid a few days, but I could get no rest whatever until I had
accomplished the work. It was a severe contest between flesh and blood
-- and then I bethought me what would come of her and my son Richard,
who I had at Lincoln, Then the Lord said unto me, 'What thou does, do
with all thy might.' I tore from her and said, 'Well, well, Lord -- Not
my will but Thine be done.' I then left Leeds, taking twenty of my
books with me; but I had no money, and went into Tadcaster; there I got
a gill of ale. [He then proceeded to state the manner in which he
travelled and supported himself to York.] On Sunday (February 1st) I
went to the cathedral service, and it vexed me to hear them singing
their prayers and amens. I knew it did not come from the heart, it was
deceiving the people. Then there was the organ, buz! huz! and said I to
mysen, I'll hae thee down to-night, thou shot buz no more! well, they
were all going out, and I lay me down by't side of the Bishop's round
by the pillar. [The prisoner concealed himself behind a tomb, between
which and the wall there was a space that more than one person might
lie down in.] I thought I heard the people coming down from the bells;
they all went out, and then it was so dark that I could not see my
hand. Well, I left this Bishop, and came out and fell upon my knees,
and asked the Lord what I was to do first; and he said. Get thy way up
the bell-loft; I had never been there, and I went round and round; I
had a sort of guess of the place from hearing the men as I thought come
down; I then struck a light with a flint and a razor that I had got,
and some tinder that I had brought from my landlord's. I saw there were
plenty of ropes -- then I cut one, and then another; but I had no idea
they were so long, and I kept draw, draw, and the rope came up. I dare
say I had hundred feet. Well, thought I to myself, this will make a
man-rope, a sort of scaling rope, and I tied knots in it. Ay, that's
it, I know it well enough (pointing to the rope which lay upon the
table). So I went down to the body of the cathedral, and bethought me
how I should get inside. I thought if I did so, by throwing the rope
over the organ, I might set it ganging, and that would spoil the job.
So I made an end of the rope fast, and went hand over-hand over the
gates, and got down on the other side, and fell on my knees and prayed
to the Lord -- and he told me, that do what I would, they would take
me. Then I asked the Lord what I was to do with velvet, and he told me,
and I thought it would do for my hairy jacket, that I have at Lincoln.
I have a very good seal-skin one there. I wish I had it with me, that I
might show it you. Then I got all ready. Glory to God, I never felt so
happy; but I had a hard night's work of it, particularly with a
hungered belly. Well, I got a bit of wax-candle, and I set fire to one
heap, and with the matches I set fire to the other. I then tied up the
things that the Lord had given me for my hire, in this very
handkerchief that I have in my hand. [The prisoner then went on to
describe his escape by means of the rope, nearly in the same terms as
have been stated, and of his proceeding to Hexham; that on the road the
coaches passed him, but he laid himself down, and was never seen.]
While I was at Hexham (I think I had been there two days) I had been to
pray with a poor woman, and the Hexham man came and tipped me on the
shoulder." He concluded by saying, "I's tired, or I'd tell you more."

The unfortunate man was ordered to be detained during his Majesty's
pleasure, and was afterwards conveyed to a lunatic asylum.

It appeared that this maniac was the brother of the painter, who, for
his magnificent productions, has attained so much celebrity. Up to the
time of this transaction, he had gained a precarious livelihood by
hawking books; having been, however, as we have before stated, once or
twice confined in a mad-house.

It is very remarkable that York Minster has repeatedly suffered from
fire. Its origin may be dated from A.D. 626. In 741 it was dreadfully
damaged by fire, and remained in that state till 767, when it was taken
down, rebuilt, and completed, and was consecrated in 780. Thus it stood
until 1069, when the Northumbrians, aided by the Danes, having besieged
the city of York, the garrison set fire to several houses in the
suburbs, which fire unfortunately extended further than they intended,
and, amongst other buildings, burnt the Minster to the ground. In 1137,
the same fire which burnt St. Mary's Abbey, St. Leonard's Hospital,
thirty-nine churches in the city, and one in the suburbs, again
destroyed the Minster; since which there had not been any damage done
to it by fire, excepting two trifling occurrences, which have taken
place through the neglect of the workmen, within the last sixty years,
up to the time of Martin's mad attempt. In the present year (1840), it
has again suffered severely from an accidental conflagration, which has
destroyed nearly the whole of that portion of the ancient building
which the former catastrophe had left standing.


JOHN STACEY, THE YOUNGER AND JOHN STACEY, THE ELDER
The First Executed for Murder; and the Second Transported as an
Accessory after the Fact.

Illustration: Stacey Murdering Bird and His Housekeeper

The murder of which the former of these diabolical criminals was guilty
very closely resembles that mention of which will be found in a
preceding part of our calendar, of Mr. Bird and his housekeeper, which
took place at Greenwich.

Mr. Langtrey, it appears, was a person nearly eighty years of age, and
of great bodily infirmity, residing in a small house in Prospect-row,
Portsmouth, to which he had retired, after he had amassed a
considerable fortune in his business as a brickmaker. His only servant,
and the only other inmate of the house, was a woman upwards of sixty
years old, named Christian Jollife, who acted as housekeeper, but who
was assisted in procuring such comforts as the old man required, by a
Mrs. Dyott, a neighbour, living at an adjoining cottage. Mr. Langtrey
was so feeble as to be unable to quit his bed-room, which was situated
on the first floor of his house, and he was attended there by Mrs.
Jolliffe. He was known to have saved a considerable sum of money, and
he was reputed in the neighbourhood to keep a very large amount (in
notes and gold) in the house. Amongst those who were observed to be
particularly inquisitive into his affairs, was a young man named
Stacey, about twenty-one years of age, an apprentice to a barber,
living close by, who usually shaved Mr. Langtrey,-- an office which his
infirmity prevented his performing for himself.

On the morning of Monday the 2nd of March, 1829, the vicinity of the
dwelling of the unfortunate old man, was thrown into a state of the
utmost confusion and alarm, by the propagation of a report that he and
his housekeeper had, in the course of the previous evening, been
murdered in a most barbarous and cold-blooded manner. Inquiries were
instantly set on foot by the authorities of the town, and it proved
that the statement was true; the murders having been discovered by Mrs.
Dyott, the assistant of Mrs. Joliffe in her attendance upon her master.
Mrs. Dyott, it appeared, had repaired to Mr. Langtrey's house, in
accordance with her usual custom, on the previous evening, at a little
after six o'clock, to assist Mrs. Joliffe in preparing the old man's
bed; but was unable to procure admittance, although she made a
considerable noise at the door. Imagining, however, that the old people
were asleep, she took little notice of the circumstance; but upon
returning on the following morning, and finding the same silence
prevail, and the same inattention to her application for admission, she
became alarmed, and called in the aid of a neighbour. It was determined
by the latter instantly to force open the back door, and upon his
entering the house, he at once perceived the fearful crimes which had
been committed. Upon the floor of the lower room lay the body of the
aged housekeeper, frightfully mangled, and with the head nearly severed
from the trunk; while around her lay the instruments by which some of
the injuries had evidently been caused. A slater's hammer (smeared with
blood and brains), which was known to have belonged to Mr. Langtrey,
was lying at her feet; and near her were portions of a broken
broom-handle, which had been evidently employed in the desperate
conflict which must have taken place between the old woman and her
assailant. The skull of the deceased was found to have been completely
smashed in, in several places; and around her were pools of blood,
extending over a space of several feet. In the upper apartment a scene
no less frightful presented itself. The old man, whose age nor
infirmities could protect him from the assassin's blow, was found to
have been murdered with equal barbarity. His body lay upon the floor,
dressed in his usual attire, with his walking-stick by his side; but
his skull had been frightfully fractured by repeated blows from the
same deadly weapon with which his housekeeper had been assailed, and
his blood and brains were scattered over the apartment to a
considerable distance.

A further alarm was immediately raised upon this dreadful discovery
being made, and the utmost consternation prevailed. Upon a minute
examination of the house, it became evident that plunder had been the
object of the assassin. The boxes and drawers had been rifled of their
contents, which lay strewed about the rooms; and money, deeds, papers,
and wearing apparel were scattered in indiscriminate confusion. The
murderer had been apparently disturbed in his work of robbery, probably
by Mrs. Dyott's knocking on the previous evening, and had left his work
unfinished, but a bag containing 600l. was found to have been stolen.

The aid of the London police was immediately obtained with a view to
the more speedy apprehension of the murderer, for it appeared as if one
only had been engaged in the diabolical acts; but several days passed
before any suspicion of a tangible nature could be said to attach to
any one. Stacey, the barber's apprentice, during the week had pursued
his ordinary avocations with his accustomed coolness; and, although the
murder had been made the subject of conversation in his presence, had
exhibited no agitation or feeling which could indicate that he viewed
the circumstance in any but the most ordinary light. On the Friday,
however, he complained of a sore hand, and claimed exemption from work;
and on the Monday following, he became very free with his money. His
wages as an apprentice amounted only to two shillings and sixpence per
week; but on this day he was observed to quit Portsmouth in a hired
chaise, with two women of the town, on a "lark" as he expressed
himself. Some suspicion in consequence attached to him, which was
strengthened by the discovery of a knife which corresponded in every
particular with one which was known to have belonged to him, at a short
distance from the scene of the murder, and in a direct line between
that place and his father's residence, smeared with blood and hair. The
instrument with which the throat of the unfortunate Mrs. Joliffe had
been cut could nowhere be found in the house; and it was at once
concluded that the weapon which had been discovered was that which had
been used for that horrid purpose. Upon inquiry, it turned out that
young Stacey had been absent from his master's house on the afternoon
of the murder, with a fellow -apprentice named Connamore, the
brother-in-law of his master, and had been at his father's house, in
Charlotte-row, during a considerable portion of that evening. It was,
in consequence, thought advisable that he should be at once
apprehended; and the result proved the propriety of the adoption of
such a course. He was discovered by the constables at a house at
Porchester, in company with the females who had quitted Portsmouth with
him; and immediately on his perceiving that he was pursued, he became
agitated, and exclaiming, "I am done!" endeavoured to conceal himself
in a barn. He was soon discovered, however, and carried back to
Portsmouth, where he was examined before the magistrates. The testimony
of young Connamore proved to be most important. From his statement, it
appeared that Stacey had told him that old Langtrey had desired him to
purchase for him a tract called "The Book of Martyrs;" that Stacey
having no money, had requested him to advance the necessary means for
this purpose; and that he himself purchased the tract, and handed it
over to his companion. On the Sunday, the 1st of March, Stacey and he
went from their master's house to visit the father of the former,
taking the tract with them, which Stacey expressed his intention to
carry to the old man. They remained together during the greater part of
the day, but at about twenty minutes before six in the evening, young
Stacey went away, carrying the tract with him. It was nearly eight
o'clock before he returned, and then on his knocking at the door, the
witness let him in. He passed rapidly by him, and rushed up stairs, at
the same time calling to his father that he wanted him. The latter
directly followed him, and they remained in close conversation for a
considerable time. Shortly afterwards, Mrs. Stacey, who was young
Stacey's step-mother, joined them, and then Connamore heard something
as if some clothes were thrown into a tub of water and washed.
Immediately after this, old Stacey sent him off to a distant shop to
purchase some bread and cheese, and on his return, he found his
fellow-apprentice sitting by the fire, without his shirt, which his
stepmother was drying by the fire, after it had been apparently washed,
and which was subsequently ironed before he put it on. At about half
past nine o'clock, he returned home with young Stacey, and on their way
the latter said that he had been fighting, and had got some blood about
his clothes. The witness examined his coat, and found that a portion of
it was so completely covered with blood as to require a knife to scrape
it off. It further appeared that a copy of the tract, called "The Book
of Martyrs," was found close by the bloody knife which had been
discovered, and the additional testimony of a witness having been
obtained of the prisoner having been seen getting over the railings of
old Langtrey's house on the night of the murder, he was committed for
trial. His father also, of whose knowledge of and acquiescence in the
murder there could be no doubt, was also secured, and committed to take
his trial on the minor charge of harbouring his son, at the same
assizes.

In the interim the additional evidence of the identity of a glove which
had been found in the house of Mr. Langtrey, and which had been left
there by the murderer, was procured, from which it appeared that it was
one of a pair which had been given to young Stacey by a gentleman, and
both of which he wore on the day on which the murder was committed.

During his confinement, young Stacey exhibited little contrition; but
after having been visited by his three sisters, he appeared to become
sensible of the awful nature of his position, and confessed to a
fellow-prisoner that he was guilty of the crimes imputed to him, and
communicated the manner in which he had murdered the poor old people.
He said, that he had presented himself at the door with the tract in
his hand, and that having gained admission to the house, he seized Mrs.
Joliffe by the throat with an intention to strangle her, but that
finding she resisted, he took the candlestick which she held in her
hand from her, and beat her over the head with it until it was bent in
all directions. She at length fell down, and then he seized the handle
of a broom, with which he beat her, until she ceased to move, and he
thought she was dead, the broom, however, being broken in the struggle.
He then went up stairs to the old man, and seizing him by the collar,
demanded his money. He made some resistance, and struck him with his
stick; upon which he knocked him out of his chair; and taking up a
tiling hammer, which he saw in the room, he killed him. Returning down
stairs, he thought Mrs. Joliffe moved, and he struck her also repeated
blows with the hammer, and at last took out his knife and cut her
throat. Whilst engaged in this act, some one knocked at the door, and
he became terribly alarmed; but he heard the person go away, and then
he commenced his work of robbery. He was too hurried, however, to
secure more than the bag containing 600l.; but before he took this, he
cut the old man's throat, in order to be certain that he was not
watching him.

On the same day on which this most fearful detail of his crimes was
made by young Stacey, his father also made a confession, pointing out
the place in which he had concealed the bag of money. The turf had been
cut out, and the bag placed beneath it, in such a manner as to have
rendered it exceedingly doubtful that it would ever have been
discovered, but for its being pointed out. The whole of the money was
recovered, with the exception of about 30l., which had been spent by
the younger prisoner in the purchase of a watch and seals, and some
articles of clothing.

The trial of the prisoners came on before Mr. Justice Burrough, at
Winchester, on Thursday the 30th of August, in the same year, when a
verdict of guilty was returned upon the facts which we have detailed
being proved in evidence.

The learned judge at once passed the sentence of death upon the younger
prisoner, who was ordered to be executed on the following Monday, and
his father was sentenced to be transported for life.

The day fixed for the execution being that upon which Magdalen Hill
Fair was held, the concourse of people assembled was immense. The
wretched criminal met his fate with sulky resolution, and declined the
services of the chaplain, whom he had dismissed on the previous day.
His parting from his father is related to have taken place without the
smallest exhibition of regret or feeling on either side; and the
miserable parent had so far overcome the ordinary sensations of
paternal affection, as to request to be permitted to witness his son's
execution,-- a request which was granted; and of the accordance to
which he took advantage. The miserable youth appeared to suffer but
little after he was turned off. Upon the scaffold he declared that he
was assisted in the murder by an associate of his, whom he named; but
who, subsequently, distinctly proved his innocence.

The execution took place on Monday, the 2nd of September 1829, at
Winchester, opposite the jail.


RICHARD GIFFORD
Executed for Forgery.

In the termination of the career of this unhappy young man, the direful
effects of dissipation are clearly evidenced. Having received an
education in Christ's Hospital, and backed by interest calculated to
procure for him advantages of a first-rate character, his weakness of
mind led him step by step from a position of respectability through the
various grades of dissipation, until it involved him in a system of
crime, for which his life was taken away by the laws of his country.

Gifford's father was originally a butler in the family of Mr. Abbott,
afterwards Speaker of the House of Commons, and finally Lord
Colchester. His mother was also a servant in the same family. On Mr.
Gifford's marriage, Mr. Abbott obtained for him a situation about the
House of Commons; and when they had a family, care was evinced for the
welfare and advancement of the children. Richard Gifford was the eldest
son and child, and when he arrived at an age fit to be sent to school,
admission into the admirable institution of Christ's Hospital was
obtained for him. After quitting the Blue Coat School, he had some
occasional and temporary occupation as a writer in the Parliament
offices. Eventually, through Lord Colchester's influence, a situation
was procured for him in the "National Debt Office;" and the death,
advancement, or removal of those above him were most favourable to him,
and he rose rapidly. For some time he gave satisfaction in his office;
but, at last, the fatal peculiarities which ruined him -- the love of
drink, and low and abandoned company -- broke out with undisguised
violence, and he neglected both office and home. His inattention to
business led to three or four several suspensions from his office; and
it was only by the most powerful and influential intercession that his
friends could have him restored: but, at length, his conduct was so
outrageously bad, and his absences so long and continued, that he was
finally dismissed. It was long before his friends could find him, and
apprehensions began to be entertained whether he was still in
existence; however, at last his mother (who was most tenderly attached
to him) discovered his retreat. Having found him, she succeeded in
getting him out of his infamous den, and in taking him home with her.
On his part, contrition or concern about the past was not visible, and
though the kindest efforts were made to keep him in the house, in the
hope of estranging him from bad company and diverting him from infamous
ways, to succeed his parents were obliged to keep him without hat or
money, and almost without clothes. Eventually, it was supposed, or
hoped, that he was somewhat changed, and that his disposition was a
little mollified, which induced his mother, in particular, to take him
out occasionally. He, however, finally absconded from his parents'
roof, revengefully announcing, that "he would make them remember their
conduct to him -- he would do for them yet," and other such language.
What became of him they knew not; at last, he was heard of as living in
a respectable style, appearing well-dressed, at a house near the
Waterloo-road. To account for the change, he gave it out that he was
married, and that his wife had money. Almost the next thing heard of
him was, his being before the Lord Mayor, undergoing examination on
charges of forgery on the Bank.

He was placed upon his trial at the Old Bailey sessions, in the month
of October 1829, when he pleaded guilty to an indictment charging him
with having personated William Green, of Crucifix-lane, brazier, and
thereby having obtained 125l., being the value of stock standing in his
name in the Bank-books. On the 6th of March the prisoner applied to Mr.
Linton, a stock-broker, in Shorter's-court, requesting him to sell out
the stock standing in the name of William Green. The broker declined
selling the stock, on the ground that he did not know the prisoner;
upon which he replied, "Your father knows me well, and has frequently
seen me at the National Debt Office." The broker's father was sent for,
and on seeing the prisoner, said that he recollected him somewhere, but
could not tell where. The broker was satisfied with this partial
recognition, and made out the necessary documents for the transfer. The
receipt for the transfer was signed by the prisoner in the name of
Green, and on comparing it with one which had been previously given on
the receipt of the dividend upon the same stock, the hand-writing was
found to correspond.

He also pleaded guilty to an indictment charging him with having
personated Richard Mann, and thereby obtained 27l., being the dividend
due on 300l. Consolidated Bank Annuities, of which Mann was the
proprietor. A few days after the fraud on Mr. Green, the prisoner went
to the Rotunda, in the Bank, and introducing himself to a broker as Mr.
Mann, requested him to witness his receipt of the dividend. The broker
asked for a reference, and the prisoner named Mr. Linton, who happening
to be close by, was instantly appealed to, and at once recognised the
prisoner as being the person who had imposed upon him in the name of
Green. The prisoner refused to withdraw his plea of guilty, although
advised by the judge to do so.

Upon this sentence of death was at once passed; and upon the recorder's
report being made to his Majesty, the unhappy prisoner was ordered for
execution.

Monday the 19th of October, was the day upon which the sentence was
directed to be executed, and the convict upon being led out from his
cell was totally unnerved, and glanced about him with a fearful and
hurried look. He appeared deeply and bitterly to repent his crimes; and
the wretched course of life he had adopted, in spite of the anxious
solicitude of his parents.

He was executed with two other men, who had been convicted of
housebreaking, in the twenty-sixth year of his age, on the 19th of
October, 1829.


JAMES BELL
Transported for Stealing a Body.

The great singularity of the offence, as well as of the apprehension of
this fellow, induces us to lay their short particulars before our
readers. The prisoner was of that class called "Resurrection men," and
the crime of which he was convicted was committed by him and three of
his associates in this horrible traffic.

Bell on the 17th December, 1829, was placed at the bar at the Maidstone
Assizes before Mr. Baron Garrow, under a charge of burglariously
breaking and entering the dwelling-house of Daniel Redday, at Deptford,
and stealing therein a shirt, a worsted comforter, and the body of a
black man whose name was unknown.-- It appeared that Daniel Redday was
a lodging-house keeper at Deptford; an unfortunate black man had come
to lodge in his house shortly before the 20th of November, and on the
19th died suddenly. His body was laid out in a back room with the shirt
on, and the comforter round his head, until a coroner's jury could sit
on him. In the course of the night of the 20th the prosecutor was
alarmed by a noise in the room of the dead man. Not choosing to examine
into the cause from within, he went out of the house, and soon
perceived a ladder placed up against the window of the room in which
the corpse was deposited, and four men, of whom the prisoner was one,
on the ladder. In his hurry to apprehend them he ran against the
ladder, and the whole four, with the corpse, the comforter, and the
shirt, came to the ground. Three of the four men made a successful
retreat, but the prisoner was taken into custody.-- The jury found him
Guilty, and Mr. Baron Garrow, after having commented upon the heinous
nature of his crime, aimed as it was at the best interests of society,
sentenced him to be transported for life.


WILLIAM BANKS
Executed for Burglary.

We do not recollect that we have ever met with an instance of a
burglary having been committed attended with greater violence or
atrocity, than that for which this man underwent the punishment of
death.

The Reverend William Warrington, it appears, was a gentleman of large
property, residing at Grove Cottage, West Moulsey, in the vicinity of
that well-known spot, Moulsey Hurst, Surrey; and on the night of
Wednesday, 19th of November, 1828, his house was entered by four
burglars, and a great quantity of valuable property carried off. Mr.
Warrington's house adjoined that of Mr. Jeffs, a magistrate of the
county, and a ladder, which had been accidentally left in the garden of
the latter gentleman, was employed by the thieves in effecting an
entrance to the house, which they had determined to rob. The
circumstances attending the burglary are as follows:--

Between one and two o'clock on Wednesday morning, Mrs. Warrington was
in her bed-chamber engaged in writing, and Mr. Warrington was in the
same room in bed, asleep, when the former was terrified by hearing some
persons at the back part of the house attempting to force a window on
the first floor, which opened to a staircase and to a passage leading
to the bed-room. Before she had time to alarm her husband, the
fastenings of the window were wrenched off, without breaking the glass,
and as she opened her bedroom door, she beheld four men, who had
entered at the window by means of the ladder before-mentioned, in the
act of ascending the stairs and approaching her chamber. Her fears were
so excessive, that she was struck speechless for a few seconds. When
she recovered, she shrieked, and exclaimed, "Good God, we shall be
murdered; there are thieves in the house." Her husband was awoke
instantly by her cries, and he had just time to leap from his bed and
proceed in his shirt to the mantelpiece, on which he constantly kept a
loaded pistol, before the four villains entered the chamber. He seized
the pistol, levelled it at one of the thieves, and fired, but without
effect. The first man who entered the room, a dark, ferocious-looking
fellow, however, in turn drew from under his coat a pistol, and
presented it at Mr. Warrington. The villain pulled the trigger, but the
powder did not ignite. He recocked it, and pulled it a second time, and
it flashed in the pan. Mrs. Warrington fell upon her knees, and in the
most earnest and affecting manner implored the villains not to murder
her husband, but to take all the property without interruption. The
thieves then produced some cords (which they had stolen from Mr. Jeffs'
garden), and tied Mr. and Mrs. Warrington's hands and feet. Their hands
they tied fast behind their backs, and cautioned them to be silent as
they valued their lives. They left Mr. and Mrs. Warrington in their
bed-room for a few minutes, and proceeded up stairs to the servants'
sleeping apartments, and there they bound two female servants (the only
persons in the house beside Mr. and Mrs. W.) with cords, in the same
manner in which they had previously bound the others. After they had
bound them, the four robbers carried them downstairs to a vault which
was under the house, and fastened them in that cold place, with
scarcely any covering. The villains then returned to Mr. Warrington's
bed-room, searched his clothes, and broke open his desks and drawers,
and, in truth, ransacked the house completely. They took cash to the
amount of about 30l., and jewels and plate of considerable value, with
which they decamped. The servants had been confined for several hours
in the vault, when one of them, after much exertion, released one of
her hands from the cord, and forced her way through the door of the
vault. After ascending the steps, she found another door fastened, and
she had to break through that before she could assist her master and
mistress, who were in the most deplorable state of agitation. She
unloosed the cords which secured them, and having released her
fellow-servant also, they alarmed Mr. Jeff's' family and the other
neighbours. Mr. Warrington found that not only all his portable
property of value was carried off, but that the villains had actually
stolen a horse, value 80 guineas, from the stable, and had taken his
phaeton from his chaise-house, and by these means had carried off their
booty. Mr. Warrington sent information of the robbery to Mr. Cooke,
constable of Kingston, who set off in pursuit of the robbers. He was
able to trace the phaeton and horse and two of the robbers from the
house of Mr. Warrington, by a very circuitous route, to Waltonbridge,
and from thence through several by-roads to Knightsbridge.

On the same day Mr. Warrington also gave information of the robbery at
Bow-street, and Ellis, Ruthven, and Bishop, were directed to institute
an investigation with a view to the apprehension of the thieves.

Upon the arrival of the officers at the house of Mr. Warrington various
minute circumstances transpired, which induced a strong belief in their
minds that the robbery had not been committed by experienced thieves;
and that it had been "put up," or sanctioned by some person in the
house. The clumsy manner in which the boxes and drawers had been opened
seemed to point to the first impression, and the undoubted circumstance
of six buck-shot having been withdrawn from Mr. Warrington's pistol
which had been lying on the mantelpiece during several days, led to the
latter conclusion. Suspicion seemed to attach to one of the female
servants, who had been familiarly accosted by her name, "Fanny," by one
of the robbers, and who had been the first to secure her escape from
the cords by which she had been confined, and she was taken into
custody. After a few days' imprisonment, however, the officers declared
themselves unable to produce any positive evidence against her, and she
was discharged.

From this time the most anxious exertions were made by the police
officers to secure the robbers. Every means in their power was tried;
but although they succeeded in tracing them by witnesses to London,
where Mr. Warrington's carriage and horse were found, they were unable
to discover who were the persons by whom the burglary had been
perpetrated.

In the month of July 1829, however, the long-pending mystery was
solved. A man named Barnett, a Jew, had been convicted of a burglary in
the house of Mr. Colebatch, in Thames-street, for which he had been,
sentenced to transportation for life; but anxious to save himself from
the infliction of this punishment, he tendered information as to the
parties who had composed "The Moulsey Gang," as they were now called,
upon condition of his liberty being restored to him. The proposition
was at once accepted, and he immediately impeached Banks, and four
other men named John Smith, William Johnson, James Taylor, and William
Potts, alias Emery. The officers instantly set about endeavouring to
procure the apprehension of these persons, and Cragg, a resolute
officer of Bow-street, was directed to proceed in search of Banks. This
fellow was a notorious thief, and was suspected to have been concerned
in many robberies which had recently been committed; but Cragg had
heard that he had frequently declared his resolution not to be taken
alive. The officer, however, was determined in his object, and attiring
himself in the garb of a butcher, he proceeded in search of him. Many
days elapsed before he could find him, but at length meeting with him,
he rushed at him, and presenting a pistol at his head, called upon him
to surrender himself a prisoner. Banks appeared astounded at this
salutation and made no resistance, but exclaimed, "I am a dead man." On
his person being searched, a loaded pistol was found in his pocket, and
on his back was a coat, which was a part of the produce of a robbery in
which he had been recently before concerned, in the house of Mr.
Campion, at Waltham Cross.

The other prisoners were apprehended nearly at the same time; and Potts
was proved to have pawned a pair of shoes which had also been stolen
from Mr. Campion's. Upon their examination before the magistrates at
Bow-street, Banks' participation in both burglaries was clearly proved,
and he was committed for trial. Both Mr. and Mrs. Warrington identified
him as one of the persons who had entered their house, but pointed him
out as having acted with some degree of humanity, strongly protesting
against the exercise of any cruelty by his companions.

Banks alone was committed for trial upon the charge of burglary at Mr.
Warrington's, the evidence against the other prisoners not being
sufficiently conclusive to warrant their being indicted, and was found
guilty, and sentenced to death at the succeeding Surrey assizes.

After his conviction, he professed himself to be perfectly willing to
meet his fate, as he knew nothing of a state hereafter, declaring that
all he cared about being hanged was for the pain it would cause him. He
refused to receive any consolation from the chaplain, and was perfectly
unmoved up to the time of his being pinioned.

He was hanged at Horsemonger-lane jail on the 11th of January, 1830.


ROBERT EMOND
Executed for Murder.

The crime which subjected this criminal to condign punishment was that
of the murder of an aged, widow and her daughter, to whom he was
related by the ties of marriage.

Mr. Franks, at the time of the murders lately deceased, was gamekeeper
to the late Lord Elcho; and when age, and consequently frailty,
rendered him incompetent to the prompt discharge of his duties, his
lordship made such arrangements as enabled his old and respected
servant to subsist in an humble but comfortable independence. On the
26th of July, 1829, Mr. Franks was consigned to the grave, and he left
the hapless subjects of this notice -- a widow, nearly fifty, and a
daughter of fifteen years of age -- to lament his death.

On Sunday, the 25th of October, according to custom, they attended the
Rev. Mr. Hogg's chapel, and, no doubt, they had very little suspicion
that it was for the last time. The house in which they resided near
Haddington was about one hundred yards from the village of Abbey, in
East Lothian, and with the garden was enclosed by a wall above six feet
in height. The village youth never once thought of stealing fruit from
people so warmly beloved, and consequently the garden-door stood always
open. On that night they were brutally murdered. His plans carefully
matured, the murderer deliberately fastened the garden-door, so that
the escape of the intended victims, and any attempts at resistance,
were rendered exceedingly difficult. He then scaled the wall, and
proceeded to the awful work of homicide. His first attempt to gain
admittance was at a window in front of the house. He broke two panes of
glass; but the inside shutters were too securely fastened to yield to
his efforts. Baffled and disappointed, he had recourse to another
window in the same room; and after breaking two panes of glass, and
using great exertion, the keeper gave way, and the monster obtained
admission. He passed deliberately through the room, through a sinuous
passage, through the kitchen, and then burst into the bedroom of Mrs.
Franks and her daughter. The unfortunate ladies had been alarmed by the
noise the villain made in breaking into their sanctuary. The mother had
time to throw her gown over a petticoat; but the daughter, a stranger
to the crimes of the world, and naturally possessing a more tranquil
mind, and being more soundly asleep, had barely time to clothe herself
with the gown she had on at church, ere she was in the grasp of her
ruthless murderer. Dread, desperation, and the potent instinct of
self-preservation naturally incited a resolute resistance; but the
well-prepared and determined murderer prevailed. In the vain and
delusive hope of escape the wretched mother fled from the appalling
scene of death, and ran to the garden-door, expecting to reach the
village; but there she was stopped by the cool and fiendish
deliberation of her destroyer. Having despatched the daughter, he
followed the mother, seized her at the garden-door, and with one of her
own table-knives, ended her life, by nearly severing the head from her
body. He then threw the bleeding corpse into a hog sty, which was only
ten yards distant; and the marks of the ruffian's gory hands were
observable on the entry-door. The bloody tragedy being finished, the
scarcely less important consideration next came -- that of plunder. He,
coolly locked the kitchen-door inside, turned out the contents of the
drawers, and ransacked all the repositories; indeed, so minute and
persevering was the search, that a considerable breadth of plaster was
torn from the roof of a room in the attic story, where there had
previously been a small aperture, in expectation, no doubt, that money
was concealed in that unusual place. The rings were torn from the ears
of Mrs. Franks; three gold rings, it is said, were taken from her
finger, which were carried off, along with a silver watch. Having
completed his unhallowed undertaking, and secured all the plunder that
suited his purpose, the ruffian retired, as he had entered, by the
window.

Neither on the Monday nor Tuesday following was Mrs. Franks or her
daughter observed; but this excited no surprise, as it was concluded by
those by whom they were missed, that they were absent on a friendly
visit to the sister of the former at North Berwick. On Wednesday
morning, a woman requested a young man to make his way over the
garden-wall, and ascertain if a pig that belonged to Mrs. Franks had
any provision. He promptly obeyed; and on looking into the hog sty, was
horrified by the sight of the widow's mangled remains. He gave an
involuntary but vehement scream, and his employer, Mr. Dudgeon, a
miller, and a number more, promptly repaired to the spot. The body was
taken out, and, to their inexpressible horror, they discovered that the
throat was cut from ear to ear. Alarming suspicions flashed across
their minds; they instantly ran to the house, and having obtained an
entrance, they discovered the daughter -- pale, dead, lying amidst a
quantity of blood, and the brain protruding from her skull.

Suspicions of the guilt of Emond from circumstances which became known
to the authorities were at once excited; and efforts were made to
secure his apprehension. He had resided for some time at North Berwick,
and was married to that very sister of Mrs. Franks, whom it was
supposed she had gone to visit; and repeated expressions of dislike on
his part towards his sister-in-law, and of threatened revenge for her
interference in his family quarrels, were deemed sufficient to justify
the course which was taken. In the course of a few days he was
apprehended; but it was not until the 8th of February 1830 that he was
brought to trial. The investigation took place before the High Court of
Justiciary at Edinburgh, and the wretched criminal was pronounced
guilty amidst a tumultuous burst of execration, and was ordered for
execution on the 17th of March.

Immediately after his trial the convict confessed that he had committed
the dreadful crimes imputed to him, under the circumstances which we
have narrated. He appeared, however, to view his murder of Mrs. Franks
as an act which her previous conduct towards him justified; but when he
alluded to the death of her daughter, he appeared struck with remorse
and despair, exclaiming wildly, "Innocent blood calls for vengeance."

On the appointed day the prisoner underwent the punishment due to his
crimes, at the end of Libberton's Wynd. On the Friday before his death
he was visited by his wife, for the first time during his imprisonment.
On being informed she was come, he exclaimed, "Oh, God, how can I meet
her -- how can I see her!" She refused to proceed farther than the cell
door, and on seeing her husband, said, "Oh, Robert, Robert, you see
what you have brought yourself to!" He used some soothing expressions,
and going as far as his chains would permit, said, "Mary, will you not
shake hands with me?" but she shrunk back, saying, "Oh, no, no; how can
I touch you?" However, by the persuasion of the clergyman, she did
shake hands with him. He then wished to impress on her, that he always
loved her affectionately; but she replied, "Oh, Robert, ye ken your
conduct didna look like that." They were beginning to recriminate, when
it was thought best to finish the interview. She was again asked to
shake hands at parting, but at first refused, exclaiming, "Oh, no, no
-- I cannot touch him;" but being advised to extend her hand, which he
held firmly, she shuddered and shrieked out, "Oh that hand, that hand!"
On being told that a Mrs. Cron was with his wife, he said, "I would to
God that infernal woman had been in place of the girl (meaning
Magdalene Franks). Were I as free as ever, I would be hanged this
night, this instant, if I had her here, and had my revenge." The
criminal accused this woman of fomenting differences between him and
his wife.

At six o'clock in the morning of the day fixed for the execution, the
Rev. Mr. Porteous, who had been unwearied in his attentions to the
unhappy man, arrived and performed the religious exercises. About seven
o'clock, he was pinioned in the usual form.

The morning was cloudy and drizzling; but at an early hour the crowd
began to collect from all quarters, and a perfect stream of people
passed up the High-street for nearly two hours. The street, windows,
terraces, and chimney-tops, were densely peopled. Some hundreds of
persons from Haddington, North Berwick, and the adjacent villages
attended.

A few minutes past eight the culprit ascended the scaffold. His
appearance elicited a huzza from the boys among the crowd, but no
grown-up person joined in the unseemly and appalling shout. He was
attended by his brother, who joined him with the reverend gentleman, in
psalm-singing and prayer. The unhappy man remained firm and composed
throughout, but changed colour frequently when the executioner
proceeded to do his duty. He then shook hands with his brother, and the
official attendants said he was now ready, and bade them all farewell.
After a few moments in private prayer, the signal was dropped, and the
platform instantly fell. His struggles were unusually long and violent,
and it was apparently four or five minutes before the vital spark had
fled. Emond was a man of short stature, with ill-proportioned features,
and had, on the whole, a very unprepossessing look. After hanging the
usual time, the body was lowered down into the shell, and conveyed to
the Lock-up House, whence it was afterwards taken to the College for
public dissection.


AGRICULTURAL RIOTS
The Followers of "Captain Swing"

The agricultural riots which occurred at the close of the year 1830
will long be remembered in the southern districts of England, to which
they were confined. The revolutionary disturbances which, during the
year, had marked the progress of events on the Continent, were not
without their effect upon the agricultural, as well as the
manufacturing population of Great Britain; and interested demagogues
were easily to be found, willing and ready to fan the feeling of
dissatisfaction which prevailed among the labouring classes, and to
produce discontent where none already existed, with a view to the
excitement of dislike for the higher ranks of society, and of
insurrection against the government of the day. The poverty of the
lower orders had done much to produce that hatred to property which
induced these riots, and the inattention to their wants was urged by
them as a sufficient justification for the mistaken and guilty course
which they adopted.

The outrages, which commenced in the county of Kent, where undoubtedly
the agricultural labourers were in a state of the very greatest misery,
soon extended themselves through the whole of the southern counties of
England, and the progressive march of incendiarism was as much feared
as that of an invading army. Bodies of men proceeded through the whole
line of country which we have pointed out, making converts to their
atrocious principles, and their track was testified by the devastating
effects which were produced. Stacks of grain and farm buildings were
everywhere burned and consumed; and so determined were the monsters in
the work of destruction, that none dared to oppose them, or to raise
their hands to stop the dreadful deeds which every hour brought to
light. Day after day bodies of men were seen passing from farm to farm,
breaking all the machinery on the premises, the employment of which
they looked upon as the cause of all their distress; and night after
night, the secret incendiary plied his dreadful occupation, with a
success which promised to produce the most dreadful desolation.

The limited exhibition of the ordinary constabulary force had no effect
in checking the progress of these riots, and it was not until the
yeomanry and finally the military were called out, that the fearful
proceedings of the enraged mob were stopped. Meanwhile through Kent,
Sussex, Surrey, Middlesex, Suffolk, Berkshire, Buckinghamshire,
Wiltshire, Hampshire, Somersetshire, Dorsetshire, Devonshire, and
Cornwall, had the work of destruction proceeded; and where the general
body had not shown itself, local discontent had been sufficient to
change the character of the simple labourer to that of the midnight
incendiary. Notice was usually given of the intention to fire in
threatening letters, signed "Swing," and the determination expressed
seldom failed of being carried out.

In the course of several months, during which these outrages continued,
many rioters were apprehended and lodged in jail, and the eventual firm
proceedings of the magistrates did much to check the mischievous
progress of wilful devastation. In many instances, small villages gave
up their peaceful character, and assumed the appearance of military
encampments, so long as the fear of danger remained in their vicinity,
and not unfrequently the alehouse or the justice's mansion was
converted into a temporary lodging for the prisoners. The first
convictions which took place for these atrocious acts of violence were
at the quarter sessions for the county of Kent, held at Canterbury on
the 24th November, when many prisoners were tried and convicted upon
charges of machine-breaking and riot. For the former offence a man
named Reid, who had previously suffered imprisonment for lead-stealing,
was sentenced to transportation for life; while John Stannard, William
Siddars, William Stone, Thomas Strood, Henry Andrews, and Henry Halke
were sentenced to seven years' banishment from the scene of their
offences. Other prisoners, who were convicted only of assault and riot,
were ordered to be imprisoned for terms varying from six months to two
years; and the discovery by the labourers thus of the responsibility to
which they subjected themselves did much towards quelling the
disturbances, which even yet had not ceased.

Proclamations were subsequently issued offering rewards for the
apprehension of all offenders, and before the conclusion of the year a
vast number of prisoners had been taken into custody.

At the succeeding assizes these persons were brought to trial, and in
Wiltshire, Hampshire, Buckinghamshire, and other counties, where the
disturbances had assumed the most serious character, the prisoners were
tried under a special commission.

Our space prevents our going into the particulars of one tithe of the
cases which were tried, or even of those where the malefactors were
ordered for execution. Of the latter the number was small as compared
with the whole amount in custody, but many of their cases were attended
with circumstances of great atrocity. At the assizes at Maidstone,
Lewes, and other places on the circuits within the jurisdiction of
which these occurrences had taken place, a great number of prisoners
were convicted and sentenced to death. Many of the wretched men
ascribed their guilt to their having paid attention to the lectures or
the writings of Mr. Cobbett; and it is a remarkable fact that few of
these rioters stated that they had been driven to the commission of
crime by their poverty.

At the Hampshire special commission, held at Winchester, the offences
which were brought under the consideration of the learned judges who
presided, were those of machine-breaking, arson, extorting money by
threats with intent to procure an increase of wages,-- and near 300
prisoners were found guilty. On Thursday, the 30th December, 1830, Mr.
Baron Vaughan, as the senior judge, proceeded to pass sentence on those
who had been convicted. In the dock there were twenty prisoners, in
rows of five each; and the other prisoners were so disposed in the jury
box and elsewhere as to hear all that passed.

The judges having put on their black caps, James Thomas Cooper, Henry
Elridge, and John Gilmour, were called to the bar. The first two were
found guilty of destroying the machinery employed in the manufactory of
hemp and flax, the property of Messrs. Thompson, at Earl Mill, in the
parish of Fordingbridge; and the latter for destroying the machinery
employed in the foundry of Messrs. Robert and William Tasker, in the
parish of Upper Clatford; to which the law affixed the punishment of
death. Cooper had been particularly active as the captain or leader of
the rioters, and was mounted on a horse giving the word of command. He
was called Captain Hunt.

Mr. Baron Vaughan addressed these men with great eloquence, and in the
most feeling manner, on the enormity of their offences and the
necessity in their persons of making a severe example with the view of
deterring others from the commission of similar offences hereafter.
Having pointed out the aggravated character of the conduct of the
prisoners, he forewarned them that their fate was fixed, and there
remained for them no hope of mercy on this side the grave. His lordship
then passed the awful sentence of death.

Cooper and Elridge were deeply affected -- the latter nearly fainted;
but Gilmour behaved with the most stoical apathy.

Robert Holdaway, James Annalls, and Henry Cooke were then placed at the
bar. They had been convicted -- Holdaway of demolishing, with others,
the poor-house belonging to the parishes of Headly, Bramshot, and
Kingley. -- James Annalls, of robbery from the person of William
Courtnay, of Barton Stacey; and Henry Cooke, of robbery from the person
of Thomas Dowden. These were all cases of peculiar aggravation, and as
in the case of the three previous convicts, the prisoners were told to
prepare for death, from which no hope of reprieve was to be
entertained. In alluding to the crimes of these men, Mr. Baron Vaughan
made the following important remarks:-- "I believe that there are a
little short of a hundred persons whose lives are now forfeited to the
state for their participation in the guilt of these transactions. It is
my firm and decided conviction, that many persons engaged in them under
a delusion, and instigated by the practices of artful and
evil-designing men. I state publicly, that in the course of these
trials we have found few instances -- and I am not certain that I could
lay my finger upon one -- in which the pinching spur of necessity has
compelled the offenders to the commission of their offence. They are,
in general, persons of a different character and description. We find
among them carpenters, blacksmiths, sawyers, and others, whose wages
are admitted to be adequate to their wants, and who yet take an active
part in perpetrating these outrages. Not only persons in the handicraft
trades which I have just mentioned, but occupiers of land, gardeners,
and others who labour under no necessity and suffer no want, have been
found strenuously engaged in stimulating those who were in more want
than themselves to the commission of those crimes, I am happy, however,
to observe, that there are but few, if there are any, instances in
which downright want has proved the cause of the commission of
offence."

Many other prisoners were also sentenced to death with an understanding
that the extreme punishment would not be inflicted, but that they would
be transported for life; and the remainder were ordered to undergo
various terms of transportation and imprisonment.

The trials of the persons charged with committing outrages in the
county of Berks commenced on Tuesday, 28th December, at Reading. The
prisoners who were first placed at the bar were W. Oakley, W. Smith,
alias Winterburne, D. Bates, and Edmund Steele. They were charged with
robbing J. Willis, Esq. of five sovereigns. It appeared that on the
22nd of November, two large mobs assembled in the neighbourhood of
Hungerford and Kintbury, and after demolishing the windows of several
houses, proceeded to the Town-hall of Hungerford. A deputation from
each mob, of which the prisoners were the leading characters, was then
admitted into the magistrates' room. They demanded twelve shillings per
week wages, the destruction of machines, and a reduction of house-rent.
Oakley, in a violent manner, demanded 5l.; and Bates, who had a
sledgehammer in his hand, flourished it, and struck it on the ground,
saying, with an oath, "We will have the 5l. or blood." Others cried
out, "We will have blood for blood." The mob, which was about 400 in
number, also became exceedingly clamorous, and the magistrates then
gave them 5l. -- The jury found all the prisoners Guilty.

D. Hawkins, W. Chitter, J. Pullen, W. Haynes, D. Yarlick, G. Rosier, J.
Field, J. Cope, C. Smith, J. Dobson, W. Oakley, W. Winterborne, J.
Watts, T. May, J. Tuck, E. Steel, and D. Bates, were then tried for
rioting and destroying machinery belonging to Richard Gibbons, at
Hungerford. On the 22nd November, a mob, consisting of about 400
persons, went to Mr. Gibbons' manufactory; they had sledge-hammers,
bludgeons, handhammers, sticks, &c. They rushed into the factory and
broke the machinery, which was worth about 260l. -- The jury found all
the prisoners Guilty, except Haynes and Smith.

The trials were continued up to the succeeding Tuesday, and a great
number of men were convicted of offences of a similar character, marked
by different degrees of aggravation; the greater part of whom were
sentenced to transportation for seven years.

On the latter day, however, the commission was brought to a close, and
Oakley, Winterburne, and a man named Darling, were left for execution;
but the sentence was carried out only in the case of Winterburne.

At Salisbury, the commission was opened on Friday, 31st December; and
its proceedings did not terminate until Monday, 10th January. On that
day such of the prisoners as had not received sentence at the time of
the conclusion of their trials were brought up. Peter Withers and James
Lush were severally sentenced to death, amidst a most distressing and
heart-rending scene in the court. Lush appeared to be dreadfully
sensible of his situation, and during the whole period occupied by the
address of the learned judge, lay on the bar in a state of dreadful
anguish, crying with the most piteous groans for mercy.

It would be useless to follow the course of these dreadful proceedings
through the country, or to attempt adequately to describe the scenes of
misery and wretchedness produced to the families of the misguided men,
who were in custody by their dreadful acts. At Dorchester, Exeter, and
the other assize-towns in the west of England, scenes such as we have
alluded to occurred, and in almost every place some miserable wretches
were left to expiate their offences upon the scaffold, while others
were doomed to suffer transportation from the scene of their former
happiness and of their crimes.

Notwithstanding these events, however, it was long before the country
assumed that position of peace and quietude for which its agricultural
districts had always been remarkable.

On the 17th August, 1836, it was announced in the House of Commons by
Lord John Russell, that of 216 persons sentenced to be transported for
their participation in the offences of this period, all but ten, who
were suffering punishment for crimes committed in the colonies, had
been pardoned.


WILLIAM SWALLOW, alias WALDON; GEORGE JAMES DAVIS, alias GEORGE
HUNTLEY; WILLIAM WATTS, alias CHARLES WILLIAMS; ALEXANDER STEPHENSON,
alias TELFORD; and JOHN BEVERIDGE, alias ANDERSON.
Tried for Mutiny and Piracy.

The whole of these persons at the time of their trial for piracy were
already convicts; but having been concerned in a mutinous seizure of a
vessel, in which they were confined as prisoners, they subjected
themselves to a punishment more severe than that to which they had been
already sentenced, and were therefore liable to a second trial.

They were indicted at the admiralty sessions of the Old Bailey on
Thursday, November 4, 1830, for having, on the 5th September in the
previous year, piratically seized the brig Cyprus. And they were also
indicted for that they, being convicts, had been found at large in
England before the period of the sentence of transportation passed upon
them had expired.

The facts proved in evidence were shortly these:-- The prisoners were
convicts in Hobart Town, but having been there guilty of second crimes,
by which they rendered themselves liable to new punishment, they were
tried before the supreme court of judicature there, and sentenced to
transportation. The places to which prisoners twice convicted were at
this period assigned, were Macquarie Harbour, a place on the northern
coast of Van Diemen's Land, and Norfolk Island, which is situated at a
distance of about a week's sail from Sydney, in an easterly direction.
The prisoners were ordered to be conveyed to Macquarie Harbour, where
they well knew they would be subjected to drudgery of the very worst
description, in punishment for their offences. The Cyprus, a colonial
brig, was chartered to convey them to the place of their destination;
and, in the month of August 1829, she sailed, having on board
thirty-two convicts, a crew of eight men, a military guard of twelve
men, under the command of Lieutenant Carew, whose wife and children
were passengers, and a medical gentleman named Williams, under whose
superintending care the convicts were placed.

On the 5th of September, Dr. Williams, Lieutenant Carew, the chief
mate, a soldier, and a convict named Popjoy, went ashore in Research
Bay on a fishing excursion; but when they had left the ship about
half-an-hour, they heard a firing on board, which induced a fear that
the convicts were striving to overpower the guard and crew. They
immediately returned, and on their going alongside found that their
anticipations were realised, and that the convicts having risen en
masse, had mastered the guard, and were now in possession of the ship.
They refused to suffer any one to board except Popjoy; and, having
secured him, they thrust him down below. Immediately afterwards the
convicts sent the crew and the soldiers and passengers ashore, but
without provisions or the means of existence. Popjoy swam ashore the
next morning, and was of material assistance afterwards in procuring
fish, &c. for his fellow sufferers.

On that evening the Cyprus made off, and Lieutenant Carew and the rest
remained in a most forlorn and miserable condition for many days, until
they were at length happily delivered from the dangers which surrounded
them by the Zebra, a small vessel which was accidentally sailing by,
and saw some signals of distress which they made. The Cyprus was never
afterwards heard of; but the prisoners were apprehended separately in
various parts of Sussex and Essex, whither they had returned to their
old haunts.

The evidence of Popjoy, who for his good conduct on this occasion had
received a free pardon, and who was now a seaman in the East India
Company's service, was procured at the trial, and tended to fix guilt
upon all the prisoners; Stevenson and Beveridge, however, he admitted
were not so active as many others; and the conduct of Swallow, he said,
was quite consistent with the defence which he set up, that he had been
forced to act by the other mutineers.

Other witnesses corroborated his testimony, and Swallow was acquitted,
while a verdict was returned against the other prisoners, Stevenson and
Beveridge being recommended to mercy.

Sentence of death was immediately passed upon the convicts. On the 1st
of December following, the cases of the prisoners were reported to His
Majesty, by Sir Christopher Robinson, the judge of the Admiralty Court;
and His Majesty was pleased to grant a respite to all but Watts, alias
Williams, and Davis, alias Huntley.

On Thursday, 9th of December 1830, the sentence of death was carried
into execution on these culprits. In the early part of the morning they
partook of a slight repast, and at about half-past seven received the
sacrament. They then admitted that they were about to die justly, and
declared that they were at peace with the world. Davis was neatly and
respectably attired in a new suit of blue clothes; and his
fellow-sufferer also wore a blue jacket, with a white waistcoat and
trousers. They behaved with much decorum, but were both extremely
dejected.

Beveridge and Stevenson, who had also been convicted, were transported
for life to Norfolk Island; and Swallow having been identified upon the
indictment, by which he was charged to be a returned transport, was
sentenced to be once more sent back to Macquarie Harbour, to undergo
the remainder of the punishment to which he had been already sentenced.


LUKE DILLON
Transported for Rape.

No person possessing the ordinary feelings of human nature can read the
dreadful detail of this villain's detestable crime, without shuddering
at the baseness of heart which prompted him to its commission. Few
instances are to be found where the remorseless debauchee has resorted
to means so horrid as those adopted by this youthful destroyer of
female virtue; and setting aside his age, and the respectability of his
family, one is at a loss to discover a reason why the full sentence
which the law awarded to his crime should not be carried out, and why a
mitigated punishment of transportation only should have been inflicted
upon him.

He was tried at the Commission Court at Dublin on Thursday the 13th of
April 1831, on a charge of feloniously violating the person of Miss
Anna Frizell, a young lady of most respectable connexions and amiable
disposition, and but twenty years of age.

Upon his being placed at the bar, Dillon appeared to be only about
twenty-one years of age. He advanced to the front of the dock with an
air of the most unblushing effrontery. He was fashionably and gaily
attired, and his appearance was highly prepossessing.

Miss Frizell was the material witness against him; and her evidence
detailed the whole of the connexion which had existed between her and
the prisoner. She was frequently interrupted during her examination by
her emotions; and her answers were allowed to be repeated by Mr. West,
king's counsel, who sat near her. From her statement it appeared, that
she had been principally educated abroad, and that, after having passed
eight years in a convent in France, she returned to her father's house
at Stapolin, near Howth, in the year 1828. She was occasionally in the
habit of visiting her relations, Dr. and Mrs. O'Reardon, who resided in
Molesworth-street, Dublin; and there she met the prisoner about two
years before the trial. An acquaintance soon ripened into an intimacy;
and on her meeting him at a party at Mr. MacDonnel's, in Stephen's
Green, whither she had accompanied Mrs, O'Reardon in October 1830, he
professed himself to be her warm admirer. At her invitation he was to
call upon her on the following day, for the purpose of receiving some
letters which he had undertaken to convey to England for her; but upon
his knocking at the door, Dr. O'Reardon presented himself, and denied
her to him. On the 4th of November they again met, and the prisoner
then accompanied her, and Mrs. O'Reardon, to a dinner party. They
entered into conversation in the course of the evening; and Dillon
requested her to meet him on the following day, as he had something
particular to say to her. She exhibited some hesitation in complying
with this request; but eventually she consented to an appointment in
Kildare-street. She accordingly repaired to the spot; but it proved
wet, and for shelter they entered a cottage which presented itself to
them in a walk which they took. They remained there during two or three
hours; and in the course of that time the prisoner disclosed to her his
object in requesting her to meet him, which was to ask her hand in
marriage. Her answer to him was that she should be very happy, provided
he could obtain her father's consent; but added, that if money was his
object, he would be disappointed, as her father had a large family, and
could not give her any considerable portion. He declared that he had no
such sordid motive in view in making the offer which he presented to
her, and that if he succeeded in gaining her affections with her hand,
he should consider himself supremely happy, for he had money enough to
support them both, and had besides very considerable expectations from
his uncle. Before they quitted the cottage, he kissed her twice; and as
they drove away in a carriage, which he had sent for in consequence of
the rain, he pressed her to marry him privately, as he was sure that
her father would never consent to their union. The carriage drove on as
Miss Frizell believed in the direction of Molesworth-street, but
presently it stopped at a house in Capel-street; and at the earnest
solicitation of the prisoner, the young lady alighted to take some
refreshment, receiving an assurance that she should immediately
afterwards be conveyed home. She entered a house with the prisoner, and
they were shewn into a back apartment by a young man, who was directed
to bring some fish. They sat together for a time, and then Dillon left
the room. He was away for ten minutes or a quarter of an hour; but on
his return he said, that the evening was fine, and she could walk home.
As she had taken no punch, however, he insisted that she should have a
little warm wine and water; and some was almost immediately brought by
the waiter. Dillon then placed the glass to her lips, and held her head
until she had swallowed full half the contents of the glass. She
directly felt stupefied and faint, and became quite unconscious of what
subsequently passed, until she found herself at night, undressed, and
lying on a bed by the side of the prisoner, in a room above that in
which they had been sitting. Frantic with terror, she sprang from the
bed, and in her hurry rushed against the wall instead of going through
the door. The prisoner ran after her, and seized her round the waist,
saying it was all over then, and she might as well be quiet; but she
screamed aloud. He dragged her away from the door with great violence,
cursing and swearing at her all the time, and again threw her on the
bed, where he completed an outrage, which, there was no doubt was a
repetition only of an act of violence of which he had before been
guilty. He put his hand upon her mouth to prevent her screaming, and
swore to God that he would marry her the next morning. He, however,
again repeated his violence, and detained her in bed until daylight,
when he allowed her to rise; and she ultimately left the house with
him, under a promise that he would take her to Mr Kenrick, the priest,
and marry her. This promise, however, he did not fulfil, and she
returned alone to Mrs. O'Reardon's house. She told Mrs. O'Reardon that
she was married; but acquainted her also with the violence which had
been used, and that lady fainted, and subsequently she also
communicated what had passed to other persons. The prisoner never kept
his promise to marry her, and she had never seen him until that day in
court since the transaction, the circumstances of which she had just
related.

The witness was cross-examined at great length by Mr. Serjeant
O'Loughlen, in the course of which she admitted having written a
letter, of which the following is a copy, the day after the atrocities
described in her evidence in chief: --

"My dearest Dillon -- Our car came in to-day. Fortunately papa did not
come with it. I was wishing to see you, so I went to Home's, but you
were out. I cannot tell you what torture I have been in since I parted
with you. You may imagine I am nothing better; you may guess the rest.
If you value my life -- my honour; everything depends upon you. I have
thought of something that will, I think, do. I will see you to-morrow.
When I see you I will -- . I was obliged to tell Maria (Mrs. O'Reardon)
we were married. She is exceedingly ill. The Doctor thinks I was at a
lady's in Gardiner-street, a Mrs. Dwyer's. He went to Mrs. Callaghan's
himself, so I could not say I was there. For God's sake, meet me
to-morrow, about twelve o'clock, at the end of the street, in
Dawson-street, and I will, at least, be a little happier, for I am
miserable now. Buy me a ring, and, for Heaven's sake, arrange
everything. Recollect who you had (these words were scratched out) I am
not to be trifled with. I am sure papa would blow my brains out were he
to know it. I, therefore, rely on your solemn promise last night; and,
once more, be punctual to the hour to-morrow. Really, I am almost dead
with grief. Indeed, my dearest Dillon, on you depends my future
happiness for life. Yours,
     "Saturday night. "Anna."
     "Luke Dillon, Esq., Home's Hotel, Usher's-island."

In her further cross-examination, she affirmed she wrote to him in
these affectionate terms because Mrs. O'Reardon told her, that if she
called him a villain or a wretch, he would never come back to her; and
that she wrote the letter for the purpose of bringing him back. After
she had been under examination and cross-examination upwards of five
hours, her mother, Mrs. Frizell, and Mrs. O'Reardon, were examined, and
they corroborated her testimony as far as they had any knowledge of the
facts.

For the defence, several persons from the hotel or house where the
affair took place stated that the lady was a consenting party, and that
no outrage had been committed. -- In their cross-examination, however,
they prevaricated a good deal, and acknowledged visiting the prisoner
in Newgate.

Judge Torrens charged the jury in a luminous speech, who, after one
hour and three quarters' deliberation, returned a verdict of Guilty,
but strongly recommended the prisoner to mercy on account of his youth.

On the next day he was brought up for judgment, when, in answer why
sentence of death should not be passed on him, he replied, in a low,
but rather firm voice, that standing in the awful situation in which he
did, it was not for him to arraign the verdict of twelve men on their
oaths, and he should, therefore, bow with submission to the sentence of
the court.-- Judge Torrens then, in an impressive manner observed, that
after a most anxious consideration of his case, the recommendation of
the jury could not be attended to. His lordship, in a tremulous accent,
pronounced the awful sentence of the law, fixing Saturday, the 7th of
May, for his execution.

The most strenuous exertions were made to save the life of this unhappy
but most guilty culprit; and petitions signed by many persons of the
highest respectability were forwarded to the crown in his favour. The
recommendation of the jury was also most strongly represented, and as
it was said that even the friends of the young lady herself were
unwilling that he should expiate the foul crime of which he had been
convicted on the scaffold, a reprieve was granted, and his punishment
was eventually commuted to transportation for life.

The wretched young man was eventually transmitted to Sydney with other
convicts; but here his fortune and the respectability of his connexions
enabled him to obtain privileges not usually granted to persons in his
situation. He was of an excellent family in the county of Roscommon,
and by the death of some of his relations came into a handsome fortune.
Money, in the colony in which he was compelled to reside, would obtain
for him every luxury which he could desire; and from recent accounts
received from that place, it appears that he was among the gayest of
the gay of that extraordinary society.

We have but one other fact to add to our recital of this most
distressing case. The unhappy object of Dillon's machinations and
brutal crime died in the month of June 1831, a victim to her own
sensitive feelings. She had gone to Bangor, in Wales, in hope that a
change of scene might relieve her of the melancholy which appeared to
have settled upon her mind, but she died there of a broken heart.


IKEY alias ISAAC SOLOMON
Transported for Receiving Stolen Goods.

There are few offenders whose name and whose character are more
universally known than Ikey Solomon; but there are few also with regard
to whom more certain information cannot be obtained. The following
brief particulars, we believe, are correct; but the difficulty of
procuring positive knowledge upon the subject must prove an excuse for
the shortness of our memoir.

Solomon was born in the neighbourhood of Petticoat-lane in the year
1785, of poor parents, who, as their name imports, were of the Jewish
persuasion. At an early age young Ikey was compelled to exert himself
to procure his own living; for it is a custom which exists among the
poorer classes of the Jews, that every child shall be early instructed
in habits of industry. At the age of eight years, therefore, he was
despatched into the streets with a supply of oranges and lemons, which
constituted his first stock in trade. The profits of his business as a
fruiterer were not deemed by the young Jew a sufficient remuneration
for his labours, and the profession of a sham ringer, as it was
technically termed, or of a passer of base coin, was added by him to
that which he openly carried on, and his youth served him materially in
enabling him to escape detection.

At the age of fourteen years, he had acquired considerable knowledge of
the general habits of thieves, and he is reported to have practised
picking pockets, when opportunity offered, with great success. As he
grew older, however, his person and his proceedings became known, and,
apprehending that some unpleasant consequences might arise from his
carrying on so dangerous a profession, he determined to quit it, and to
join a gang engaged in one no less enterprising, but attended with less
cause of fear -- that of duffing. By this means he obtained a wide
connexion, while the sums which he realised amply repaid him for the
change which he had made in his mode of life. The business of a fence,
or receiver of stolen goods, in which afterwards he became so
notorious, appears, even at this early period of his life, to have
struck his fancy; and although the extent of his trade was limited, by
reason of his want of the necessary capital to carry it on, his
purchases being confined to the produce of the robberies of area sneaks
and young pickpockets, he acquired much celebrity amongst his fellows
in the same business.

After some time, from some unexplained cause, he quitted this mode of
life, and joined a gang of thieves associated at the west end of the
town. Always avaricious, he was guilty of unfair play even among his
"pals," and the old adage of "honour among thieves" was set at nought
by him in his division of the spoil which he obtained in the course of
his daily exertions. For this breach of good faith he was expelled the
community, and he determined upon making an effort in his own behalf --
single-handed! His good fortune now forsook him, and, after a very
short practice, he was taken into custody for stealing a "dumby," or
pocket-book. This was the first occasion on which he had any reason to
fear the consequences of his numerous thefts. In the city, according to
his own account, he had been frequently in custody, but had escaped by
feeing the officers! but his apprehension having now taken place in
"the county," as it is usually denominated, or beyond the city bounds,
he knew that he stood little chance of escaping by such means.

For this offence he was tried at the Old Bailey in the year 1807, being
then twenty-two years of age; and a conviction having followed, he was
sentenced to transportation for life. He was removed to the hulks at
Chatham, preparatory to his being sent to one of our penal colonies,
but, by good luck, was permitted to remain in England, in the hope that
he might reform. His uncle, it appears, was a slop-seller at this port,
where he carried on a considerable, and, it was believed, a respectable
trade. Through his instrumentality his nephew was retained in his
native country; and, after six years, the fortunate Ikey obtained a
pardon. A circumstance occurred, however, in reference to this event,
which is worthy of notice. Ikey was not the only person of the same
name who had been guilty of an offence against the laws of meum et
tuum, confined on board the same hulk. His equally unfortunate
namesake, in the year 1813, by the exercise of influence, succeeded in
obtaining a remission of his sentence, and a pardon and order for his
discharge were sent down to Chatham. By an error, either of accident or
design, but which it was we have no means of deciding, our hero was
discharged instead of the person really intended. His surprise and
gratitude at this unexpected favour induced him, on his return to
London, to proceed to the Home Office to express his thanks for his
liberation; but here, to his dismay, he was informed that there was
some mistake -- that he was not the person intended to be pardoned, and
that he must return to his ship. He had prudence enough to do that at
once, which he knew he would be compelled to do eventually; but the
circumstance operated so much in his favour, that in three months
afterwards a genuine pardon in his name was received, which once again
sent him to perform his part upon the stage of life.

His first employment was to all appearance an honest one. He was
engaged by his uncle at Chatham as a barker, or salesman; and, in the
course of a couple of years, he realised a sum of 150l., with which he
determined to start in business for himself. He therefore proceeded to
London, and in a short time we find him possessed of a house and shop
in Bell-alley, Winfield-street. He lost no time in renewing his
acquaintance with some of his former associates, and he found that many
of them, who had escaped the fangs of the police so long, had now
become expert thieves, or experienced housebreakers. His old trade of a
"fence" appeared to him the most profitable, and, at the same time, the
best in every other respect, in which he could embark, and his desire
to deal in stolen goods was soon circulated among his connexions. For
this business his general knowledge admirably adapted him, and he
speedily obtained as much business as his small capital would enable
him to get through. As every transaction, however, increased his means,
so his sphere of action became more extended, and ere long he was
engaged fully in every species of business which came within the usual
course of persons engaged in the same profession. Forged notes, or
"queer screens," as they were called, afforded him means of
speculation, which produced the most profitable results; but the danger
of carrying on this branch of his trade, arising from the vigilance of
the officers employed by the Bank of England for its suppression, at
length determined him to give it up, and to confine his operations to
that which he looked upon as a safer game, the purchase and disposal of
the produce of the robberies of his friends.

In this line he was probably one of the most successful in London.
Every year afforded him new opportunities of extending his connexion,
and the profits which he obtained were enormous. His house was looked
upon as the universal resort of almost all the thieves of the
metropolis; but so cautiously and so cunningly did he manage his
transactions, as to render every effort of the police to procure
evidence of his guilt unavailing. His purchases were, for the most
part, confined to small articles, such as jewellery, plate, &c., and in
his house, under his bed, he had a receptacle for them, closed by a
trap-door, so nicely fitted, that it escaped every examination which
was made. In the space between the flooring and the ceiling of the
lower room, there were abundant means to conceal an extent of valuable
property which was quite astonishing.

Solomon's trade was now at its height, and he found that one house
would be insufficient to contain all his property. He had been married
some years before to a person of the same persuasion with himself; but
it appears that constancy was not one of the virtues of which he was
able to boast. It suggested itself to him, therefore, that while a
second house would enable him to secrete a considerable quantity of
additional property, he might also hide there from his wife a new
object, to whom his affections had united him. With these double views,
he took a house in Lower Queen-street, Islington (unknown to his own
family), in which he followed out the plan which he had laid down for
his guidance. The lady and the valuables were placed in it.

At about this period, however, a very extensive robbery of watches and
jewellery took place in Cheapside, in which there is no doubt Solomon
participated, in the character of receiver. The excitement produced by
the occurrence raised considerable alarm in his mind lest he should be
discovered and apprehended, and he determined on a trip to Birmingham,
in order that the affair might blow over. During his absence, his wife,
whose jealous animosity had been excited by his frequent absence from
home, discovered his Islington retreat, and her anger, as may be
supposed, was not expressed to him in the gentlest or most becoming way
upon his return.

This discovery, and the still pending investigation of the
circumstances of the robbery in Cheapside, created so much alarm in his
mind, that he determined to emigrate to New South Wales, taking with
him all his property. His arrangements were commenced, but his wife,
whose fears pictured to her the sailing of her husband with her rival,
and her own abandonment in England, most strongly opposed the plan.
Ikey, however, persisted in carrying out his expressed intention, when
his apprehension at his Islington abode effectually prevented the
fulfilment of his plans. The charges preferred against him were those
of receiving stolen goods, and Ikey was committed to Newgate for trial.
Property, it was said, to a very large amount had been seized, amongst
which many articles which had been stolen were identified. Whilst
awaiting his trial, a plan of escape was concocted, which was
completely successful, and which was conducted in the following
manner:--

It is a part of the law of the land, that every prisoner who is in
custody, no matter what his offence, is entitled to apply to a judge of
one of the superior courts, to be admitted to bail. The application is
made for a writ of habeas corpus upon which the prisoner is taken from
the prison, where he is confined, before the judge, in whose presence
the matter is to be argued. Solomon's friends determined to adopt this
course, and the application being made, the writ was granted, and a
certain day was fixed for the argument. The prisoner, in obedience to
the writ, was sent in the custody of two officers to Westminster, and
as the trio passed Bridge-street, Blackfriars, it was proposed that
they should have a coach. The proposition appeared to be anticipated by
a man, whose vehicle was near the head of the rank, and his carriage
was immediately engaged. The three men entered it, and were driven to
Westminster, but when they arrived there, the judge was found to be
engaged. An adjournment took place to a neighbouring public-house, and
while there, Mrs. Solomon joined the party with one or two friends, and
brandy and water was speedily introduced in abundance. The turnkeys
were not sparing in their libations, but were interrupted in their
orgies by the announcement that the judge was ready. The argument took
place, the bail was refused, as it was known it would be, and a second
adjournment to the public-house took place. One more glass was
swallowed, and Ikey, his wife, and the two turnkeys, once more entered
the vehicle. A short ride threw Smart, the head turnkey, into a species
of stupor; and in Fleet-street, Mrs. Solomon was so affected by her
husband's danger, as to fall into fits. Solomon entreated the under
turnkey, who still remained awake, not to take him to prison, until he
had set his wife down at a friend's house, and this request, being
probably backed by a fee, was granted. The coach, which it is almost
needless to say was driven by one of Ikey's relations, proceeded to
Petticoat-lane, and there pulling up at a house, the door was suddenly
opened. Ikey popped out, ran into a house, the door of which stood
open, but was closed immediately after him, through the passage, into a
house at the back, and again through an interminable variety of
windings, until at length he was lodged in a place of security. The
turnkey was almost as stupefied as his fellow at this surprising
disappearance of his prisoner, and Mrs. Solomon having speedily
recovered from her fits, the two jailors were left to find their way
back to Newgate, and to tell their tale at their own leisure. The
turnkeys, it is almost needless to say, had been drugged.

This escape was so admirably conducted, that all traces of Solomon were
lost, and notwithstanding the most strenuous exertions of the police,
no tidings of him could be obtained. For two months, it appears, he lay
concealed at Highgate, and at the expiration of that time he found
means to quit the country in a Danish vessel for Copenhagen, from
whence in about three months he proceeded to New York.

Ever active in "turning a penny," he was soon engaged in his old trade
in forged notes, which was here carried on to a great extent. He became
convinced, however, that he could make money by other means also, and
he wrote to his wife, desiring her to send him a quantity of cheap
watches, which he had good reason to believe would turn to good
account. In this letter, according to his own statement, he charged his
wife to send him none but "righteous" (honestly obtained) watches, and
not to touch one which had been got "on the cross;" but it appears she
did not act up to his advice, for she was found guilty of receiving a
watch knowing it to have been stolen,-- which turned out to be one of
those which she was about to ship off to the new world to her husband,
to be employed by him in his new speculation. For this offence she was
sentenced to be transported for fourteen years; and, in obedience to
her sentence, she was conveyed to Van Diemen's Land. Ikey, in his
account of this affair, does not scruple to assert, that his wife had
in truth been guilty of no offence whatever; and he seeks to confirm
his assertion by relating the circumstances under which the watch was
obtained. He declares that there were some persons in England who had
been so enraged at his escape, as to be determined to revenge
themselves upon him by every means in their power. With this view they
sought to tamper with one of his relations, then in custody, in order
to procure the entrapment of his wife in some supposed illegal
transaction. Mrs. Solomon at this time was engaged in the purchase of
the watches for her husband, and she consulted some of her friends upon
the best means of procuring them. The imprisoned relation about this
time was set at liberty, to carry out his scheme, and he being applied
to, produced and sold to her the very watch for the possession of which
eventually she was convicted. How far this is true, as regards the
individual referred to, we cannot say; but we believe it to be
impossible that villainy so gross as that which he imputes, could be
connived at by any person holding a responsible public situation in the
police.

Ikey, it seems, upon hearing of his wife's misfortune, found himself
the object of suspicion where he was, and he determined that he would
follow Mrs. Solomon; and, having assembled the family at Hobart Town,
endeavour to alleviate her sufferings. In this place he proposed to
strike out some new pursuit for their support; but he never imagined
that the laws of England would pursue him in the very place to which he
was about to proceed as a refuge from them.

Upon his arrival at Hobart Town he lived for some time in comparative
decency, having opened a general shop, which he conducted with much
profit, and having also purchased a public-house, which he let to
another person. But he soon found that his dreams of future security
were not to be realised. An order arrived from England for his
apprehension, and he was hurried off by the next vessel sailing for
London, to take his trial for the numerous offences with which he was
charged. He had just time to transfer his property to his son before he
sailed, and at length, on the 27th of June 1830, he was once more
lodged in Newgate, where he was confined in the transport yard, which
was considered the most secure place in the prison.

At the following Old Bailey sessions he was indicted upon eight
different charges, and his trial came on Friday, the 9th of July 1830.
His conduct throughout was remarkable for great firmness, which was
increased by his being acquitted on the first and second days upon five
of the indictments preferred against him. On the following Monday he
was again placed at the bar, and then, on the sixth and eighth charges,
verdicts of Guilty were returned. The verdict on the seventh indictment
was one of Not guilty, owing to the absence of a material witness in
India.

A point of law was raised as to the propriety of these convictions, and
the prisoner was remanded, in order that the matter might be discussed
before the superior judges. Solomon was kept in suspense during a
period of ten months; but at length, on the 13th of May 1831, he
received an intimation that the opinion of the judges was against him,
and sentence of seven years' transportation was passed on each
indictment.

Upon this sentence he was conveyed to the hulks, and, on the 31st of
May 1831, he once more sailed from Portsmouth. In obedience to an order
made upon a petition which he had caused to be presented at the Home
Office, he was conveyed to Hobart Town, where his family was, instead
of to Sydney; and, upon his arrival at that place, he found his son
still carrying on the business which he had commenced. By good conduct,
Solomon eventually obtained for himself the rank of overseer of
convicts, and we believe that he still retains that situation.

Some anecdotes of the mode in which he conducted his business in London
will not be uninteresting, exhibiting as they do the general habits of
receivers of stolen goods.

It may be admitted, as an established fact, that no man who does not
possess very considerable connexions can attempt to carry on the
business of a "fence "with success. An acquaintance and co-partnery
with persons residing at the out-ports, and with the itinerant dealers
in jewellery, travelling inland, are necessary to enable them to put
off the proceeds of their dishonest dealings; for while by the former,
bank notes, and other property, the identity of which cannot be
destroyed, can be despatched abroad, by the latter, watches and other
articles of trifling value can be distributed among towns and villages
in remote districts, from which it is unlikely they will ever find
their way to the great mart of London, where they can be recognised.
Diamonds, and other valuable stones, may be taken out and re-set
according to another fashion, while the settings are destroyed; but in
most instances receivers admit no articles into their houses until they
are satisfied that they cannot be recognised. In the first of these
respects Solomon was amply provided with associates, and he was too
good a judge in most cases to permit any possibility of detection to
arise. When a large robbery was contemplated, he was always apprised of
it, and the place and time were fixed at which he should go and look
over its produce. The first thing he said when he met the parties was,
"Now I am to offer you a price for these things; first assist in
removing all the marks, and then I will talk to you." When the goods
consisted of linen or cloth, every means of identification was removed;
the head and fag ends being cut off, and occasionally the list and
selvage, if they were peculiar. The marks on the soles of boots and
shoes were obliterated by hot irons, and those on the linings were as
speedily removed by their being cut out, and others placed in their
stead. After this, he found no difficulty in vending every species of
property which could be converted into apparel, to the numerous
ready-made, and slop-shops, in which trade so many Jews are engaged.
Watches of great value, which could find purchasers only in large
towns, were either metamorphosed by skilful hands, or sent to the
continent. If a watch were valuable for its works more than its case,
the interior was soon entombed in another. A boot and shoe-maker, some
years since, in Princes-street, Soho, was, in one night, robbed of his
stock, value 300l.; the whole was carried away in sacks in coaches, and
the next morning found its way, before twelve o'clock, to the premises
of our hero. By threats and offers to one of the coachmen, who happened
to be recognised by a servant in the neighbourhood, as having been at
the door the night before, he was induced to give information of the
place to which the goods had been conveyed. The shoemaker sent a man to
watch the premises, while he went to seek for two officers; the man was
in time to see the goods removed to the house of Solomon. When the
shoemaker and the officers arrived they entered the premises, but Ikey
defied them to touch an article, so carefully had the marks been
removed. The shoemaker was compelled to admit that he could not swear
to them, and at once saw that he stood no chance of procuring the
restoration of his goods. Solomon then said that he had purchased them
fairly, but, out of mere compassion for his loss, whether the goods had
been his or not, he would sell them for the price which he had paid for
them. The robbed man was glad to accept of these terms, and it cost him
upwards of one hundred pounds to re-stock his shop with his own goods.

Solomon was allowed to be a most ready and superior judge of the
intrinsic value of all kinds of property, from a glass bottle to a five
hundred guinea chronometer; how it could be disposed of, and what was
the value thieves generally estimated it at. He established among the
rogues a regular rule of dealing, which is continued to this day,
namely, to give a fixed price for all articles of the same
denomination. For instance, a piece of linen was in his view a piece of
linen, whether fine or coarse; the same with a piece of print, a silver
watch, or a gold one: taking the good, as he used to tell the young and
inexperienced thief, with the bad vons. By this plan he sometimes
obtained very valuable watches at a moderate rate. He, however, outbid
all his opponents in the purchase of stolen bank-notes; this he was for
a long time enabled to do, in consequence of his connection with Jews
in Holland. All stolen bank-notes which come into the hands of those
who buy them, are sent to the Continent, to pass in the way of
purchases through some regular mercantile house, when they find their
way, by remittances to London houses, into the Bank, where they must be
paid. The price given by Solomon for large notes, was 15s. in the
pound; and he calculated that on an average he could send them their
circuit of safety for 1s. in the pound: thus securing for himself 4s.
profit on each 20s., that is twenty per cent., and this is now the
regular price for stolen notes with the London fences.

At the time of Solomon's apprehension his chief store was in
Rosemary-lane, and he was reported to have had goods of the value of
20,000l. then collected there. A very great proportion of this property
was seized, and Solomon bitterly complained of the manner in which he
was deprived of his goods. A great portion of the articles were
restored to their owners; but as late as the year 1832, a considerable
amount was sold, which was avowed to have belonged to this notorious
offender.


WILLIAM GILCHRIST, GEORGE GILCHRIST, and JAMES BROWN
Tried for a Coach Robbery.

The ingenuity of thieves has been frequently referred to in the course
of this work, and many instances have been afforded by a perusal of its
pages of the extreme perseverance with which the practitioners in this
dishonest calling carry on their proceedings. In the case of Huffey
White a striking instance is afforded of the laborious determination of
men, whose object was to rob the Glasgow bank; in the instance with
which we are now about to present our readers no less ingenuity and
determination are exhibited than by that case; and the daring
effrontery with which the robbery, the circumstances of which we are
about to detail, was committed, must strike them with astonishment.

It was on Thursday, the 24th of March, 1831, that this most impudent
robbery was committed; and the circumstance of its occurrence was first
notified to the public in a Glasgow newspaper in a paragraph, of which
the following is a copy, which being compared with the real facts of
the case as they were proved at the trial, will sufficiently inform our
readers of the remarkable measures adopted by thieves at this time,
first to commit robberies, and then so to conceal the real
circumstances attending their commission, as to mislead the public and
the police as to the persons, or even the description of the persons
concerned in the depredation:--"Another of those dexterous tricks in
abstracting a bank parcel from one of the public coaches was on
Thursday week successfully practised in a somewhat novel manner. The
following is an account of the transaction:-- The parcel in question,
which contained notes and gold to the amount of 5,700l., had been
entrusted by the Commercial Bank's branch in Glasgow, to be forwarded
to the head office in Edinburgh, by the Prince Regent coach, which left
Glasgow at noon on the Thursday. The parcel had been put into a tin
box, which was, as usual, placed in the boot of the coach, but was
missed by the coachman who drives the last stage. It was then found
that the stuffing inside had been cut, and a hole made in the body of
the coach by piercing it first by a brace-bit, and then cutting out the
piece with a saw, by which means the thieves got at the box, which they
forced open and rifled of its contents. The paper in which the parcel
was packed, with part of one of the notes, were left. After committing
the robbery, in order to elude observation, the lining of the coach,
which had been cut, was pinned neatly together. We understand that the
whole of the inside seats had been taken in Glasgow, four in the name
of Mrs. Gordon, and two in the name of Mr. Johnston, but no inside
passengers came forward when the coach started. When about three miles
from Glasgow, however, two passengers, a man and a woman, were taken
up, who continued to travel with the coach until within three miles
from Airdrie, and no suspicion was raised against them when they left
the conveyance. The notes were principally of the Commercial Bank, and
consisted of 20l., 5l., and 1l. notes. A number of them had blue
borders of a peculiar description, not generally in circulation, and
which will easily be detected. It is said there were about 300l. in
gold. Immediately on the intelligence of this daring robbery reaching
Glasgow, an officer, accompanied by one of the gentlemen of the Branch
Bank at that place, set off in the direction of Airdrie in search of
the robbers, but hitherto without success. The driver of the coach is
quite unable to give any account of the appearance or dress of the man
and woman who were in the coach; but we believe the passenger who
assisted them out, has been able partially to furnish one." The latter
part of this paragraph is peculiarly worthy of notice, for it turns out
that Brown was the outside passenger, and he, no doubt, affecting
ignorance of the persons within, endeavoured to gull the police by
giving an erroneous description of the thieves.

A long and searching inquiry into all the circumstances of the affair
took place, and at length, through the arduous and persevering
exertions of the Glasgow police-officer named Nish, the three prisoners
whose names head this article, together with a man named Simpson, were
committed for trial.

During the period which intervened before the inquiry took place before
the High Court of Justiciary at Edinburgh, the investigation which had
been commenced was carried on by Mr. Nish; but the main evidence at the
trial was that of Simpson, who was admitted a witness against his
accomplices.

The trial came on at Edinburgh on Wednesday, July the 14th, 1831. It
was then proved that the prisoner George Gilchrist was a coach
proprietor residing on the road between Glasgow and Edinburgh; and that
being aware of the frequent transmission of money by the coach from one
place to the other, he formed the design of abstracting the parcel
containing it from the boot, and carrying it off. He communicated his
object to his brother, and to Brown and Simpson, as well as to two
other persons who were to assist them. The parcel of the 24th of March
was fixed upon to be attempted; and in order to render their operations
secure from observation, the whole of the inside of the coach was taken
for the use of the party.

On the 24th of March, William Gilchrist and Brown started from Glasgow
on the outside of the coach, and about two or three miles from that
place they met with George Gilchrist and Simpson, whom Gilchrist had
hired to assist him. George Gilchrist was dressed in female apparel,
and Simpson carried a small basket, which contained centre-bits and
other instruments of that description. Simpson, on his examination
said, "When they got into the coach they put up the windows, when
Gilchrist took off the straw bonnet and shawl, and took out the tools;
he then ripped up the cloth of the coach, and bored five holes
horizontally with the brace and bit; the place between the holes was
cut with a chisel; they then attempted to cut the tin box with the
chisel, but finding they could not do so, they pressed the lid up with
a chisel, and in doing this raised up the lock. They took out two
parcels of notes and a packet, which, from its weight, he supposed was
gold. They left some parcels in the box, which he believed were bills,
and put some of them under the cushion. Having effected the robbery,
they pressed the lid of the box down, and it then had the same
appearance as if locked. He put part of the notes and gold about his
person, and Gilchrist put the rest about him, and again put on the
bonnet and shawl. All this occupied about an hour. When at Airdrie, he
heard some one say, 'John, get on, remember the opposition.' William
Gilchrist said it was Brown that said so, and that he would drive on if
he saw any danger. Gilchrist said to witness that no one should get
into the coach, and he would keep one side, and directed witness to
keep the other; that they would get out in about a mile and a half; and
that witness should look out of the window, and Brown would see him:
this, he believed, was a signal that all was right; and he thought
Brown observed him look out. He was desired by Gilchrist to call out to
stop at the first entry on the left hand. The coach stopped at the
place, and Brown came down and opened the door, and said to the
coachman, 'John, I've got half-a-crown for you.' When they came out,
witness carried the basket, and the coach immediately drove off. He and
Gilchrist proceeded down the avenue about half a mile, and went into a
planting. He saw a man coming down the avenue, when he told Gilchrist,
who said he was a friend. The woman's clothes were put into the basket,
and Gilchrist put on his own clothes. All the money was put into a silk
handkerchief."

The trial continued until twelve o'clock on Thursday forenoon, when the
jury unanimously found George Gilchrist Guilty of the charges; by a
plurality of voices the libel Not Proven against James Brown; and
unanimously finding the libel Not Proven against William Gilchrist. The
lord justice clerk then passed the awful sentence of death on the
prisoner, George Gilchrist, and ordered him for execution on the 3rd of
August.

The prisoner, however, subsequently made communications to the officers
of justice, in consequence of which a great portion of the stolen
property was recovered, and his punishment was commuted to
transportation for life.


WILLIAM KING
Imprisoned for Robbery.

Illustration: King Robbing a Jewish Pedlar

The offence of which this man was convicted, was attended by a
fraudulent misrepresentation of his character, which we should have
imagined would have made him a fit object of severe punishment.

At the time of his conviction he was fifty-two years of age, and
appeared to be a person of some respectability. He, however, declined
giving any account of himself.

He was indicted at the Bridgewater assizes, on the 7th of August 1831,
for assaulting Elias Cashin upon the king's highway, putting him in
fear, and taking from his person and against his will a box containing
twenty-four gold seals, forty-five brooches, and a variety of other
articles of jewellery.

The robbery was alleged to have been committed at Huntspill, on the
10th of March, and Cashin, who was a member of the Jewish persuasion,
stated, that on that day he was offering his wares for sale at
Huntspill, when the prisoner came up to him, and representing himself
to be an inspector of pedlars' licences, demanded to see his licence.
He admitted that he had none, upon which the prisoner seized his box
containing his jewellery, and took him by the collar, saying, that he
must accompany him to a magistrate's. They went together to the house
of a Mr. Rockett, where the prisoner behaved with much violence, in
consequence of which Cashin rung the bell. Young Mr. Rockett appeared,
who said that his father was not at home, and the prisoner then desired
the Jew to meet him on the next day, at the house of a Mr. Phippen,
another magistrate, residing at a short distance off. Cashin begged for
his box, but the supposed inspector refused to give it up, and the poor
Jew was at length compelled to go away, leaving his property in the
hands of the prisoner.

On the next day he was faithful to his appointment, but neither the
prisoner nor his box was to be seen; and Cashin added, that he could
never meet him afterwards, until a short time before the trial, when he
accidentally ran against him in Bristol. He now, in turn, became the
assailant, and seizing the prisoner by the collar, demanded his box. He
at first denied all knowledge of him, but then finding that the Jew was
determined to take decisive steps against him, said that he had been
robbed of it himself. Cashin, however, called in the aid of the police,
and upon the prisoner being searched, a pair of spectacles was found
upon him, which had been in the box, when he had carried it off.

The jury at once declared the prisoner guilty, but of the mitigated
offence of larceny only, negativing the capital charge; and he was
sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment.


MARY ANNE HIGGINS, AND EDWARD CLARKE
Tried for Murder.

The trial of these prisoners, which took place at the Warwick assizes,
on the 9th of August, 1831, excited the most intense interest in the
county in which it occurred, owing to the peculiar circumstances under
which the crime, with which they stood charged, was committed, and the
relative position of the persons accused, and the deceased. The female
prisoner, Mary Anne Higgins, was rather a good-looking girl, with a
fresh complexion, and pleasing, though un-intellectual expression of
countenance, and her appearance produced almost universal sympathy.
Clarke, however, was the object of very different feelings; and
although previously to the trial his guilt was involved in much doubt,
the indifference which he exhibited on being introduced to the dock,
procured for him a very unfavourable consideration amongst the crowd of
persons assembled.

The indictment charged that the prisoners had been guilty of the wilful
murder of William Higgins, at Coventry, on the previous 22nd of March,
by administering to him three drachms of arsenic. In a second count
Clarke was charged as an accessory to the murder, by aiding and
abetting Higgins in its commission. Clarke was twenty-one years of age,
and his fellow-prisoner only nineteen years.

Upwards of forty witnesses were called, and the investigation lasted
from nine o'clock in the morning until an advanced hour in the evening;
the material facts of the case, however, as elicited from the evidence,
may be stated in a comparatively small compass: --

William Higgins, the deceased, was a man in an humble station of life,
who had saved a little money, upwards of 100l. of which he had placed
out at interest. Upon the death of his only brother, who left four or
five children behind him, the deceased, being unmarried, took one of
the children (the female prisoner) to live with him, and reared her as
he would his own child, intending also to leave her the little money he
possessed at his death.

About the beginning of the year 1831, a courtship commenced between the
girl and the prisoner Clarke, who was an apprentice at the watch
factory of Messrs. Vale and Co. at Coventry, in the course of which he
evidently acquired considerable influence over her mind. He was
observed, in the months of February and March, in the possession of
more money than usual, including one or two golden guineas, a
denomination of coin of which the deceased's savings were supposed
principally to have consisted; and he boasted, on more than one
occasion, that he had only to go to the old man's house whenever he
wanted money.

On Tuesday, the 22nd of March, the female prisoner went into a
druggist's shop, and asked for two-pennyworth of arsenic to destroy
rats. The young man in the shop told her that she could not have it
except in the presence of a witness; upon which she went away, and did
not return. She afterwards went to another shop of the same
description, and made a similar application, to which she received the
like , answer. Upon which she observed, that she did not know what she
was to do, as she came from the country. She added, however, that she
had a sister residing at Coventry, and she would go and fetch her. She
then left the shop, and, when passing through Spon-street, she met a
girl named Elizabeth Russell, who told her that she was going to the
factory (Vale and Co.'s); upon which the prisoner said, "Just come with
me as far as Messrs. Wyly's, the druggists, and I will then accompany
you to the factory." Elizabeth Russell asked her what she wanted at the
druggists'? To which she replied, that she wanted some arsenic to
destroy rats. The girl then accompanied her to the druggists', where
she received the arsenic in her presence, with a label upon the paper
having the words, "arsenic, poison," printed on it. She inquired of the
shopman how she was to use it, in order to destroy the rats; and he
told her she might mix it up with some bread, or some substance of that
kind. She then left the shop, and on going into the street she tore off
the label, saying at the same time to the other girl, "What has he
stuck this on for?"

They walked as far as the factory, which they reached just as the men
were coming out of it to go to dinner, it being then about one o'clock
in the day; they here parted, and the prisoner Higgins was joined by
the prisoner Clarke, who walked with her towards her uncle's house; a
waggoner who. was passing along the street shortly afterwards, observed
Clarke entering the uncle's house, and the niece the next moment
closing the door, which Clarke had left open, after him.

At two o'clock Clarke returned to his work at the factory, and remained
there until eight in the evening; about nine he was observed standing
at the entry which led from the deceased's house to a yard where there
was a certain convenience, from which the old man was seen apparently
returning. The niece was also observed standing at the entry. Whilst
the old man was in the yard, a particular kind of noise was heard, and
the place afterwards exhibited the appearance of a person having been
vomiting there.

At about one o'clock at midnight the female prisoner knocked up an old
woman named Green, who lived a few doors off, and implored her, for
God's sake, to come to her uncle, who was taken very ill. Mrs. Green
accordingly got out of bed, put on her gown, and followed her to her
uncle's. On her way, Mrs. Green was met by a man, who, when passing by
Higgins's door the moment before, heard two voices, as he thought, in
the house; but could not tell whether they were male or female voices,
or the voices of a male and female. Upon Mrs. Green going in, she found
the deceased lying upon his niece's bed, with his head resting on his
left hand, in the attitude of a man who had been vomiting. Upon going
up to him, she thought at first she heard him breathe, but found, when
she stirred him, that he was stiff. She called to him, but received no
answer. Observing some water on the floor near the bed, and knowing
that the old man had been subject to a complaint which she called the
water-swamp, she proposed going down stairs and making some tea for
him. She and the niece went down accordingly, and, while below, the
latter said, "Oh! I hear my uncle groan."

They immediately returned to the room, but on Mrs, Green again going to
the bed, she found that the old man was dead; and also concluded, from
a more particular examination of his body, that he must have been dead
for at least half an hour. The niece wept bitterly, exclaiming, "Oh my
dear uncle! my dear uncle! now he 's gone, all my friends are gone!"
She told Mrs. Green that she and Edward Clarke were to have been
married on Easter Monday, and that had it not been for her poor uncle's
death, they were all to have had a jovial day of it. She said that they
must still be married, however, on that day, as she was in the family
way; that she would put on mourning for her uncle, but put it off on
the day of her marriage, and then resume it again, it being unlucky to
be married in black. The statement of her being in the family way was
untrue.

In answer to previous inquiries from Mrs. Green, she said that her
uncle had had some pea-soup for supper; that he had been taken very
ill, and gone to bed; that after she had retired to her own bed, her
uncle came into her room, and becoming very sick, she got up, and
placed him on her bed, Mrs. Green observed the bed in the deceased's
room very much tumbled, as if by a person who had been tossing from
side to side in great pain. There was also a quantity of water on the
floor, with two little lumps of bread in it, which appeared to have
been discharged from the stomach. Some other of the neighbours being
called in to assist in laying out the deceased, Mrs. Green went away.

In the course of the morning, between six and seven o'clock, another
neighbour, a Mrs. Moore, called, and, on seeing the niece, asked if it
was true that her uncle was dead? She said it was, and that she was
then going out to purchase mourning. She went out accordingly, and when
she was gone, Mrs. Moore, seeing the place in a state of confusion, set
about putting the things to rights. On going into the pantry, she
perceived a basin on the shelf about three quarters filled with
pea-soup. She took it to the window, and stirred it up with a spoon
that lay in it; upon which she perceived that it was of a whitish
colour and thick substance, different from the usual appearance of
pea-soup. She replaced it on the shelf, and then examined another basin
containing a similar quantity of pea-soup, which, however, was of the
usual yellow colour, and of the ordinary substance. This basin she also
replaced on the shelf, and said nothing until the niece returned, when
she asked her the cause of the different appearances of the two soups;
to which the latter replied, that she had thickened one with flour, and
the other with oatmeal.

Mrs. Moore's suspicions having been excited, she gave the soup into the
charge of a carpenter who had come to measure for the coffin, who
locked it up in the room in which the corpse lay. A surgeon was then
sent for, who opened the body, and found the coat of the stomach
extremely vascular and red. He also found within the stomach a pint and
a half of fluid, which he put into a bottle, and which he sent,
together with the basins of soup, in a basket, to his surgery, for the
purpose of having them analysed. The fluid taken from the stomach was
afterwards submitted to several chemical tests, in the presence of four
or five professional gentlemen, all of which led to the same result --
namely, that it was impregnated with arsenic. The pea-soup was not
analysed, but was given to a dog, which immediately threw it off its
stomach, and consequently survived it.

When the female prisoner was taken into custody by an officer named
Gardiner, she was questioned on the subject by him, in a manner which
was severely reprehended by the learned judge, and excited a feeling of
strong indignation in the minds of every person in court, including the
learned counsel on both sides. She told him, in reply to his questions,
first that she had not purchased any arsenic; and on his saying that
Elizabeth Russel could prove that she had, she admitted it, but said
that she had only used it to destroy rats, and that one lay dead under
a particular chair, A dead mouse was found under that chair; but on its
being opened, there was no appearance of inflammation in the stomach,
which there must have been had it died from having swallowed arsenic.
She also denied having any money in her possession; but on being
searched, a box was found in one of her pockets, containing five
guineas; another box contained three; and in a purse were one guinea, a
half-guinea, and a seven-shilling piece. Gardiner, afterwards, when
conveying her to prison through the street, no other person being
present, said to her, "How could you be over-persuaded to do such a
thing?" to which the unfortunate girl replied, that she had not been
persuaded by any person, she had done it herself. She said she had put
two tea-spoonfuls of arsenic into a basin, and poured the soup over it,
and then gave it to her uncle.

There were no circumstances in the case, as against Clarke, to lead to
a positive conclusion that he had been aware of the poison having been
put into the soup, or of its having been purchased at all.

When called on for his defence, he put in a written address, in which
he principally dwelt upon the vagueness of the evidence adduced against
him, and asserted his innocence of the crime with which he stood
charged. The female prisoner merely said she was innocent, and left the
rest to her counsel. Several witnesses gave Clarke a good character;
but none appeared for Higgins.

The learned judge summed up the case to the jury with the most anxious
care and minuteness.

The jury, after deliberating for about five or six minutes, returned a
verdict acquitting Edward Clarke, but finding Mary Anne Higgins Guilty.

The learned judge then, in the usual form, sentenced the wretched girl
to be executed at Coventry, on Thursday, and her body to be dissected.

Throughout the whole of the trial the unhappy girl appeared to be
sensibly affected by the position in which she was placed; and during
the period occupied by the learned judge in passing sentence, she wept
bitterly. Upon being removed from the bar, her lamentations were of the
most piteous description, and she appeared deeply to deplore the death
of her uncle, and the crime of which she had been guilty.

The wretched convict, during the short period intervening between her
trial and execution, conducted herself in a becoming manner, and made
no efforts to excuse her unnatural conduct. She declined, however, to
make any statement accounting for the dreadful deed; but there can be
little doubt that her object was to prevent her uncle's discovery of
the robberies, of which it was perfectly evident she had been guilty,
upon him. At the place of execution she appeared to be sincerely
repentant, and prayed with great devotion.

     She was executed at Coventry, on the 11th of August, 1831.

It has been frequently observed with great truth, that secret poisoning
is one of the worst of crimes; because it is an offence against which
even the most wary can provide no safeguard. In the case the
particulars of which we have now laid before our readers, one is at a
loss to account for the crime of which the wretched convict was guilty:
and no less must we be surprised at the means taken by the unhappy girl
to secure her object, than at the circumstance of a person in her
position, with regard to her victim, engaging in so fearful a
transaction. Poisoning is universally looked upon as a crime of
peculiar atrocity; but the following anecdote will exhibit the
diminution of the frequency of its occurrence in recent years.

In the year 1670, the Marchioness of Brinvilliers, a lady of noble
family, resided in Paris. An officer named St. Croix, of good family
but ruined reputation, having formed an intrigue with her, her friends
procured his confinement in the Bastille, where he acquired from some
Italians the art of compounding poison. On his liberation he hastened
to the marchioness, and imparted to her his acquisition, as a means of
revenging themselves, and of bettering their ruined fortunes. She
eagerly entered into his views, and carried on the horrid trade with a
diabolical activity. Her husband, father, brothers, and sister quickly
perished. She is said to have disguised herself as a nun, and
distributed poisoned biscuits to the poor, in order to try the efficacy
of her poisons. Her career was cut short by an accident. A glass mask
which St. Croix wore while preparing his poisons fell off, and he was
found suffocated in his laboratory. A casket was also found there,
which was directed to Madame Brinvilliers, but opened by the police. It
contained poisons sufficient to destroy a community, labelled
differently, according to their effects, as ascertained by experiments
on animals. St. Croix's servant was seized, tortured, and confessed the
crimes of his employers, in which he had aided. The marchioness
escaped, but at last was captured; and having undergone the torture
with inflexible courage, was beheaded. On her person was found a full
confession and detail of her horrible crimes. This punishment did not
put a stop to the crime of poisoning in France, which was very common
between the years 1670 and 1680.


EDWARD HOGSDEN
Executed for Raping his Daughter.

Human nature itself must be startled at the horrible crime for the
commission of which this wretch was executed. The depravity of mankind
appears in him to have met with one of its fittest and most atrocious
representatives.

He was indicted at the Croydon Assizes, on Wednesday the 10th of
August, 1831, for a rape upon Harriet Hogsden, his own daughter, a girl
only seventeen years of age.

The evidence of the prosecutrix even placed the transaction in a
blacker light than that in which it had previously stood. The prisoner
and his family, consisting of his wife, the witness, and a younger
sister, resided on Ashtead Common, in the county of Surrey; and so many
of them as were able to work had employment on the farm of Mr. Haggett,
in the neighbourhood. On the 27th of July, the prisoner's wife and
youngest daughter went at four o'clock in the morning to work, the
prisoner having been out all night. At six o'clock the prisoner came
home and found the prosecutrix alone in the house. He then committed
the fearful crime which was alleged against him, under circumstances of
an appalling nature, which it would be impossible to repeat. The girl
implored him to desist, and used every exertion in her power to repel
his vile attack, but in vain. The presence of an infant -- the
offspring, as the girl swore, of a former forced connexion with her
unnatural parent -- had no effect in inducing him to desist, but only
brought down oaths of vengeance if she dared to say one word of what
occurred. The girl immediately sent for her mother and informed her of
the dreadful scene which had been enacted; and the prisoner was, in
consequence, taken into custody.

The prisoner, in his defence, strove to elicit from the girl that she
had had an acquaintance with a packman, who was the father of her
child, and that he had found him in bed with her on the morning in
question, but without effect; the girl swore that she had never been
intimate with any man except her father!

The wretched man then adopted a new line of defence, declaring that the
girl was not his daughter; but this too failed, and at length the
villain, driven from his second standing-place, asserted boldly that
his daughter had been a consenting party to all that had occurred.

In a written defence which he put in, he endeavoured to persuade the
jury that the charge had been trumped up by his wife and the
prosecutrix, because they wanted to get rid of him; and urged that it
was unlikely that he should be guilty of such a crime at such a period,
when he had been up all night watching his mother's grave, where her
remains had only been interred the day before; a fact which on inquiry
turned out to be true.

The jury unhesitatingly returned a verdict of Guilty, and the prisoner
was immediately sentenced to be executed; a sentence which was carried
out on Monday, the 21st of August, 1831; when the miserable convict
admitted the justice of his punishment.

We shall abstain from adding any further account of the life of this
diabolical ruffian, exhibiting as its circumstances do a degree of
sinfulness and crime not exceeded by any of those bloodthirsty
murderers whose offences it is our duty to describe.

At his execution, as during his trial, he exhibited the most callous
indifference.


ELIZABETH ROSS
Executed for a "Burking "Murder.

The period of the actual occurrence of the murder for which this woman
was executed, was antecedent to that of the crime of Bishop and
Williams; but the inquiries which took place in reference to her case,
rendered the delay of her punishment necessary until after those
atrocious malefactors had expiated their offences on the gallows.

The discovery of this murder took place in the month of November 1831,
when a young woman, named Baton, made a statement at Lambeth-street
Police-office, which induced a supposition that her grandmother, an
aged woman named Elizabeth Walsh, had been unfairly dealt with. An
investigation was ordered to be commenced by Lea, the officer, into the
affair; and he succeeded in making discoveries which excited the
strongest presumptions of the guilt of a woman named Cook, alias Ross,
of the crime of murdering the old woman. Mrs. Walsh, it was elicited,
was aged and decrepit, and was reduced to obtain a livelihood in the
streets by the sale of bobbins, stay-laces, and other similar trifling
articles. Mrs. Ross was known as a "cat-skinner," and collector of
hare-skins; and she lived with a man named Cook, in Goodman's-yard,
Minories, who had obtained an equally unenviable notoriety as a
"body-snatcher." Mrs. Ross, having become acquainted with old Mrs.
Walsh, had been known to express a strong desire that she would go to
lodge with her; but Mrs. Walsh, whose connections were somewhat
respectable, had been repeatedly cautioned to have nothing to do with a
person whose pursuits and associations were so disreputable. The poor
old woman, however, was over-persuaded by the specious arguments of her
wily friend; and at length, on the 19th of August 1831, she took up her
abode with the supposed Mr. and Mrs. Cook, at their residence. Mrs.
Cook occupied only one room, which formed the habitation of herself,
her paramour, her son (a boy about eleven years old), and her new
lodger. Mrs. Walsh was observed to go out only once after she took up
her residence in Goodman's-yard -- and after that she was never seen
alive. The circumstances of the case were thus far known when the
grand-daughter of Mrs. Walsh made her statement to the magistrates; but
the inquiries of Lea soon brought other facts to light, which amply
proved the guilt of Mrs. Ross of the crime imputed to her. Lea, as a
preliminary step, took Cook, Mrs. Ross, and their son, into custody;
and, on Wednesday, the 2nd of November, they were conveyed to
Worship-street Police-office. During the period which elapsed between
the apprehension of the boy and his examination at the police-office,
he was observed to be exceedingly agitated and uneasy. The master and
mistress of the parochial school at Aldgate, which he had attended for
two or three years, were, in consequence, sent for; and he made a
statement to them upon the subject of the death of Mrs. Walsh, the
substance of which he subsequently detailed before the magistrates.

On the same afternoon Cook and the female Ross were placed at the bar;
and their astonishment, on perceiving that their own child was about to
be admitted as a witness against them, was quite apparent.

The magistrate asked the boy if he was quite willing to make a full
disclosure of what he knew as to the disappearance of the old lady,
Elizabeth Walsh? And, having answered in the affirmative, he was sworn,
and made the following statement:-- He recollected the old lady,
Elizabeth Walsh, coming to his father and mother at No.7,
Goodman's-yard, Minories, about ten o'clock on a Friday morning. She
brought some bread in a basket, a part of which she gave to him for his
breakfast; she went away shortly afterwards, and returned about
tea-time in the evening, when she, as well as his mother and himself,
had some coffee; his father was not present at the time, though he was
when she came in the morning; they had coffee about half-past nine on
the same night for supper. He (witness) took part of it, and it made
him sleepy, but not sick; the old woman also took some of it, and it
seemed to make her drowsy, as she shortly afterwards stretched herself
on his father and mother's bed, and placed her hand under her head. She
did not at the time complain of illness; on the contrary, she appeared
in good health. Sometime afterwards he saw his mother go towards the
bed, and place her right hand over the mouth of the old woman, and her
left over her body [the boy here burst into tears, and said he was
sorry to be obliged to state such things against his own mother]. When
his mother placed her hand on the old lady's mouth her arm fell down,
and she lay flat on her back on the bed, and his mother continued to
keep one hand on her mouth and the other on her person for at least
half-an-hour; the old woman did not struggle much, but her eyes stared
and rolled very much. He (witness) stood by the fire at this time, and
his father, who was now in the room, stood looking out at the window;
his father stood so all the time, and he was sure he never once turned
round to see what was going forward, and that he had nothing to do with
it. In about an hour afterwards his mother raised the body of the old
woman from the bed, and carried it down stairs, but where to he did not
know; the body was not undressed at the time; he and his father went to
bed some time afterwards, and he could not say what time his mother
returned, as he did not see her again on that night, after she left the
room with the body in her arms. On the following morning he got up
about seven o'clock; his father and mother were then up, and in the
room; he had occasion, previous to going to school at eight o'clock, to
go into the cellar to the privy, and while searching through the cellar
for some ducks which he was told were there, he saw the body of the old
woman in a sack, which was placed underneath the stairs; a portion of
the head was out of the mouth of the sack, and the body appeared to be
partly bent, and reclining against the stairs; there was sufficient
light in the cellar for him to discern the colour of the hair on the
head; it was partly grey and black, but he could not say whether or not
the body was dressed or otherwise; the sack in which it was, was one
belonging to a person named Jones, with whom his father worked; he had
frequently seen it in their room, and he thought it was there on the
night before. He went to school shortly afterwards, and never mentioned
a word then or since about what had occurred, or his seeing the body in
the cellar; on returning home at twelve o'clock in the day, he found
his father beating his mother; he thought the cause to be, that the
latter had been out drinking with a young woman, the granddaughter of
the old lady, who had called to inquire after her; his mother, he
believed, while his father was beating her, called him a villainous
murderer, but he had no recollection of her threatening to give any
information of him. He (witness), after getting his dinner, went out to
play, and did not come home until late; himself, his father, and mother
supped together on the Saturday night, and at about ten o'clock his
mother left the room; in about half-an-hour afterwards he was standing
at the window, and saw her go past with the body in the sack on her
shoulder; it was in the same state as he saw it on that morning, except
that the mouth of the sack was tied; the body appeared to be partly
bent. [The female prisoner, in an audible voice, exclaimed, "Good God!
how could I have borne a son to hang me!"]-- The lad again burst into
tears, and said he could not help it -- that he was telling the truth.
He then proceeded with his statement. He did not know at what time his
mother had returned on Saturday night, as he and his father, who
remained in the room, went to bed, and he was asleep when she came in;
on the Sunday morning his mother told him that she had taken the body
to the London Hospital. The boy here, as in many parts of his
statement, said his father had nothing whatever to do in the business.
The magistrates examined him very minutely as to what had taken place
on the Friday night, and what conversations (if any) had taken place
between his father, mother, and himself, previous to and after the
horrid deed had been perpetrated. He said that no words or quarrel had
taken place; the old woman and his father and mother were on good
terms, and nothing particular had occurred during the evening, until
his mother placed her hand, as he had before described, on the mouth of
the old lady; nor did she say a word to him or his father while she so
held her hand on her mouth. He recollected she had been saying
something to him about taking the body to an hospital. He did not see
his father lay a hand on the old woman.

The magistrates expressed some surprise that the prisoner should, for a
whole day, leave the body in the cellar of the house, which was
accessible to all the inmates; but this was satisfactorily explained by
the landlady, who said, that in consequence of its being so dark, and
so infested with rats, the lodgers very seldom indeed entered it.

This was the substance of the boy's statement, and in many particulars
it was distinctly and amply corroborated by the concurrent testimony of
other witnesses. In some points, however, he was contradicted. It will
be observed, that he stated that the body was carried away by his
mother alone; but a man named Barry, whose evidence appeared to refer
to the same transaction, declared that he had seen the boy in company
with her, and assisting to carry the sack; while another negatived the
possibility of the truth of one of his declarations -- that his mother
had carried the body in her arms, and with great facility -- by stating
that the deceased was a very tall woman.

The prisoners, upon the proofs which had been adduced, however, were
remanded, and subsequent inquiries terminated in the production of
further evidence of the guilt of Mrs. Ross. This consisted of the
declarations of several persons that she had sold articles of clothing
to them in Rag-fair, which were identified as having belonged to the
deceased; and, more especially, that she had actually disposed of the
stock-in-trade of the poor old woman. All exertions to discover the
body of the deceased, however, proved unavailing; and, after several
examinations, the prisoners, Edward Cook and Elizabeth Ross, were, on
the 24th of December, committed for trial upon the charge of murder.

The intermediate occurrence of the case of Bishop and Williams, the
details of which we have already described, and the violent alarm
created in the public mind by the frequent reports of mysterious
disappearances, and "burking" murders, excited a great degree of
prejudice against these unfortunate prisoners, and it was not until the
6th of January 1832, that their case came on for final investigation at
the Old Bailey. Ross was then indicted for the wilful murder of the
deceased, while the charge made against her paramour, Cook, was that of
having aided and abetted his fellow-prisoner in the commission of the
offence.

Mr. Adolphus conducted the case for the prosecution, and Mr. Barry and
Mr. Churchill appeared on behalf of the prisoners. The defence set up
was,-- Perjury on the part of the boy, and the possibility that Mrs.
Walsh was still living, arising upon the non -discovery of her body.
The jury, however, returned a verdict of "Guilty" against Mrs. Ross,
but acquitted Cook.

The convict was immediately sentenced to be executed on the following
Monday: her body to be given over to the surgeons for dissection.

On Monday, the 8th of January, the wretched woman was hanged, in
pursuance of her sentence. After her conviction, as well as before, she
persisted in the strongest declarations of her innocence. Her statement
was, that she had left the old woman with Cook on the night of her
supposed murder, and that having then gone out, she did not return for
several hours. On her going back she was told that the old woman had
quitted the house. She maintained an extraordinary degree of firmness
of nerve; and, up to the last moment of her existence, continued
uttering protestations that she was not guilty, and ejaculations of her
misery at quitting her own country (Ireland) to be hanged. She mounted
the scaffold without assistance, and was turned-off at the customary
signal.


THE REFORM RIOTS
1831-2.

Illustration: The Mayor of Bristol Escaping from the Mansion House

The Political Background

The year 1831 will ever be memorable in the history of Great Britain,
for the struggles by which its progress was characterised, in favour of
the great measure of Reform. There was, in reality, no problem ever
more clearly or more satisfactorily demonstrated, than the iniquities
of parliamentary elections and representation. The necessity for reform
was almost universally admitted; for the errors and evils of the
existing system had ceased to be seriously denied, and were made the
subject of discussion by way of defence only, by persons whose
ingenuity and sophistry enabled them to raise arguments in their
favour. Half a century had elapsed since reform was on the point of
being achieved by a national movement, when it was arrested by the "No
Popery" riots of Lord George Gordon. Subsequent events of a nature too
powerfully exciting to admit of so large a measure of power to be
immediately accorded to the people, required its temporary abandonment;
but never entirely laid aside, and always appreciated for its
importance and certain utility, it was reserved to be brought forward
at a period when tranquillity and favouring circumstances should secure
for it a triumphant reception. Such an opportunity presented itself at
the commencement of the reign of a liberal and puissant monarch. In
William the Fourth, a king was found in every respect worthy the
admiration and respect of his subjects, and his reign, short though it
was, forms an eventful period of modern history.

The retirement from office of those ministers who had so long swayed
the destinies of the nation, afforded to the party who had cherished
the anticipation of their procuring the adoption of a measure, which
should have for its effect the removal of the existing abuses, an
opportunity of attempting to carry out the object which they had in
view, and which was so anxiously looked for by the people. The
formation of a ministry from among the leaders of this party was an
event highly calculated to excite the most favourable expectations, and
the speedy declaration of the wishes of his majesty being in entire
accordance with those of his people, produced a degree of general
satisfaction, which had not been equalled during a long series of
years. Savile, Wyvile, William Pitt, Charles Grey, Burdett, Cartwright,
Brande, Lambton, and Lord John Russell, were among the names of those
by whom the important topic of reform had been already brought before
Parliament, and the period had now arrived when the exertions of these
men were to have their effect and their reward.

The ministry of Earl Grey was formed in November 1830. Public opinion
imperatively marshalled the way, and there was no intention exhibited
by the new advisers of his majesty to diverge into any by-path. Those
members of the government who had not always been favourable to reform,
were now converted, or acquiesced in the necessity of the introduction
of such a measure, and it was fully understood that the conditions on
which the ministers proposed to conduct the government committed to
them, was peace abroad, and reform and retrenchment at home. These were
pledges which they most honestly redeemed, in a spirit of wisdom, and
temperance, and of firmness, and patriotism.

The Reform Bill was first introduced to the House of Commons on the 1st
of March 1831, and so great had been the excitement during the election
of the preceding year, that the second reading was carried by a
majority of one, in a parliament chosen under the auspices of the
Wellington administration: but on the 20th, General Gascoigne carried
an amendment, in opposition to a clause proposed by ministers, by a
majority of eight. Two days afterwards parliament was dissolved, in a
speech in which the king stated that the appeal about to be made to the
people had been resolved upon, expressly with a view of ascertaining
their sense as to the proposed alteration in the representation. The
general election took place in May, and the new parliament met on the
14th of June. On the 24th of the same month the second Reform Bill was
introduced, and on the 4th of July, after a debate of three nights, the
second reading was carried by a majority of one hundred and thirty-six;
the motion having been supported by three hundred and sixty-seven
members, and opposed by two hundred and thirty-one. The bill passed the
House of Commons, but at half past six o'clock on the morning of the
8th of October, after a debate of five nights, it was thrown out, on
the second reading, in the House of Lords, by a majority of one hundred
and ninety-nine to one hundred and fifty-eight. On the 20th, parliament
was prorogued, and was not called together again until the 6th of
December. The year, which had already been so busy and eventful, did
not close till the great measure, in the discussion of which so much
time had been spent, was again before the legislature. The third Reform
Bill was introduced into the Commons on the 12th of December, and was
read a second time on the 17th, by a majority of two to one. Having,
however, been detained nearly two months in committee, it did not leave
the Commons until the 19th of March 1832, when the third reading was
carried by a majority of three hundred and fifty-five to two hundred
thirty-nine. At seven o'clock on the morning of the 1 4th of April, it
was read a second time in the House of Lords, by a majority of nine,
the numbers being one hundred and eighty-four in its favour, and one
hundred and seventy-five against it: four nights having been occupied
in its discussion. On the 7th of May, the day on which parliament
re-assembled after the Easter recess, the motion proposed by Lord
Lyndhurst, to postpone the consideration of the disfranchising clauses
until the enfranchising clauses had been discussed, was carried against
ministers by a majority of one hundred and fifty-one to one hundred and
sixteen; and as this was looked upon as the first of a series of
obstructions, dextrously intended by the noble and learned lord to
delay and mutilate, if not to destroy, the national scheme, the
ministers adopted, on the instant, a firm and resolute course. On the
9th of the same month Earl Grey announced in the Lords, and Viscount
Althorp in the Commons, that ministers had resigned. A week of terrific
agitation ensued, but the sequel proved the efficiency and the
excellence of the step which had been adopted.

Lord Lyndhurst, the Duke of Wellington, and Sir Robert Peel, were the
new advisers selected by his majesty; but they were made acquainted
with his majesty's determination that an extensive reform should be
effected. Lord Lyndhurst and the noble Duke were not unwilling to lend
themselves to the existing emergency; but the right honourable baronet
was more untractable, and the consequence was, the abandonment of the
design of the new administration, and the recurrence of the king to his
old advisers. On the 18th of May, Earl Grey intimated that he and his
colleagues had re-assumed their offices, and that they had done so with
an assurance from the king, that his majesty's co-operative aid to
carry the Reform Bill should not be wanting. Reports had been long in
circulation of the possibility of the creation of a sufficient number
of new peers to overwhelm the Tory majority of the House of Lords; but
the king and his ministers had hitherto manifested a laudable
reluctance to resort to such a measure. Now, however, it was felt that
this was the only course left to be pursued; and that measure, which
was looked upon rightly as one to which recourse should be had only
when all other means had failed, was determined to be resorted to. But
the king's resolve having become known, its execution was rendered
unnecessary. The Tory peers, rather than such a step should be taken,
consented to forego their opposition; and, on the 4th of June 1832, the
Reform Bill was read a third time, and passed by a majority of one
hundred and six to twenty-two. On the 7th of June it received the royal
assent. The Scotch and Irish Reform Bills, and the Boundaries Bill,
were, in like manner, soon after enacted into laws. On the I6th of
August parliament was prorogued, and, on the 3rd of December, a
dissolution took place. The remainder of that month was occupied in the
first general election under the new system of representation.

Having thus succinctly detailed the eventful proceedings of parliament
during this short period, we shall now proceed to describe the
consequences produced by the frequent and repeated refusals of the
legislature to accede to the wishes of the people -- consequences, the
causes of which, without such an introduction, would scarcely be
intelligible.


Riots in London

It was in allusion to the rejection of the Reform Bill in the month of
October 1831 by the House of Lords, that the popular feeling was most
strongly exhibited. Many of the newspapers, which announced the result
of the division in the House of Lords, were put into mourning, and a
feeling of the deepest and most melancholy foreboding soon spread
itself throughout the country. The fate of the Reform Bill became
speedily known, and on the Monday following marks of unequivocal sorrow
and disgust exhibited themselves. In the metropolis circulars were
distributed in every parish, calling meetings; all business appeared
suspended; and the shops in all directions were either partially or
totally closed. Mourning flags were exhibited from the houses,
accompanied by placards, in which the bishops, who had formed a
considerable portion of the majority against the bill, presented a
source of prolific censure. In King-street, Seven-dials, the effigy of
the Duke of Wellington was burned; and, in Tottenham-court-road, a
placard was exhibited at a shop, announcing that arms might be had, to
be paid for by instalments. On the part of the government, every
precaution was taken for the preservation of the public peace. Troops
were marched into London, and stationed so as to be ready to be called
into immediate activity in case of necessity; ball-cartridges were
distributed, and everything was done which prudence could suggest for
the maintenance of order. Numerous meetings were held in the course of
the week, at which the most enthusiastic determination was exhibited;
and every means was adopted by the people to throw disgrace and
discredit upon those by whom their wishes had been opposed. The Duke of
Wellington, and other noble peers who had distinguished themselves by
their opposition to the bill, were roughly greeted, and were pelted on
their way to the House of Lords. The Duke of Cumberland was also nearly
receiving much ill-usage from a mob assembled in the Park. On Wednesday
the 13th of October, the king held a levee at St. James's Palace, at
which an immense number of addresses was presented. The trades' unions
assembled in vast mobs in the neighbourhood of the palace, accompanied
by their flags and other insignia, and some violence was done by the
mob. The residence of the Marquis of Bristol, in St. James's-square,
was made the object of an attack by them. Many of the windows were
dashed in, and a considerable quantity of valuable effects destroyed;
but fortunately there were many well-disposed persons in the vicinity,
by whom the police were assisted, and the rioters dispersed. The mob,
however, had been no sooner driven from here, than they proceeded at
once to the residence of the Duke of Wellington, Apsley House,
Piccadilly. This was, in turn, made the object of an assault even more
severe and determined than that of the Marquis of Bristol. At about
half-past two o'clock in the day, several parties were seen to approach
the residence of his grace, and the foremost of the gang threw a few
stones at the windows, and sent forth the most horrible yells. Some of
the servants belonging to the establishment came forward and presented
pistols at the mob assembled; but this only served to increase their
anger. A volley of stones was instantly hurled at their supposed
assailants; and a cry being raised of "They are going to fire on us --
now let us go to work," an instant attack was commenced on the mansion.
Stones flew in showers on the house, and not a dozen panes of glass
were left undemolished, while many valuable pictures inside were
utterly ruined, and the furniture was destroyed. The police at first
were in small numbers upon the spot, but a reinforcement having arrived
from the Vigo-street Station-house, a vigorous attack on the mob was
commenced. The employment of their staves, and the determination which
was exhibited by the constables, served, in a very material degree, to
drive away the assembled crowd; and, of those who were taken into
custody, all were of the lowest class -- showing that their object was
rather mischief or depredation, than the assertion of a principle, or
the maintenance of a right. At about seven o'clock in the evening, a
new attempt to get up a riot was made by a mob of two or three hundred
persons, who were met on their way through Piccadilly towards St.
James's Palace; but a speedy stop was put to their proceedings by the
police, who had assembled in large bodies to repel any such new effort
as might be made.

But while in the metropolis no acts of serious mischief were done, the
effects produced by this event in the country were of a nature much to
be regretted. At Derby and Nottingham, more especially, serious riots
took place. At the former place it is exceedingly probable that the
event would have been passed over without any disturbance, but for the
indecent and insulting ebullition of joy manifested by a party of those
who were opposed to the Reform Bill. The bells of the churches had been
tolling during the whole of Saturday evening, the news having reached
the town by express at an early hour on that day, and a number of
persons, amounting to a considerable crowd, having assembled at the
coach-offices, awaiting the arrival of the London coaches, in order
that their fears might be set at rest, they were assailed with laughter
and other uncalled-for insults by their political opponents. The
consequence was a retaliation on their part, which terminated in an
attack upon the houses of those who had made themselves unpopular by
their conduct. The windows of many of these houses were demolished, and
the persons of some of their owners subjected to violence; but at
length a considerable number of the rioters were taken into custody.
This served only to increase their anger, and an attack being made upon
the jail, the whole of the prisoners were liberated. The mob in turn
were assailed by the keeper of the prison and his assistants, with
fire-arms, and the result was that three of their number were killed.
The soldiery were then called out, and tranquillity was at length with
some difficulty restored.


Riots in Nottingham

At Nottingham the riots bore even a more serious aspect. The
consternation which was produced by the arrival of the news of the
defeat of the reformers was of a fearful description. During the night
of Saturday anything but tranquillity prevailed; and, on the following
morning, all were on the tiptoe of anxiety for the arrival of the
London newspapers. These brought food to increase the exasperation of
the populace. At dark on the Sunday night thousands of persons
assembled in the streets of the town, and perambulated the principal
thoroughfares. The result was, an attack upon the houses of all those
who were opposed to the measure of reform. Windows were broken in all
directions; and, as the night advanced, a body of the 13th Hussars,
stationed in the neighbourhood, was marched into the town. The people
were entreated to disperse, and they indeed quitted the spot on which
they were found assembled, but only to make a fresh circuit of the town
to complete the work of annoyance to their opponents which they had
commenced.

On the next day a meeting of the inhabitants of the town and county of
Nottingham was held in the market-place, in pursuance of a requisition
which had been numerously signed. A stage was erected in the centre,
which was speedily occupied by the mayor, Lord Rancliffe, and many
other of the influential inhabitants of the vicinity. Resolutions were
adopted, and an address to his Majesty, in unison with their tenor, was
enthusiastically cheered. All the speakers urged the people to be
guilty of no excesses; but the mob showed little disposition to listen
to advice so wholesome, and loud and deep murmurs were heard to escape
their lips, expressive of their dislike for their opponents, and of
their anxiety for an opportunity to take revenge upon them for their
unpopular acts. Shortly before the meeting separated, fourteen bodies
organised themselves, and marched in different directions, apparently
intent on mischief. Many of them joined at the outskirts of the town,
and proceeding to the racecourse they destroyed a mill there; after
which they shaped their way to the residence of Mr. John Masters,
Colwick Hall. Here they committed havoc of the most serious character.
Attacking the house, they soon forced an entrance, and they carried off
or destroyed every article of property which it contained. The damage
done was immense, and the destruction of some valuable pictures is much
to be deplored. An attempt was also made to burn the premises, which,
however, was unsuccessful, and the mob, armed with the iron palisades
by which the house had been surrounded, returned to Nottingham. The
castle of Nottingham, belonging to the Duke of Newcastle, a determined
anti-reformer, was an object which was soon exposed to their fury. It
had been built about one hundred and fifty years before, by an Ancestor
of the present Duke of Newcastle, at a cost of 25,000l., and it
presented to them at once the means of gratifying their revenge and
their spirit of mischief. They entered the castle gates, and proceeding
through the court-yard they soon reached the lofty pile. All was
anxiety, but suspense was not long delayed; flames were seen in a few
minutes issuing in abundance from the windows, and by the next morning
the edifice was destroyed. The amazement created in the neighbourhood
was intense; and for a considerable time prevented the inhabitants from
taking any steps to prevent or to stop the proceedings of the rioters.
The fifteenth Hussars were active in the discharge of their duties, and
exhibited both judgment and humanity. On the morning of Tuesday the
11th of October, the castle was found to be still burning, but the
destructive element had extended its mischievous effects only to the
interior of the building. The external walls remained standing, while
the whole of the interior woodwork, together with a large quantity of
valuable tapestry, which formed its only furniture, had been destroyed.

During the whole of this day the troops patrolled the town, but the
spirit of incendiarism was abroad, and a party of the mob of the
preceding night assembled at Beeston, near Nottingham, where they
ransacked and fired a silk mill belonging to Mr. Lowe. The whole of the
machinery and the premises were destroyed, and no fewer than three
hundred persons were thrown out of employment in consequence of this
dreadful act. The mob were attacked and routed, and two or three
persons were killed, besides about twenty being taken prisoners; and it
was only the exhibition of the determination of the military and
constabulary forces to enforce the law which at length thoroughly and
completely dispersed them.

On the following Thursday, tranquillity had been completely restored.

At Liverpool, Manchester, Birmingham, York, Sheffield, Northampton,
Worcester, and other places, the expression of the popular opinion was
no less distinct, although it was not attended with any of those
mischievous results which characterised it in the districts to which
reference has been already made.

During the ensuing week, at Nottingham, active measures were taken to
secure the persons of those who had been engaged in the riots in that
town. The Duke of Newcastle having arrived at his seat, Clumber House,
issued a proclamation, as lord-lieutenant of the county, and Clumber
House, and Wollerton Hall, the seat of Lord Middleton, were both
fortified and garrisoned, lest any new outbreak should take place. No
event occurred, however, which showed this step to have been necessary,
and in the course of a few days an additional number of twenty
prisoners was made, charged with being concerned in the late riots.

The serious nature of these occurrences attracted universal attention,
and it was deemed fit that the crimes of the offenders should be made
the subject of investigation before a special commission.

The commission was opened at Nottingham, on Wednesday the 4th of
January 1832, and the proceedings of the court terminated on Saturday
the 14th of January. Many prisoners had been convicted of minor
offences in the course of ten days, during which the judges had sat,
and had been sentenced to imprisonment, or fine; but on the 14th of
January, those who had been capitally convicted were brought up to
receive sentence. Their names were, George Beck, George Hearson, Thomas
Armstrong, Thomas Shelton, and Thomas Berkins. These were placed in
front, and behind them stood William Kitchen, David Timman, Valentine
Marshall, and Thomas Whitaker. The prisoners were addressed by Mr.
Justice Littledale, in a feeling manner: and the learned judge having
stated the leading circumstances attending the riots, said that the
four last-named prisoners would be recommended as fit objects for the
exercise of the royal clemency -- the others, however, whose share in
the riots had been greater, must prepare to quit this world.

The learned judge concluded by passing the sentence of death upon the
five prisoners to whom he had severally addressed himself.

During the period which subsequently elapsed before the time fixed for
the execution of these culprits, great and meritorious exertions were
made by the inhabitants of Nottingham to procure a remission of their
sentence, which were not entirely unsuccessful. On Tuesday 31st
January, letters were received by the proper authorities from the
Home-office, announcing a determination that the full sentence of death
should be carried out upon Beck, Hearson, and Armstrong, but that the
other two prisoners, Berkins and Shelton, should be respited. Some
disappointment was exhibited that this measure of clemency did not
extend to the whole of the prisoners under sentence; and the arrival of
the mail on the next morning, when the other convicts were to be
executed, was looked for with much anxiety, in the anticipation that
further letters might be received. In obedience to the wish of the
townspeople, the execution was postponed from eight o'clock on the
Wednesday morning until eleven; but at a quarter-past ten the mail
arrived with no further respite.

The prisoners were then immediately led from their cells to be
pinioned, preparatory to their execution. They had passed their time
since their conviction in the exercise of such religious observances as
were deemed by Dr. Wood, the minister of the jail, best suited to their
position, and declared themselves perfectly ready to die. During the
period occupied by their being pinioned, they were all three perfectly
calm and collected.

On Dr. Wood's concluding the affecting prayer which is always read to
criminals just before their execution, and on his consigning them to
God's gracious protection and mercy, the procession was formed to
ascend the scaffold. Beck ascended it first with great seriousness, but
with a firm and unfaltering footstep. Hearson, who had joined with much
fervour in all the devotional exercises of the morning, surprised all
who had seen his previous conduct by the manner in which he behaved
after mounting the scaffold. He took his cap off his head, waved it in
a sort of triumph, and began to dance like a maniac in his chains. He
recognised some individual who was seated on a housetop opposite the
scaffold, and shouted out, "Well done, Will, lad." A person in the
crowd said to him, "Good bye, Curley," addressing him by the name by
which he was commonly known. This address set him to dancing again; and
his extraordinary conduct at this crisis of his fate is attributed, not
to any spirit of bravado, but to sudden delirium. He turned round to
the hangman, and complained that he had not an inch of rope, saying,
"Give me rope enough that I may be sooner out of misery." Armstrong,
who was brought last upon the scaffold, was much distressed on seeing
the frantic gestures of Hearson. About eight minutes were consumed in
these preparations. Exactly at twenty minutes before twelve, the
hangman drew their caps over their faces; and that ceremony seemed to
be the signal for a thousand voices to utter the fearful cries of
"Murder!" and of "Blood!" These sounds must have been ringing in the
ears of the unfortunate men at the very moment when the withdrawal of
the fatal bolt carried them from the tribunals of man to appear at the
bar of heavenly justice. They were clasping each other's hands at the
moment they fell, but the suddenness of their fall severed the
association, and the agonies of death prevented their renewing it. They
struggled, but not violently, for five minutes. At the expiration of
that time, their frames had ceased to heave, and life was evidently
extinct. After the cry of murder had subsided, the multitude, which
must have consisted of eight or ten thousand people, behaved with great
propriety and decorum. It did not, however, disperse until the hangman
made his second appearance on the scaffold to cut down these
unfortunate delinquents. This was done at twenty minutes before one
o'clock. The bodies were then placed in their respective coffins, and
were delivered to their friends in the course of the next day.

At the ensuing assizes for the county of Nottingham, some further
convictions for robberies during the riots took place; and several
prisoners were sentenced to transportation, to which punishment, also,
the sentences of those who had been capitally convicted before the
special commission, but respited, were commuted.

At the Derby assizes, on Saturday the 17th of March, several prisoners
were put upon their trial for the alleged participation in the riots
which had taken place in that town. The prosecution was sought to be
supported by the evidence of an approver, who, however, was disbelieved
by the jury, and a verdict of acquittal returned.

Other prisoners were not so fortunate, and paid the forfeit of their
offences, by suffering imprisonment for various short periods.

In London, too, a similar measure of justice was dealt out to the
offenders who had been secured, but the prisoners were almost all of
the very lowest classes of the people, and their respective cases
presented no features of general interest.


Riots in Bristol

These disgraceful proceedings were consequential upon the rejection of
the Reform Bill, to which allusion is made in the last article. Sir
Charles Wetherall, who was recorder of Bristol, had, throughout the
debates which took place upon this most important subject, in his seat
in parliament, delivered himself of sentiments strongly opposed to the
great measure, which was justly looked upon as so important to the
interests of the people; and his conduct had procured for him on this
account a notoriety as unenviable as in the sequel it proved dangerous.
The wishes and the desires of the people were treated by him with
levity, and even with contempt; and in Bristol, more especially, a
strong feeling of hostility was excited against him, from the near
connexion by which he was bound to that city.

It was pretty generally known that Sir Charles would enter Bristol on
the 29th of October, 1831, for the purpose of opening the commission
for the trial of offenders; and very natural apprehensions were
entertained that his appearance would produce some popular commotion.
The mayor and civic authorities were apprised of the impending danger;
and with a degree of discretion not usually found to be exercised on
such occasions, they procured the aid of the military, and swore in a
great number of special constables, in order to be ready to meet and
quell any disturbance or riot which might arise. The office of special
constable was looked upon by the more respectable portion of the
inhabitants as one which, under existing circumstances, it would be
irksome to hold; and many persons were sworn in, whose conduct in the
end unfortunately showed how ill the confidence placed in them had been
bestowed. The consequences were of the most fatally appalling nature;
and the following statement of the occurrences of the 29th, 30th, and
31st of October will be read with pain, not unmixed with disgust at the
excesses which were committed.

On Wednesday, the 26th of October 1831, Sir Charles Wetherall arrived
at Bath; and, contrary to his usual custom, which was to take up his
residence at the house of his sister-in-law, the lady of Colonel Jones,
he repaired to the York-house Hotel. During his stay there, although
there existed against him a good deal of angry feeling, no particular
notice was taken of him. Bills, announcing the place of his sojourn,
were distributed through the town; but even this failed in so far
exciting the minds of the people as to induce them to offer any injury,
or even insult, to the learned gentleman. The ill-feeling which
prevailed against him was, however, known, and its consequences
apprehended; and so desirous were his friends to avoid any popular
outbreak against him, that the period of his departure from Bath was
determined to be concealed, Friday night was therefore openly named as
the time at which he should quit Bath, but, in reality, he did not
retire from the city until Saturday morning at ten o'clock. His
carriage at that hour was drawn up in the backyard of the hotel, ready
for his accommodation; and, drawn by four horses, the learned gentleman
was quickly driven off.

Although he thus stealthily quitted Bath, Sir Charles had repeatedly
expressed his determination not to enter Bristol in a covert manner. He
declared his belief in a "reaction," which would produce a strong
feeling in his favour; and although he was warmly and strongly
recommended not to adopt the course upon which it was understood he had
fixed, he persisted in pursuing the line of conduct pointed out.

At about half-past eleven o'clock, Sir Charles was perceived to
approach Bristol at a rapid rate, in a chariot drawn by four greys;
and, on stopping at Totterdown for the purpose of being handed into the
sheriff's carriage, he was instantly assailed by the most deafening
yells, groans, and hisses. The constables were then, in considerable
numbers, placed around the carriage; a gentleman on horseback riding
close by the side of each door, and three or four hundred preceding and
following. In this manner the cavalcade, which comprised also the usual
number of mayor's and sheriff's officers, mounted, with favours,
proceeded slowly towards the city. Just as Sir Charles was passing over
Hill's-bridge, his carriage was assailed with four or five stones; but
no movement took place with a view to apprehend the offenders, the
whole force being anxious only for the protection of the recorder's
person. As the procession moved onward, the expressions of
disapprobation from the multitude became more and more deafening. In
Temple-street, the windows of the houses were crowded with spectators,
and the lower orders of females were particularly vociferous in the
expression of their feelings, frequently charging the men with
cowardice and want of spirit. In passing from the bridge to
High-street, one of the constables, a respectable tradesman, received a
dangerous contusion in the head; and, in the latter street, also, some
few stones were thrown.

On arriving at the Guildhall, in Broad-street, it was with the greatest
difficulty that Sir Charles could alight, from the pressure of the
immense multitude; but, after the lapse of a few minutes, he was handed
out in safety, and proceeded to take his station on the bench. The
doors of the hall were then thrown open to the populace, and in a few
minutes the area was completely choked up.

The usual forms for opening the commission then commenced; but the
noise and confusion occasioned considerable interruption. Amidst a
scene of indescribable uproar, they were with difficulty gone through;
and, at their conclusion, an adjournment of the court to the following
Monday morning took place. The recorder then withdrew from the bench,
and the populace, after some further marks of their displeasure towards
the learned judge, gave three cheers for the king and retired into the
street. Some considerable time then elapsed before the recorder was
taken up for the purpose of being conveyed to the Mansion-house. During
the interval, Broadstreet, and, indeed, the whole line of the route,
was occupied by a dense mass of the population. Beyond the mere vocal
expression of their feelings, however, there was nothing in their
conduct, at this period, calculated to excite alarm. On Sir Charles's
reappearance, he was greeted with a repetition of the same favours
which had before been so liberally bestowed upon him, which continued
through the remainder of his progress, with the exception that, at the
Commercial-rooms, in front of which a body of his admirers had placed
themselves, he was greeted with three cheers. But there was no violence
until the arrival of the carriage at the Mansion-house, in
Queen-square. There a few stones were thrown, and a lamp or a window of
the carriage was broken; but the recorder himself received no injury.

We have now arrived at what we conceive to be the most important part
of our narrative, inasmuch as it was the universal opinion, that the
proceedings which directly followed the arrival of the recorder and
corporation at the Mansion-house were the more immediate cause of all
the disgraceful events which subsequently occurred. A few minutes after
their alighting, a rush was made on the populace by a posse of special
constables, for the purpose of securing the persons by whom the
missiles had just been thrown, and an individual was taken hold of, and
dragged into the Mansion-house, Again another rush took place, and
another capture was made; and this was repeated several times; the
conviction being pretty general, that persons were selected at random.
The least show of opposition on the part of the populace, who, during
these proceedings, were really guiltless of any new outrage, subjected
them to the most brutal attacks of some of the persons who assumed to
be special constables, many of whom, by imprudently brandishing their
staves, did much to excite the feelings of the people.

At this moment the number of persons collected in the square could not
have been less than ten thousand; and a cry having been raised of "To
the back," where piles of faggots and firewood were usually kept, a
large body proceeded thither, and having armed themselves with sticks,
returned in a few minutes to the scene of action. It was then that, for
the first time, any serious collision was apprehended; but the
constables rushing out in a body, in a moment infused terror into the
people, and the sticks were soon to be seen strewed in every direction
upon the ground. These were gathered up in bundles and carried off.
This was about half-past twelve o'clock. From that period till about
four o'clock, the time was passed in occasional skirmishes between the
constables and the populace, which generally ended in some one being
taken into custody. During these proceedings it was visible that the
people were becoming more and more exasperated. Now and then a pane of
glass was smashed in, or a club hurled at the heads of the constables;
and these attacks generally led to measures which heightened, rather
than allayed, the popular feeling.

At about four o'clock, when the shades of night were rapidly
approaching, a considerable portion of the constabulary force was most
unadvisedly permitted to retire to their homes, for the purpose of
refreshing themselves, with an understanding that they should return to
relieve the remainder at six o'clock. From that moment the mob became
more daring in their attacks on the Mansion-house, until at length the
mayor came forward to beg of them to desist, and to retire to their
homes. The sentiments delivered by his worship on this occasion were
such as did honour to his heart, though it is to be regretted that he
did not come forward at an earlier stage of the proceedings, before the
minds of the people had been so highly wrought up. His worship, during
his address, was assaulted with stones, and a very large one very
narrowly missed striking him on the head. The Riot Act was then read,
but without producing the least effect upon the mob, who, perceiving
the weakness of the force opposed to them, rushed upon the constables,
disarmed them, and beat them severely. In this affray many persons
sustained serious injuries. One constable, as a condition of release
from their vengeance, was compelled to throw his own staff at the
mayor's windows; others were obliged to seek refuge in flight; and one
was actually chased into the float (dock), whence he was taken up by a
boat-hook.

Nothing now remaining to curb the mob, the work of violence immediately
commenced by a general and simultaneous attack on every part of the
Mansion-house. In an instant the windows and sashes were smashed to
atoms; the shutters were beaten to pieces; the doors forced; and every
article of furniture on the ground-floor broken up. Tables, chairs,
sideboards, mirrors, chimney-glasses, were demolished. The iron
palisades, together with the curb-stones in which they were set, were
thrown down as if they had been mere reeds stuck in a mud-bank, and
furnished many a desperate villain with a formidable iron bar; young
trees were torn up by the roots, and converted into weapons of
destruction; walls were thrown down to provide bricks with which to
assail the upper windows; and straw and combustibles were procured with
which to fire the whole premises. At this critical moment it was that
Sir Charles effected his retreat, in disguise, through the adjoining
premises; but it was not made known until twelve o'clock on the
following day that he had left the city. For the present, however, the
Mansion-house was saved from conflagration by the arrival of the
troops.

It was supposed, judging from the conduct of the mob in the morning,
that the appearance of two troops of horse would have been the signal
for a general rout. They had now, however, acquired a considerable
accession of force, and it was obvious that they had been joined by
some of the most determined and desperate characters of the place.
Instead of retreating, the thousands who were present, clustering like
bees on the adjoining walls and elevations, cheered the troops with the
greatest enthusiasm.

Under the protection of the military, the constables and specials again
collected in considerable numbers, and several of the most daring of
the mob were made prisoners. Still it was found impossible to clear the
square or the streets adjacent. The soldiers trotted their horses
backward and forward amidst the cheers of the mob, but not the
slightest disposition was shown to disperse. The colonel of the
district (Colonel Brereton), exerted himself in the most humane and
laudable manner. He harangued the multitude, begged and entreated them
to repair to their homes, and cautioned them of the dreadful
consequences which their conduct otherwise would infallibly draw upon
them. He was everywhere received with the greatest cordiality, and with
loud cheers.

In the manner already described, things proceeded in the square until
twelve o'clock at night. About this time a party of the rioters,
disappointed by the restraint which the troops imposed upon them,
proceeded to the Council-house, where they commenced operations by
smashing the windows. Meanwhile orders were given to the cavalry to
make a charge, and here the scene became one of the greatest confusion.
The people who ran in all directions, were pursued through the streets
for a considerable distance by the soldiers, and several of them
received severe cuts from their sabres. Many of the people took refuge
in the various passages in Wine-street, from whence they assailed the
troops with stones, particularly at the top of the Pithay, where one of
the soldiers having been struck, he immediately turned round and shot a
man dead upon the spot. This was at half-past twelve; and the soldiers
continuing to gallop about the street, prevented the re-assembling of
the mob during the night.

On Sunday morning the people again began to collect at an early hour in
Queen-square, but everything remaining quiet, and it being hoped that
danger had subsided, the troops were withdrawn for some refreshment.
They had scarcely disappeared when the mob again commenced their
outrages. Ascending now to the upper rooms of the Mansion-house, they
proceeded to throw out the valuable furniture into the square. The
drawers and other depositories were ransacked, and wearing apparel, bed
and table linen, china, &c. were plundered, or wantonly destroyed.

But another, and a most dangerous, exciting cause began to develop
itself. During the sacking of the Mansion-house the wine-cellars were
forced, and it is supposed that at least one-third of a stock of
three-hundred dozen of choice wines was carried off, and wasted and
drunk by the mob. It is needless to say that the result was fraught
with the worst possible effects; they became madly infuriate, and
regardless alike of what mischief they committed, or what risk they
incurred. The scene at this moment was of the most depraved
description; all ages, of both sexes, were to be seen greedily
swallowing the intoxicating liquors; while upon the ground the bodies
of scores were to be found, dead with drunkenness. The streets remote
from the scene of action, from this time became noisy from the
turbulence of wretches who were to be seen staggering about in all
directions. The troops were then speedily replaced, but the infuriate
mob began to act on the offensive, and sought to wreak their vengeance
on them for the wounds they had inflicted on the preceding evening, and
particularly to be revenged for the killing of the man on the top of
the Pithay. They attacked them with a shower of stones and brickbats,
which the men were prevented from resisting, no magistrate being in
attendance to take the responsibility of orders to that effect. In this
state of things the commanding-officer judged it prudent to withdraw
the troops (the 14th Light Dragoons) and replace them with a body of
the 3rd Dragoon Guards, commanded by Captain Warrington. On the
retirement of the former, they were followed by a large portion of the
mob, who continued their assaults upon them along the quay and over the
drawbridge. On arriving at St. Augustine's Back, being provoked beyond
further forbearance, they turned round and fired several shots on their
assailants. The mob, however, nothing daunted, still continued to
follow them; and in College Green some further firing occurred. In this
place a considerable number of persons had assembled, expecting that
Sir Charles as usual would attend Divine Service in the Mayor's Chapel.
Still the mob continued their assaults, hanging upon the soldiers'
heels, until they arrived at their quarters in the Boar's-Head-yard,
where they were again fired upon. The discharges, as the result must
show, were however but partial; the number of killed being only one,
and wounded seven or eight. One poor fellow, who had taken no part in
the disturbances, was shot through the arm as he was standing upon the
Quay, on the opposite side.

Immediately after these occurrences, Colonel Brereton rode down to the
Square, followed by a considerable number of men and boys, who cheered
him on his way thither. He assured them that there should be no more
firing, that the 14th should be immediately sent out of the city, and
again exhorted them to return to their homes. This was about eleven
o'clock; and it was truly awful to reflect on the scenes which were
passing at the time when service was commencing in the churches in the
neighbourhood. In the square, with the exception of the scenes of
drunkenness which were still going on, nothing particular transpired
until the evening, with the exception that an individual mounted the
statue of King William, and fixing a tri-coloured cap on a long pole,
pronounced aloud, "The Cap of Liberty." The soldiers were drawn up in
front of the Mansion-house, and the mob seemed nowise disposed to
molest them.

After a while, however, they manifested a restlessness for action, and
a party, by no means numerous, proceeded to the Bridewell, for the
purpose of rescuing the prisoners. On their arrival, they lost no time
in procuring sledge-hammers from the nearest smith's shop, and
immediately proceeded to beat in the doors. The keeper, Mr. Evans, had
just sat down to dinner when he received the visit of the unwelcome
intruders. Having succeeded in opening the doors, they became
apprehensive that the large folding-gates, which at night shut up the
thoroughfare, would be closed upon them, and they directly set about
removing them. This they accomplished with the most astonishing
facility, and disposed of them by throwing them over the bridge into
the float; they then proceeded to liberate the prisoners, and having
accomplished their end, they forthwith set the building on fire. During
their operations not the slightest molestation was offered to them.
This happened about two o'clock.

About the same time a stronger party of rioters, comprising, indeed,
almost the whole body, proceeded to the New Jail, a strong-built modern
edifice, having been erected about ten years before, at a cost of
nearly 100,000l. The scene which there presented itself almost baffles
description. Along the New Cut, in front of the jail, a dense mass of
the rioters had assembled; and on the opposite bank of the river, and,
indeed, wherever the eye could range, the people were posted in
thousands. The mob had already succeeded in forcing an entrance into
the yard and the governor's house, and were busily employed in throwing
every moveable article into the New River; and, as the tide was fast
ebbing, all was carried off by the stream. The caravan used for
conveying the prisoners to the Guildhall, was launched into the water
entire, and thither also were consigned the governor's books, and the
apparatus for constructing the drop. The rioters procured hammers from
the adjoining ship-yard, and with them the massive locks on the iron
doors of the different wings were smashed to atoms. The prisoners were
now released, and the scenes which followed were dreadful. Many of
them, both male and female, stripped off their prison clothes, and
proceeded on their way almost in a state of nudity. As they passed
along, the mob cheered them and followed them with exultations. Many of
them met their friends on the outside; and it is not easy to depict the
extravagant joy with which they mutually embraced each other.

After the prisoners had been liberated, amounting altogether (exclusive
of debtors) to more than one hundred, the next step taken was that of
setting the prison on fire; and a black handkerchief having been tied
to the weathercock on the top of the porter's lodge over the gateway,
it seemed to be the signal for commencing operations, for immediately
after dense clouds of smoke were seen to issue from every part of the
building. The flames were first seen to break out from the tread-mill,
which burnt with fury until it was quite consumed. In about an hour the
governor's house, over which was the chapel, was completely enveloped
in flames, and the reflection on the heavens was grand and terrific.
The wings, however, being almost exclusively of stone and iron, with
iron roofs, were but little injured by fire; though the rioters left
behind them every possible mark of wanton outrage. During the
proceedings, and while the prisoners were in the course of liberation,
a party of the third guards, about twenty in number, arrived; but the
mob appeared nothing intimidated; but cheered the troops, who
acknowledged the compliment by taking off their caps, and almost
immediately after turned round and departed.

As soon as the work of destruction was here completed, the rioters
divided themselves into parties, the one proceeding to the toll-houses,
at Prince's-street-bridge, another to that at the Wells, and another to
that at St. Philip's. These, in the present state of things, were
considered minor affairs, and were speedily in flames. The tenants had
liberty given them to remove their effects. While these were being
destroyed, the fire at the prison raged with the greatest fury.

The rioters then set off, about seven o'clock, to the Gloucester county
prison, Lawford's-gate, which in a short time was broken into, the
prisoners all released, and the building also fired. Here the flames
were as appalling as at the new jail. At the same time, also, a party
proceeded to Bridewell, which had been only partially destroyed, and
kindled up the wing occupied by the keeper; so that the three prisons
were in flames at the same instant.

There was now not even the appearance of a check to the licentiousness
of the mob, nor indeed had there been since the firing of the soldiers
in the morning; and they seemed to revel in a consciousness of their
security. Accordingly, a mere handful of the miscreants proceeded to
the Bishop's palace, Canons' Marsh, and, having effected an entrance,
immediately commenced the work of destruction. A few individuals,
however, were hastily collected, and for a while succeeded in staying
their diabolical designs. Orders were sent for the military, who had
been guarding the Mansion-house, to repair for the protection of the
bishop's residence. They had no sooner left for that purpose, than the
mob, who had all day meditated the total destruction of the
Mansion-house, commenced operations, and in a very short period set it
on fire, beginning in the kitchen under the banqueting-room. On the
arrival of the troops at the Bishop's palace, they found things there
tolerably secure; but the flames which even then arose from the
Mansion-house, too plainly indicated that they had gone to the
protection of the one place at the expense of the destruction of the
other. They turned back again, but by the time of their re-appearance
in the square, the reflection on the opposite side of the Froom made it
apparent that, by their endeavours to protect both places, each had
been sacrificed to the fury of the incendiaries. When they arrived in
the square, they found the whole of the back premises of the
Mansion-house burning fiercely, and the rooms in the front occupied by
wretches facilitating the destruction of the building, by firing the
apartments simultaneously. The infatuated creatures, no less
intoxicated with their successful career than with liquor, pressed
forward to the windows and waved their handkerchiefs, cheering at the
same time, in exultation of the final accomplishment of their designs
on the ill-fated building. Many of them paid the forfeit of their lives
for their criminal temerity. From the rapidity of the progress of the
flames, it is supposed that some were cut off from a retreat, and that
they thus met with an untimely end. The fire spread with most
surprising quickness, and in about twenty minutes the roof fell in,
and, together with the whole front, came down into the street, with a
tremendous crash.

By this time, the fire at the Bishop's-palace raged throughout the
whole pile of building, which in a short period was reduced to ashes.
The Right Rev. the Bishop, who happened to have been in town during the
last ten or twelve days, removed out of the city about the middle of
the day; and the most valuable of his effects had also been removed, as
a measure of precaution.

But to return to the square.-- After the destruction of the
Mansion-house, it was hoped that the fury of the mob would have been
appeased. The military, having no orders to act otherwise than as mere
spectators, were, immediately after their arrival, withdrawn, and
joined the remainder of their comrades, altogether few in number, in
protecting the Council-house, which it was expected would be the next
public building attacked. It was at least hoped that the house
adjoining the Mansion-house, if not protected from the flames, would be
the last that would be permitted to be destroyed; but we blush while we
record the fiend-like conduct which followed. The rioters conceived the
plan of firing the adjoining houses, and, by twelve at night, the whole
mass, from the Mansion-house to the middle avenue, including the
Custom-house, and all the Back Building, in Little King-street, was one
immense mass of fire. The Custom-house, as may readily be supposed, was
a large building, and the expertness of the wretches in lighting it up,
it is certain, proved the destruction of many who were ranging the
upper apartments. Many of them were seen as they approached the windows
to drop into the flames, and others, among whom was a female, threw
themselves in desperation from the windows. The latter was carried to
the infirmary, where she subsequently died.

Again the hope was raised that the dreadful work would now cease; but
it was in vain, A small band, chiefly boys, who seemed to go about
their work as if they had been regularly trained to the hellish
employment, proceeded to extend the ravages of the devouring element,
preceding their operation by giving half an hour's notice to the
inmates to retire. The windows were afterwards smashed in, the
furniture thrown out and carried off, and the premises ignited with a
rapidity truly astonishing. In this manner they swept away one whole
side of the square, and then proceeded to another, commencing with the
Excise Office, at the corner. To follow up the account from this time,
three o'clock in the morning, would only be a repetition of the details
which we have already given.

Morning dawned on such a scene as had never before been witnessed in
this place. The flames, it is true, were subsiding, but the appearance
of Queen-square was appalling in the extreme. Numerous buildings were
reduced to a heap of smoking ruins, and others were momentarily falling
in; while around, in various parts, lay the rioters, in the last stage
of senseless intoxication, and with countenances more resembling fiends
than men. Meantime the soldiers, who had been ordered out of town, were
remanded; and the magistrates, having again assembled, came at length
to a decision, called out the posse comitatus, and made an application
to Mr. Herapath, through the medium of Mr. Under-Sheriff Hare, for the
assistance of the Bristol general union. Mr. Herapath, their
vice-president, called the members together by public notice -- a
course which we understand he had already determined on; and in a short
time a large body of them had collected together; previous to which Mr.
Herapath was invested, by the magistracy, with an authority equal to
that of the Under-Sheriff. We are sorry to have to record another piece
of folly. The military were ordered to clear the streets -- an order
which was fulfilled to the letter by a party of the troops which had
experienced some rough treatment, and had, in consequence, fired upon
the people on the previous day. The sight of this useless piece of duty
was peculiarly distressing; nothing was to be seen on every side but
unoffending women and children, running and screaming in every
direction, while several men, apparently on their way to work, were
deliberately cut at, several seriously injured, and some killed. Yet
worse effects might have followed this ill-advised measure, if the
soldiers had not been shortly after withdrawn from their bloody work,
and the streets principally manned with the inhabitants, armed with
good strong staves. Several troops, however, of soldiers, together with
the eleventh regiment of foot, continued to reach Bristol during the
day, and, in the course of the afternoon, intelligence having arrived
that there was some disturbance in the neighbourhood of Lawrence-hill,
a party galloped off, and secured four countrymen in the very act of
robbing a house. With these exceptions, no further collision with the
military took place.

Towards the evening, the flames in several houses of the square broke
out afresh, and part of the pavement in King-street was forced up by
the heat arising from some brandy which was burning in the vaults
beneath; but the engines being in readiness, no further injury
occurred. An attack on the shipping having been anticipated, the ships'
bells were rung, signal-guns were fired, and every thing was prepared
for resistance. The Earl of Liverpool was moored in the centre of the
river, and mounted with guns, an attack on her in particular having
been expected; but happily these anticipations were not realised. It
being thought possible that if the rioters renewed their attempts, they
would, in all probability, endeavour to reduce the streets to total
darkness, by cutting off the gas-pipes, the magistrates issued a
notice, recommending the inhabitants to illuminate their houses -- a
recommendation which was pretty generally complied with. The churches
also were lit up, and the posse comitatus of the several parishes were
stationed in them, a constant guard being kept up, and relieved at
stated intervals. The members of the union paraded the streets during
the whole of the night.

These measures at length effectually put an end to the frightful scenes
which had been enacted during the last two days. In the course of the
ensuing week, the magistrates and other authorities of the place were
occupied in adopting such measures as would prevent the repetition of
the attack, in disposing of the cases of the various persons in
custody, who had been concerned in the riots, and in making other
general arrangements to secure the tranquillity of the town. Nearly two
hundred persons were found to have been secured, but of the whole
number, there were very few who were really inhabitants of Bristol, or
who were in any way connected with the political party interested in
the opposition offered to Sir Charles Wetherall. Many of the facts
which were disclosed in evidence before the authorities, as to the
occurrences of the days of the riots, were of the most astounding
description. Prisoners were proved to have been made, whose pockets and
houses were crammed with stolen property, consisting of furniture, gold
and silver plate, specie, bank-notes, and other matters of great value.
Many inquests were held upon the bodies of persons who had been killed
during the riots, in the course of which the most frightful disclosures
were made. No new riot, however, arose, and the system of watch and
ward, which was adopted, effectually prevented the repetition of such
outrages as had been committed. The conduct of the magistrates became
the subject of discussion, and many were found who did not hesitate to
assert, that they had exhibited great pusillanimity in the course which
they had taken. The magistrates were not backward in entering into a
defence of their proceedings. They in turn imputed blame to the
military, whilst Colonel Brereton declared that he had been actuated by
a feeling of humanity only, and by a positive conviction of the
uselessness and the danger of infuriating the mob, to the destruction
of life, as well as property, by adopting steps more decisive than
those which he had taken.

The result of this event, however, was a conviction throughout the
public mind, of the necessity of some improvement in the police system
of the country. Already had the institution of a metropolitan police
force produced a firm reliance in the powers of such a body to suppress
outrages of a similar description, and the adoption of some new
measure, more extensively carrying out the general plan, was strongly
recommended to the attention of Parliament by his Majesty, on his
opening the session, on the 6th of December following. The
recommendation was not unattended with good results, and the adoption
of a measure sanctioning the establishment of a police force in
Bristol, similar in character to that which existed in London, afforded
considerable satisfaction to the inhabitants of that city.

A special commission for the trial of the persons who were in custody,
and who were charged with having been concerned in the riots, commenced
at Bristol on Monday, the 2nd of January 1832.

On Tuesday, William Clarke, Patrick Kearney, James Williams, Daniel
Higgs, James Courtney, and John Mackay, were placed at the bar. They
stood indicted for that they, in that part of the parish of Bedminster
within the city and county of Bristol, with others riotously and
tumultuously assembled, and pulled down and destroyed a house, the
property of his majesty. Other counts in the indictment laid it as the
property of the corporation of Bristol, of the citizens, of the
commissioners for building the jail, and of the governor.

Having pleaded severally "Not guilty," they were again arraigned upon
the indictment for having burned down the same jail; to which also they
in a firm tone put in their plea of "Not guilty."

The attorney-general, in opening the case, said, that the charge now
against the prisoners was framed on the words of the Act of the 7th
Geo. IV., which contained almost in precise words the terms of the Riot
Act, passed in the 1st Geo. I., "that if any persons shall riotously
and tumultuously assemble together, and begin to pull down any house,
&c., every such offender shall be a felon without benefit of clergy."
Under this Act of Parliament, persons tumultuously assembling together
for the purpose of destroying any house were guilty of felony. With
regard to the individuals now before them, it would be proved that they
were riotously and tumultuously assembled together, to the disturbance
of the public peace; that they were parading the town about noon on
Sunday, the 10th of October, in the most riotous and disorderly manner;
that after destroying the Bridewell by fire, they proceeded to the
public jail, and whether for the purpose of liberating the persons
there confined, or with a view to the general destruction of property,
they broke into the jail, and set fire to several parts of it. Clarke
was seen with a crowbar on his shoulder, actively engaged in the acts
of violence and outrage at the head of the party that attacked the
jail, which was a strong building, and the gates of which required
considerable force to break them down. They did resist for some time
all the combined efforts of the mob. At length, however, an entrance
was effected by making a small hole through one of the gates, through
which some of the rioters made their way, and who succeeded in
wrenching them from their hinges. Arrived at the interior of the jail,
the mob proceeded, amongst other acts of outrage, to the destruction of
the governor's house, which was in a short time reduced to a heap of
ruins. These acts would be satisfactorily proved; and it would be also
proved, that the prisoners criminally participated in those acts of
outrage. To establish still more clearly the guilt of the prisoner
Clarke, it would be proved that he was afterwards seen with the keys of
the prison in his hand, going about in one of the public-houses in the
town, boasting of what he had done -- talking of the keys of the "Hen
and Chickens," or some expression to that effect, and indulging in the
most violent and inflammatory language. He believed that this prisoner
was rather of a superior caste, and one from whom such conduct was not
to have been expected. He stated himself to have been a Dorsetshire
man, and it appeared that he had for some time been himself the
proprietor of a public-house. It was to be the more lamented that an
individual thus raised above the common crowd should have demeaned
himself in so disgraceful and criminal a manner. With regard to all the
other prisoners, he did not believe that they would be affected by
evidence of the same strong description; but he believed there was not
one of them who would not be clearly proved to have taken a large share
in the late disgraceful riots.

Several witnesses were then called, who proved most distinctly the
active part which Clarke had taken in the disturbances. The trial was
continued by adjournment from Tuesday to Wednesday, when the jury found
Clarke, Kearney, Higgs, Courtney, and Mackay, "Guilty;" but acquitted
Williams.

Clarke, the principal prisoner, appeared throughout the investigation
in a most deplorable state, and his weak nerves, contrasted with his
muscular figure, rendered him an object both of surprise and
compassion. He fainted two or three times, and seemed in a state
bordering on insensibility during the three hours which it occupied the
lord chief-justice in summing up. He was a strong athletic man, rather
above the common size, with nothing in his countenance indicative of
the determined outrages laid to his charge. The prisoners Williams,
Kearney, Higgs, and Mackay, were young men of about twenty years of
age, and Courtney about the middle age; they all appeared to be of an
inferior station in life, and presented nothing remarkable in their
appearance.

Thomas Evans Bendall, aged nineteen, and James Sims, aged eighteen,
were then placed at the bar, charged with having riotously assembled,
together with other persons, to the disturbance of the public peace,
and with having demolished and destroyed, or begun to demolish and
destroy, a certain dwelling-house, the property of the Lord Bishop of
Bristol. The attorney-general, in stating the case, said, that though
by the act of parliament, the mere beginning to pull down and demolish
any building was sufficient to constitute the offence with which the
prisoners were charged, yet in this case he should be enabled to prove
that the prisoners had been most active on this particular occasion. An
attempt was made to prove that Sims was silly, but both were found
guilty.

On Wednesday, Christopher Davis, a man of most respectable appearance,
about fifty years of age, was placed at the bar, charged with having,
on Sunday, the 30th of October, with divers other persons, riotously
assembled, demolished and pulled down a certain house belonging to his
majesty, called the New Jail. The attorney-general, in opening the
case, described the prisoner as having acted as a leader of the mob. He
would be proved to have been first at the Mansion-house, encouraging
the mob by gestures and by language; to have been one of those who
entered that building; to have been up during the whole night; and to
have been present at all the disturbances of Sunday. He was near the
Bridewell when it was broken into; he was afterwards in Queen-square
and at the New Jail, where he was seen at the time that building was in
flames. He would be proved to have been seen waving his hat, saying
that it was a most glorious sight, and what he had long wished to see;
that the churches should be pulled down to mend the highways, and that
the bishops should be put down. When the Bishop's Palace was in flames,
it would be stated to them by a witness, that he appeared quite
overwhelmed by joy. He expressed his readiness to head any mob for
purposes such as these. He waved his hat on his umbrella, as if it were
a cap of liberty. He was a man of most respectable situation in
society, retired from business, and living with his family on a
comfortable independence thereby acquired. From such a man a very
opposite course was to have been expected -- one would have thought he
would have rather dissuaded the mob from their disgraceful outrages,
than have given his open approval to them.

Several witnesses were then called, who sustained the opening of the
attorney-general to the letter, and on the following day the prisoner
was found "Guilty."

Many other prisoners were also convicted in the course of the week, and
on Thursday a most heart-rending scene was presented. The capital
convicts were then brought up to receive sentence of death. Their names
were Christopher Davis, William Clarke, Thomas Gregory, Richard Vines,
and Joseph Keys, and each prayed with earnest cries for mercy.

The Lord Chief Justice, in a most impressive, though tremulous, manner,
addressed the prisoners:--

"Prisoners at the bar:-- You have been convicted, five of you in
number, upon evidence, in each particular case, which can leave no
doubt of your guilt, upon any reasonable mind, of crimes so deeply
affecting the interests, and even the very existence, of human society,
that your lives have become justly forfeited to the laws of your
country. Assembled together with multitudes of other evil-doers like
yourselves, you have, by threats and acts of violence, thrown the
peaceable and industrious inhabitants of this city into a state of
panic and alarm -- you have deprived many of their only means of
livelihood -- you have carried fire to public buildings and to private
dwellings, and have exposed the property of all to pillage, and the
lives of many to destruction. Human society cannot be held together, if
crimes like these are not put down by the strong hand of the law.
Unless others are deterred from the commission of similar enormities by
the just severity of your punishment, all that makes life valuable to
man -- the free enjoyment of the fruits of his honest industry, and
protection from personal violence, must be altogether given up. The
innocent and weak will become a prey to the wicked and strong; and mere
brutal force will take the place of order and of law. What motive could
lead you to the commission of these crimes it is impossible, from the
evidence brought before us, to judge with any reasonable certainty. It
was not the pressure of want or misery -- it was no grievance,
imaginary or real, under which you laboured. I fear no other purpose
can be assigned that will apply to the greater number of those who
shared in these wicked transactions, than that of giving up this city
to flames, that it might become the object of universal pillage. You
stand, each of you, a striking and awful example to others, of the
wickedness which men commit, and the misery which inevitably follows
it, when they throw off the restraint of the laws of God and man, and
give themselves up to their own unbridled passions. I can only pray
that your unhappy example may be the means of preventing all others
from treading in your steps."

Having then separately referred to the circumstances of the cases of
the various prisoners, he said in conclusion --

"Let me most earnestly exhort you all to prepare yourselves, by every
means in your power, for that great and awful change which doth most
assuredly await you within a very short time; apply yourselves
earnestly and fervently to the Throne of Grace, that you may endeavour
to obtain from him, who knows how to reconcile mercy with justice, that
forgiveness which the laws of man cannot extend to you. And now,
nothing more remains than the duty, to me a most painful one, of
pronouncing the last sentence of the law -- That you, and every of you,
be taken to the place from whence you came, and from thence to the
place of execution, where you will be severally hanged by the neck
until you are dead; and may the Lord, in his infinite goodness, have
mercy on your guilty souls."

This awful ceremony having been gone through, the prisoners were
removed in a most pitiable condition.

     The following prisoners were then brought up: --

Patrick Kearney, Daniel Higgs, James Courtney, John Mackay, T. E.
Bendall, James Sims, John Powel, Matthew Warry, Cornelius Hickey, James
Snook, William Reynolds, George Andrews, Patrick Barney, Benjamin
Broad, Stephen Gaisford, Michael Sullivan, Timothy Collins, Henry
Green, and Charles Williams.

     The Lord Chief Justice addressed them in the following terms:--

"Prisoners at the bar,-- After patient trials, before impartial and
intelligent juries, each of you has been found guilty of an offence
against which the laws of your country have, for the security of all,
denounced the sentence of Death. You have, with many others, who for
the present have escaped the hands of justice, devoted to plunder and
destruction the city in which you live, and the place which had
afforded to all of you subsistence and protection. You have reduced
parts of it to a state of ruin and desolation, more complete than any
foreign enemy, unless the most merciless, would have inflicted upon it.
You have deprived many industrious families of their only means of
support and subsistence; and the blood which it was necessary to shed
in order to repress your acts of wanton outrage may be justly
considered to lie at your door. But the hope we entertain that the fate
of those upon whom the sentence of the law hath been passed, will
operate as a sufficient warning to all others, induces us to join in an
humble recommendation to his majesty that your lives may be spared, I
would not, however, have you expect, that by escaping the bitterness of
death, you have avoided all punishment for your offence. You will pass
the remainder of your lives in a foreign and a distant land, separated
for ever from parents, relations, and friends, and in a state of severe
labour and privation."

Patrick Kearney, who, evidently, when first brought up, expected the
extreme sentence would be passed upon him, and was then crying and
begging for mercy, when he had heard the sentence, brightened up, and
said, waving his hat at the time, "Never mind, my life is saved and
Ireland is free."

The day's proceedings thus concluded; and on the following day the
business of the commission terminated.

On Friday, the 27th of January, the sentence of death which had been
pronounced, was carried out upon the four convicts -- Clarke, Davis,
Gregory, and Keys, Vines having been respited on the previous day. The
miserable convicts, after their trials, conducted themselves with much
propriety. They were attended by the reverend chaplain of the jail, and
by the Rev. Mr. Roberts, a dissenting minister, whose exhortations were
received by them with much apparent satisfaction. The place where they
were doomed to receive their death was the very spot which had
witnessed the commission of the crimes of which they had been found
guilty -- the New Jail. The outside walls now only remained -- a sad
memento of their desperate purposes.

Every precaution was taken to preserve order. The sheriffs arrived
about eleven o'clock, and immediately proceeded to the cells of the
wretched men, who were deeply engaged in devotion. It was not till past
twelve that they were brought from their cells. The short time of
anxiety which had elapsed since their trials had made a deep impression
upon all. Still they were all comparatively firm, without the slightest
tendency to bravado or improper boldness. The mournful procession
slowly paced the prison-yard, the chaplain repeating the Burial Service
--"I am the resurrection and the life." Having gone round the ruins of
the governor's house, they approached the lodge, and then went up the
winding staircase to the press-room.

The customary ceremonies were here gone through, of pinioning the
convicts; and the procession once more, and for the last time, resumed
its march, going up the winding staircase to the top of the lodge on
which the scaffold was erected. Here all knelt down, and the Rev. Mr.
Roberts offered up a prayer for heavenly mercy. The executioner now
made his appearance. Davis was then conducted up the stairs to the
frail scaffold, followed by Gregory. The latter bowed to the populace,
Davis took no notice of those beneath, but once cast his eyes up to the
fatal beam, Clarke next ascended, and was followed by Keys, The
reverend divines having prayed with them a short time, and again taken
leave of them, the caps were pulled down over their faces, and the
fatal bolt was drawn. Keys apparently suffered much -- the others died
almost instantly. The crowd did not utter any expressions of
approbation during the time of execution -- all were quiet, and
apparently were not much affected by this dreadful exhibition.

During the time occupied by the proceedings of the special commission,
other inquiries were carried on scarcely less interesting to the
inhabitants of Bristol. The first of these was an investigation by
court-martial of the conduct of Lieutenant-Colonel Brereton in the
affair. The charges made against him were, for negligence and want of
due energy in assisting the civil force to suppress the tumultuous
outrages of the mob during the riots in the city of Bristol on the
29th, 30th, and 31st October. The case against the defendant was opened
on Monday 9th January, at the Merchant's Hall, in the presence of a
very crowded audience, including many ladies. Captain Thomson, of the
81st foot, acted as Deputy Judge Advocate. Mr. Erie was counsel for
Colonel Brereton; and General D'Albiac, at the command of his Majesty,
conducted the prosecution. Colonel Brereton, on the charges being read
over, pleaded Not Guilty.

General D'Albiac opened the case, calling upon the Court to form their
judgment strictly upon the evidence, and to relieve their minds from
all extraneous observations which might have arisen elsewhere.

The first witness called was Mr. Serjeant Ludlow, town-clerk of
Bristol. He was at the Mansion-house on Saturday the 29th of October,
from twelve at noon till twelve at night. There was a riotous and
tumultuous assemblage in front of the house; the troops were called out
under the command of Colonel Brereton; orders were given to Colonel
Brereton to clear the streets, disperse the mob, and get the city
quiet; this was not peremptorily and effectively done; the riots
continued at intervals till twelve o'clock at night. The following
statement was then made by the learned serjeant:-- When
Lieutenant-Colonel Brereton and the troops came to the Mansion-house
door, the people on the outside were engaged in battering the front
door; they had battered in one of the windows on the ground-floor, and
some of them had entered into the dining-room. The immediate effect of
the arrival of the troops was to remove them from the front of the
Mansion-house, but they did not withdraw far. I repeatedly noticed,
that the people having withdrawn from the streets while the soldiers
were passing, immediately afterwards returned again to the front of the
very door of the Mansion-house; occasionally stones were thrown at the
windows, and indications of tumult and violence did not appear to me to
have decreased materially. Colonel Brereton occasionally went down
stairs and returned, and said that the people appeared to be very
good-humoured, and he had no doubt he could drive them, away by merely
walking the horses. Just before one of these occasions, two of the
soldiers of the 14th were brought in wounded -- one of them very
seriously. I asked Colonel Brereton if he thought that a symptom of
good-humour on the part of the people out of doors? I said also they
appeared to me to be increasing in number rather than lessening; and it
certainly was intimated to him that it would be desirable to get the
city quiet. The effect of his answers was such as to induce me to ask
him if he had any recent instructions from the War Office to prevent
him from attending to the directions of the magistrates? He said, "My
directions are to attend to the orders of the magistrates." I then
said, the mayor and one or two of the aldermen being near, "Your
directions are immediately to clear the streets, and to get the city
quiet as soon as you can," or to that effect. Some sort of cavalry
movement was made in the interior of the square, where the people had
collected; they were driven from the green part of the square, and
entered the courts in front of the houses, and occasionally returned to
the front of the Mansion-house, and continued the same kind of conduct
which had prevailed the early part of the evening; in short, they were
not effectually dispersed. Late in the evening, probably eleven
o'clock, an officer of dragoons came into the room where we were.
Colonel Brereton was in the room at the time. The officer stated, that
his troops were receiving considerable annoyance in one of the streets
near the Mansion-house, the situation of which he described. He said,
that the lights (lamps) had been put out -- that it was quite dark --
and that the people, when followed by the soldiers, retreated into some
boats or barges lying in the river, from which they annoyed the troops,
and where of course the troops could not follow them; he said he wished
to fire a few ball-cartridges in that direction. One of the
magistrates, I believe Mr. Alderman Daniel, said, that in the situation
in which the boats were described to be, there were probably a good
many people going from market in the market-boats, and it would be
desirable to avoid injuring those persons if possible. One of the
gentlemen present, I believe a special constable, said, "Let me have
twenty-five men, and be supported by the troops, and I will undertake
to go down and dislodge the people in the boats." That operation
certainly would have been undertaken if it had not been for what
Colonel Brereton said. He said, "If you'll take my advice, you'll let
them alone; it 's getting very late, and I dare say they will go
quietly home to bed." Some observation was made as to the necessity of
getting the city in a state of peace and quietness; upon which Colonel
Brereton answered, his men should patrole the streets during the night,
and that he would be answerable for the peace of the city, or words to
that effect. The officer of the 14th went away, and Colonel Brereton
retired shortly afterwards.

Several other witnesses were called, whose testimony went to show
considerable want of energy on the part of the colonel, as well as
mistaken lenity, that led to the perpetration of outrages, which, had a
more decided and vigorous policy been adopted, might have been
prevented.

The inquiry had proceeded to a very considerable length, and on Friday
was approaching a termination, when an event occurred which effectually
put a stop to all further investigation, while it cast an additional
gloom upon this most lamentable affair. It appears, that the gallant
colonel seemed to feel the full force of the evidence against him as it
went on, and was obviously much depressed. On quitting the court on
Thursday afternoon, he went, as usual, to Reeve's Hotel, where he
remained during the evening. At twelve o'clock his gardener brought his
horse and gig, and he drove home to his house, called Bedfield Lodge,
about a mile and a half from the city. He retired to his room without
exciting any particular remark on the part of his servants; but about
three in the morning his housekeeper heard the report of a pistol: she
immediately called the guard and footman, who entered his room, and
found the unhappy man weltering in his blood on the bed. Life was
extinct; and on examination it turned out that he had shot himself
through the heart. Surgical assistance was instantly summoned, but it
was without avail. The news of the melancholy event reached Bristol at
an early hour on Friday morning, and produced a most painful sensation
in all ranks.

The effect of this tragical circumstance was the termination of this
court-martial, which, however, was followed by another upon Captain
Warrington, the inferior officer of Colonel Brereton at Bristol, at the
time of the riots. The insertion of the following paragraph, however,
which appeared in most of the public prints of the day, will be deemed
only just to the memory of Colonel Brereton, before we proceed to the
conclusion of this dreadful business:-- "The proceedings of the
court-martial evidently preyed on his susceptible and humane mind. He
is acknowledged by all parties to have been a man of the most kindly
and benevolent disposition, and during the eight years he has held the
command of the district, was universally respected. He has been a
widower for above two years, and has left two daughters, the one five,
and the other three years old. He had served abroad, and distinguished
himself as a brave and excellent officer. He was fifty years of age,
thirty-three of which he had been a soldier; and as a testimony of the
regard in which he was held, had received a sword, value two hundred
guineas, from his brother officers. There is no doubt his mistaken
lenity was influenced by his desire to avoid shedding human blood, and
a conviction that he should have been able to pacify the mob without
proceeding to those extremities which his duty under the circumstances
clearly demanded. It would be ungenerous now, however, to dwell on the
errors of one whose fate every feeling heart must deplore."

It was on Wednesday the 25th of January that the court-martial upon
Captain Warrington commenced its proceedings. The charges preferred
were three in number. The first imputed that, on the night of the 30th
of October 1831, being in personal command of a troop of the 3d
Dragoons in the city of Bristol, at the time when the most outrageous
and alarming riots prevailed, although required by Mr. Thomas Kington,
a merchant of the city, who required his aid, and that of the military
under his command, to prevent the firing of the Custom-House, he not
only refused to act, but neglected to inform Colonel Brereton, his
superior officer, of the information he had received.

The second charge imputed, that the following letter from Mr. Charles
Pinney, the mayor, to Colonel Brereton, was delivered to Captain
Warrington, which he read, but neither acted upon it nor forwarded it
to his commanding officer.

"Bristol, Three o'clock Monday Morning, 31st October 1831. "Sir -- I
direct you, as commanding officer of his Majesty's troops, to take the
most vigorous, effective, and decisive measures in your power to quell
the existing riot, and prevent further destruction of property.
     "I am, &c.
     C. Pinney."

An hour elapsed with the troops inactive after the letter was
delivered, and in consequence great mischief was done. Several houses
were sacked, and property to a large amount destroyed.

The third charge accused the Captain of neglecting to command his
troops in person, and leaving them to the guidance of a young cornet,
only sixteen months in the service, while he was absent from his
quarters or retired to bed.

The evidence adduced was merely a repetition of those details which had
already become perfectly notorious.

Captain Warrington commenced his defence on Monday the 30th of January,
and, in a clear and manly speech, touched upon all the charges which
had been preferred against him, and in a short narrative endeavoured to
prove that when there was any apparent want of energy, or exertion, on
his part, it arose, not from want of inclination in him, but from the
omission of orders from his superior officer, or the absence of those
magistrates who would have justified his proceeding even without the
commands of Colonel Brereton. With regard to his temporary absence from
his troop, he accounted for it by stating, that he had gone to General
Pearson to ask his advice, and, on his return, was labouring under a
fit of the ague, brought on from being repeatedly exposed to the rain,
for the two preceding days; he retired to change his dress, and when
his personal presence was officially and regularly required, he lost no
time in heading his troop, and assisting in dispersing the rioters. He
adverted to his past services under similar circumstances, and appealed
to these, as well as to his conduct throughout his military career, as
the best refutation of his having intentionally neglected the important
duties imposed upon him. The address seemed to make a deep impression,
and apparently went to remove all serious imputation from him as an
officer and a gentleman. The witnesses called for the defence went to
give the most satisfactory explanation of the course which the gallant
officer had pursued throughout.-- The following curious evidence was
given by Major Beckwith, of the 14th Dragoons, on Tuesday:-- "I must
relate in what manner I saw the civil and military authorities
co-operating, in order to show to the court the difficulties under
which I saw Captain Warrington acting. On reaching Bristol, on Monday
morning the 31st of October, I immediately went to the Council-house,
where I found the mayor and several magistrates, who appeared to me
bewildered and stupefied with terror. On hearing the state of affairs
in the city of Bristol from those gentlemen, I urged that one or more
magistrates should accompany me on horseback, for the purpose of
restoring order. They all refused to accompany me, saying, it would
make them unpopular, and cause all their property to be destroyed; they
also added, that none of them could ride on horseback; and the one I
requested to accompany me said he had not been on horseback for
eighteen years. Seeing, therefore, that any assistance from the
magistrates would be out of the question, I demanded to receive from
them a written authority to take what measures I deemed expedient. From
what I have related, and from what I saw in another quarter, to which I
cannot refer, the impression of my mind was, that Captain Warrington
and the 3rd Dragoon Guards were in a great measure paralysed by the
imbecility and misconduct of those who ought to have directed them. I
have further to state, that during the time I had a personal
opportunity of observing Captain Warrington, he appeared to me alert,
zealous, and desirous of doing his duty."

On the following Thursday, General D'Albiac replied to the defence of
Captain Warrington; and this closed the case.

The decision of the court was not, however, promulgated, in obedience
to the usual course, until it had first been submitted to his Majesty;
but on the 21st of February, it was intimated to Captain Warrington
that he had been found guilty, and was sentenced to be cashiered; but
that he was recommended to mercy, and that his Majesty, having listened
to the recommendation, had been pleased to authorise his disposing of
his commission.

There were yet other persons in authority whose conduct upon this
occasion it was deemed fit should be the subject of a judicial
investigation. Reports unfavourable to the character and demeanour of
the magistracy of Bristol had been circulated; and the necessity of
allaying the irritation of the public mind, as well as of determining
the real extent of blame to be attached to the mayor and aldermen, was
felt too strongly to admit of this final inquisition being omitted. It
was not, however, until Thursday the 25th of October 1832, that the
case came on for trial. It was then brought before the Court of King's
Bench, upon an information preferred against Mr. Charles Pinney, the
mayor, and was decided by a special jury selected from the County of
Berks.

The Attorney-General proceeded to state the facts to the jury, and
said, he had no doubt he should be able to adduce evidence to prove
that the defendant had neglected his duty as chief magistrate, and that
he was guilty of the misdemeanour charged in the information.

Mr. John W. Newcombe was the first witness examined. After detailing
the scenes already described, and the inertness of the police, in his
cross-examination he said that he did say, on being applied to, to act
as special constable to protect Sir Charles Wetherell, he would not do
so, but said he would not injure him; and he had repeatedly said since,
that it would have been better had Sir Charles been thrown over the
bridge than that so many lives and so much property should have been
destroyed. A similar feeling seemed to exist with many others, who had
been applied to in a similar manner, and it was evident that the
magistrates found great difficulty to get a sufficient number of
persons to act on that occasion. Several other witnesses were examined,
making out a strong case against the defendant. A good deal of
amusement was excited in court by the description given by one of the
witnesses of the escape of the mayor from the Mansion-house, during the
heat of the attack. The witness said, in his examination, "I saw the
mayor in the larder, on the ground -floor. I believe it is called the
larder: it is the men's water-closet as well, but they hang up meat
there (a laugh). There were three or four female servants with his
worship (renewed laughter). They were making great efforts to get up on
the leads -- the female servants and his worship (a laugh). His
worship, seeing me, said, 'For God's sake, young man, assist me up.' I
stooped down and helped his worship up, the female servants assisting
him behind. (Here the laughter became so loud that Lord Tenterden found
it necessary to censure it in strong terms as foolish and indecent.) We
got the mayor up on the leads, myself and the female servants, and he
got away over the wall."

The inquiry continued until the following Thursday, and then terminated
by a verdict of acquittal.

This, we believe was the last of the proceedings which arose out of
these dreadful riots, if we except those which were carried on by those
persons whose property had suffered damage through the violence of the
mob. The extent of the mischief done could never be properly or
specifically calculated; but its amount could be scarcely computed at
less than 300,000l. The injuries done to property, however, were not
those only which were to be regretted. The destruction of the buildings
of the town, splendid and costly as they were, was small in importance
compared with the loss of human life, and the personal violence
sustained by many of those who were engaged in these proceedings. Of
those whose misguided or wicked desires led them into this terrible
fray, who died of the wounds which they sustained, a number scarcely
less than twenty was discovered; and it is reasonable to suppose, that
others also shared a like unhappy fate, whose death accident, or the
design of their friends, concealed from public notice. Many were taken
to the hospitals of the city, gorged with drink, who died from the
combined effects of intoxication and exposure, while others were
brought in at the last gasp, suffering from the effects of the wounds
inflicted by the weapons of the soldiery, or produced by the falling of
buildings, which they had themselves fired or overthrown. Some even yet
retained in their possession the fruits of their rapine, and were found
to have their pockets crammed with money, or other valuables. Of the
number who fell victims to their own temerity, in their anxiety to
complete the hellish work of destruction which they had commenced, and
who were smothered in the falling ruins of burning houses, it is
impossible to form an accurate calculation. They were principally of
the very lowest and most abandoned classes of the people; and their
loss was scarcely discovered, even by their oldest companions and most
intimate associates. The number of wounded was of course much larger,
and equally difficult to be properly estimated. Many, it is true,
received surgical relief on the spot; but still there were great
numbers who abstained from an open admission of their condition, in
order to avoid the probability of those future proceedings, the result
of which might have been more inconvenient than the injuries which they
had received. Hundreds in this way concealed the effects of their own
violence; but their crippled or maimed appearance eventually told too
plainly the tale of their guilt.

With regard to the conduct of the magistracy and the military upon this
occasion, it does not become us to offer any observations. The
demeanour of both was the subject of legal investigation; and the
determination arrived at must be deemed to have been both correct and
conclusive. The want of energy which, it must be admitted, was
exhibited, must nevertheless be the subject of universal and most
sincere and painful regret.

WILLIAM JOBLING.
Whose Body was Stolen from the Gibbet

At the Durham assizes, on Wednesday the 1st of August 1832, William
Jobling was tried on an indictment charging him with the wilful murder
of Mr. Fairies, a magistrate, on the previous 11th of June. Mr.
Fairies, it appeared, had given offence to the colliers, from his
spirited exertions to suppress their riotous proceedings. On the day in
question he was returning from the Jarrow Colliery on his pony, when he
was overtaken by the prisoner and a man named Armstrong, who, having
first asked him for money, dragged him from his horse and beat him
unmercifully with a bludgeon, and also pelted him with stones as he lay
on the ground. Mr. Fairies was found in a state of insensibility, and,
on his recovery, swore distinctly to the prisoner and Armstrong, as the
persons by whom he had been attacked. He subsequently died of his
wounds. The prisoner was secured at Shields; Armstrong escaped; the
prisoner was found "Guilty," and received sentence to die on Friday --
his body to be hung in chains.

This sentence was carried out to its full extent, the body of the
criminal being suspended to a gibbet in the neighbourhood of the scene
of the murder.

This exhibition, however, gave great offence to the colliers; and after
the remains of the unhappy wretch had been exposed for several weeks,
they were, on Saturday the 8th of September, suddenly missed, having
been removed during the previous night. The deceased had been a
collier; and little doubt was entertained that his late companions and
fellow-workmen had done this service to his memory: all subsequent
efforts to discover the place of concealment of his body proved
unavailing. But although undoubtedly its unauthorised removal was a
serious breach of the law, there were few to be found who looked upon
it as matter for regret, or who did not view the circumstance as a
convincing proof of the impolicy of reviving a practice so barbarous as
the exposure of the bodies of executed criminals.

The law by which this exposure was authorised was enacted by the
statute 2 and 3 W.4, c.75, s.16. That act provides, "Whereas an act was
passed in the 9th year of the reign of his late majesty (9 Geo.4,
c.31), for consolidating and amending the statutes in England relating
to offences against the person, by which latter act it is enacted, that
the body of every person convicted of murder shall, after execution,
either be dissected or hung in chains, as the court who tried the
offender shall seem meet, and that the sentence to be pronounced by the
court shall express that the body of the offender shall be dissected or
hung in chains, whichsoever of the two the court shall order; Be it
enacted, that so much of the said last recited act as authorises the
court, if it shall see fit, to direct that the body of a person
convicted shall, after execution, be dissected, be and the same is
hereby repealed; and that, in every case of the conviction of any
person for murder, the court before which such prisoner shall have been
tried shall direct such prisoner either to be hung in chains or to be
buried within the precincts of the prison in which such prisoner shall
have been confined after conviction, as to such court shall seem meet;
and that the sentence to be pronounced by the court shall express, that
the body of such prisoner shall be hung in chains, or buried within the
precincts of the prison, whichsoever of the two the court shall order."

The legislature appears to have duly estimated the extent of the
disgust created by the two exhibitions which have been referred to of
the remains of Cook and Joblings; and, by the 4 and 5 W.4, c.26, s.1,
the provisions of the statute last mentioned are repealed, so far as
they relate to the hanging of criminals in chains. That act enacts
(after reciting the provisions of the statutes of 9 Geo.4, and 2 and 3
W.4), "That so much of the said recited act, made and passed in the
ninth year of the reign of Geo. 4, as authorised the court to direct
that the body of a prisoner convicted of murder should, after
execution, be hung in chains, and also so much of the said recited act,
made and passed in the second and third year of the reign of W. 4 as
provided, that in every case of the conviction of any prisoner for
murder, the court should direct such prisoner to be hung in chains,
should be and the same is hereby repealed."


WILLIAM KENNEDY and WILLIAM BROWN
Tried for a Murder Committed on the River Thames.

This unfortunate case produced a deep sensation throughout the
metropolis, and for a considerable space of time tended, in a very
material degree, to prevent persons attached to the exercise of rowing
on the river Thames from pursuing their favourite sport. The
circumstances of the death of the deceased are singular, and deserve to
be related.

It appears, that Mr. William Wilkinson was the managing clerk to
Messrs. Williams, Jacob, and Co., merchants, of Hare-court,
Aldersgate-street, and at the time of his death had reached his
twenty-fifth year. He was fond of the sports of the river, and
frequently enjoyed the exercise of rowing, either alone or in company
with a friend. On the evening of Tuesday the 17th of July, accompanied
by a Mr. Smales, a stationer, of No.36, Aldersgate-street, he proceeded
to the yard of Mr. Hodges, near Blackfriars-bridge, and there hired a
boat for the purpose of proceeding up the river. They had reached
Vauxhall-bridge, when through the falling shades of night they saw two
boats advancing upon them, and as they supposed dogging or following
them. They did not immediately take any notice of the circumstance, but
pulling on through the bridge they reached a spot near to the lock or
opening of the Grosvenor Canal. They found that the boats were still in
their vicinity, and were drawing nearer to them; and Mr. Wilkinson
remarked, that he did not like their appearance. At this moment Mr.
Smales drew his watch from his pocket to see what time it was, and he
found that it was ten o'clock. Mr, Wilkinson suggested that they could
pull on for ten minutes longer, and then return with the tide and take
a glass of ale at the Spread Eagle tavern, a much frequented waterside
house. While this conversation was going on, one of the boats which had
been chasing them passed, and they had just taken their sculls in their
hands to resume their progress, and had pulled a few strokes, when they
found that they had come in contact with the boat. Mr. Wilkinson
exclaimed, "We are foul of a boat here, let us shove her off," and
proceeded to clear the funny in which he was from the other boat; but
he found that his efforts were unavailing, and that, notwithstanding
his exertions, the boat came alongside. There were two persons in it,
and one of them, whose appearance was remarkable from his wearing a
blue and white nightcap, made a snatch at the coats of Mr. Wilkinson
and Mr. Smales, which were lying at the feet of the former in the
funny. He was successful in reaching them and drawing them into his own
boat, which was a light skiff, and he and his companion then directly
shoved off and rowed away with all speed. Mr. Smales raised his scull
and endeavoured to strike the leading offender in this impudent
robbery; and at the same moment, Mr. Wilkinson sprung from his own boat
and seized the gunwale of the receding skiff. The second boat at this
moment was observed to be rowed away with great speed, and Mr, Smales'
attention was directed to his friend, who, holding the antagonist boat,
was immersed in the river. He saw that his hands were pushed away from
their hold by the same man who had before been active in the robbery,
and then the same man and his companion struck him repeatedly and
violently over the head and hands with their sculls. Mr. Smales cried
"Murder," at perceiving the imminent danger in which his friend was
placed, and exerted himself to save him by throwing to him two of the
sculls in his boat. His efforts were, however, futile, and he saw Mr.
Wilkinson sink, apparently overpowered by the blows which he had
received. The boat in which their assailants were now rowed away as
quickly as possible, and the waiter and jack-in-the-water at the Spread
Eagle, alarmed by the outcry, put off to the assistance of Mr. Smales.
He acquainted them with what had passed, and urged them to endeavour to
save his friend, but they were unable to render any effectual aid, and
were compelled to give up their search after a useless attempt to
recover the body of Mr. Wilkinson. Fresh assistance from the shore was
procured, and drags were employed, but to no purpose.

Mr. Smales, on his proceeding on shore, at once gave information of
what had occurred to two friends whom he accidentally met at the Spread
Eagle, and accompanied by them he secured the co-operation of Mitchell,
a surveyor of the Thames Police, in endeavouring to secure the
originators of the attack upon him and his friend, and the death of the
latter.

In the course of the ensuing morning, the skiff which had been used by
their assailants was found at Nine Elms, Vauxhall (on the opposite
shore to that on which the Spread Eagle is situated), and it was
discovered to belong to Mr. Moore, a boat-owner, from whose yard it had
been clandestinely taken on the previous night by two men named Kennedy
and Brown. Mitchell was perfectly acquainted with the persons and the
character of these individuals, and he hesitated not to believe that
they were the men who had been guilty of this outrage. Proceeding in
search of them he soon succeeded in apprehending them, together with
three of their companions, named Kitley, Lyon, and Flack, who, like
them, were of notoriously bad character, and were well known as river
thieves. Evidence was not long wanting to connect Kennedy and Brown
with the transaction. Independently of the knowledge of their having
possessed themselves of Mr. Moore's boat, on the Tuesday evening, at
about the time when Mr. Smales and Mr. Wilkinson must have been passing
the yard where it was lying, and where, a moment before, they had been
in conversation with an apprentice of Mr. Moore, named Shearing; it was
ascertained that they had been seen walking together from Nine Elms
towards Lambeth Butts, at about half past ten o'clock, on the night in
question, and that on their arrival at a beer-shop, which they
frequented there, their demeanour was confused, and entirely different
from its usual character. On the following morning they were seen at
the same house, in company with the other prisoners, Flack and Kitley,
and they all appeared to be intently occupied in the destruction of
some letters or papers, which had been produced by Kennedy. They had
remained thus employed some time, when all but Kennedy went away.
Isbester, a Thames Police officer, shortly afterwards made his
appearance in search of them, but Kennedy seemed to be instinctively
aware of his approach, and speedily vanished. Bean, the landlord,
presently discovered that he was hidden in an adjoining empty house,
and having driven him out he was immediately secured. The other
prisoners were taken into custody in the course of the same day.

It was not until Thursday morning that the remains of Mr. Wilkinson
were recovered from the river. They were then washed ashore opposite
the very spot where they had sunk. They presented in themselves
sufficient evidence of the violence which the unfortunate gentleman had
suffered. The nose was broken, and the head, face, and hands, were
severely bruised. At an inquest held on the body on the next evening,
Friday the 20th of July, Mr. Davis, a surgeon, was examined, who had
inspected the body of the deceased. He declared, that the injuries of
themselves would have been sufficient to cause death, but he suggested
that in all probability they had created insensibility, and that the
deceased, having sunk, had been suffocated by drowning. The facts which
have been already detailed were proved in evidence before the jury, and
a verdict of "Wilful Murder" against Brown and Kennedy was returned;
the latter being recognised by Mr. Smales as the man with the
night-cap, who had been most active in the attack. The other prisoners
were declared to be insufficiently connected with the affair to admit
of their being included in the verdict which had been given; but the
further investigation of the case was directed to be carried on by
Captain Richbell, the magistrate at the Thames Police Office.

The subsequent inquiries of the police-officer tended to confirm the
suspicions which were entertained with reference to Brown and Kennedy.
The papers, the destruction of which it had been shown Kennedy was
anxious to procure, had been only partially burned; and some fragments
of them which were secured, were proved to bear the handwriting of the
deceased. The coats too of Mr. Smales and Mr. Wilkinson were afterwards
discovered at the lodgings occupied by the two prisoners. The ends of
justice, it was considered, rendered it fit that Kitley and Flack
should be examined as witnesses, and their testimony afforded
conclusive proof of the premeditated guilt of their late companions of
the crime of robbery; but they asserted their belief that in
determining to commit that offence, they had no intention to cause the
death of the persons whom they attacked.

The prisoners Brown and Kennedy said that the statement of these new
witnesses was quite true, and they admitted that they had put off in
the boat from Mr. Moore's yard, intending to rob Mr. Wilkinson, but
they affirmed that although on that gentleman's jumping to their boat,
they had pushed his hands off to prevent his any longer clinging to the
gunwale, they had struck him no blows with their oars, but that the
wounds which he had been found to have received, had been caused first
by his falling, when he jumped with his face on their boat's stern; and
secondly, by the ill-directed attempts of Mr. Smales to throw to him
the sculls, with which he might assist himself, in keeping his head
above water.

The prisoners were then committed for trial; Lyons, against whom there
appeared to be no evidence, being discharged, and the other men, Kitley
and Flack, being bound over to give evidence.

The further and final investigation of the case, before Mr. Justice
Patteson and a jury, took place at the Old Bailey, on Friday the 7th of
September. The evidence having then been gone through, the prisoners
put in a written statement, reiterating the defence which they had made
before the magistrate. A verdict of "Guilty "followed, and sentence of
death was immediately passed on the prisoners by the Recorder, and
their execution was directed to take place on the following Monday.

In the course of the trial, however, circumstances had arisen which
induced a belief on the minds of the jury, that there might be some
doubts whether the intention of the prisoners might not have been that
which they had pointed out, and whether in fact the blows received by
the deceased might not have been unintentionally dealt by the hand of
his friend, Mr. Smales. The evidence which was adduced, compelled them
to return a verdict of "guilty," but immediately after the trial a
petition was prepared and signed by them, in which they prayed that
some further inquiry might take place, with a view to the commutation
of the punishment, to which the prisoners had been sentenced. The
learned judge was equally uncertain with them, whether, in truth, Mr.
Smales might not unconsciously have struck Mr. Wilkinson, while he was
in the water, and whether the prisoners' account of the transaction
might not be true; and these doubts being increased by the production
of an affidavit, which was placed in the hands of the sheriff, that the
deceased was intoxicated at the time of the occurrence, (although this
statement was contradicted by Mr. Smales), sufficient grounds were
deemed to be made out for a respite being granted. While, however, this
measure of leniency was accorded, it was distinctly intimated, that it
was only under the peculiar circumstances of the case, that the Privy
Council had taken upon itself to recommend the exercise of the royal
prerogative of mercy. The crime of murder had no doubt been proved, but
the remarkable nature of the transaction rendered it advisable that,
while justice was impartially administered, its dictates should not be
obeyed with harshness. The respite was communicated to the wretched
convicts, on Sunday the 9th of September, when they expressed
themselves deeply grateful for the lenient view which had been taken of
their case. During their imprisonment they had conducted themselves in
a manner to show their sincere penitence for the crimes which had
marked their previous lives. They admitted their participation in many
robberies on the river, and on its banks, for which they had frequently
been apprehended, and acknowledged the wickedness of their career.

Their punishment was eventually commuted to transportation, to which
they had. confessed themselves liable.


JAMES BERRYMAN and THOMAS BERRYMAN
The one Hanged, and the Other Transported, For a Burglary in which the
Victim was Blinded for Life.

Illustration: The Berrymans Robbing the Hancoxes

This atrocious outrage was committed on the night of the 2d of November
1832, at a place called Tunley, within two miles of Disley and six
miles of Gloucester, at a farm-house, the residence of Mr. Hancox. Mr.
Hancox, it appears, had a family consisting of two sons and several
daughters, who resided with their father and mother at the farm of
Tunley. The young Hancoxes assisted their father, who was becoming
aged, in the management of the farm, while their sisters were equally
engaged in such occupations as befitted their sex and age.

On the night of the 2d of November, the elder of Mr. Hancox's sons was
in the homestead or farmyard attached to his father's house, when he
observed three men approaching whose appearance was strange to him, and
whose intentions he was disposed to believe were not honest, as the
farm was considerably out of the main road, and nearly two miles from
any other house. He determined, therefore, to retire to the cover of
the dwelling to procure the assistance of his father and brother, in
case of any intention to commit violence being shown, in order by their
united efforts to repel any attack which might be made. To reach the
house in a direct line he sprang over the garden fence, but in taking
the leap his foot caught something, and he fell to the ground. The
approaching strangers by this accident were enabled to come up with him
at the moment he entered the kitchen-door; and the young man, now
convinced of their evil designs, called to them to know what they
wanted, at the same time advancing to the fire-place to reach down a
gun which was suspended over the mantelpiece, in accordance with the
custom of most farm-houses of the district. An observation was made by
one of the party, the precise nature of which was not heard; and young
Hancox turning round to ascertain what was said, suddenly received in
his face and eyes the greater portion of the contents of a pistol
discharged by one of his assailants, consisting of small shot and sand.
The unfortunate young man blinded, and for a moment deprived of his
senses, fell to the ground; but his father entering the kitchen at the
moment of the discharge of the pistol, was also wounded by some of the
shot. The disturbance created by this sudden attack instantly attracted
to the spot the other inmates of the house; and Mrs. Hancox and her
younger son directly afterwards entered the kitchen. They were,
however, felled to the ground by the same ruffian who had fired the
pistol; and then a second fellow armed with a sword advanced to them,
and swore he would murder them if they made any outcry, or attempted
any resistance.

Thus overpowered, Mr. Hancox at once perceived the uselessness of
making any effort to prevent the object which he conceived his
assailants to have in view -- that of robbery; and the foremost
villain, with the man who had hitherto taken no active part in the
affair, instantly proceeded to ransack the house for valuables.
Demanding that Mr. Hancox should first give him what money he had in
his possession, they received from him a sum of 65l. in bank-notes and
gold, and then they proceeded to the upper rooms to secure whatever
portable articles they could find which might be worth being carried
away. The daughters of Mr. Hancox had been dreadfully alarmed at the
proceedings of the robbers in the kitchen, of which they had been
partial witnesses, and terrified lest violence should be offered to
them also, they had run in different directions from the house to the
garden and out-houses, in order to conceal themselves. The two thieves
on whom the task of searching the premises had devolved, had made their
examination of several rooms, when they reached the apartment occupied
as the sleeping-room of the eldest Miss Hancox. They had a light with
them which reflected through the window, and the youngest Miss Hancox
supposing that it was her sister going to bed, yet afraid to re-enter
the house, which she knew the thieves had not yet quitted, threw a
handful of gravel at the window. The boldest burglars, it is well
known, may be easily alarmed, and so it proved in this case; the
villains, whose consciences doubtless pictured to their minds the
approach of powerful assistance to repel their attack, made a
precipitate retreat from the house, carrying with them some articles of
silver plate; and running in a direction contrary to that by which they
had approached it, were soon lost to view in the darkness of the night.

Instant medical aid was now procured for Mr. Hancox and his son, who
were suffering severely from the wounds which they had received; and
the youngest son was despatched to Disley with intelligence of the
outrage, and a request that assistance might be immediately afforded in
searching for its perpetrators. The village soon sent forth all its
male inhabitants to assist in the inquiry, but in vain; and after many
hours' watching they were compelled to return home without having
learned anything tending to convey any suspicion in their minds as to
who were the guilty parties. Young Hancox, it was found, had been
severely wounded both in the face and eyes, and to the grief of all it
was ascertained that his eyesight had been destroyed entirely, and for
ever.

On the following day information of the event was conveyed to London,
together with such a description of the persons of the robbers as Mr.
Hancox and his family were able to give. Their features had been
partially concealed by red comforters which covered the lower part of
their faces, and by black crape; but Mr. Hancox and his family had a
strong impression upon their minds of the general appearance of the
men, whom they declared they should be able to recognise if they were
again to see them.

Upon the facts of the case being stated to the magistrates at
Bow-street, Ellis, an active and shrewd officer of that establishment,
was instructed to exert himself in securing the offenders. A few
inquiries on the spot were sufficient to put him upon a scent, which in
the sequel proved the correctness of his judgment. Three brothers of
the name of Berryman, natives of Gloucestershire, but now resident in
London, were the persons to whom his suspicions attached the guilt of
the transaction; but he found that he had wily game to follow. The
apprehension of one without the others would have been to destroy his
chance of complete success; for to let it be known that they were
suspected, would be only to cause their instant flight. To secure his
object, therefore, he had to act with extreme caution. He found that
James Berryman, one of the brothers, was engaged as a journeyman hatter
in the service of Mr. Straight, in Charlotte-street, Blackfriars-road,
while his brother William, the youngest of the three, was occupied in
the uncertain calling of selling pies and sweetmeats in the streets,
his usual haunt being the neighbourhood of Goswell-street. The third
brother, Thomas, was to be seen occasionally with each of his
relations, but appeared to have no fixed occupation or employment.
Ellis, with an assistant, a lad named Goodison, was for several weeks
intent upon watching his prey without being able to find the favourable
moment to pounce upon them, and disguised in almost every variety of
costume he continued his observations of them. At length, on Wednesday
morning, the 5th of December, he succeeded in finding them all together
in Goswell-street, and closing upon them he secured them and carried
them to Bow-street. James and Thomas Berryman were then instantly
recognised by the younger son of Mr. Hancox, who had been awaiting
their apprehension in London, as having been parties to the robbery,
and Ellis declaring his impression that he should be able also to
procure evidence against the third brother in Gloucestershire, they
were all three ordered to be conveyed to Disley.

Upon their arrival there they were examined by a local magistrate, by
whom they were remanded until a subsequent day. On that day James
Berryman was distinctly sworn to as the man who had discharged the
pistol, and his brother Thomas was recognised as having been one of his
associates; but the third brother, William, against whom there was no
proof whatever, was discharged out of custody. The testimony of the
family of Mr. Hancox as to the identity of the prisoners was not left
wholly unsupported, but by the indefatigable exertions of the officer
other corroborative evidence was procured. This consisted of proof of
the absence of the prisoners from London on the day before and the day
after the robbery; of their arrival at Cirencester from London on the
afternoon of the 2d of November in a van, and of their almost instant
departure from that place in the direction of Disley; and finally, of
their presence at the Bird-in-Hand public-house, about twenty-five
miles on the London road, apparently foot-sore and fatigued, at mid-day
on the 3d of November; and of their departure from that place in the
evening in the waggon for London, and their subsequent arrival in the
metropolis.

Upon this evidence the prisoners were committed for trial at the
ensuing assizes; but Ellis was still convinced of the practicability of
securing the third man, who had been engaged in this atrocious outrage.
He had reason to believe that he was a relation of the Berrymans, named
Desmond, alias Hunt; and after considerable difficulty he at length
succeeded in securing him by a stratagem, while he was working at his
trade of a shoemaker in the Goswell-street-road.

This new prisoner, however, expressed his anxiety to disclose all he
knew upon the subject; and although it was known that he was implicated
in the transaction, the uncertainty of procuring his conviction
operated in his favour, and he was admitted to give evidence for the
prosecution.

On Saturday, the 6th of April 1833, the trial of James and Thomas
Berryman took place. The testimony of all the witnesses tended at once
to attach the guilt of firing the pistol to the former prisoner; and
the latter was also positively identified as having been a party to the
robbery. The statement of the approver confirmed the declarations of
the other witnesses, and both prisoners were found guilty.

The superior atrocity of the conduct of the prisoner James Berryman,
marked him as a fit object for the infliction of a punishment of a
serious nature, and he was sentenced to death, while his brother
received sentence of transportation for life.

The sentence of death was executed upon James Berryman at Gloucester,
on Saturday the 20th of April.


RICHARD COSTER
Transported for Forgery after a Long Career as a Crooked Businessman.

The name of Richard Coster will long be remembered in the city of
London. A most accomplished and successful swindler, he for years
succeeded in evading that punishment which was the just reward of his
offences against society; but at length, like all other of his class,
he overreached his own ingenuity, and met the fit return for his
numerous frauds in a sentence of transportation.

We are not able to supply our readers either with the date or the name
of the place of the birth of our hero, neither are we in possession of
the means of informing them who were his parents, or what was the
sphere of life in which they moved. From the extent of the education of
their son, however, it is pretty evident that their rank was
considerably below that which may be denominated as the "genteel;" and
the same conclusion may also be drawn from the very early period of
life at which this most daring public depredator was placed "upon his
own bottom," and sent forth to gain a living for himself. At an early
age we find him at Oxford, and his first employment of any note was
that of driving an errand-cart, between that city and London. In this
humble occupation he continued for some years, and such were his
industrious and penurious habits, that he at length realised sufficient
money to start on his own account, in the "costermongering line," with
a horse and cart of his own. In this business he soon found the
importance of a connexion with the metropolitan trade, and ere long he
located himself in London, a scene admirably adapted for the display of
those peculiar talents which he possessed. He was not long there in
forming acquaintances, and connexions with persons, whose advice and
instruction were highly important to him, in the scenes in which he was
destined to move. Horse chaunters, or copers, swindlers of all sorts,
utterers of base coin, thieves, "et hoc omne genus," were his constant
companions, and Coster now became the competent associate of all. He
felt, however, that he had a genius above the situation in which he was
placed, and that his present calling was beneath the position which he
ought to fill, and he soon quitted dealing in apples, and, by the
various gradations of a small horse-dealer, an occasional purchaser of
the proceeds of the produce of his associates' plunder, and the other
occupations commonly followed by such "men upon town," he at length
started in the year 1810, in Queen-street, Bristol, as a general agent
and bill discounter.

Here, however, he was unfortunate; for in the course of the year he
became an inmate of Newgate, in that city, on a charge of obtaining
goods by false pretences; but on this occasion he seems to have slipped
pretty quickly through the hands of justice, for in the following year
we find him at the head of the firm of Coster and Co., in Bread-street,
St. Philip's, Bristol.

His retirement to Bristol appears to have taken place in consequence of
the notoriety which he had gained in London; but in 1814 we find him
again shifting his quarters back to the seclusion of the crowded
metropolis, for a reason, apparently, no other than that which had
before induced his migration from it; conjoined, however, with a desire
to avail himself of the wider sphere of action which was presented to
him in that city. At this period he located himself at No.8,
Eltham-place, Kent-road; but a short residence there satisfied him, and
he removed to No.204, High Holborn, from whence, in 1815, he again
changed his quarters to No.7, Bazing-lane. In the following year, as if
to be as close to the good things of this life as possible, he carried
on the business of an eating-house keeper, at No.19, Noble-street,
Falcon-square; but in the year 1818, he again appeared in the world of
money, as a job-broker, at No.5, Oat-lane, Wood-street, and at No.22,
Lower Smith-street, Northampton-square, while at the same time he acted
as clerk to a Mr. Thomas Gray, provision merchant. No.4, Berry-court,
Love-lane, Wood-street.

In 1819, Coster removed to No.3, Bridge water-square, Barbican, at
which time he is still represented as acting clerk to the above Thomas
Gray, at No.1, King-street-terrace, Lower Islington, and No.4,
Cross-street, Finsbury. The following year (1820), he established
himself (still retaining his locality in Bridgewater-square) at No.4,
Staining-lane, under the firm of Coates and Smith, and afterwards under
that of Smith and Martin, of both of which he was the ostensible
partner. In Staining-lane, he carried on business for a number of
years; and only gave up this concern in 1829, to conduct, on a larger
scale, his operations, under the firm of Young and Co., Little
Winchester-street; and Casey and Coster, Great Elbow-lane,
Dowgate-hill, Upper Thames-street.

In the course of these repeated changes of residence, and of avocation,
however. Coster did not pass unnoticed, or unknown. In September 1825,
he was indicted at the Old Bailey, together with a man named Frederick
Wilson, described as of No.35, Union-street, Moorfields, for a
conspiracy to defraud; and at the same sessions, Wilson was convicted
upon a charge of obtaining bills of exchange under false pretences, and
sentenced to seven years' transportation. At the following sessions,
too, Coster was also indicted for an offence precisely similar to that
upon which his companion, Wilson, had been convicted. The prosecutor,
in this case, it appears was a person named Marquet; and Coster, having
first tried every means, and spent a large sum of money in endeavouring
to escape from justice, at length succeeded in compromising the
indictment with him, and in destroying all the evidence of his guilt
which was in existence, namely, the bills which he was charged to have
illegally obtained.

In February 1826, Coster was announced, by the report of the Society
for the Suppression of Swindling, to have a warehouse in Little
Britain; and in the May following his name was gazetted in the list of
bankrupts. He had at the same time a counting-house at No.5, New
Union-street, Little Moorfields, under the firm of William Stoppe and
Co., and was drawing bills on Messrs. John Heslop and Co., corn
merchants and flour factors, South Town, Yarmouth, Norfolk; which were
accepted, payable at Messrs. Esdaile and Co.'s, in connexion with Lacon
and Co., Yarmouth Bank, indorsed "Major J. H. Montgomery."

In June 1827, Coster is proclaimed as circulating bills to a large
amount in Bristol, and elsewhere; and in the report of the Society of
the following September, we find it stated, that "Richard Coster, so
often mentioned, has procured his admission, under the feigned name of
De Coste, into the Honourable Society of Freemasons, at the Burlington
Lodge, No.152."

The Swindling Report for the 23rd of January 1828, localises our worthy
at No.111, Hatton Garden; and in the March following we trace him to
the Queen's Arms-yard, Newgate-street, where he kept an office, while
at the same time he had another place of business at No.9,
Parliament-street, Westminster, under the name of Davis and Co.,
together with a feather-bed manufactory, at No.19, Macclesfield-street,
City-road, under the name of Smith and Bruce; and a Wharf, at No.11,
City-road Basin, in the name of Smith. In the course of the same year,
this most determined swindler is announced as having a house at No.14,
Dorset Crescent, New North-road; as having procured gloves and silk
manufactured goods in the name of Wright and Co., Little
Winchester-street; and as having premises at No.2, York Wharf, Jew's
Harp Basin, in the name of J. Smith; "And I am also directed to inform
you (says the secretary to the Society for the Protection of Trade),
that Young, Richards, and Co., No.5, Upper Thames-street; Young and
Co., No.6, Little Winchester-street, Broad-street; Brown and Co.,No.3,
Cushion-court, Broad-street; and Yates, Smith, and Co., No.3,
Cushion-court, Broad-street, are firms belonging to Richard Coster, so
often noticed."

In the following July, Coster is again alluded to in this report, as
having a residence at No.1, James-street, Kent-road, and another at
Myrtle Cottage, Goswell-terrace, Goswell-street-road; and in the
following October there appeared in the Gazette a formal notice of the
dissolution of partnership between Richard Coster and William
Cunningham, of No.4 Staining-lane, merchants, warehousemen, and general
dealers.

It would be useless to go through the vast variety of places of
residence and of business which Coster occupied, as well as of the
denominations of trades which he carried on up to the year 1833, when
he was taken into custody. A bullion dealer, in Little
Winchester-street; he was driven thence to Great St. Helens, and to
Primrose-street, Bishopsgate. A coral dealer at the latter place he was
again discovered and proclaimed; and at length he pitched his stall in
New-street, Bishopsgate, the most fortunate of all his speculations, so
far as the extent of business which he transacted went, but the most
unfortunate considering the result of his proceedings here, namely, his
conviction and transportation.

While, however, we have thus described the wanderings of Mr. Coster
from house to house, and from business to business, we have not as yet
acquainted our readers with the measures by which he was so successful
in his cheating schemes. The following copy of a circular issued by
him, headed "Accommodation," in large black letters, supported by the
emblems of masonry, gives a fair sample of his mode of raising the
supplies.

He commenced his leading documents thus -- with all the pomp and parade
of a recruiting-sergeant at a country fair to catch his flats:--

"Merchants, manufacturers, farmers, graziers, tradesmen, and persons of
respectability in England, Ireland, Scotland, and Wales, or in any
foreign part, may have good London accepted bills of exchange procured
for them, regularly drawn, accepted, and indorsed, and, if necessary,
specially indorsed to them, at any dates and for any amount their
circumstances may require; or they may be allowed to draw themselves on
respectable and responsible houses in the city of London, and which
will be regularly accepted when presented for that purpose, provided
the drawers advise of such bills being drawn, and enclose the
commission of eight-pence in the pound (otherwise they will be
disowned). These bills they get easily discounted at their country
bankers, or amongst their private moneyed friends; and in some cases
pay them for merchandise, even on their own respectability, and, when
they become due, they remit to us, or any friend in London, the money
to pay the same; and in case they are incapable of taking them up, they
again apply to us in sufficient time to procure them fresh bills, say
upon B, which they instantly get discounted, and with the proceeds
thereof pay the first they negotiated upon A; and so they go on until
such time as their own produce or property turns into advantage, so as
to enable them to do without this accommodation or temporary aid. By
this mode money to any amount may be raised, according to the
circumstances and situation of the borrower, at about seven per cent.,
the object of which is trifling, when compared to the advantage a man
of business may receive from being furnished with plenty of money to
speculate and trade with."

The eightpence in the pound spoken of as being required to be
transmitted, and not unfrequently bills to which the poor dupes were
induced to put their signatures, were invariably disposed of by the
London negotiator, who failed not to reap the profit himself, which he
professed generously to give to his country agents.

The conclusion of this document is equally well worth perusal with its
commencement, and serves at once to stamp our hero as the very prince
and leader of all swindlers.

"He must be a bad merchant, tradesman, or agriculturist," says Coster,
"who cannot always make from fifteen to twenty per cent, of money. Some
persons, for want of knowing this system of raising money, are obliged
to sacrifice their property by locking it up in mortgages for one half
its value, and spend the other half in paying solicitors' enormous
bills, and expenses of mortgage deeds, &c. We have particularly to
observe, that the parties pay all expenses of postage, to and from,
also bill stamps, and our net commission of eightpence in the pound,
which commission, with money for stamps, &c. must be remitted before we
send the bills. We also have respectable references from the parties,
before we accommodate them, to some of their friends in London (if
any), otherwise in the country (the strictest secrecy and delicacy
being observed in the inquiry), to know if they are really respectable,
and an acknowledgement or undertaking when they receive such bills of
accommodation, stating that they received them for the express purpose,
and will pay them when due. When any bills become due, if the money is
remitted to us, or goods equivalent thereto, a day or two beforehand,
we will at all times pay them here, without any extra charge whatever;
and for any money which may be entrusted to our care, if the parties
have not friends here, for taking up the bills when due, or any goods
that may be consigned to us for sale, on commission, we can give
security and references on our part of the highest respectability."

An instance of his success under this circular may not be
uninteresting.

A farmer in Essex, taken off his guard by the apparent plausibility of
this high-sounding circular, complied with the requisitions, and got
bills accepted by Coster, in the name of one of his firms, to the
amount of two hundred pounds, in two bills, at three and four months.
When the became due, the honest hood-winked bumpkin, relying on the
apparent integrity of the party, remitted a hundred pounds, the amount
of the bill, which fell with the nicest precision into the hands of the
swindler, who, indeed, anticipated nothing less. This circumstance only
got wind through the medium of a lawyer's letter to the drawer, who
hastened with all possible expedition to town to learn the cause of
such an unexpected application, when, as he had assured himself, the
bill ought to have been in the hands of his accommodating friends, for
the hundred pound equivalent which he had punctually forwarded to them
for that purpose. His astonishment, however, was not diminished on his
reaching Little Winchester-street, when he was plumply told by Coster
himself that no such letter as the one to which he alluded, containing
the money, had been received, and, in short, that it was all "a
humbug." "That the firm of Young and Company, the acceptors of the
bill, had recently been bankrupts, and had gone away, the Lord knew
where." At such tidings, the poor farmer looked as sheepish as an Essex
calf; and finding all his applications accompanied with the same
uncompromising negative, he was glad, to prevent an exposure of
circumstances, which might have been the means of ruining him, to beat
a retreat to his native place; not, however, without the reflection of
having purchased a hundred pounds' worth of common sense to direct his
future conduct in the bill line.

This, however, is far from being a solitary instance of the success of
our hero's schemes, or the uncompromising impudence and determination
with which he proceeded in his machinations.

The variety of the names and residences of the firms of which he was
the sole proprietor enabled him to carry on his trade with great
plausibility and success. Thus, when a transaction was to be carried on
by Messrs. Young and Co. of Little Winchester-street, Messrs. Brown and
Co. of Cushion-court would be perfectly able to speak in the highest
terms of the respectability of that firm, and the delivery of goods, or
the handing over of bills of exchange to be discounted, as the case
might be, was looked upon as being secure, and as being perfectly
warranted, by the reference. It would be as useless as impossible to go
through one tithe of the speculations of this vagabond, by which he
gulled various persons engaged in trade. In one case he obtained the
whole stock of a celebrated wine-grower in Germany, who was about to
sell off, to be consigned to him; in another he procured the possession
of a very large quantity of Dublin stout; while, in a third, he became
the consignee of a valuable stock of timber; in neither of which
transactions, however, did he ever pay one shilling of the purchase
money. The number of his aliases, and the impossibility of identifying
his person, secured him from the consequences of arrest; for in no
transaction in which he engaged did he ever appear personally to
complete the terms of his contract, or to give any security for
re-payment. All was done through the medium of agents, whom he had
bound to him by some tie of more than ordinary firmness, and who acted
either as principal or agent, as purchaser or referee, as the
necessities of the case might require their employment. To these
persons, who were mostly decayed tradesmen, he behaved with little
generosity. They were retained at salaries varying from ten to twenty
shillings per week, according to the extent of their usefulness; and he
scrupled not, whenever an opportunity presented itself, to cheat them
of their stipulated share of the plunder which he might procure. At the
time of his apprehension. Coster had four of these persons in his
employment, one of whom, named Smith, had long been in his service, and
was now destined to become his dupe, and to be liable to the same
amount of punishment as his master.

It is to Alderman Sir Peter Laurie, and to his indefatigable exertions,
that the public are indebted for the riddance of the city of this
notorious swindler. Sir Peter had long been aware of his existence, and
of the mischiefs which he produced, and the frauds which he committed,
and he determined to suffer no exertion of his to be spared to secure
his apprehension and conviction. He soon discovered his residence in
New-street, and had him taken into custody, with his man Smith. Coster,
it appears, had not latterly confined his business to the ordinary
routine of swindling by procuring goods under pretence of the solvency
of his firm, but he had added to it that of putting off forged notes.
In the month of February 1833, he and Smith wrote letters to a person
named Clarke, residing at Honiton, in Devonshire, desiring him to
transmit a quantity of lace to Mr. W. Jackson, at No.84,
Bishopsgate-street (the Four Swans), and inclosing three 10l. notes to
pay for it. Mr. Clarke discovered that the notes were forged, and
transmitted them to the Bank of England solicitor (Mr. Freshfield),
with an account of the manner in which they had reached his hands. A
scheme was determined to be put in operation to secure Mr. Jackson,
whoever he might be, and fictitious parcels were made up and sent to
the Four Swans, purporting to be transmitted from Honiton. Smith
applied to receive them, and they were handed over to him, upon which
he was immediately taken into custody. Coster was soon after discovered
to be at the head of the transaction and was also secured, and the
letter containing the notes was found to be in his handwriting.

After undergoing several examinations at the Mansion House, the
prisoners were committed to Newgate for trial; and on Tuesday, the 16th
of April 1833, were convicted at the Old Bailey. This result to the
investigation was principally secured by the testimony of two men, who
had formerly been instruments in the hands of Coster, and who gave an
extraordinary account of the success of the schemes of their late
master.

At the conclusion of the same sessions Coster was sentenced to be
transported for life; but his servant, Smith, was unable to attend the
court, in consequence of severe ill health, and his judgment was
respited. At a subsequent period, however, he also received sentence of
transportation.


ALFRED RAE.
Convicted of a Criminal Assault.

This person, at the date of his trial, was a youth who had just
attained the age of fifteen years only. He appeared to have been well
brought up, and to have received a good education; but no effort could
induce him to divulge the residence of his parents, or of any person
with whom he was connected, or indeed to give any account of himself.
He was a stout, well-made lad, and appeared to possess a degree of
strength beyond his years. His offence undoubtedly is one of a most
extraordinary description.

He was indicted at the Launceston assizes on Tuesday, the 1st of April
1834, for having assaulted Grace Brenn, with intent to commit a rape.

The prosecutrix appeared in court to give evidence. She was apparently
in a state of extreme suffering. She stated herself to be a widow with
two children, and to be thirty-one years of age. Her appearance denoted
her to be of a delicate constitution, and gained for her much sympathy.
Her evidence was to the following effect: --

She occupied a small cottage at a place called Botusfleming, near
Launceston, which consisted of only three rooms -- a front and back
kitchen, and an upper apartment, to which access was had by a staircase
leading from the latter. On the evening of Tuesday, the 11th of March,
she was on the point of retiring to rest, at half-past nine o'clock,
when she heard a knock at the door. She demanded who was there, and
some one from without answered, "A boy -- a lad," and said that he had
lost his way. She was induced, by his representations of his distress,
to open the door, and then, on her seeing him, she recognised him as
having called at her house three weeks before to enquire his way to
Corgreen. On his being admitted he at once assumed an authoritative
air, locked the door and pocketed the key, and declared his intention
to stop there that night. He called for tea and bread and butter, which
were supplied by the witness, who was in a dreadful state of alarm, and
then demanded that a bed should be brought for his use into the
sitting-room. This, after some remonstrance, she consented to do, and
then she retired to her own room, where, retaining all her clothes but
her gown upon her person, she lay down by the side of her little boy.
Unable to sleep, after a while she was alarmed to hear the prisoner
suddenly ascend the stairs, and immediately afterwards he rushed into
her room, to the side of the bed where her little girl lay. He took up
the girl and flung her to the bottom of the bed, and in a moment threw
himself across the bed, and laid hold of witness by the head. She
exclaimed, "Good God, what have I done?" and got his hands off her
head, and continued screeching. [[Here followed evidence of the
brutality of the prisoner, developing a series of the most shocking
expressions and brutish attempts on the witness. Thrice he thrust a
handkerchief in her mouth, to prevent her cries; repeatedly knocked her
down across the bed and on the floor; the witness stating explicitly
acts, the evidence of which was conclusive of the attempt, and all but
accomplishment of his diabolical purpose. The prisoner had nothing on
but his shirt at the time of the attack]. The witness at length
succeeded in gaining the staircase, down which she rushed, when the
prisoner, leaning over the rail of the stair-head, laid hold of her
hair, by which he attempted to pull her up stairs again. Her hair gave
way, and she fell through the staircase-door, at the bottom of the
stairs. She got up and tried the front door, but the key was taken
away. The prisoner had by this time also come down stairs, and he
repeated the violence of which he had before been guilty. He swore that
he had razors and pistols with him and would murder her, and he
attacked her with the most brutal ferocity with a fire-shovel, with
which he wounded her many times on the head and face "All his aim now
was," said the witness, "to murder me. He said he passed by the door a
few nights ago, with three more of the gang. I said 'Spare me my life
for the sake of my dear little fatherless children.' He said, 'Will you
promise me never to split, or to divulge, or to make it known?' I said,
'No, sir, I never will.' He said, 'I must put you upon your oath; if
you divulge, and I am taken up and punished, the others will soon do
for you; are you agreeable?' I said, 'Yes; anything to save my life.'
He said he should be put to death himself by his gang. He said he never
went through but one such case before, and then his life was a narrow
escape to him, or something to that effect. I fell upon my knees, and
he said the words over that I was to say. I cannot recollect them
exactly, but the last were 'Holy Ghost.' I then thought he was going to
spare my life. There was blood upon the floor. He said to me, 'You must
wash yourself.' I said 'Yes, sir.' He said, 'You must, for you are all
over blood.' I said, 'I will get some water,' and I took a basin, but
he said he would get the water. He went out and returned immediately; I
said I would wash up the blood from the floor, as when Mr. Fitzgerald's
groom came to the stable close by he might notice it. Prisoner had
thrown away the water with which I had washed; I took the basin out to
the pump, and lifted the handle once or twice, and then ran away to
William Summerfield's; the prisoner was brought there by William
Summerfield and Mr. Fitzgerald's servant; they asked me if that was the
person; I exclaimed, he was the rogue. The prisoner then fell on his
knees; he said, 'My dear ma'am, if you'll forgive me, I'll never do the
like again.' Before I left my house, he ordered me up stairs whilst he
dressed himself; he ordered me down, and I came; he took the candle and
said, 'I fear I have injured you too much to spare your life!'" Here
the witness described her desperate condition, the dreadful effects of
the assault. One tooth had been knocked down her throat, another broken
off in the jaw, which was much swollen, her head had been cut with the
shovel, her limbs much bruised by the fall over the stairs. Other hurts
were also described of a nature not to be put in print.

The prosecutrix was cross-examined by counsel for the prisoner, but no
part of her sad recital was invalidated.

Counsel addressed the jury on behalf of the prisoner, endeavouring to
show that the youth for a time must have been possessed of a demon, or
that the whole account of the prosecutrix was exaggerated, as it
appeared more like a tale of fancy than an exposition of facts.

His lordship charged the jury, who, without much hesitation, returned a
verdict of "Guilty," with a recommendation to mercy.

The learned judge, in delivering the sentence of two years'
imprisonment and hard labour, explained that the prisoner owed his life
to the courageous conduct of the prosecutrix. Had she not resisted to
the life, and had he accomplished his guilty and brutal purpose,
nothing could have saved him from an ignominious death.


JAMES PAGE
Transported for Maliciously Wounding Cattle.

As yet we have presented our readers with no instance of the conviction
of a prisoner for the offence of maiming cattle. The case of James Pago
is worthy of observation.

He was indicted at the Bedford assizes on Wednesday, the 16th of July
1834, for maliciously and feloniously wounding three cows and a mare,
the property of Mr. William George, a farmer at Houghton Conquest, on
the previous 1st of May. The prisoner was a pauper of the parish of
which the prosecutor was overseer; and, having applied for relief, was
set to break stones on the roads. This employment seemed to produce an
ill feeling in his mind towards Mr. George, and he was heard to express
his dissatisfaction. On the night of the 30th of April, Mr. George's
cattle were placed in a particular field in his farm in good health and
condition, but in the morning, at four o'clock, three fine cows and a
mare were found to have been hamstrung, and so severely injured as to
render it necessary that they should all be killed. The evidence by
which this offence was brought home to the prisoner consisted of the
repetition of observations made by him, subsequent to the 1st of May,
in reference to the act, and the testimony of one Chappell, to whom the
prisoner had proposed that he should accompany him to execute his base
purpose.

The prisoner was found "Guilty," and sentenced to be transported for
life.


JOHN EDWARDS, alias HEATH; PETER LEGASSER; AND JEREMIAH WEEDON
Imprisoned for Kidnapping a Solicitor to Extort a Client's Money from
him.

On Monday, the 12th of May 1834, Mr, Gee, a respectable solicitor at
Bishop's Stortford, appeared before the magistrates at Lambeth-street
police-office, to prefer a complaint of a most extraordinary
description.

It appeared from his statement that he had been professionally retained
for the estate of a gentleman named Canning, deceased, who at his death
had bequeathed a life-interest in a sum of 2000l. to his widow, the
principal of which, at her death, was directed to descend to his three
children. Mr. Gee's occupation had been, under the direction of the
executors of Mr. Canning's will, to invest in good securities the
amount thus bequeathed, with a view to as good a rate of interest being
procured upon it as was possible. A sum of 1200l. had been already
invested, and 800l. only remained in his possession, which he had
deposited in the hands of his bankers, Messrs. Gibson and Co., of
Saffron Walden, for security. A few days before, he had received a
letter signed "W. Heath," the writer of which professed his desire to
have a personal communication with him in London, upon the subject of
certain landed property which was for sale in the neighbourhood of
Bishop's Stortford. He returned an answer, announcing his intention to
visit London on that day (the 12th of May), and expressing his
willingness to meet Mr. Heath in the coffee-room of the Bull Inn,
Aldgate, at ten o'clock in the morning. Having received no negative
reply, he accordingly proceeded to the Bull Inn at the appointed hour,
and found a young man in the garb of a sailor waiting to see him. He
presented him with a letter in the same handwriting as that which had
been before delivered to him, and signed with the same name, in which
he was requested to accompany the bearer in a coach, which had been
prepared, to the residence of the writer, who was too ill to attend the
appointment which had been made, an assurance being given of a desire
to afford every assistance to Mr. Gee with a view to the saving of his
time. On his reading the letter he had no hesitation in complying with
the wish which was expressed, and the messenger having conducted him to
a coach, he immediately entered it and was driven off. The carriage
proceeded along the Commercial-road, and at length drew up at the house
No.27, York-street West.

On his quitting the vehicle and entering the house, a person met him in
the passage, who told him that his brother was in the kitchen at his
breakfast, but suggested that he would not, perhaps, have any objection
to go there to him. The door was at this moment closed and the coach
driven off, and, as he was about to descend the stairs, he was suddenly
seized by the man who had delivered the letter to him, and who had
followed him into the house, by the man who had accosted him in the
passage, and by a third person, who made his appearance from below.
Alarmed at this proceeding, he made considerable resistance; but, in
spite of all his exertions, he was carried into the back kitchen, and
from thence into a species of cupboard, or den, where he was instantly
placed upon a seat and securely fastened. A chain, fixed to staples at
his back, passed round his chest, under his arms, and was padlocked on
the left side; and his feet being secured with cords, were so tightly
bound to rings in the floor, as to prevent the possibility of his
moving them. Having been thus confined, one of the party addressed him,
and representing himself as the brother of Mrs. Canning, demanded that
he should immediately give him a check for the 800l. of her money which
he had in his possession, as well as an order, upon the presentment of
which he might procure the delivery to him of the bond for 1200l.
invested for her benefit and that of her children. Now for the first
time informed of the object of his assailants, he remonstrated with
them upon the illegality of their proceeding, and entreated them to
release him. They answered, that they were quite aware that what they
had done was contrary to law, but that they were resolved to brave the
consequences, and that not only would they retain him in his present
situation until he had complied with the demand which they had made,
but until they had actually obtained the money and the deed.

They were then about to leave him, and lock him in the horrible den in
which he had been confined, where he would be left in utter darkness,
when, on reflection, he became apprehensive that, if he made any
attempt to give an alarm or to procure assistance they might return and
murder him, and calling them back he notified, that he was willing to
comply with their demands. Pen, ink, and paper, were, in consequence,
brought, and he wrote a check on his bankers for 800l., and a letter
directed to Mr. Bell, at Newport, Essex, requesting the delivery of the
deed in his possession to the bearer, for the inspection of Mrs.
Canning.

The person, who had described himself as Mrs. Canning's brother, on
receiving these documents immediately quitted the house, and being left
by the other men also, the door of his cage standing open, he began to
meditate upon the possibility of his escape. For three hours he found
every effort which he made unavailing; but at length he succeeded, by a
violent exertion, in shifting the iron chain which encompassed his
chest a little upwards, and in freeing his body from it. Thus at
liberty he was able to reach his feet, and he soon liberated his legs
from the cords by which they were confined. His only remaining effort
now was to quit the house; and stealthily making his way out of the
back-kitchen into the garden, he succeeded in eluding the vigilance of
the two remaining men, who were at dinner in the front kitchen, and
escaped over the garden-wall into an adjoining street. He instantly
despatched messengers to Mr. Bell, and to Messrs. Gibson's bank, with
instructions not to obey the orders which he had signed, and then made
the best of his way to the police-office to describe the treatment to
which he had been subjected.

Mr. Walker, the magistrate, immediately afforded Mr. Gee every
assistance in his power, and despatched Lea and Shelswell, two active
officers of the establishment, to York-street, in order that they might
apprehend the parties concerned in this most extraordinary conspiracy.
On their reaching the house, however, they found that it had been
already vacated, and that it was closed. An entry was soon forced, and
then they discovered that the house had evidently been taken solely for
the purpose of effecting the outrage which had recently been committed
in it. It was devoid of any furniture, with the exception of a few
chairs in the kitchen, and a blind to the window of the same room. The
den, in which Mr, Gee had been confined, was situated in the
back-kitchen; it was partitioned off from the room with boards of an
immense thickness and strength. Its dimensions were about five feet by
three, and outside the immediate walls of the cell, and within another
exterior partition, a large quantity of earth had been placed, so as
effectually to prevent any sounds emitted within from escaping or being
heard in any of the neighbouring houses. The interior of the cell
resembled a privy in its structure, although it had evidently been
built expressly for the purpose for which it had been used. There was a
seat at an elevation of about two feet from the ground, and at the
back, about a foot above the seat, was securely fixed a strong bar of
wood to which the chain with which Mr. Gee had been confined was still
suspended, in the same state as that in which he had left it. On the
floor there was also another bar of wood securely fixed; and attached
to this were two swivels, through which a large quantity of sash line,
which had been employed in binding the feet of Mr. Gee, passed. On
inquiries being made in the neighbourhood, it was learned that the
occupants of the house had only entered upon its possession on the
previous Saturday; and that immediately after Mr. Gee had escaped, two
men were seen in the garden anxiously looking right and left, as if in
search of some person, and that on their being asked what they wanted,
they declared that they were in pursuit of a thief who had escaped.
They were observed to leave the house immediately afterwards.

The subsequent investigation of this singular affair induced a belief,
that the person who had represented himself to Mr. Gee as the brother
of Mrs. Canning, was a man named Edwards, who was blind, and who had
taken the house of Mr. Wych the landlord. It was ascertained that
Edwards was in the habit of visiting Mrs. Canning at her residence at
No.4, Providence-row; and after a short interval he was observed to
quit that house, and was taken into custody. The apprehension of Peter
Lecasser, his wife, Mary Lecasser, and Jeremiah Weedon, soon after took
place, as they were about to enter the house in York-street; and the
prisoners were on Tuesday morning taking before the magistrates. Mrs.
Lecasser, it then appeared, was the sister of Edwards, and her husband
and Weedon had been employed by him to assist him in his attack upon
Mr. Gee. Edwards, it was proved, had admitted when he was taken into
custody, that he had been the prime mover in this conspiracy; that he
had tried by all legal means to get the money from Mr. Gee, and that
having failed, he had determined upon procuring it at all hazards.

While the prisoners were under examination, a singular fact developed
itself. The Rev. D. Mathias, rector of the parish of Whitechapel,
recognised Edwards as having been recently married by him in the name
of Heath, to a female named Elizabeth Jenkins, who, however, from the
description given of Mrs. Canning, he was now induced to believe was
that person. Edwards, upon being questioned, hesitated to admit the
truth of this assertion, but made no attempt to deny that the statement
made by Mr. Gee was correct. He made every effort to exculpate his
fellow-defendants, declaring that they had been employed by him, and
that he alone was to blame. Weedon, who was a smith by trade, had built
the cell, and both he and Lecasser had acted entirely under his orders.
He said, that he was acquainted with Mrs. Canning, and that he had
become known to her about two years before, from his being recommended
to her to tune her piano, an occupation which he followed for his own
support.

On Wednesday the prisoners were again brought up, and on this occasion
Mrs. Canning was in attendance. The three men were distinctly
identified by Mr. Gee, as the parties by whom he had been assaulted;
and Mrs. Canning was also recognised by Mr. Mathias, as the person whom
he had united to the prisoner Edwards. This fact was, however, denied
by Mrs. Canning; but after some questions had been put to her she
fainted in the office, and her sister then admitted that the
declaration of the clergyman was true. A reason for her denial of the
fact was suggested in the circumstance, that her interest in the
property left by her deceased husband terminated with her widowhood.

On the following Tuesday, the 19th of May, the prisoners, except Mrs.
Lecasser, who was discharged, were fully committed to take their trial
at the next Old Bailey Sessions. Their committal was made out under the
provisions of statute 7 & 8 Geo. IV. c. 29, c. 6, which enacts, "That
if any person rob another person of any chattel, money, or valuable
security, every such offender being convicted thereof, shall suffer
death as a felon. And if any person shall steal any such property from
the person of another, or shall assault any other person with intent to
rob him, or shall with menaces or by force, demand any such property of
any other person, with intent to steal the same, every such offender
shall be guilty of felony; and being convicted thereof, shall be
liable, at the discretion of the court, to be transported beyond the
seas for life, or for any term not less than seven years; or to be
imprisoned for any term not exceeding four years; and, if male, to be
once or twice publicly whipped (if the court shall think fit) in
addition to such punishment."

At the Old Bailey Sessions on Monday the 12th of July, Edwards, Weedon,
and Lecasser, were put upon their trial. Mr. Lee having stated the case
for the prosecution, it was argued by Mr. Phillips, on behalf of the
prisoners, that the indictment which charged them with felony could not
be sustained. The allegation was, that the prisoners intended to take
the security for 800l. "from the person" of Mr. Gee, which was
inconsistent with the fact. The case was on this objection stopped by
Mr. Justice Patteson, who declared that the prosecution could not be
sustained, and a verdict of acquittal was, in consequence, returned.

The prisoners were then indicted for demanding from Mr. Gee, with
threats and menaces, a legal security for 12001.; and also, an order
for the payment of 100l., with a view to steal the same. Mr. Adolphus
having opened the case, the Court declared that this indictment was
also open to objection. The prisoners were alleged to have demanded the
security "with a view to" obtain it. They had actually obtained it, as
it appeared, and they must be acquitted. Mr. Gee, besides, never had
possession of the papers giving up the security, and as there could be
no robbery where there was no possession, the indictment could not be
sustained.

The prisoners were then declared "Not Guilty; "but a bill of indictment
having been already found against them at the Middlesex Sessions,
together with Mrs. Canning, for an assault, they were all held to bail
to answer that charge.

On Friday, the 1st of August, the whole of the parties were put upon
their trial at the Middlesex Sessions. The case occupied the Court
until ten o'clock at night, when it terminated in a verdict of
acquittal as regarded Mrs. Canning, and of guilty of the offence of
conspiracy against Edwards and Weedon, and of guilty of an assault
against Lecasser.

Edwards was sentenced to two years' imprisonment in Newgate; Weedon to
twelve months' imprisonment in the House of Correction; and Lecasser to
six months' imprisonment in the same jail.


JOSEPH MOSELEY AND WILLIAM GARSIDE
Trades Unionists who Murdered a Grinding Employer, Executed after a
Long Delay.

This remarkable murder was committed on the 3rd of January, 1831,
although the strong arm of the law did not reach its guilty
perpetrators until August 1834. The case is worthy of note, not only
from the length of time which intervened between the murder, and the
time when the murderers were discovered, but also from a remarkable
dispute having arisen with regard to the execution of the criminals,
and the consequent delay of the sentence passed upon them.

The murder, as we have stated, occurred at the beginning of the year
1831, a period when there was much discontent exhibited by the
labouring population of England, engaged in agricultural and in
manufacturing pursuits. At Ashton, and many other places in the
neighbourhood of Manchester, which were thickly inhabited by
cotton-spinners, and other persons employed in the various factories of
that district, the feeling of distaste towards the masters was almost
universal; and "unions "were formed amongst the men, who were bound by
the terms of the compact into which they entered, to work only at
certain prices for their labour, which they desired to dictate to their
masters, and to hold commune with no man who presumed to labour for
smaller wages than those they chose to accept. Although there can be no
doubt that in this case the murder which was committed by Moseley,
Garside, and their companions, arose out of the prevailing system of
combination amongst the workmen, it would be hard from such a fact to
draw an inference, condemnatory of the whole system, and of all parties
to it. Mr. Thomas Ashton, the victim of the murder, was the younger son
of a master cotton-spinner at Hyde. It is remarkable that at this place
little discontent was shown by the workmen, who were employed at the
usual wages; but the master-spinners of Ashton justified their refusal
to raise the wages of their men, upon this circumstance; and as this
was known to have excited dissatisfaction among the workmen at the
latter place, little doubts were entertained that they were the persons
to whom the diabolical act would be traced.

The circumstances attending the murder were these:-- Mr. Ashton had
taken tea at his father's house at an early hour on the evening in
question, and had gone to visit a newly-erected factory, about a third
of a mile distant. He quitted the factory at half-past six o'clock, and
his murdered remains were found on the road leading towards his
father's house at eight o'clock. He had been killed by a shot through
the heart; and the appearance of the body showed that the assassin must
have stood close to him at the time of the murder. On his left side in
front was one large wound, evidently produced by the discharge of slugs
from a pistol, which had entered his body so immediately after their
quitting the muzzle of the weapon as not to have had time to separate,
as would have been the case had they been discharged at him from a
distance. In his back were two wounds, a small distance asunder, which
showed that the slugs had diverged in the body of the murdered man, and
had thus passed out at his back. This event excited universal
astonishment at Hyde, as well from the amiability of character of the
unfortunate deceased, as from the absence of all apparent cause for the
sanguinary deed; and rewards from the friends of Mr. Ashton, and from
the government, amounting to 2000l. were immediately offered for the
apprehension of the murderers, and for the evidence of any accomplice
who had not actually fired the fatal shot.

Officers were despatched in all directions to endeavour to secure the
offenders, but years passed ere the real authors of the diabolical
crime were discovered. William Moseley, a convict in Chester jail, in
the month of April 1834, disclosed the leading circumstances of the
murder; and Garside and Joseph Moseley, the brother of the prisoner,
its leading perpetrators, were shortly afterwards apprehended at
Oldham.

On Thursday, August the 7th 1834, the prisoners were put upon their
trial at the Chester assizes. William Moseley was the principal
witness, but his evidence was corroborated in many important
particulars. He stated that the murder had been committed at the
instance of a man named Samuel Scholfield, a unionist, who gave as a
reason for it, the unjust measure of wages paid by Mr. Ashton. The
subject was broached by this person to them all; and for the trifling
sum of ten pounds, they undertook to carry out the diabolical plot. In
pursuance of the agreement, they all met near the mill belonging to Mr.
Ashton, called the Woodley Mill; and stationing themselves in a quiet
position, they awaited the coming of their victim. Shortly before seven
o'clock, his approach was observed; and Garside rising and advancing to
him, shot him dead before he had time to litter a word, or to offer the
smallest resistance to the cowardly attack made upon him. The three
murderers instantly ran off, without waiting to remove the body from
the middle of the road where it lay; and as we have already said, at
eight o'clock it was discovered. The price of the murder was paid on
the same night, the three murderers and Scholfield going on their
knees, and swearing to each other, that "they wished God would strike
them dead if they ever told." The oath was strictly obeyed until
William Moseley, being imprisoned in Chester jail for some other crime,
disclosed all he knew of the transaction. The witness was subjected to
a severe cross-examination, in which he admitted that his reputation
was stained by a long list of the blackest crimes. His testimony,
however, received so great confirmation from the statements of other
witnesses, that a verdict of "Guilty "was returned against both
prisoners, and they were ordered for execution on the morning of the
following Saturday.

A difficulty, however, now arose upon the subject of the proper
officer, by whom this sentence was to be carried into execution. The
sheriff of the County Palatine, and the sheriff of the city of Chester,
each refused to perform this painful duty, upon the ground that the
other was the officer to whose lot it fell. The wretched prisoners
remained up to Saturday morning in suspense as to the period of their
execution; and on that day Mr. Justice Parke granted a respite until
the 18th of the same month, in order that the difficulty might be
settled.

This delay, the cause of which was intimated to the convicts, enabled
the proper officers to hold communications with them upon the subject
of the offence of which they had been convicted. Both admitted their
participation in the murder, but denied that Scholfield was at all
implicated in the affair. Garside declared that if an offer which he
had made to become a witness had been accepted, the whole truth would
have been arrived at; but, as it was, they had got nothing but a parcel
of lies, and he should say "note" (nothing).

On the day after the trial, William Moseley was carried to Stockport,
and there, upon the information which he had given, Scholfield was
taken into custody. He, however, denied the truth of the assertions
which had been made of his guilt, but he was detained in custody.

On Saturday the 16th of August, the prisoners were further respited
until the 18th of September; and from that date they were again
respited until the commencement of Michaelmas Term, in the following
November, should enable the Court of King's Bench to determine the
question in dispute between the sheriffs.

On Thursday the 6th of November, the Attorney-General moved for a
certiorari, to bring the conviction into that court, and also for writs
of habeas corpus, to bring up the persons of the prisoners, with a view
to the question being discussed. The learned gentleman explained the
objections made by the two sheriffs. Previously to the passing of the
Statute 11 Geo. IV., all complaints in the County Palatine of Chester
were tried by the Chief Justice of Chester, and rules of court were
made for the execution of such prisoners as were condemned to death,
which orders were carried into effect by the sheriff of the city of
Chester. By the act in question, the court by which this authority was
exercised, was abolished, and in its stead assizes, under commissions
of oyer and terminer, were ordered to be held in Chester, as in other
counties. By the sixteenth section, however, it was provided, "that
nothing therein contained should affect the duties or obligations to be
performed by the magistrates and citizens of Chester." In the present
case, the sheriff of the city of Chester refused to execute the
sentence on the prisoners, alleging that his jurisdiction in such
respects extended only to the Palatine Court, which had been abolished,
and that if there was any such obligation, it rested on the mayor and
citizens, and not upon the sheriff. Under these circumstances, the
learned judge had felt it to be his duty to respite the prisoners from
time to time, and indictments had been preferred against both sheriffs,
which, however, had been ignored. Ex officio informations would be
filed against them by him (the Attorney-General) for their neglect of
their duty; but as much time must elapse before the questions involved
in those informations could be legally discussed, he was compelled to
come to the court, with a view to the carrying into effect the sentence
of the law upon the prisoners, an object which was of the highest
importance. It would be in the power of the court to order the
prisoners to be executed by either of the disputing sheriffs; by the
sheriffs of Middlesex, or Surrey; or by their own marshal. Several
cases were then cited, in which the court had interfered with regard to
the execution of offenders, and the writs were granted.

On Tuesday the 11th of November, and Thursday the 13th, the prisoners
were brought before the Court of King's Bench. Mr. Dunn, on behalf of
Garside, contended that the court could not award sentence against that
prisoner, because he had made a statement to the authorities of
Cheshire with regard to the circumstances of the murder, which, by the
proclamation which had been issued, offering a reward of 2000l. and a
pardon, to any accomplice of the actual murderer, entitled him to be
liberated. This fact having been pleaded by the learned gentleman, on
behalf of his client, in obedience to the direction of the court, the
Attorney-General was heard on the other side. He contended that the
jury had distinctly found that Garside had fired the fatal shot; and
that even taking the statement of the prisoner to be correct, he was
not therefore entitled to his pardon.

Lord Denman held this good ground of demurrer to the plea, and
execution having been prayed, the court awarded that it should be done
by the marshal, assisted by the sheriff of Surrey.

The prisoners were then conveyed to the King's Bench prison, to await
their death. A petition was prepared by Mr. Dunn, on behalf of Garside,
setting forth the same facts which were urged by the learned gentleman
in court, but it was declared to be of no avail; and on Tuesday the
25th of November, the wretched convicts expiated their foul offence on
the top of Horsemonger-lane jail.

Garside had, during the latter portion of his imprisonment, striven to
shift the guilt of firing the pistol upon the witness, Joseph Moseley,
and it was not until the very moment of his being turned off, that he
retracted this allegation. His conduct, as well as that of his fellow
prisoner, during the whole period of their confinement, had been
remarkable for its extreme coolness; and on the morning of their
execution, their demeanour was in no way altered.

At nine o'clock in the morning the prisoners mounted the scaffold,
Garside being first, and they were immediately turned off; Garside's
last words being, "All the statements that I have made at different
times since my conviction are false."

At the Assizes for the County of Chester, held in the month of April,
1835,a bill of indictment was preferred against Scholfield, but it was
ignored; and he was, in consequence, set at liberty.


EDWARD CHALKER AND JEREMY KEYS
Poachers, Tried for Murder of a Gamekeeper.

Illustration: Chalker and Keys Attacking the Gamekeepers.

At the Bury Assizes, on Thursday the 26th of March, 1835, Edward
Chalker and Jeremy Keys, were indicted for the murder of Bryan Green,
on the 22nd of November. -- The unfortunate man, whose fatal end led to
the inquiry, was one of the under-gamekeepers of. Miss Lloyd, the lady
of the manor of Hintlesham; and on the night of the 22nd of November,
he and a fellow-servant named Masterman, were on the watch in the great
wood upon the manor, which was well stocked with pheasants; and which
was separated from a smaller wood by a glade. Nothing particular
occurred till half-past three in the morning, when they heard the whiz
of an air-gun very near the place where they had posted themselves. The
sound proceeded from the little wood, to which they immediately made
their way, and on crossing the glade they saw a spotted spaniel dog and
a man passing from one wood to the other. The man instantly ran into
the little wood, and the keepers pursued and overtook him. He suffered
himself to be taken without any struggle, but he was no sooner in hold
than he gave a "signal whistle," and two other men ran to his
assistance, one of them having in his hand an air-gun. The three men
then assailed the two keepers, who were instantly struck to the earth,
and Masterman was beaten with a club as he lay on the ground, until he
became quite insensible. Green had at first threatened to shoot the
men, unless they let him go unharmed; but they swore he should not
escape himself, nor harm them, and presently he too was left in a state
of insensibility. Upon Masterman's coming to himself, he heard Green
groaning most piteously, and upon his crawling to him, he found his
head in a pool of blood, which was still flowing profusely. After some
time Masterman contrived to get as far as the head-keeper's house, and
upon their returning to the scene of the outrage, they took the wounded
man on a litter to the keeper's lodge, and sent for a surgeon. It was
found, upon examining his head, that there was a wound on one side,
through which the brain was escaping, and the skull was extensively
fractured. A portion of the bone was pressed into the brain; upon
removing this, the patient experienced some relief, and in a few hours
could utter a few monosyllables; but he soon afterwards relapsed, and
after fluctuating between life and death for a few days, he ceased to
suffer. He had, on the night in question, a pistol and a gun with him,
and upon searching on the spot on the following morning, they were
found lying upon the ground. The cock of the pistol was struck down,
but the pan had not risen, and the pistol, consequently, had not gone
off. His gun was found with the barrel broken from the stock, and on
the breech a piece of skin and hair and some blood were observed, and a
recently killed pheasant and a bludgeon were lying close by.

It appeared that the prisoners were in the habit of frequenting a
beer-house, called the "Fox and Grapes," at Ipswich, which was six or
seven miles from Hintlesham; and a day or two before the evening in
question, Chalker told a Mr. Frost, who was drinking there, that he
would give him a pheasant for his Sunday's dinner. In the afternoon of
the 22nd, one Upson, the village smith, went to the Fox and Grapes to
repair the lock of the cellar door, and whilst he was in the cellar the
landlady heard the peculiar sound which is made by discharging an
air-gun; and it appeared that the prisoner, Chalker, kept his in the
cellar. It was further proved that the prisoners and two other men left
the house on that evening, and returned early the next morning, when
some mysterious conversation was heard between them, respecting
Hintlesham wood. Other corroborative facts were given in evidence,
which clearly proved that Chalker had been concerned in the dreadful
transaction. The evidence respecting Keys was not so conclusive.
Chalker was found guilty, but Keys was acquitted.

The former received sentence of death, and was executed on the
following Monday, the 30th of March.


MARY ANNE BURDOCK
Executed for Murder.

Great excitement and extraordinary interest was created at the Bristol
Assizes, held in the month of April, 1835, before the Recorder (Sir
Charles Wetherell), by the trial of a woman named Mary Anne Burdock,
who stood indicted for the wilful murder of an old lady named Clara
Anne Smith, who had been her lodger, and whom, it was alleged, she had
poisoned with yellow arsenic, to obtain possession of her property. The
trial commenced on Friday the 10th of April, and was continued through
the whole of that day and Saturday, and the Recorder did not proceed to
sum up till Monday, the jury having been kept under the care of the
proper officers during the whole of the time.

The evidence was circumstantial, but perfectly conclusive. It appeared
that the deceased, a widow aged sixty, went to lodge with the prisoner
at Bristol, in the year 1833, and was known to be possessed of
considerable property, in sovereigns and bank-notes. She had a
brother-in-law residing at Oporto, and a nephew in this country. She
died on the 23rd of October. Shortly afterwards an undertaker, named
Thompson, was sent for by the prisoner, who told him she had an old
lady dead in her house, who died very poor, and had no friends, and who
must therefore be buried at as little expense as possible. A coffin and
coffin-plate, on which were the deceased's name and age, were in
consequence provided, and the lady was interred in St. Augustine's
church-yard, at eight in the morning, of the 80th of October. The
prisoner, previous to this, was very poor, and lived with a man named
Wade. Subsequent to the funeral of the deceased, she suddenly became
possessed of wealth, and said she had been left a large property by her
uncle. Wade went into business, but died in the April following, and
made a will, by which he settled considerable property on the prisoner,
including stock in trade, valued at 700l. She was also proved to have
600l. in cash. She told one of the witnesses that a rich old lady had
died in her house, and left her property to Wade.

Matters went on thus till December 1834, when the relatives of the
deceased, hearing of her death, went to make further inquiries
respecting her fate and property. This led to investigations which
created suspicions of foul play, and it was determined that the case
should undergo a searching scrutiny. Inquiries had previously been made
of the prisoner, who gave up some papers of the deceased, but denied
that she had left any property. The body was exhumed, the place of
interment and the coffin being distinctly sworn to by the undertaker,
who also swore to the shroud and other articles on the person of the
deceased. The body was then opened by Dr. Riley, the physician of the
Bristol infirmary, assisted by Mr. J. J. Kelson, surgeon. Dr. Symonds,
and Mr. Herapath, a lecturer on chemistry, and was found in an
extraordinary state of preservation, notwithstanding the time which had
elapsed since its interment. There was a quantity of water in the
coffin, which covered part of the body and legs. The stomach and
abdomen were laid open at once, and it was discovered that the
integuments had been converted into adipocire, which is a hardening of
the fat, or animal soap. The stomach was carefully taken out, and found
to contain a quantity of yellow arsenic. The contents of the stomach
were submitted to various chemical tests, all confirming the belief
that yellow arsenic had been administered, and was, in fact, the cause
of death -- in all other respects the subject was healthy, A beautiful
preparation of the stomach was produced in court.

This fact established, other witnesses were called to bring the crime
home to the prisoner. A seaman, named Evans, proved that he lodged with
the prisoner when she passed as Mrs. Wade; this was in October 1833.
She asked him to purchase two-pennyworth of arsenic for her about six
days before Mrs. Smith died, saying there were rats in the house (this
was proved not to have been the case). He accordingly purchased the
arsenic from a druggist named Hobbs, in the presence of two witnesses,
all of whom confirmed his statement. He gave the arsenic to the
prisoner, and she put it in her pocket. He was in the house when Mrs.
Smith died, and heard Wade and the prisoner laughing during the night.
The prisoner said the deceased died poor, and she should sell some
plate she left to pay the funeral expenses. He had seen the deceased
with a gold watch and chain about a month before.

The actual administration of a yellow powder (the arsenic no doubt) was
proved by a girl named Mary Ann Allen, who had been engaged to wait on
the deceased, and who saw the prisoner put some yellow powder out of a
paper, which she took from her pocket, into a basin of gruel, which she
subsequently gave to the deceased -- shortly after which the poor
creature was seized with dreadful convulsions and died. After her death
the prisoner opened a cupboard and drawers, and applied abusive
epithets to the deceased, and conducted herself in the most unfeeling
manner, exclaiming, "Only think of the drunken old b--- having this,"
&c. She told witness never to tell anything of Mrs. Smith, or who she
was, or what she was, nor that she had ever lived with her; and, if any
one asked, to say she was a stranger and a foreigner, from far away in
the East Indies; "Nor don't you ever tell any one," said she, "you saw
me put anything into the gruel, for people might think it was curious."

These details were confirmed by other witnesses, including the mother
of the girl, and a servant who at the time lived with the prisoner. Mr.
Charles Read, a wine-merchant, who knew the deceased's brother-in-law
in Oporto, then proved that in November after her death, he went to the
prisoner's house and saw her and Wade. He made inquiries as to Mrs.
Smith's property. The prisoner said she died very poor, and that her
clothes were in so bad a state that she was compelled to burn them, and
that she would not produce anything belonging to her till he paid the
funeral expenses, which amounted to 15l.; he went again the next
morning, when Wade said there was a box which contained some papers
belonging to the deceased; she ultimately agreed that they should each
get a professional man to meet. They went again the next morning, and
the box was at length produced and opened, and the papers were
examined, and there was an old will of Mr. Smith's in favour of his
wife. There were no deeds. Mrs. Smith had dressed very respectably
since the death of her husband, five years ago. He knew she had
possessed property. He had paid her 700l. in 1829. He paid her an
annuity of 15l.

The case having been brought to a conclusion, some witnesses were
examined to the character of the prisoner, who strongly protested her
innocence.

On Monday the recorder summed up the evidence with great perspicuity,
going through the whole of the testimony of the witnesses, and finally
remarking on such parts as required explanation. He observed in his
address to the jury -- "The issues of life and death were, by the
constitution of the realm, committed to them, and not to him. The
prisoner was charged with having murdered, by means of poison, a lady
of the name of Clara Ann Smith, the poison being yellow arsenic mixed
in water gruel. They would have to make up their minds upon the three
following points:-- First, whether Mrs. Smith's death was occasioned by
poison; secondly, whether that poisoning was carried into effect by the
prisoner; and, thirdly, whether the prisoner knew that she was
poisoning Mrs. Smith. If they were of opinion that she did administer
the poison knowing it was poison -- if their consciences were made up
on these points, however fatal and tremendous the consequences might be
to the prisoner, they were bound to make a true deliverance between the
king and the king's subjects, and they were bound to pronounce her
guilty. They would have to exercise their judgment. The verdict was
theirs, and not that of the court. They were charged with the duty of
pronouncing the question of guilty or not guilty."

The jury retired for rather more than a quarter of an hour, during
which time great and more than ordinary excitement was manifest in the
court. The prisoner apparently retained the most perfect composure, her
solicitors and other persons were crowded round her, with whom she
appeared in most anxious communication; but her eyes were constantly
wandering towards the door, in expectation for the jury's return, upon
the countenance of each of whom she was observed, upon their leaving
the court, to have looked with a steadfast wish to discriminate the
opinion each had formed of her case. -- Upon an intimation that the
jury were about to return, there was a general anxiety to obtain a
sight of the prisoner throughout the Court, which occasioned so much
noise, and cries of so various a nature, that some time elapsed before
order could be obtained, or the judge had any power to proceed. The
noise having somewhat subsided, the names of the jury were called over,
and they were then in the usual manner asked what verdict they had to
return, when the foreman, in a most solemn manner, and evidently with a
great degree of feeling, returned the verdict of "Guilty."

The prisoner's countenance at this interesting and awful moment was
slightly changed, but she addressed the judge in an audible voice,
although rather faltering, saying, "My lord, I am innocent, I am
innocent. Standing at this bar, I call upon the Almighty to put his
judgment upon me if what I am now saying is not true. I know nothing of
it; I am innocent; and the Almighty, I hope, will put his judgment upon
me at this moment if I am not innocent."-- The learned judge then
passed upon her the awful sentence of the law, directing her to be
executed on Wednesday, and her body to be buried within the precincts
of the jail. The prisoner said, in an audible voice, "May the Lord have
mercy upon my soul." She was perfectly unmoved during the passing of
the sentence. She was then removed, and immediately partook of
refreshment under the dock. An immense crowd of persons was waiting in
every avenue leading from the court; and, upon her departure from the
Guildhall, on her way to the jail, she was assailed with the most
frightful and discordant yells, the carriage in which she was conveyed
being followed by a great concourse of people.

On Wednesday, the 15th of April, the unhappy wretch was hanged. During
the religious service before execution she sat sullenly silent, never
once rising or kneeling. At the conclusion of the sermon she got up
without betraying any emotion, and left the chapel with firmness. But
afterwards, when in the room under the platform, having her dress
arranged, when the fatal cap was placed on her head, and the rope round
her neck, she certainly joined in the prayers which the chaplain
continued, with something like feeling -- repeating the responses of
"Lord have mercy on my soul!" "Christ have mercy on my soul!" with
earnestness. In this room she lingered long, and appeared to lengthen
the time, and it was here generally expected that she would have
confessed the justice of her sentence -- but, alas! she made no
statement whatever. She ascended to the fatal drop with comparative
firmness, but looked pale and ghastly, and evidently now felt
intensely. She quickly dropped the handkerchief, and the fatal bolt was
drawn at exactly twenty minutes before two o'clock in the afternoon.
Her weight evidently caused instant death.

The wretched woman, it appears, was a native of Bristol, in which city
she passed her life. She was forty years of age at the time of her
execution.


HENRY STANYNOUGHT.
Tried for the Murder of his Son.

This melancholy case excited, at the time of its occurrence, almost
universal sympathy, as well for the unfortunate victim of the attack,
as for the miserable parent by whom that attack was made.

Mr. Stanynought was a stationer in a respectable way of business,
residing in Connaught-terrace, Edgeware-road. On the morning of Friday,
the 4th of September 1835, his shopman was horror-struck at perceiving
his master run down stairs in a state of partial nudity, bleeding
profusely from a wound which he had inflicted on his breast with a
case-knife, which he carried in his hand. Rushing towards Mr.
Stanynought, he at once was informed by him of the death of his son by
his hands. An instant alarm was given; and the declaration of the
wretched father, that he had killed his son, was found to be true. Mr,
Stanynought and his son aged about twelve years, it appears, had
retired to rest in the same room on the previous evening; and in the
course of the night the former was heard moving about by his servant.
The body of the deceased child presented a melancholy spectacle. It was
lying with the face towards the bed, and the poor boy had evidently
died of suffocation. There was, however, a deep wound across the
forehead, which seemed to have been dealt with some blunt instrument.
Mr. Stanynought, upon being questioned, at once declared that the
dreadful act had been committed by him. He said that he had long
meditated the destruction of both his child and himself, and that he
had burned charcoal in the room in which they slept on two nights
without effect. On the previous evening he had taken laudanum; and in
the course of the night he had struck his son with the boot-jack; but
finding his blows ineffectual, he had smothered him with a pillow.

Further inquiry at once elicited the fact that the wretched man was
subject to occasional fits of insanity -- a malady from which both his
father and grandfather had suffered. The apprehension of the same
disease displaying itself in his son, appeared to be the sole cause of
the dreadful deed which he had committed.

At a coroner's inquest held on Monday the 7th of September, the
circumstances attending the death of the deceased were elicited, with
the additional fact of the insanity of the father. Proof of this
feature in the case before the coroner's jury, however, was unavailing,
and a verdict of "Wilful Murder," was returned.

Between this time and the period of his trial, Mr. Stanynought almost
completely recovered from the effects of the wound he had committed
upon himself. On Friday, the 25th of September, the wretched man was
put upon his trial at the Central Criminal Court, when his insanity
being clearly proved, a verdict of acquittal was returned upon that
ground.

He was therefore ordered to be detained during his Majesty's pleasure,
and was subsequently conveyed to a mad-house.


ROBERT BALLS, THOMAS HARRIS, and MORDECAI MOSES.
Transported for Forgery.

The offence of which these men were convicted, was that of forging and
circulating an immense number of notes which were forged, but which
purported to be genuine notes of the Austrian and Polish banks.

The prisoner Balls was an engraver residing in the neighbourhood of
Clerkenwell, and he had been employed by Harris and Moses, both of whom
were of the Jewish persuasion, the latter being a native of Poland, to
prepare facsimiles of the notes of the Austrian and Polish banks, with
a view to the preparation and circulation of forged instruments of the
same description. An immense number of these notes had been already put
into circulation before the apprehension of the prisoners; and M.
Salzman, a cashier of the Austrian bank at Vienna, was despatched to
London, from which place it was found the forged notes emanated, in
order to take the necessary steps to secure the parties guilty of these
fraudulent proceedings. Ruthven and Fletcher, the Bow-street officers,
were employed by him to assist him in his inquiries; and in a short
time, they succeeded in discovering the connexion of Harris, Moses, and
Balls, with the forgeries. Their proceedings were in consequence
watched for some time; but at length Balls and Harris were secured on
Monday, the 16th of November 1835, at the Star Coffee-house,
Crown-street, Finsbury, having in their possession a quantity of
unfinished Austrian notes, and the necessary plates and other
instruments to complete fac-simile representations of genuine notes. In
the house of Harris, in Sadler's-court, Gravellane, Houndsditch, other
instruments of a similar description, but which had been prepared to
print Polish notes, were found, together with evidence which left no
doubt of his guilt on both charges. On the 9th of November, Moses was
also apprehended at the Strand Coffee-house, near Temple-bar, with a
parcel in his possession containing like evidence of his guilt of the
crime of forging and uttering notes of the Polish bank.

After several examinations at Bow-street, the prisoners were committed
to Newgate, and they took their trial at the following Central Criminal
Court Sessions, on Friday the 18th of December. The first case gone
into was that of an indictment, which charged Moses, who was described
under the alias Marcus Warshaur, Balls, and Harris, with forging and
uttering notes of the Polish bank. The evidence was insufficient to
support this charge, and they were acquitted. On the following day,
however, Moses was tried upon an indictment, charging him with
feloniously possessing copperplates engraved with a fictitious
undertaking in the Polish language, to pay the sum of five guilders,
(equal in value to 2s. 6d.), and a verdict of guilty was returned,
after a trial of several hours' duration. Harris was on the same day
tried upon an indictment charging him with uttering forged notes on the
Polish bank, and he too was found guilty. On Monday, the 21st December,
Balls was also tried and convicted; but further proceedings against the
prisoners upon other indictments were delayed, until the opinion of the
Judges should have been obtained upon certain objections which were
taken to the indictments upon which they had been convicted.

On Wednesday, February the 3rd 1836, the prisoners were informed, that
the objections taken in their favour were unavailing, and that they had
been rightly convicted, and on the 10th of the same month, they were
sentenced to transportation; Balls and Harris for life, and Moses for
fourteen years.


WILLIAM SUMMERS.
Transported for Larceny.

This unfortunate young man was guilty of a very extensive robbery upon
his employers, Messrs. Ashley and Co., bankers, of Regent-street. He
held a responsible situation in the service of that firm; but in the
month of May, 1835, he suddenly absconded, carrying with him a sum of
3240l. in Bank-of-England notes, four hundred sovereigns, and 40l. in
silver. His accomplice in this crime was supposed to be a person named
Jackson, a member of the New Police, and notwithstanding every exertion
was made to discover their retreat it was without avail, and for a time
they succeeded in getting clear off. Nothing more was heard of them
until the month of November, when a paragraph appeared in the daily
papers, copied from a journal published at Montreal, in which the fact
was notified of the apprehension of Summers at Quebec. Handbills
describing the persons of the runaways, and also the nature of the
property which they had stolen, it appears, were extensively circulated
after the robbery; and some of these reached the possession of the
managers of the Montreal bank. In the month of September, a young man
presented himself at the counter of that bank, and requested money for
a 50l. note of the Bank of England. The particulars of the note were
found, upon comparison, to correspond with those furnished of one of
the stolen securities; and upon the person who presented it being
questioned, he at length, after some hesitation, confessed that his
name was Summers, and that he had committed a robbery upon his
employers and had absconded with its proceeds, in company with an
acquaintance named Jackson. Upon his being taken before a magistrate of
the place he made a confession, of which the following is a copy.

"William Summers being charged on oath before me with having, on the
6th of May last, feloniously stolen a large sum of money belonging to
his employers, Messrs. Ashley, bankers, London, voluntarily and freely
declared that he was clerk in Messrs. Ashley's employ, and that on the
day in question he did abscond with a sum of money, of which the notes
now produced were a part; and that for this act, he being desirous of
making all the amends in his power, by delivering up notes and gold in
his possession, amounting to 1,300l., has done so; and further
declares, that he had been acquainted with George Jackson (formerly of
the Metropolitan Police) for about ten years; that they were in the
habit of frequenting gaming-tables together, and that his salary of
36l. a year being insufficient to meet his expenses, he was instigated
by the said George Jackson to commit the robbery; that George Jackson
had said to him, he had ample opportunity of making his fortune; that
with the booty he could obtain from Messrs. Ashley they might both go
to America and be independent; that he did commit the robbery, and at
two o'clock the same day he went to a coffee-shop in Long Acre, and met
Jackson there by appointment; that he and Jackson took a private
lodging at Dock-head, and remained for about three weeks, when both
went to Dublin; that they remained there about two months, when
Jackson, during the absence of witness, robbed him of three hundred
sovereigns, and 2,015l. in notes, and left Dublin, and he had not seen
nor heard of Jackson since; that it was agreed between him and Jackson
they should go halves; that after Jackson left Dublin, witness took a
passage to America, by the name of William Smith, in the Friends,
Captain Duncan, in August last; that this statement was carefully read
over to the prisoner, and he persisted therein and signed it."

The prisoner, therefore, was committed to jail for safe custody, until
an opportunity should occur for his transmission to England.

On Saturday the 26th of December, he was placed at the bar of
Marlborough-street Police-office, charged with the robbery, and he
exhibited no hesitation in at once confessing himself guilty of the
charge preferred against him. He was immediately committed for trial,
and on Thursday the 7th of January, 1836, having been arraigned at the
Central Criminal Court, upon an indictment charging him with stealing
the money from the dwelling house of Messrs. Ashley, he pleaded
"guilty."

At the conclusion of the sessions, he received sentence of
transportation for life.

The unfortunate man, at the time of his conviction, was twenty-eight
years of age. He was the son of respectable parents, who lived in
Westminster, and who were remarkable for their religious demeanour.
Their son was supposed to be equally devout; and it is worthy of
observation, that notwithstanding the offence of which he was guilty,
and the irregularities of which he accused himself, a memorandum-book
was found in his possession, containing a vast number of quotations
from the Scriptures.

This case is remarkably similar in its nature to one which occurred
with reference to a person named Air, a clerk at Messrs. Brooks and
Dixon's banking-house, in Chancery-lane. The consequences to Summers,
however, were more severe than those experienced by Air; for while the
latter succeeded in effecting his escape to America, where he was free
from all criminal responsibility for his guilt, the former remained in
Canada, exposing himself to the probability of apprehension, and of
transmission to England, to suffer the penalty of his crime.

In the month of November, 1831, Mr. Air absconded from the employment
of Messrs. Brooks and Dixon, carrying with him money to the amount of
2,400l. It was soon ascertained that he had immediately set off for
Portsmouth, to join an American ship, bound for New York, which had
sailed from the river, and only waited a fair wind to be off. On
reaching Portsmouth he retired to rest, and had nearly lost his passage
by oversleeping himself; and, indeed, would have done so, had not the
ship's boat, by a lucky chance for him, been upset, with the captain on
board. Through the assistance of a pilot-boat, however, he reached the
vessel and escaped. Scarcely had the American got clear away, when one
of Brooks and Dixon's confidential assistants, and a Bow-street
officer, reached Portsmouth, but they were too late, for the bird had
flown. No time was to be lost in pursuing another course. Application
was made to the American consul, who advised that an affidavit of debt
should be made, and sent out, with a power-of-attorney, to an agent at
New York, to act for the interests of Brooks and Dixon. This was done:
a fast-sailing ship was on the eve of starting from Liverpool, and by
this the documents in question were despatched. The latter vessel
reached New York in a very few days after Air, who, on landing,
invested his sovereigns in Ohio and Insurance shares, which he
subsequently deposited with a banker. The moment the affidavit of debt
and power-of-attorney, accompanied by a description of Air's person,
arrived, he was arrested and thrown into prison, and the situation of
his property being ascertained, an injunction from the Court of
Chancery was obtained to impound it. Thus circumstanced, the fugitive
had no alternative but to remain in prison, or consent to the
restitution of his plunder; he preferred the latter course, gave up the
shares, and was discharged. We have only to add, that by these simple
means Messrs. Brooks and Dixon shortly after received back from their
American agent upwards of 2,000l. of their loss, and at a very trifling
cost, while Air was left pennyless, to reap the ignominious reward of
his breach of trust, in poverty and disgrace.


WILLIAM JOURDAN, alias LEARY; THOMAS SULLIVAN; HENRY MOTT; AND WILLIAM
SEALE.
Transported for a Robbery at the Custom-House.

The extraordinary robbery, for their participation in which these men
were convicted, was committed on the 27th of November, 1834, and
Banknotes and money to the amount of 4,824l. were then carried off. The
whole of the particulars of this most daring burglary were revealed at
the trial of the offenders, whose names are above-mentioned, by one of
the men who were concerned in it; and they exhibit, probably, more
plainly than any case which ever came before the public, the system to
which modern thieves have reduced their plans of depredation, while, at
the same time, they show the success which but too frequently attends
their enterprising attempts at robbery. Few among the "family men," as
these experienced housebreakers are commonly called, appear to have
been so successful as Jourdan and Sullivan, but few have been able to
proceed with the same determination and ingenuity in the execution of
their plots.

We have already stated that it was on the night of the 27th of November
1834, that the robbery at the Custom-house of London, for which
Jourdan, Sullivan, Mott, and Seale, were eventually convicted and
transported, was effected. This extensive depredation was committed in
the office of Mr. Frederick Thomas Walsh, the receiver of fines and
forfeitures. The office, on the evening before the robbery, was left
securely fastened in the ordinary manner; but on the next morning, it
was ascertained that the iron safe had been broken open, and property
to the value of 4,824l. carried off. The consternation produced in the
establishment by such an event, it may be easily conceived, was of an
extraordinary description, and upon its discovery instant information
was conveyed to the various police-offices in the metropolis of the
circumstance, as well as of the numbers and dates of such of the notes
as, by memoranda made of their particulars, could be identified. More
than a year elapsed, however, before any of the perpetrators of this
daring outrage were apprehended. Lea, an officer of Lambeth-street
police-office, was the person to whom the duty of making inquiries into
the case was deputed, and after the most arduous investigation, carried
on with praiseworthy perseverance, he was at length enabled to bring
the principal parties to this burglary to punishment.

On Wednesday, the 2nd of December 1835, Jourdan and Sullivan were taken
into custody, and the circumstances of their apprehension deserve to be
narrated. Lea, it seems, had been long convinced of their participation
in the robbery, and had striven hard to obtain evidence confirmatory of
his suspicions, and, at the same time, to procure such a knowledge of
the "whereabouts "of the objects of his investigations, as to enable
him, when a fitting opportunity should present itself, to secure them,
and to bring them to account for the long list of evil deeds of which
he knew they had been guilty. Keeping them in his eye, he at the same
time was anxiously engaged in procuring testimony of their criminality;
but, at the moment when this evidence came to his knowledge, he found
that his birds had suddenly flown. For two months all his exertions to
discover their retreat were useless; but at length chance threw him
again upon their track. An assistant to the officer watched a
well-known associate of theirs to the Red Lion, in King-street,
Holborn, and in that house they were captured on the morning of the 2nd
of December. Upon inquiry it was ascertained that they had been staying
there during a short time only, and that they passed as mercantile men.
They occupied an upper room, where they kept their trunks; and they
appeared to be possessed of plenty of money, an excellent wardrobe,
and, indeed, they seemed to lack nothing to render their appearance
highly respectable. Upon the introduction of Lea to the "gentlemen,"
they appeared astonished to find that he had discovered them, and,
without hesitation, consented to accompany him; but Sullivan declared,
that if he had been armed, nothing should have induced him to surrender
himself alive. They were instantly taken to Lambeth-street, and Lea
then commenced a search through the apartment which they had occupied.
In their trunks he found a great variety of housebreaking implements,
of the most ingenious construction. Files, centre-bits, spring saws,
and every sort of tool used by "cracksmen" were among those which were
discovered, while a pair of scales, calculated for ascertaining the
precise weight of metals and precious stones, was also discovered to be
in their possession. These, of course, were instantly seized by the
officer, who, having further examined the room, and satisfied himself
that nothing was concealed, retired from the house. A gold watch and a
10l. note were taken from the person of Jourdan, as being calculated to
lead to the discovery of further evidence against him; and the
circumstances of the apprehension of the two prisoners having been
detailed to the magistrates, they were ordered to be remanded.

In the course of the subsequent investigation of the case, information
was obtained with respect to the two prisoners, which exhibited them to
be most determined and successful thieves. They were both Irishmen, and
many years had not elapsed since they were known as common pickpockets
in Whitechapel, associating with the very lowest classes of vagabonds
in that notorious vicinity. With regard to Jourdan, whose real name was
Leary, it was ascertained that four years before he had introduced
himself to a Mr. Brace, a baker in Goodman' s-yard, Minories, one of
the committee of management of an Irish free-school in the
neighbourhood, and placing 12l. in his hands, had requested him to
appropriate a weekly sum of five shillings towards the support of his
mother (Mrs. Hart) and his half-sister, Mary Hart, who was then a pupil
in the school. Mr. Brace at once consented to this, and Leary went
away, saying that he was about to sail for America, but that he would
soon send more money for the use of his mother, and to carry her and
her daughter to meet him at New York. Some time elapsed before anything
more was heard of him, but then a letter was received from him,
containing a sum of money which Mr. Brace was requested to forward to
Mrs. Hart, in order that she and Mary Hart might at once proceed to
join him. The amount was amply sufficient to carry them to New York in
good style, and thither they proceeded. From that time up to the year
1834 Mr. Brace had neither seen nor heard anything of them, but in that
year Leary called to inquire whether there were any letters lying there
for him from his mother. He came on horseback, was well dressed, and
appeared to be in a respectable position in life; and he accounted for
this change in his appearance by saying, that a Spanish gentleman, in
whose service he had been, had died and left him a large sum of money;
that he had taken the name of Jourdan, and had then just arrived from
Virginia, having left his mother at New York. No letters had then
arrived for him, and he went away; but shortly afterwards a letter was
brought by the post from the landlord of a hotel in New York,
announcing the death of Mrs. Hart. This letter was given to Jourdan
upon a subsequent visit, and then he expressed his intention to send
for his half-sister. Subsequently to this, Jourdan's wife called upon
Mr. Brace, and saying that her husband was gone to Birmingham on a
journey in pursuance of his trade as a travelling jeweller, requested
to be permitted to leave with him a box of valuable papers, which she
was afraid of having stolen from her house. They lived then in
White-hart-row, Kennington, at a house which they had hired upon the
representations of Mr. Brace as to their respectability, and Mrs.
Jourdan declared that an attempt had been made to break into it. Mr.
Brace expressed his willingness to take charge of the trunk, and it was
sent to him; and, in the month of September 1835, Jourdan called upon
him and deposited with him 100l. in 10l. bank notes, which he requested
him to take care of for him until he should call for it, promising to
give him six months' notice of his desire to have the money refunded.
The box with its contents was given up to Lea, the officer, and the
papers which he found in it, consisting of letters, memoranda, bills of
parcels, and other documents, afforded him material assistance in
tracing the notes which had formed a part of the booty in the
Custom-house robbery, while, at the same time, they bore upon the face
of them conclusive testimony of the fact of both Jourdan and Sullivan
having for years carried on a system of plunder together, both in
England and America, in which they had been highly successful, and by
means of which they had amassed a very large sum of money.

Sullivan, it appeared, had been already indicted for a robbery at
Macclesfield four years before, from the consequences of which he had
escaped by breaking out of jail. He was apprehended in company with a
man named Wilson, upon suspicion of having been concerned in a robbery
upon the person of a Mr. Stephens, an Irish gentleman residing in Cork,
in Vauxhall-gardens. The produce of the robbery, which consisted of
notes and bills to the amount of 238l., was found in the pockets of
Sullivan, and he was committed for trial for the offence. He managed,
however, before many days had passed, to escape from the prison in
which he was confined, and subsequently to America, where he joined
Jourdan. Wilson, his fellow-prisoner, was tried for the robbery, but
acquitted; but the indictment still remained in operation against
Sullivan at the time of his apprehension on this charge.

The prisoners had undergone several examinations before the magistrate
at Worship-street, when on Tuesday, the 29th of December, a piece of
intelligence was conveyed to Mr. Hardwick which left no doubt of their
having also been engaged in one or more very extensive robberies of
jewels which had just before occurred. It was stated by Lea, that
notwithstanding the pains he had taken to search the room which had
been occupied by Jourdan and Sullivan at the Red Lion at the time of
their apprehension, he now found that he had not done so effectually.
Since the prisoners had been in custody at that office, infinite pains
had been taken by their friends to procure admission to the room which
they had occupied at the Red Lion. Persons, apparently recently arrived
from a journey, would drive up in a coach and demand to be supplied
with lodgings; but although this and many other ruses were resorted to,
evidently with an object, the precise nature of which could not be
discovered, all was in vain, and Mr. Proctor, the landlord, refused to
admit any strange person to reside in his house. On Monday, the 28th of
December, a Mr. Hanson, an old customer at the Red Lion, arrived in
town, and, upon his presenting himself to the landlord, he was
immediately shown to the long vacant apartment. A fire was kindled by
the servant, and, in the course of the evening, the attention of Mr.
Hanson was attracted to some brilliant substance which he perceived
amidst the flames. With the tongs he drew it forth, and he perceived it
to be a brooch, set with splendid pearls, which, however, was much
injured by the fire. Further search presented to his view other
articles of a similar description; and, in the course of a short time,
he picked from the embers two other brooches, seven large brilliants,
seven emeralds, one or two of which were of very great value, and about
four dozens of small diamonds. This discovery, it may be supposed,
excited great astonishment; but, upon its being communicated to the
landlord of the house, the mystery was at once solved by his
recollection of the former inmates of the apartment. Lea was instantly
sent for; and, on his instituting a further examination, he found in a
bag, suspended in the chimney, three massive gold chains of foreign
manufacture, which he immediately recognised as answering the
description of some chains which had been stolen from the warehouse of
Messrs. Hall and Co., on the Custom-house Quay, in the previous month
of February, when property of the value of nearly 8000l. was carried
off. A renewed investigation brought other articles to light, and the
anxiety of the strange visitors to the house was at once accounted for,
while, at the same time, strong grounds of suspicion were excited that
Jourdan and Sullivan had been parties to that robbery, and had secreted
the produce of their depredation during their stay at the Red Lion,
lest any accidental circumstance should reveal their possession of it.

It would be useless to go through the whole of the evidence which was
from time to time adduced at the police-office against the prisoners. A
great variety of minute facts were proved, which traced the possession
of some of the stolen notes to them; but all doubts which might have
existed as to their participation in the robbery, and as to the real
circumstances of its commission, were at length satisfied by the
confession of Mr. William Huey, a landing-waiter of the Custom-house,
to whom also some notes had been traced. This statement was first made
to Mr. J. Manning, surveyor-general of customs, and was confined to a
declaration on the part of Huey, that he had received the notes which
he was proved to possess at a gambling-house. No.1, Leicester-square.
Subsequently, however, a more minute and more truthful confession was
made by him, in which he gave the fullest account of all the
proceedings antecedent to and attendant upon the burglary. This
confession led to the apprehension of Mr. Henry Mott and Mr. William
Scale, who also held situations in the Custom-house; and, after
repeated examinations, in the course of which an enormous mass of
evidence was collected, all four prisoners were at length fully
committed for trial, on Friday, the 12th of February, 1836.

At the trial of the prisoners at the Central Criminal Court, which
commenced on Wednesday, the 2nd of March, Huey was examined at length
as to the circumstances of the robbery.

He said that he was a landing-waiter at the Custom-house, and had held
that situation since the year 1827. Soon after his appointment he
became acquainted with the prisoner Seale, whose office was similar to
his own. After about six months, however, they quarrelled, and it was
not until June 1834 that their difference was made up. They were then
stationed at the London Docks; and after business they were in the
habit of frequenting various public-houses. The Duke of Sussex at
Peckham, The Royal Mortar, and the Castle in the Old Kent-road, were
often visited, but they occasionally went to the Three Kingdoms near
the Custom-house. Shortly after their reconciliation, Seale mentioned
to him a design which existed to "crack" the Custom-house; and on the
same afternoon they met the prisoner Mott at the Three Kingdoms; he was
a clerk in the king's warehouse. Mott spoke of the subject as if it
were a familiar one to him, and he advised that they should delay the
intended robbery until an opportunity should present itself, when they
might obtain a larger booty than they could then procure. This was
agreed to by all parties, and although they subsequently frequently
spoke upon the subject, the execution of their plan was deferred. In
the following August, the witness went to see his father at Drogheda.
He had previously been introduced to Jourdan and Sullivan, and he knew
that the object of their introduction was, that they might assist in
the project which they had in view. He met them in Dublin, and they
inquired whether he had any means of assisting them in robbing the
Custom-houses at Drogheda and at Dublin. He answered in the negative,
and returned to London the same day; and on the 4th of September he
resumed his occupation. He soon after met Mott and Seale at the London
Docks, and the discussion of the subject of the robbery was resumed.
After a short time they proceeded to Jourdan's lodgings, at No.3,
East-street, Walworth, and acquainted him with their plans. He made
various inquiries with regard to the contents of the strong box in the
office of the Receiver of Fines, upon which it had been determined
their attack should be made, and on the next day went with Sullivan to
inspect the place. At a subsequent meeting they declared that it would
be easy to commit the robbery; and Sullivan suggested that the best
means of effecting their purpose would be to fit the locks with false
keys. Mott said that he could procure impressions of one of the keys,--
that of the outer door; and at a meeting which they afterwards held, he
produced the key of which he had spoken, saying that he had taken it
from the desk of Mr. Billing, in the king's warehouse, who was out on
leave. An impression of it was taken in wax by Sullivan, from which
subsequently a skeleton key was made. The assistance of a fifth person
was now spoken of, and Seale introduced a man named William May, or
Morgan, (a thief, and the former companion of Jourdan and Sullivan). At
the next meeting Sullivan produced the skeleton key, and said, that he
and Jourdan had tried it and found that it would fit, but it was not
strong enough, and a new and firmer key was ordered to be prepared.
Seale then also showed them some padlock keys, one of which he
suggested would open the padlock with which the door was fastened; but
after impressions of them had been taken, and trials made with skeleton
keys made from the model, it was found that none of them belonged to
the lock which they desired to open. A suggestion was then made, that
the best way to commit the robbery would be by "stowing away," by which
was meant, hiding one of the party in the house, who could,
undisturbed, secure the booty and then make his escape. May volunteered
to conceal himself, and a proposal was made that they should again
inspect the place In order to ascertain whether this could be done. The
king's sale was now approaching, and Jourdan said that he should like
to know what would be the probable amount of the contents of the box.
This, it was observed, might be easily ascertained. One of the party
could buy a lot at the sale, and going to pay for it, he could see what
money was in the chest, by presenting a note of such an amount as that
Mr. Walsh would not be likely to be able to give change without going
to the safe. This was agreed to; and a lot of rum having been purchased
for 11l., Jourdan took a 50l. note to pay for it. On the 26th of
November he Informed his associates of his success in the project which
he had undertaken. He said, that on his presenting the 50l. note, Mr.
Walsh felt his pockets, and looked into his drawers, but finding that
he had not got sufficient change, he went to the iron-chest. Having
only one key, he was obliged to wait until the person who kept the
other came down stairs; (it is the custom to have a double lock to the
iron safes of public institutions, so that they cannot be opened except
with the concurrence of two persons, each of whom has a key). He then
took out a large cash-box, which he could only move with both his
hands, and on its being opened there appeared to be about 3000l. in it
at least. Jourdan gave his own name and address to be indorsed on the
note which he paid; and having received the change, he went away
satisfied with the observation he had made. Mott censured him for
giving his own name, and observing that all the particulars were
written in a book, it was agreed that when the robbery was effected,
the book should be destroyed, by the leaves being cut out and burned.
The final plans were then arranged, and it was decided that May should
go to the Custom-house at a little before four o'clock accompanied by
Jourdan and Sullivan, and that in the confusion which usually prevailed
at the time of shutting the offices, the former should enter the
Receiver's Office and conceal himself behind the door. On the next
morning at nine o'clock, Jourdan and Sullivan were to be again in
waiting, and having seen all safe, they were to give a signal to May,
so that he might quit the place when the watchmen had opened the doors.
Mott was also to assist in this design by keeping the clerks in his
office, where they went to sign the appearance-sheet. If May got clear
off, they were all to meet at Scale's house at Peckham on the same
morning, to divide the booty. These arrangements being completed, they
separated, and the witness remained away from business next day, on the
pretended ground of ill-health. In the afternoon, Seale, and
subsequently Jourdan and Sullivan, called on him and told him, that May
had been safely "lodged;" that they had all walked into the passage
together, and in the confusion had "flashed" an umbrella, under cover
of which May entered the office. They afterwards waited on the
esplanade for ten minutes to see that all was right, when seeing the
doors locked, they went away. On the next morning, the 28th, witness
went to Peckham, and meeting Seale, they went together to the
Waterman's Arms, which commanded a view of the road by which Jourdan
and the others must go to them. They remained there until they saw them
coming, and then they went and met them, and they all proceeded to
Scale's house together: Mott was not present. May then produced the
money from his pocket, and it was divided into six equal parcels: it
consisted of 4700l. in notes, 122l. in gold, and about 50s. in silver.
May detailed to them the manner in which he had committed the robbery.
He said, that as soon as he was locked in, he set to work: he found the
key which opened the Receiver's lock to the chest, and employed it; but
he was compelled to break open the other lock. Having done so, he took
out the money and put it into his pockets. He next tore out the leaves
from the book, and he now produced them. One of them bore the name
"Leary, East-lane, Walworth," and that with the rest was burned. The
whole party then tossed for choice of the lots of money, because some
contained more gold than others; and the selection having been made,
Jourdan and Sullivan claimed something for expenses. A 20l. note and
some silver were paid them, as well as the 10l. note marked "Leary,"
and they with May went away. Seale then took the three remaining shares
up stairs, saying, that he should send them out of town; and on the
same evening he said that they were sixty or seventy miles off. In
about a month afterwards, however, he told the witness that they were
at Leicester, and he went and fetched them. The lots were then counted
over, and the share of each was 743l. in notes. The witness further
stated, that he disposed of all the notes under 20l. in amount to
Jourdan at 20l. per cent, discount, and subsequently all under 100l. in
value upon the same terms; and that having done so, he concealed the
remainder in Camberwell churchyard, where they remained for several
months. Seale then introduced a person who undertook to dispose of some
of those which were left, on the Continent; and a portion of the notes
was given to him, and he brought back cash. Seale took away what was
left of his money, and the witness retained 900l. in three notes of the
value of 300l. each. These he concealed in the panelling of one of the
doors of his house, by boring a hole with a centre-bit, and then having
introduced the notes, filled up the remaining space with a cork; and on
his apprehension he disclosed the place of their concealment, and they
were seized by the officers.

On his cross-examination, the witness declared that he had no object in
making this disclosure, but that of saving his friends from disgrace.
He did not desire to screen himself from punishment; but having
committed so heinous a crime, he felt called upon to repair the
mischief he had done so far as he was able.

In the course of this and the following days, a vast body of testimony
was produced, which proved the transmission of a great part of the
stolen notes to the Continent, and their negotiation there: the
intimate connexion and acquaintance between the prisoners and Huey
about the time of the robbery was also shown, and a great variety of
other corroborative evidence was adduced.

The prisoners declared that Huey's story was untrue, and had been
invented by him to screen himself; and attempts were made to show that
at various periods of the transaction Jourdan and Sullivan had been at
places which forbade their implication in the robbery. Other witnesses
gave Mott and Seale a good character; but the jury, on Thursday night,
found all the prisoners "Guilty," but recommended Mott and Seale to
mercy.

On Tuesday the 8th of March, the prisoners received sentence of
transportation for life; Jourdan and Sullivan being informed that they
would be sent to a penal settlement, where they would be compelled to
undergo the most severe and painful labour; while Mott and Seale were
told that upon their arrival in the colony to which they were about to
be sent, they also would be severely punished, by their being worked in
road-gangs.

The distressing nature of Scale's position was rendered doubly painful
by the sudden death of his wife on the Saturday after his conviction.
The wives of all four prisoners were allowed a last interview with them
on that day in Newgate. One of those who availed herself of the
privilege was Seale's wife, who went there soon after ten o'clock on
the above morning. She had a long interview with her husband, and
appeared very much affected on being apprised by him that it was
probable he would be transported for life. She afterwards proceeded
home; but had scarcely entered the house where she had been lodging
since her husband's incarceration, when she dropped down and almost
instantly expired.

The convicts were subsequently conveyed to the penal settlements, where
they were immediately placed in the positions of painful punishment
which had been described to them by the learned judge at the time
sentence was passed upon them. Reports afterwards reached England that
Sullivan had escaped from custody immediately upon his arrival in
Sydney. It appears that he secreted himself on board a Dutch vessel
bound for England. But the period during which he retained his freedom
was short; for the captain discovering him, put back to Hobart Town,
and he was conducted to a place called Goat Island, from which no
subsequent effort enabled him to retreat.


JAMES HILLS, WILLIAM HARLEY, AND WILLIAM FISHER, alias CURLY BILL.
Tried for Burglary.

This burglary was marked by circumstances of very considerable
peculiarity.

The men whose names appear at the head of this article were indicted at
the Kingston Assizes, on Thursday the 31st of March 1836, for a
burglary in the house of Mrs. Mary Anne Long, at Chipstead, in Surrey,
on the night of the 2nd of September 1835, and for stealing therefrom
various articles of property.

The circumstances attending the robbery were well described by Mrs.
Long at the trial. She said, "I am sixty-six years of age, a widow, and
reside with my sister, Mrs. Scholefield, at Mint House, Chipstead,
which is a lone house, situate between Gatton and Reigate: on the night
of the 2nd of September last, I, Mrs. Scholefield, her son (Mr.
Rankin), and a female servant, were the only inmates; we retired to bed
after having seen that all the premises were properly fastened; I slept
with my sister, and about ten minutes past one in the morning I was
awoke by hearing the dog, which was kept in the yard, barking
violently; I got up and opened the bed-room window, and thinking that
some persons were about the premises, I hallooed out that they had
better keep out of the way, or I would put a bullet into their stomach,
which was not a pleasant thing; I did so to intimidate them, and then
retired to bed; shortly after I heard a noise, and again got up; on
going to the window I saw a man trying to get in; he had smashed the
pane, and was armed with a stake; I seized hold of the stake, and tried
to wrest it from him, but he was too strong for me, and struck me a
violent blow on the head, inflicting a wound of an inch and a half in
length; he also struck me on the shoulder and hand, of which I lost the
use for some time; I then called to my nephew, Mr. Rankin, and he came
armed with a cutlass; he made a cut at the man, but the night being
very dark, and there being railings at the window, he missed him, and
he got down the ladder and went away; I then lit three or four candles,
and went down stairs for my nephew's gun; I brought it up, but
recollecting that I had left the powder and ammunition, I again went
down for it, and locked the pantry-door after me; I returned up stairs,
and my nephew loaded the gun; about a half or three-quarters of an hour
afterwards we heard a great noise outside the house, and the panel of
the south door looking out upon a meadow was smashed in; we heard the
voices of six or seven men, who entered the house; they remained down
stairs three-quarters of an hour; I slept in a room at the end of a
passage, and my nephew's bed-room was opposite; there is a door at the
top of the passage leading down the stairs; we placed ourselves in the
passage; we then heard one of the men say, 'Now we will go up stairs,'
and I heard what I supposed to be a man crawling on his hands and knees
-- I judged so from the scraping his toes made along the floor-cloth;
Mrs. Scholefield was very much alarmed, and cried out for mercy; the
men said, 'Give us 50l. or 30l. or 20l.; I told them that all my money
was in the bank, and my plate at my banker's: one of the men said, 'I
will murder you; and another man said, 'We will murder you all;' they
then forced in the panel of the door, and a man at the bottom of the
stairs said, 'Go it, my boys:' Mr. Rankin dropped on his knee, and
presented the gun through the panel; I could only see the rim of the
hat of a man who appeared to be stooping down; Mr. Rankin fired, and
the men fell back, and the candle went out; they all then went away; we
waited for some time, and the dog having ceased barking, I and my
nephew proceeded down stairs, he armed with a gun, and I carrying the
cutlass; we fastened up the door as well as we could, and then went
into the parlour, and found that the men had drunk two bottles of wine;
we also found the cores of fourteen apples; they had taken away a
watch, some cruet-frames, and other articles."

This statement of facts was corroborated by the testimony of Mrs.
Scholefield and Mr. Rankin, who added their positive declaration as to
the identity of the prisoners Hills and Harley. The former was the man
who had been shot; and on his being taken into custody, shot of the
same description as that which had been fired from his gun by Mr.
Rankin were found in his breast. Fisher had been apprehended at the
same time, and in company with the other prisoners; but there appeared
to be considerable doubt whether he had been personally concerned in
the burglary.

     The jury found Hills and Harley "Guilty," but acquitted Fisher.

Mr. Justice Vaughan, in passing sentence of death upon the prisoners,
remarked upon the great courage which had been displayed by Mrs. Long
and Mr. Rankin, and directed that they should receive a reward as a
mark of the high estimation in which he held their conduct.

After their conviction the prisoners were removed to Horsemonger-lane
jail, where they paid the most assiduous attention to the spiritual
consolation offered to them by the Rev. Mr. Mann, the chaplain.

On Monday, the 11th of April, the last sentence of the law was carried
into execution upon the person of the convict Harley, a respite during
pleasure having been granted on the previous day in the case of his
fellow-convict Hills. The convict maintained a deportment of great
firmness, unmixed, however, with any symptoms of bravado, or unnatural
courage. He appeared sincerely penitent and met his fate with becoming
resignation.

The sentence of Hills was eventually commuted to transportation for
life, in consequence of some favourable circumstances which transpired.

Both convicts were men of an inferior station, but there was good
reason to believe that in the course of the proceedings of their lives
they had been guilty of more than one offence of considerable enormity.


HENRY WILLIAMS
Transported for Burglary

The case of this prisoner is remarkable only for his singular and
daring escape from Newgate after his conviction. He had been tried at
the Central Criminal Court Sessions, in the month of July 1836, for a
burglary at Islington, and the offence being clearly brought home to
him, he was convicted and sentenced to death, in obedience to the
requisitions of the then existing law. On Friday the 22nd of July, he
succeeded in effecting his escape from the condemned yard, in which he
was confined.

The prisoner, it appears, had been brought up to the trade of a sweep;
but naturally disinclined to follow a steady and honest course of life,
he quitted the business to which he had been educated, but made his
aptitude for it subservient to a new avocation. He joined with a gang
of fellows of bad character, who pursued a system of plunder to gain a
livelihood, and with them he adopted a means of effecting robberies, as
remarkable as it was novel. Procuring access to the roof of an empty
house, they would fix upon any other house in the row, from which they
might hope to obtain a good booty, and one of them descending the
chimney, he would generally succeed in carrying off such a prize as
well repaid his daring. The burglary for which Williams was committed,
however, was one of an ordinary character; but while in jail he still
found his powers of climbing of use to him. It appears that he was
confined in the condemned yard, with two other prisoners, and on the
26th of July, the day of his escape, while his companions were reading
in the room appropriated to their use, he managed to work his way to
the roof of the jail by means of his hands, back, and knees,
sweep-like, up the angular corner of the building. The ascent, to a
person of his accomplishment in this particular line, was comparatively
easy, by reason of the roughness of the face of the wall, and he had
soon gained the top of the building, in spite of all the obstacles, in
the shape of chevaux-de-frise, and iron spikes, which presented
themselves. To traverse the roof of the prison and gain the houses in
Warwick-lane was the work of a very few minutes, and availing himself
of an open sky-light, he dropped through it. To his astonishment, he
found himself confronted with a woman who was at work in the room into
which he had fallen; but speedily taking advantage of her alarm, he
slipped past her, and had reached the open street before she had time
to recover her scattered senses, or to give any intimation of her
fright to the other occupants of the house.

Williams knew too well the value of his liberty to afford an
opportunity for his re-capture, and he had soon quitted the vicinity of
his late residence.

His want of means of support, or his unfortunate disinclination for an
honest life, however, soon again placed him in the custody of his late
keeper, Mr. Cope, the governor of Newgate. Within a fortnight after his
escape, Mr. Cope received an intimation that he was in Winchester jail,
upon a new charge of burglary, committed since he had gained his
liberty in the extraordinary manner which we have described. He, in
consequence, proceeded to that place to receive his prisoner back into
his custody, and in a few days Williams was once again lodged in his
old quarters.

A humane consideration of his case, subsequently procured for him a
commutation of his punishment to transportation for life.


GEORGE EDWARD PEACOCK.
Transported for Forgery.

This unfortunate young man, at the time of his conviction, was only
thirty years of age, and he had, for a considerable period, carried on
business in his profession as an attorney, in Chancery-lane. He was of
a highly respectable family, residing in Yorkshire; and the forgery of
which he was convicted, was that of a power-of-attorney for the
transfer of stock, which formed the subject matter of the settlement of
his brother, the Rev. Mr. Peacock, on his marriage with Miss Selina
Willmar.

On Wednesday the 21st of September, 1836, the prisoner was placed upon
his trial at the Central Criminal Court, upon this charge.

The evidence adduced against him consisted of proof of the execution of
the deed of settlement, by which the Rev. W. A. Fountain, Mr. W.
Watkins, and the prisoner, were made trustees for Mrs. Peacock, for an
amount of 7,814l., in the three per Cent. Consols; and it was further
shown that on the 7th of December, 1835, the stock was sold out by the
prisoner, through the medium of Mr. Clark, a broker, a
power-of-attorney being produced, signed with the names of Mr. Watkins,
the Rev. Mr. Fountain, and the prisoner. The two former names
subsequently proved to be forgeries; and it was ascertained that there
were no such persons in existence as those who purported to have
affixed their signatures as attesting witnesses to the execution of the
power.

The case for the prosecution being closed, the prisoner proceeded to
address the court and jury from a written paper. He began by declaring
that he was fully aware of his offence, and had never attempted to deny
it; and the feeling by which he was influenced in avowing his guilt
thus early was to save his relatives and friends from the pain which a
full exposure of all the circumstances of the case must have caused
them. He could, however, assure the jury, that necessity, not
inclination, had led him to the commission of the act. He found himself
surrounded by pecuniary difficulties, and the ruin with which he was
threatened would not only have destroyed his professional prospects,
but his wife and child, his aged and venerable parents, and respectable
family, would have been involved in his misfortune. To save them and
himself, he was induced to adopt the desperate expedient by which he
was placed in his present situation. He considered, however, that he
was only making a temporary use of the money, and that fact, he
thought, must be apparent to every one, because, had he contemplated a
felony, he might have at once absconded, instead of which he kept his
ground for several days before and after the discovery took place. He
should not trouble his lordship and the jury with a detail of his
complicated troubles; but he was desirous to advert to a few
circumstances connected with his life, in order to show the
difficulties in which he had been placed. The prisoner then went on to
state, that he was admitted an attorney in the year 1830, and commenced
business in London under the most cheering auspices, but he had not
been long in practice when he lost 1500l. and was further compelled to
pay 600l. in consequence of his having become security for a friend. He
was then obliged to accept bills, in the hope of being thus enabled to
extricate himself from his difficulties; but, unfortunately, this
course only added to them, for when the bills became due, being unable
to answer them, he was compelled to borrow large sums of money to meet
his liabilities, and last year he found that he had incurred debts and
suffered losses to the extent of 5000l. A great proportion, however, of
the money he had borrowed was expended in the maintenance of his family
and the support of his professional respectability. In order to redeem
his losses, he conceived the plan of appropriating his brother's
property to his temporary use; and such was his misplaced confidence in
his own abilities, that he anticipated he should have been enabled, in
a very short time, to emerge from his difficulties, and replace the
money in the bank. He felt assured that, if he could prove to his
brother his ability to do so, he would be perfectly satisfied, and he
had not the most remote idea that the Bank of England would suffer any
loss by the transaction. All his speculations, however, proved
abortive. Loss succeeded loss, and at the time he was taken into
custody, he was almost without a pound. Fallen, however, as he was from
a situation of respectability to his present degradation, and sunk as
he must appear in his own eyes and those of the jury, he nevertheless
threw himself on their merciful consideration. His brother was now
quite aware that it was his intention to have replaced the stock, and
he most solemnly assured the jury that he had firmly resolved to do so.
He begged leave to thank the Governor and Company of the Bank of
England for granting him time to prepare for his trial, and he begged
to repeat that he never contemplated a fraud on that establishment, and
that, in fact, he had no intention to wrong any party. He did not,
however, attempt to justify his motives, because, whatever might be the
intention, it was neither an excuse nor a defence for an offence
committed against the laws of God and man: that he had deeply suffered
for his crime, the days and nights of remorse and mental agony he had
endured might testify, and perhaps it might yet be his fate to suffer
the still greater misery of being cut off from the world by a sudden
and degrading death, to appear before his offended Maker with all his
imperfections on his head, and all his sins to atone for. [Here the
prisoner, who appeared deeply affected, was unable for some moments to
proceed.] He trusted that the jury would humanely consider the awful
situation in which he was placed, and the consequent disadvantages
under which he unfortunately laboured. He implored them most earnestly
to accompany their verdict with a recommendation of mercy, and that
they would weigh and consider well before they decided on consigning a
fellow-creature to a premature grave. He trusted that they would not
forget he had a wife and child. (Here the unfortunate man dropped his
head, and burying his face in his handkerchief, sobbed bitterly.) He
hoped the jury would bear in mind, also, his two respectable and
venerable parents, one of whom, bowed down by age and affliction, was
tottering on the verge of the grave: and it was much to be feared that
the grey hairs of his other parent would be brought with sorrow to the
tomb. Besides these ties, he had a large circle of friends, to whom his
disgraceful end would afford a lasting pang. Let the jury, then,
consider all this. Let them weigh well the consequences of their
decision, and he hoped that they would be influenced by that humane and
merciful feeling which they would wish to see exercised in their own
cases. In conclusion, he prayed that the great and merciful Father, who
read the secrets of all hearts, would influence their decision in
favour of the humble, wretched, and repentant individual who pleaded
for mercy before them.

Several most respectable individuals, including clergymen, barristers,
merchants, and solicitors, came forward and gave the prisoner an
excellent character for strict honesty, honourable and upright dealing
in his profession, and the highest respectability of conduct in every
relation of life.

     The Lord Chief Justice summed up the evidence.

The jury having retired for about ten minutes, returned into court and
delivered the following verdict:--"We find the prisoner Guilty; but the
jury are unanimous in their wish to recommend him strongly to mercy, on
account of his previous good character."

On Monday, the 26th of September, the prisoner received sentence of
death; but a subsequent consideration of all the circumstances of the
case procured for him a merciful mitigation of his punishment to
transportation.


JOHN PEGSWORTH.
Executed for Murder.

The murder of which this unfortunate man was convicted, appears to be
entirely unjustified by any of those circumstances, which, in some
instances, form a palliative, small though it be, for offences of a
similar description.

The object of his crime was Mr. John Holiday Ready, who carried on the
business of a tailor and draper, at No.125, Ratcliffe Highway. It
appears that Pegsworth was a man in a decent station of life, occupying
a situation as messenger in the tea-department of St. Katherine's
Docks; and he at one time also pursued the trade of a tobacconist, in a
shop opposite to that of Mr. Ready, No.69, Ratcliffe Highway, which,
however, only a short time before the murder he had given up. In the
course of his residence here, he became indebted to Mr. Ready in the
amount of 20s., for a jacket which had been supplied to him for his
son; but although he had been frequently pressed to pay the sum which
was due, he always declined upon some frivolous ground. At length
Ready, determined no longer to wait for his money, summoned his debtor
to the Court of Requests, and Mrs. Ready having proved the debt on the
10th of January, 1837, an order was made on the defendant to pay the
amount with costs. On Pegsworth returning home, he expressed himself
much exasperated at the conduct of Ready, and said that he would be
"the death of him." His wife endeavoured to pacify him, but in vain;
and he went out, vowing vengeance against the man who, he said, had
injured him. Proceeding through Ratcliffe Highway, he purchased a large
knife, such as would be used in killing a pig, at the shop of a cutler,
and armed with this formidable weapon he went direct to the house of
Ready. He entered the shop, and calmly and coolly conversed with Mrs.
Ready; and her husband having invited him to sit down in the back
parlour, he at once advanced towards him. For a few minutes he
continued in conversation upon the subject of the debt, when presently
he demanded to know whether his creditor intended to proceed upon the
judgment which he had obtained? Mr. Ready answered decidedly in the
affirmative, upon which he suddenly drew forth his knife, and stabbed
the unfortunate man in the right breast. The murdered man exclaimed
that he was stabbed, and instantly expired; while his wife rushed
frantically into the street, as soon as she discovered what had
occurred, calling loudly for assistance. Several persons instantly ran
into the house, and they found Pegsworth in the act of withdrawing the
knife from the wound, but making no effort whatever to escape. He was
immediately secured, and surgical aid was called in, but it was found
that the knife of the assassin had passed through the principal
arteries into the lungs, and that the unfortunate Mr. Ready was quite
dead.

At a coroner's inquest held on the body of the deceased on Thursday the
12th of January, a verdict of "Wilful Murder" was returned against
Pegsworth, and he was fully committed to Newgate for trial. Before his
trial Pegsworth confessed that he had been guilty of the act with which
he stood charged, but he declared that he was intoxicated, and in a
high degree of excitement at the time. He professed the most sincere
repentance for his act, and declared his intention to pass the
remainder of his short life in prayers for forgiveness.

On Friday the 3d of February, the prisoner was arraigned on the
indictment which had been preferred against him at the Central Criminal
Court. He immediately confessed himself guilty of the offence imputed
to him, and notwithstanding the humane interference of the learned
judge refused to withdraw that plea.

On Tuesday the 7th of February, the prisoner was brought up to receive
sentence, when the recorder addressed to him the following
observations: "Let me implore you (said he) to bethink yourself of the
awful situation in which you stand, on the brink of eternity and of the
grave, beyond which there is no room for repentance. The legislature,
in cases of murder, has, by a recent statute, interposed an increased
interval between conviction and condemnation, and between condemnation
and the final execution of the dreadful sentence of the law. It has
done so in its humanity, and consistently with sound policy; but it has
extended to the murderer a mercy which the murderer has not shown to
his victim. The rash hand of the guilty individual who, without
warning, hurries a fellow-creature to another world, cuts off from him
the opportunity of approaching his Maker in prayer, or of preparing for
that judgment which is painful for the best, and overwhelming for those
who are not ready. [Here the prisoner became visibly affected.] You
will be afforded an interval for seeking that mercy at the throne of
God which you cannot expect from the laws of man." The learned
gentleman then passed the sentence of death upon the prisoner.

On Wednesday, the 1st of March, the case of the prisoner was reported
to his Majesty, and he was ordered for execution on the following
Tuesday the 7th of March.

On that day the sentence was carried into effect; the wretched convict
meeting his fate with becoming resignation.


CHARLES W. PENRUDDOCK.
A Student, Convicted of Assaulting an Examiner who asked him Difficult
Questions.

At the Central Criminal Court, on Wednesday the 1st of February 1837,
Charles Wadham Wyndham Penruddock, was indicted for assaulting and
wounding Mr. Thomas Hardy, with intent to maim and disable him.

The prisoner, it appeared, was a medical student, and a candidate for
admission to practise as an apothecary. On the 22d of December 1836, he
went to Apothecaries' Hall for the purpose of undergoing the customary
examination, when Mr. Hardy, Mr. Este, Mr. Randall, and Dr. Merriman,
were the examiners. The usual course of questions was taken, but the
prisoner, by his answers, showed himself to be ignorant of many
necessary branches of his profession. A question being put to him by
Mr. Este, the prisoner did not immediately answer it, upon which Mr.
Randall offered some explanatory observation. With considerable
violence of tone and manner, the prisoner asked, "How the devil he
could answer, if they all badgered him with questions? "And that
question being passed over, the inquiry proceeded. Mr. Este, who was
the chief examiner, put several points to him, upon which, however, he
seemed unable to give any explanation, and which Mr. Este partly
answered himself; but Mr. Hardy suggested, that this was not the proper
course of examination, and that the real fitness of the prisoner to
receive the certificate which he sought to obtain, ought to be
ascertained before it was granted to him. Some new questions were then
proposed which he answered incorrectly; and the prisoner, apparently
seeing that he should be turned back, declared that he never could
answer questions, even at school. Mr. Ridout observed, that it was only
by questions that the examiners could determine the qualifications of
the candidates for certificates; that in the performance of their
duties they were compelled to be strict, and that they could have no
wish to injure him or any other young man. The prisoner remarked that
Mr. Ridout and Mr. Este had conducted themselves like gentlemen to him,
and he asked that they would examine him in anatomy, for he had studied
that branch of his business with great care, and he had almost lived in
the dead-house. This, however, he was told, was not within their course
of examination, and that unless he was acquainted also with Chemistry,
Therapeutics, and Materia Medica, he was not competent to practise. The
prisoner remarked that in a pecuniary point of view their licence was
of no importance to him, because he was going to leave the country; but
he added, with much violence, that "he would not be disgraced in the
eyes of his family by such a set of fellows as they were -- he would
rather die first, and would swing for it." Mr. Hardy at this moment was
standing behind him, but seeing his excited state he moved three or
four paces from him. The prisoner turned round to him, and looking
steadfastly in his face, said, "You are one of those who have been hard
upon me:" and then drawing a life-preserver heavily loaded with lead
from his pocket, he struck him on the forehead, lending to the blow his
utmost power. Mr. Hardy was stunned by the attack and reeled away; and
Dr. Merriman and Mr. Este rushing upon the prisoner, they also received
blows which were dealt with great force. The prisoner was immediately
given into the custody of a policeman, when, on his being searched, a
small bottle of gin, the exciting cause of his violence, was found in
his pocket.

Upon subsequent examination, Mr. Hardy, Mr. Este, and Dr. Merriman,
were discovered to have sustained severe contusions, the blood flowing
rapidly from the wounds of the two former gentlemen.

The defence set up was, that there was nothing to show distinctly that
the blows had been inflicted by the life-preserver, but that it was
quite within the bounds of possibility that the knuckles of the hand
only of the prisoner had come in contact with the gentlemen who had
been assaulted.

The prisoner was described as a member of a highly-respectable and
honourable family in the West of England, and as being remarkable for
the kindness of his disposition, and the mild quietude of his manners.
Dr. Seymour, and other persons of high respectability, gave the
prisoner a most excellent character for humanity, and the jury returned
a verdict of "Not Guilty."

Mr. Penruddock, however, was immediately held to bail to appear to
answer the charge of common assault, of which it was admitted he had
been guilty.

For this offence he was tried at the London Sessions, on Wednesday the
5th of April following, and a verdict of "Guilty" having been returned,
he was sentenced to be imprisoned for twelve months in Giltspur-street
Compter, and on his discharge to enter into his own recognizance in
200l., and to find two sureties in 100l. each, that he should keep the
peace.


JAMES GREENACRE AND SARAH GALE
The First Executed for Murder, the Second Transported as being
Accessory to the Fact.

In few instances has the public mind ever received so severe a shock,
as that produced by the discovery of the barbarous and revolting murder
of which Greenacre was guilty. The mere mention of the name of this
atrocious malefactor is a sufficient introduction to his case; and
without farther comment we shall proceed to describe the dreadful
circumstances by which his crime was surrounded.

The first cause of suspicion of the murder having been committed arose
from the discovery of the mutilated remains of a woman in the
Edgeware-road. It would appear that in the year 1836, some dwellings,
called the Canterbury Villas, were in progress of completion, situated
in the Edgeware-road, at a distance of about a quarter of mile from the
spot at which the Regent's Canal emerges from under the pathway. Five
of these had been finished, and the gardens in front of them were
protected from the public highway by a wall about ten feet high, which
had not yet been extended to those houses in which the workmen were
still employed. The materials for building lay along the side of the
footpath, and in one of the finished houses, the only one which
remained unoccupied by tenants, a man was lodged by the builder as a
superintendant of the works, and as general watchman over the property
which lay there. The severity of the weather towards the close of the
month of December compelled the labourers to desist from work, and from
Saturday the 24th of the month until the following Wednesday few
persons visited the spot. On the latter day, the 28th of December, a
man named Bond, a bricklayer engaged upon the buildings, visited his
place of work; and about two o'clock in the afternoon was proceeding in
the direction towards Kilburn, when his attention was attracted by his
perceiving a package enveloped in a coarse cloth or sack, which
appeared to have been carefully placed behind a paving-stone which was
resting there, for the purpose of concealment. He removed the stone in
order to obtain a more distinct view of the package, and was terrified
to observe a pool of frozen blood, in such a position as exhibited that
it had escaped through the wrapper of the parcel. In a state of great
alarm he called the superintendant of the works, and another person, to
the place, and they determined at once to open the package to ascertain
the nature of its contents. Their astonishment and horror may easily be
imagined, when they found that it consisted of a portion of the remains
of a human body. The trunk only was there, the head and legs having
been removed. Fearfully excited by this shocking discovery, they at
once called in the aid of the police; and Pegler, a constable on duty,
took charge of the dreadful package, and procured its immediate
conveyance to the workhouse of the parish of Paddington. It was there
at once submitted to the inspection of Mr. Girdwood, the surgeon of the
district, who made a most minute examination of all its parts. It
proved to be the body of a female, apparently about fifty years of age,
and who from the appearances presented by the arms and hands, had
evidently been employed in a laborious occupation. The head had been
severed from the trunk in an awkward manner, the bone of the neck
having been partly sawed through, and partly broken off; and the legs
had been removed in a similar irregular way, the one at a distance of
about four inches, and the other at a distance of about five or six
inches from the hip-joint. The body itself presented a healthy aspect,
but exhibited a malformation of a peculiar nature, which eventually
proved of material importance in proving its identification, but to
which it would be indelicate more specifically to allude. The result of
the investigation of Mr. Girdwood, however, clearly showed that the
deceased person had not met her death from any illness, and that
therefore the presumption was that she had been murdered, and that the
mutilation of her body had not taken place until subsequently to her
decease, when, in all probability, means had been adopted by the
murderer to conceal the identity of the person, as well as to dispose
of her remains.

An occurrence of so extraordinary a nature, it may well be supposed,
excited a degree of consternation and horror throughout the metropolis
of the most fearful description; and the dreadful mystery in which the
transaction remained wrapped for a considerable time, the remains of
the deceased and her situation in life being alike unknown, tended in
no small degree to extend the universal anxiety which prevailed.
Inquiries of the most minute and searching description were made with a
view to ascertain the means by which the mangled remains had been
placed in the position in which they were found; and suspicion seemed
to attach to a chaise-cart which had been seen to draw up near the spot
on the previous Saturday night; but all the vigilance of the police
failed, as well to discover the owners of this vehicle, as the
murderer. The body had been wrapped up in a piece of blue printed
cotton, which appeared to have formed a child's frock, but which was
worn to rags, an old towel, and part of a small white shawl, over which
was placed a piece of sacking; but no marks were visible on either of
the articles which could at all tend to afford any clue to their former
possessor.

An inquest was held on the body on Saturday the 31st of December, at
the White Lion Inn, Edgeware-road; but although every witness was
examined, whose evidence tended to throw the smallest light on the
occurrence, the jury were at length compelled to return a verdict of
"Wilful Murder against some person or persons unknown." A minute
description of the appearances and aspect of the body was then taken by
Mr. Girdwood; and in the course of the ensuing week, it was committed
to the grave in Paddington churchyard, no prospect being yet afforded
of the discovery of the remaining portions of the murdered woman's
frame.

The public excitement, however, was soon afterwards wound to the very
highest pitch, by a notification being given of the finding of a human
head in a place called the "Ben Jonson Lock," of the Regent's canal,
which runs through Stepney fields. Universal credit at once attached it
to the body which had been already discovered, and no time was lost in
exhuming those remains, in order to ascertain the truth of the
suspicions which were entertained. This new discovery had been made on
the 7th of January 1837, under circumstances of a remarkable character.
A barge had entered the lock for the purpose of passing through it, and
the lockman was engaged in closing the flood-gates at the tail of the
lock, when he found that there was some obstacle which prevented their
completely meeting. He remarked that he had no doubt that it was the
carcase of a dead dog, and called to his assistant to bring him a long
instrument called a hitcher, shaped like a boat-hook, usually employed
for similar purposes, to remove it. Having made several ineffectual
attempts to bring it to the surface of the water, he at length fixed
his hitcher in the substance; and upon raising it from the water, it
was seen to be the head of a human being. It was instantly brought on
shore, and the circumstance communicated to the police, by whom the
head was conveyed to Mr. Birtwhistle, a surgeon, for examination. His
report stated that the face was disfigured with bruises and
lacerations, and that the lower jaw was broken -- injuries which were
without doubt the result of the exertions of the lockman, first to
close the gates, and secondly, to bring the head out of the water, but
that there was appearance of a bruise on the eye inflicted during life;
and further, that the head appeared to have been severed from the body
in an awkward manner; the cervical vertebrae being sawed through in a
rough way, evidently denoting that it had not been done by any surgeon.
The exhumation of the body having now taken place, the necessary
comparison was made, and Mr. Girdwood at once declared that the head
and the trunk were portions of the same frame.

Although some public satisfaction was afforded by this most singular
event, still no clue whatever appeared yet to have been found to
conduct the police to the murderer; for that murder had been committed
there was no doubt. The expression of the face was so much altered and
disfigured since the death of the woman, that little hopes were
entertained of the possibility of its identification. Thousands of
persons inspected it, prompted by curiosity or a desire to secure the
ends of justice, by pointing out the individual who had been murdered;
and although frequent reports were circulated, that the features had
been recognised, no real evidence was obtained as to the person whose
remains had been discovered. Decomposition in the head shortly
commenced; and it was deemed advisable to adopt measures to prevent all
remaining traces of the features being destroyed, and Mr. Girdwood was
instructed to take the necessary steps to secure this object. The head
was accordingly placed in spirits, and was preserved at Mr. Girdwood's,
where it remained open to the inspection of all persons who it was
supposed would be able to afford any information upon the subject.

The mystery which surrounded the case, however, seemed to become
greater every day. The inquiries of the police for the remainder of the
body were quite unsuccessful; and the difficulties which existed,
arising from their total ignorance of the quarter to which their
investigation should be directed, appeared to leave small hopes of its
eventual dissolution. Until the 2nd of February this obscurity still
prevailed; but then accident again interfered to bring to light the
remaining members of the body of the murdered woman.

On that day James Page, a labourer, was employed in cutting osiers in a
bed belonging to Mr. Tenpenny, in the neighbourhood of Cold Harborlane,
Camberwell, when in stepping over a drain or ditch, he perceived a
large bundle lying in it, covered with a piece of sacking, and partly
immersed in the water. His curiosity prompted him to raise it, and he
saw what appeared to be the toes of a human foot protruding from it. He
became alarmed and called for his fellow-workman, who was only a short
distance off; and upon their opening the package, they found it to
contain two human legs. These, like the head, were transmitted to Mr.
Girdwood for examination, and proved to be portions of the frame which
had been discovered in the Edgeware-road. Thus had three discoveries,
each more remarkable than the last, produced the component parts of the
body of the deceased; but the further interposition of the all-powerful
hand of the Almighty was yet wanting to disclose the name and character
of the murdered woman, as well as to point out her inhuman murderer.
Intense anxiety was universally manifested by the public to unravel the
mystery in which the dreadful transaction was enveloped; and every
minute circumstance connected with the affair was sought after with the
most astonishing avidity. Investigations of the most searching
description were carried on by the authorities, but every inquiry
proved fruitless.

That discovery which alone was wanting to satisfy the public mind was,
however, at length made. On the 20th of March, Mr. Gay, a broker
residing in Goodge-street, Tottenham-court-road, applied to Mr.
Thornton the churchwarden of the parish of Paddington, for permission
to inspect such of the remains of the deceased woman as had been
preserved above ground. He founded his application upon the fact of the
sudden disappearance of his sister, whose name was Hannah Brown, and
who having quitted her home on the afternoon preceding Christmas-day,
had not since been seen or heard of. A request so reasonable was at
once complied with; and upon Mr. Gay seeing the head, which had been
placed in spirits, he at once declared his belief that it was that of
his unfortunate relation. Other persons who had been acquainted with
Hannah Brown also came forward to express their opinion as to her
identity; and from the statements which they made upon the subject of
her habit of body, and the opinions which they expressed in reference
to the identity of the head, no doubt remained of her being the
individual who had been so inhumanly destroyed.

From the inquiries of the police, it was elicited that the unfortunate
woman had received with favour the advances of a man named James
Greenacre, to whom she was about to be married; and that on
Christmas-eve she had quitted her lodgings in Union-street, Middlesex
Hospital, in order to accompany her intended husband to his house, in
Carpenter's-buildings, Camberwell, preparatory to their union on the
ensuing Monday. Greenacre was the person in whose company she had been
last seen; and to him, therefore, the authorities naturally turned for
information, as to the manner in which they had parted, if they had
parted at all, before her death. A warrant was granted by the
magistrates of Mary-le-bone Police-office for the apprehension of this
man; and after considerable difficulty he was at length taken into
custody on the 24th of March, 1837, at his lodgings at St.
Alban's-place, Kennington-road, together with a woman named Sarah Gale,
with whom he cohabited, and her infant child.

On Monday the 25th of March, an extraordinary degree of excitement
prevailed throughout the parishes of Paddington and Mary-le-bone, in
consequence of the apprehension of these persons being made known. At
an early hour the greater part of High-street was thronged with persons
who were anxiously awaiting the arrival of the prisoners. A coach was,
at a quarter-past twelve o'clock, seen to approach the police-office,
from which Greenacre and Mrs. Gale were taken, and conducted through
the magistrates' private entrance to the office. Upon their being
placed at the bar, Greenacre appeared to be a man about fifty years of
age, of middle height, and rather stout in figure. His aspect was
forbidding, and he conducted himself with considerable firmness of
demeanour. He was wrapped in a brown great-coat, and returned the gaze
of any one who looked at him, with an air of insolent bravado. Towards
the close of the examination, however, he appeared to be oppressed with
a sensation of weakness, a circumstance which was attributable to his
having, during his sojourn in the station-house, attempted to strangle
himself with his pocket-handkerchief -- an attempt, the effects of
which were only removed upon the introduction of surgical assistance.

The prisoner Sarah Gale was between thirty and thirty-five years of
age; she was tolerably well dressed, and had with her a child between
four and five years old; she seemed quite unconcerned at her situation,
and was the object of as much, if not more attention, and interest than
her fellow-prisoner and paramour.

In the course of this and the succeeding examinations of the prisoners,
evidence extending to a very great length was procured. A succinct
narrative of the proceedings, however, will be perhaps better
understood than a lengthy statement of the testimony of each particular
witness; and to such a descriptive account, therefore, we shall confine
ourselves. The various witnesses having been examined, whose testimony
was requisite to prove the circumstances attending the discovery of the
body, the head, and the legs of the deceased woman, which we have
already described, proof of the identity of those remains was given;
and upon this subject the peculiarity of the formation of the body, to
which we have already alluded, tended at once to dispel all doubts, if
any such existed. Mrs. Brown, it then appeared, had lived for about a
year-and-a-half before her death at No.45, Union-street, Middlesex
Hospital, where she gained a living by taking in washing and mangling.
While in this situation she became acquainted with Greenacre, and the
intimacy after a while ended in an offer of marriage on his part, which
was accepted by her. Mr. and Mrs. Davis, of No.45, Bartholomew-close,
Smithfield, were friends of Mrs. Brown, and were made acquainted by her
with the nature of her connexion with Greenacre; and they acceded to a
proposition which was made to them, that Mr. Davis should give away the
bride, and that their daughter should act as bridesmaid. The day after
Christmas-day was fixed upon as the day of the wedding, and the banns
were in due course put up at the church of St. Giles, Camberwell,
preparatory to the nuptial rites. On the 22ud of December, Mrs. Davis
last saw Hannah Brown. The latter then called at her house with
Greenacre, and they at that time appeared perfectly happy and
"sociable," and, as it seemed, eagerly wishing for the wedding-day.
They remained to supper and went away together, having immediately
before their departure spoken of an intention which they had, after
their marriage, to settle at Hudson's Bay. On the afternoon of the 24th
of December, Mrs. Brown quitted her lodgings in Union-street, with
Greenacre, in a coach, and on the same evening they were seen together
at the residence of the latter, in Carpenter's -buildings. Mrs. Brown
had previously disposed of what little property she possessed; but as
the coach would not contain all her personal movables, she took away
the key of her door with her, saying, that she should return for them
at night. She did not return, however, and Mrs. Corney (her landlady)
did not again see her alive. On the night before Christmas-day,
Greenacre called upon Mrs. Davis, and inquired whether she had seen
anything of Hannah Brown? She answered that she had not; and Greenacre
then said that he found, upon inquiry, that Mrs. Brown had deceived him
as to her property, and that it would not do for them to plunge
themselves into poverty by marrying. At this interview he appeared
agitated and angry, and his countenance presented an aspect of such
peculiarity, that it was remarked by Mrs. Davis to her husband. On the
Tuesday after Christmas-day, Greenacre also called upon the brother of
Mrs. Brown; and he acquainted him also with the fact of the
postponement of the marriage, saying that he and his intended wife had
quarrelled with respect to her property, and that she had in
consequence quitted his house, and he had seen nothing of her since.

In the meanwhile, the continued absence of Mrs. Brown from her lodgings
excited some apprehension in the minds of her friends; but it was not
until the 27th of March, (as we have already stated), that they
exhibited any fears of the probability of the murdered remains which
had been found being those of their unfortunate relative. An inspection
of those remains, however, at once informed them of the melancholy
cause of her disappearance.

The apprehension of Greenacre and Gale took place under circumstances
which tended to confirm the suspicions of their guilt of murder, and to
give conclusive evidence of their perfect cognizance of the fact of the
death of the deceased. Inspector Feltham was the person by whom this
capture was effected; and he took the prisoners into custody at a small
house, No.1, St. Alban's-place, Kennington-road, accompanied by a
police constable of the L division. He proceeded to that house and
found them in bed together; and upon his entering the room, he informed
them of the object of his visit. Greenacre at first denied all
knowledge of any such person as Hannah Brown; but subsequently, upon
his being further questioned, he admitted that he had been going to be
married to her, although he did not then know what had become of her.
The prisoners having dressed themselves, Greenacre declared that it was
lucky that the officer had gone on that night, for that they were about
to sail on the next day for America, a fact which appeared to be true,
from the appearance of a number of boxes, which stood in the apartment,
ready packed and corded for travelling. A minute examination of the
contents of the trunks, afforded highly important evidence.

Many articles were found in them, which were known to have belonged to
Mrs. Brown; but besides these, some remnants of an old cotton dress
were discovered, exactly corresponding in pattern and condition with
the pieces in which the body had been wrapped, on its being first seen
in the Edgeware-road.

Subsequent inquiries afforded additional proofs in the case,
implicating both Mrs. Gale and Greenacre. These consisted in the
discovery of evidence as to the proceedings of the prisoners, on the
night of Christmas-eve, and the following days. Greenacre, as we have
already stated, was observed on Christmas-eve to take home his intended
wife to his house in Carpenter's-buildings. Previously to this time,
Mrs. Gale had been living with him there as his wife; but she appears
to have been sent away on the morning of the 24th of December, in order
to made room for the new-comer. On that night some noise and scuffling
was heard in Greenacre's house by the neighbours, but no notice was
taken of it; and on the following day Greenacre was observed to go out,
and the house remained locked up, and with the shutters closed all day.
On that day it was proved that he went to dine with Mrs. Gale, at
lodgings which she occupied temporarily, at Portland-street, Walworth.
On Boxing-day (Monday), Mrs. Gale was again in Carpenter's-buildings,
and she seemed to be engaged in washing the house, as she procured some
water from some of her neighbours, and she was noticed to be employed
with a bucket and mop, as if she were hard at work. On Wednesday,
Greenacre was observed to leave his home, carrying with him a blue
merino bag, and it was ascertained that about a week afterwards he
quitted the house in Carpenter's-buildings altogether, his boxes and
furniture being removed by a man named Chisholm. About a fortnight
afterwards the house was stated "to be to let," and several of the
neighbours went to look at it. The floors of one or two of the rooms
appeared to have been carefully scrubbed and cleaned; and besides this,
there was observed to be a strong smell of brimstone, as if it had been
employed in fumigating the house, and the fire-places were boarded up,
so as to prevent the escape of the vapour by the chimney. Independently
of these circumstances, various expressions were attributed to
Greenacre and Mrs, Gale, from which it was inferred that the latter was
aware of the murder; and it was also shown that the bag or sack in
which the body was enclosed, had been stolen by Greenacre about a week
before Christmas, from the shop of a Mr. Ward, a mangle-maker, in
Cheyne-walk, Tottenham-court-road; whose shopman, Higgins, was enabled
to identify it by a particular species of shaving, which was still
adhering to its interior, and also by the cord, with which it was made
to close.

Upon the statement of all these circumstances, the prisoners were
called upon for any defence which they might have to make, and
Greenacre thus addressed the magistrate. He spoke in a clear voice, and
without betraying any emotion.

"I have to state, that in the evidence given there are many direct
falsehoods. I distinctly told Mrs. Davis that we had had no words at
all of consequence -- that is, no quarrel. What I mentioned to her was,
that I had found out Mrs. Brown had no money at all, and had tried to
set up things in my name at a tally-shop. I merely argued the point
with her, but there had been no dispute worth speaking of. There may
have been duplicity on both sides. I represented myself to her to be a
man of property, as many other people do; and I found out that she was
not a suitable companion for me, which may fairly be concluded from her
conduct towards her brothers and sisters. I'll adhere strictly to the
truth in what I am saying, although there are many circumstances in the
evidence combining together against me, and which may perhaps cost me
my life. One of the witnesses has said, that I helped to move the boxes
on the Saturday; that is true, but I will precede that remark by
stating, that I had this female (the other prisoner) in a room at the
time, where she was lodging, and did my cooking for me. I gave her
notice to leave previous to Mrs. Brown coming home, and she had left
accordingly. On the Saturday night before Christmas-day, Mrs. Brown
came down to my house, rather fresh from drinking, having in the course
of the morning treated the coachman, and insisted upon having some more
rum, a quantity of which she had had with her tea. I then thought it a
favourable opportunity to press upon her for the state of her
circumstances. She was very reluctant to give me any answer, and I told
her she had often dropped insinuations in my hearing about her having
property enough to enable her to go into business, and that she had
said she could command at any time three hundred or four hundred
pounds. I told her I had made some inquiry about her character, and had
ascertained she had been to Smith's tally-shop, in Long-acre, and tried
to procure silk gowns in my name. She put on a feigned laugh, and
retaliated by saying she thought I had been deceiving her with respect
to my property, by misrepresenting it. During this conversation she was
reeling backwards and forwards in her chair, which was on the swing,
and as I am determined to adhere strictly to the truth, I must say that
I put my foot to the chair, and she fell back with great violence
against a chump of wood that I had been using; this alarmed me very
much, and I went round the table and took her by the hand, and kept
shaking her, but she appeared to be entirely gone. It is impossible to
give a description of my feelings at the time; and, in the state of
excitement I was in, I unfortunately determined on putting her away. I
deliberated for a little while, and then made up my mind to conceal her
death in the manner already gone forth to the world. I thought it might
be more safe that way than if I gave an alarm of what had occurred. No
one individual up to the present moment had the least knowledge of what
I have stated here. This female I perfectly exonerate from having any
more knowledge of it than any other person, as she was away from the
house."

Mrs. Gale, after denying that she was at Camberwell at the time of the
murder, or that she had participated in any way in causing the death of
the deceased, said -- "Mr, Greenacre told me I was to leave his house a
fortnight before Christmas, but I did not then leave, as I could not
suit myself with lodgings, and I went away on the following Thursday.
On the Monday week after that I returned to the house, and he told me
that, the correspondence between him and Mrs. Brown was broken off.
That's all I have to state."

During the whole of the time occupied by the police in prosecuting
their inquiries, new and increasing interest prevailed upon the subject
of the case, and every opportunity was seized upon by the public at
which it was thought that a glimpse of the prisoners might be obtained.

The 5th of April was fixed upon for the last examination; but owing to
the extreme difficulties which had attended every fresh inquiry before
the magistrates at the police-office, arising from the crowds which
were every day collected, they were induced to determine upon holding
their final meeting at the New Prison, Clerkenwell, where Greenacre had
been confined. Mrs. Gale had been kept in custody at the House of
Correction; and the intention of the magistrates being soon made known
to the mob, many of them proceeded from the neighbourhood of Marylebone
to Clerkenwell, in the hope of catching a glimpse of her as she passed
to the New Prison. During the examination both prisoners were much
affected, and trembled violently.

The principal object of this meeting was the re-perusal of the whole of
the vast body of evidence which had been obtained in the presence of
the prisoners. The statements made by Greenacre and his fellow-prisoner
were also read, and signed by them as true. Gale, when called upon to
affix her name to her statement, appeared to be labouring under extreme
trepidation. She got up from her seat, and walked with a faltering step
to the table; she took the pen with a trembling hand, when Greenacre,
seeing the agitation she was in, said to her, "Sign, sign; don't
frighten yourself at what people say about your going to be hanged, and
all that sort of stuff!" Gale at length appended her name, and resumed
her seat.

The whole of the evidence having now been read over, the prisoners were
fully committed to Newgate for trial.

The following lines were circulated by Greenacre among the reporters
present at this examination, with a view to their publication in the
newspapers.

     "To a humane and enlightened public.
     "New Prison, Clerkenwell, April 5.
"Everything that ingenuity and malice could invent to influence the
minds of the ignorant, and to fill the minds of the good and religious
with awe, has been the result of newspaper comment against me. It is
said that the finger of God is manifested in bringing this horrid and
wilful murder to light, the day only before my flight to America! I
contend that this manifestation of Divine Providence is to serve my
case, or the cause of a suffering mind, to prevent me from a life of
continual dread of being fetched back from America upon this awful
charge, and which would certainly have been the result, if the deceased
had not been recognised until I had departed; thus it may be shown that
Providence is on my side. Again, if in my crossing the Atlantic or by
any other means, my death had ensued, the fatal conviction of an
innocent female would certainly have been the result -- suspicion would
have been too strong against her to have saved her; it was for God, and
God only to prevent this fatal termination -- no human mind could have
discerned anything in her favour, if my death had preceded this
investigation. God is just; and God be praised for this timely
interference to prevent my premature death through either my crossing
the seas, or the distracted state of my mind. I hope, therefore, that
my unfortunate situation may not be prejudiced by malice and perverted
comments."

Monday, the 10th of April 1837, was the day fixed for the trial of
these offenders, and on that day they were placed at the bar of the
Central Criminal Court, and arraigned upon the indictment found against
them. Greenacre was charged, as the principal, with the wilful murder
of the deceased, and Gale was indicted for being an accessory after the
fact, in comforting, aiding, and assisting her fellow-prisoner.

Chief Justice Tindal, Mr. Justice Coleridge, and Mr. Justice Coltman,
were the judges who sat to try these offenders, and the court was
crowded in every corner.

The evidence produced now was a repetition of that which had been
brought forward at the various examinations at the police-office. Mr.
Adolphus, Mr. Clarkson, and Mr. Bodkin, appeared to conduct the case
for the prosecution; and Mr. Price and Mr. Payne defended the
prisoners. The line of defence was consistent with the statements which
had been made by the prisoners at Marylebone police-office. The
witnesses who were competent to give any evidence as to the possibility
of the truth of these declarations being cross-examined with a view to
its being shown, that Greenacre's account of the transaction might be
correct; and, further, that in the direction in which he stated Mrs.
Brown to have fallen, she might have passed through a doorway, which
was behind her, and into the back-room. This suggestion was, however,
negatived by the declaration of the witnesses; and the testimony of the
surgeons who were examined also tended to prove that the injuries which
had been received by the deceased could not have been the result of
such a state of facts. Mr. Girdwood underwent a long examination, and
exhibited throughout an extensive acquaintance with those branches of
his profession which were material to the inquiry. He declared his
belief that many of the appearances of wounds or bruises on the head
were the result of injuries inflicted during life; and, further, that
the bloodless state of the arteries of the head exhibited that the
process of disseveration had been commenced before life was extinct.

Mr. Price addressed the jury for the prisoners, urging those topics in
his argument to which he had applied himself on his cross-examination.

The Lord Chief Justice began to sum up at a quarter past six o'clock on
the second day of the trial. Having recapitulated the terms of the
indictment in form, his lordship proceeded to observe, that the
conviction of the prisoner Greenacre of murder or manslaughter would
not necessarily involve the prisoner Gale in the charge, unless the
jury were satisfied that the evidence was sufficient to bear out the
allegation of her having been an accomplice in the transactions
connected with the death of the deceased. He had no doubt the case
would receive the most benevolent and patient attention of the jury. He
would read over the evidence, and leave them to say whether they
considered the prisoner Greenacre to have been the author of the
woman's death, and whether the evidence amounted to proof of murder, or
of manslaughter of an aggravated kind. There were certain undoubted,
principles of law which must be kept in mind. One was, that where a
person met his death from the hand of another person, that other person
was bound, either by direct evidence or out of the circumstances of the
case as they appeared in evidence before the jury, to mitigate or
reduce the charge to the lower or minor class of offence. But then some
circumstance of alleviation, mitigation, excuse, or justification must
be brought before the court and jury, or be derivable by fair inference
from the evidence. What they would have to say, therefore, was,
whether, looking at the whole of the case, they were satisfied that it
was left on the broad ground on which it was started by the counsel for
the prosecution -- namely, the actual murder of the deceased
individual, or whether there were any circumstances in the case to
induce them to come to a conclusion of a milder character -- namely,
that of a felonious manslaughter or accidental homicide. The learned
judge then proceeded to refer to the evidence which had been adduced,
commenting with great minuteness and perspicuity upon every
circumstance from which the guilt or innocence of the prisoners was
argued. He observed that the male prisoner had, by his own statement,
admitted that he was guilty of manslaughter, unless they came to the
conclusion that by an act of carelessness, or of playfulness in tilting
up the chair, the woman had met her death. If, on the other hand, they
were of opinion that the prisoner had occasioned the death of Hannah
Brown, either by premeditated malice or by a malignity of feeling,
caused by conduct of an exasperating nature, thereby giving rise to a
spirit of revenge, then they must find him guilty of the higher
offence. They would observe that the doctors had given it as their
opinion, that the knife had been applied to the neck during life; they
would therefore have to say whether, being possessed of a malignant
spirit, the prisoner had not taken the knife and completed that act
which he had wickedly intended to effect. He would exhort them to weigh
well the circumstances of the case, which was one of extreme
difficulty. Above all things, it behoved them to turn a deaf ear to any
manifestations of clamour which might have been exhibited on the part
of the public; such impressions ought at all times, but more especially
upon an occasion like the present, to be banished from a court of
justice. They would enter upon the performance of their solemn and
painful duty with feelings of patience and calmness, giving to every
portion of the evidence such favourable interpretation as it would
allow, and they would give any benefit which might arise therefrom to
the prisoners; they would look into all the evidence watchfully and
narrowly, and if upon mature reflection they entertained a doubt of the
guilt of the prisoner of the charge of murder, they would let him
derive the full advantage and benefit of such a doubt. If, on the other
hand, the evidence was so clear and satisfactory as that in their minds
it brought the commission of the crime home to the prisoner, they would
doubtless do their duty. With respect to the other prisoner, Sarah
Gale, if they found the male prisoner guilty, either of the crime of
murder or manslaughter, they would say whether by her assistance and
aid she had protected, comforted, and enabled him to screen himself
from the justice of the country. If so, they would find her guilty of
the charge for which she was indicted. If, on the other hand, they
thought that she had not in any way acted as an accessory, and had had
no guilty knowledge of the crime, then they would give her the benefit
of such opinion, and return a verdict of acquittal.

The jury having retired from the box for the purpose of considering
their verdict, after an absence of a quarter of an hour only, returned
into court to deliver their decision upon the case. As they passed to
their box, Greenacre surveyed each of them with a keen, searching, and
eager glance, as if to read in their expressions the fate which awaited
him, and of which the jury were now the arbiters. His countenance,
however, remained unchanged; and he still appeared to preserve the same
degree of firmness and self-possession which distinguished his
demeanour throughout the whole of the trial, and seemed as a man who
had already anticipated his fate, and whose mind was made up to the
worst that could befall him. The prisoner Gale, on the contrary, seemed
lost and bewildered, and almost unconscious of her awful situation; but
with that feeling of attachment for her paramour which women will
evince even under circumstances of misery, shame, and peril, she fixed
her look during this painful interval of suspense and agony upon the
countenance of him to whose fate she appeared to cling, even in this
trying moment, when life or death was about to unite them once more, or
sever their unfortunate connexion for ever.

The clerk of the arraigns having called over the names of the jury,
said, "Gentlemen, how say you; do you find the prisoner at the bar,
James Greenacre, guilty or not guilty of the felony of murder with
which he is charged?". The foreman of the jury answered, "Guilty."

The question was then asked with regard to the prisoner Gale, and the
foreman of the jury again answered "Guilty."

The countenance of Greenacre remained unaltered. He exhibited no
emotion, but leaned back in his chair and seemed perfectly indifferent
to what might follow. Gale appeared almost unconscious of what was
passing around her.

Upon the announcement of the result of the case outside the Court, the
huzzaings of the crowd, who were impatiently awaiting its termination,
were of the most deafening description; and several well-dressed
persons were observed in elevated positions, waving their hats to the
mob, as if upon the intelligence of some important victory.

The recent alteration in the law with regard to the period of the
execution of murderers, rendered it unnecessary that sentence should be
immediately passed on the prisoners; but on the following day, the 12th
of April, they were brought up to receive the judgment of the Court.

Upon their being called upon in the usual way, to say any thing they
had to urge why sentence should not be pronounced upon them:

Greenacre (in a husky, but firm tone) said -- "My Lord, my unhappy
condition in this unfortunate affair has given rise to abundance of
evidence against me, such as might be collected in any pot-house or
gin-shop, owing to the reports spread abroad to my prejudice, upon
which the jurymen have acted. It is contrary to reason and common sense
to suppose that I should have meditated the death of the woman, much
less that I should effect it in the manner described, because of the
property she had. If that had been my object, I could have had it all
on the next morning, when our marriage was to have taken place, and
then it would have been mine. What, then, was my motive for murdering
of her? It is --"

The Recorder. -- "This is all very proper matter to have been urged by
your counsel at the trial, but should not be pressed upon the Court
now. The only question now is, as to the matter of law. If there are
the slightest grounds for questioning the verdict of the jury, your
only course is to apply to the Secretary of State, the Court having no
power of itself to interfere. Have you anything more to say?"

Greenacre. -- "In the next place, my lord, I beg to say that this woman
was utterly ignorant of the affair up to the time of my being taken to
the police-office. She had no knowledge whatever of it, and is as
innocent as any lady or gentleman in this court. This I say, as I am
going into my grave -- that she is innocent. I invited her back to the
house after the body was removed, and she never knew anything of it. I
deem it a religious duty to exculpate her from having any concern in
this unfortunate affair. I have no more to say."

The Recorder.  "I shall make the same observation to you, Gale, that I
have just addressed to the other prisoner. If there be any ground for a
further inquiry into your case, you must apply to the Secretary of
State, who will exercise his best discretion upon the subject, under
the advice of the responsible officers of the crown."

The prisoner Gale was then led to a chair at the back of the dock, and
the usual proclamation for silence, preparatory to the passing of the
sentence of death, having been made,--

The Recorder, in a solemn and impressive tone, proceeded to address the
male prisoner in the following words:-- "James Greenacre, after a
protracted trial, which endured for two entire days, upon a patient and
impartial investigation of all the circumstances connected with your
case, a jury of your country have found themselves inevitably compelled
to find you guilty of the dreadful offence for which you were indicted.
You have been convicted upon evidence, indeed the most satisfactory, of
the crime of wilful murder. The appalling details of your dreadful case
must be fresh in the recollection of all who now hear my voice, and
will long live in the memory and (may I not add?) in the execration of
mankind; and generations yet to come will shudder at your guilt. You
have, indeed, acquired for yourself a revolting celebrity: an odious
notoriety in the annals of cruelty and crime. The means to which you
were prompted to resort, in order to conceal the mangled and
dismembered portions of your victim, were for a season attended with
partial success. You disposed of her remains, as you thought, in places
secure from discovery, but that course availed you not; for after a
short interval accumulated evidence and irrefragable proofs of your
guilty contrivance became apparent. The amputated limbs and the
dissevered body were united to the bloodless head of the murdered
woman, and every injury by you inflicted after death has afforded the
means of proving by comparison, beyond doubt, that the wound on the eye
was inflicted by you while your victim was in life, and strength, and
health. Horrible and revolting to humanity as was the spectacle
presented by the mutilated trunk and mangled remains, fresh details and
discoveries suggested both the means and manner by which you
accomplished the destruction of the deceased. Both surgical skill and
medical science came to the assistance of common observation; and it
was clearly and beyond all doubt demonstrated that the wounds on the
eye and skull were sufficient to produce death; and it was still
further proved, that while the blood was yet in a fluid state, and
circulating through the veins and arteries, you accomplished your
horrible object, by severing the head from the body. Stupor of the
senses and suspended animation were the effect of your blows; and then
you embrued your hands in the gushing life's-blood of the wretched and
unhappy being who was stretched senseless and unconscious at your feet.
The still warm corpse was then barbarously mutilated and mangled by
you, in the hope that the eye of man would not detect your guilt; but
the eye of God was upon you. The natural disgust and horror which your
conduct in this respect excites compels me to throw a veil over the
frightful and appalling particulars of that hideous scene. But even
that scene, revolting as it is, may be useful in a moral point of view,
for it shows how the hand of Providence points out the guilty, and
proves both the means of detection and the certainty of punishment. The
certain but unseen agency of Providence is exhibited in the development
of the peculiar and complicated circumstances of your case. The
curiosity excited, the alarm produced, and the peculiarity of each
succeeding discovery of the mangled members of the body, and the
seemingly impenetrable mystery in which the circumstances of such a
murder were shrouded, all conspired to awaken suspicion, renew inquiry,
and incite to fresh exertion, until at last the mystery was developed
by the family of the deceased. The embalmed head was identified, the
name of the murdered woman came to light, and sufficient evidence was
produced to point out you as the author of her death, and bring you
before the tribunal of public justice. The circumstances attending the
discovery of this murder lead to the inevitable conclusion that neither
cunning nor ferocity can shelter and secure a murderer; for although
the crime may be hidden for a time -- although delays may occur, and
the mystery of the transaction almost preclude the hope of its
discovery, yet the all-seeing eye of God is cognizant of the deed, and
man becomes the agent of its discovery. Indeed instances of escape from
such a crime are so rare, that the detection is almost as sure as the
punishment is certain. It is plain from the attention with which I
perceive you are listening to what I now say, that I am addressing an
individual not devoid of education, of reasoning faculties, and
strength of mind. The occasion you must indeed be aware is, as regards
yourself, standing where you do, and under the circumstances in which
you are placed, awful and solemn to the last degree, both as regards
your fate in this world and the world to come. I will not draw
arguments from my own feeble resources alone, to endeavour to induce
and implore you to repent before it is too late. Let me, then, before I
proceed to pass upon you the dreadful sentence, entreat you to consider
well your past life, and the chances which await you in the life which
is to come. In making this last appeal, in attempting to revive within
your breast the last remaining sparks of virtue and religion, let me
refer you to an extract which I am about to read to you from an
excellent work, called 'The Analogy of Religion, Natural and Revealed.'
I have selected the passage because I think it may be applicable to
your present state of mind, and because the sentiments it conveys are
far better than I could ever hope to address to you from my own
resources. The passage is as follows:-- 'Indeed,' says the learned
author, 'when one has been recollecting the proper proofs of a future
state of rewards and punishment, nothing, methinks, can give one so
sensible an apprehension of the latter or representation of it to the
mind, as observing the many disregard-checks, admonitions, and warnings
which people meet with in the ways of vice and folly, and extravagance
-- warnings from their very nature, from the example of others, from
the lesser inconveniences which they bring upon themselves -- from the
instruction of wise and virtuous men; after these had been so long
despised, scorned, ridiculed -- after the chief bad consequences,
temporal consequences of their follies, have been delayed for a great
while, at length they break in irresistibly like an armed force --
repentance is too late to relieve, and can serve only to aggravate
their distress: the case is become desperate, and poverty and sickness,
remorse and anguish, infamy and death -- the effects of their own
doings -- overwhelm them beyond the possibility of remedy or escape.'
The limits of time and the span of this present life furnish no
obstacles in the way. of a repentant sinner. Turn, therefore, I implore
you, with an humble and penitent heart, to the source of all hope and
mercy -- the blessed Redeemer of mankind, and employ the brief interval
which is yet left you on this side of eternity in penitence and prayer,
as the only means of obtaining that mercy hereafter which the laws of
God and man deny to you in this world. It now only remains for me to
pass upon you the dreadful sentence of the law; and that sentence is,
that you be taken from hence to the prison from which you came, and
from thence to a place of execution, where you shall be hanged by the
neck until you are dead, and that your body be then buried within the
precincts of the jail; and may the Lord God Almighty take compassion on
your sinful soul."

The learned Recorder towards the end of this address was sensibly
affected; and he could scarcely give utterance to the concluding words.

The prisoner Greenacre remained apparently unmoved, but he listened
with attention, and never once changed his position or relaxed a
muscle. He was then led back, and

     Gale was brought forward to receive her sentence.

The Recorder said -- "Sarah Gale, I will not aggravate the sufferings
which you must now endure with any observations tending to increase
those sufferings. The unhappy man who a short time ago stood beside you
at that bar has declared that you had no guilty knowledge of the
transaction in which he was involved. I cannot but observe, however,
with regard to that remark, that you had united yourself to him,
sharing his society and bed, and comforting, assisting, and sheltering
him, without being joined to him by any moral or religious tie. As he
has stated that you were ignorant of the dreadful transaction, I think
it right to remind you that the ear-rings found in your pocket had
belonged to the unfortunate woman who had been slaughtered by his
hands; that duplicates of property which belonged to her were also
found in your possession; and that in an adjoining room a box was
found, proved to have been hers, besides other property. I cannot,
therefore, as at present advised, entertain any doubt but that the
verdict of the jury in your case was well and justly grounded. How far
your attachment to the prisoner induced you to continue your
intercourse with him, notwithstanding his possession of the property of
the deceased under circumstances which I should think must at least
have excited suspicion on your mind, it is not for me to judge. Perhaps
you considered that what had been done could not be undone; but
whatever feeling actuated your conduct in connexion with the
circumstances of the case, I feel that I am bound to pass upon you the
full sentence directed by the act of parliament; and if upon further
investigation of your case, should you be disposed to apply to the
Secretary of State for a revision of your sentence, any favourable
circumstances should arise, that matter will be considered and disposed
of by the competent authorities. At present I have only to pronounce
upon you the sentence of the law; and that sentence is, and this Court
do adjudge, that you be transported beyond the sea to such place as His
Majesty, with the advice of his privy council, shall direct and
appoint, for the term of your natural life."

The prisoners were then led away from the bar; but Greenacre, instead
of being conducted to the condemned cell, as is customary, was re-taken
to the apartment which he had previously occupied. The reason for this
alteration in his case, was the necessity which existed for a strict
watch being maintained over him, to prevent a repetition of the attempt
which he had made upon his own life, which there was good reason to
apprehend; and it was felt that the inclemency of the weather would
render such a duty in the lower cells of the prison, a punishment upon
the attendant turnkeys of no ordinary severity. The demeanour of
Greenacre, after his conviction, partook of the same firmness and
determination which he had hitherto maintained; and upon the day after
his condemnation he requested to be supplied with pens, ink, and paper.
His desire was instantly complied with; and from this time he appeared
to be occupied in the fabrication of a new statement, bearing the
impress of truth, in reference to the foul crime for which he had been
tried. He industriously applied himself for several days to this task;
but none of the productions of his pen appeared to afford him
satisfaction, and each was committed to the flames almost immediately
upon its completion. In the course of the day after he received
sentence of death, he was visited by the sheriffs, and to them he made
a new confession of the circumstances of his crime. The general facts
which he now detailed corresponded with the story he had told at the
police-office; but in one most important particular he admitted the
falsehood of that statement. This was with reference to the immediate
cause of the death of Mrs. Brown; and he now stated that the
unfortunate woman, having accompanied him home, as proved in evidence,
they had taken tea together. Mrs Brown afterwards proceeded to wash up
the tea-things, and while she was so occupied, they continued a
conversation which had before commenced, upon the subject of her
property. He became enraged at the deception which she had practised on
him, and seizing a rolling-pin which lay on the dresser, he menaced her
with it, and at length struck her on the eye. She fell to the ground,
and on his going to her, he was shocked to find that she was
insensible, and apparently dead. He paced the room for some time, in
terror at the act which he had committed, as he conjectured that he
should be charged as her murderer, and began to reflect upon the best
means of screening himself from the consequences of his guilt. A
variety of methods presented themselves to his mind; but at length he
hit upon the horrible expedient of dividing the limbs from the body,
and disposing of the dissevered members separately. He, in consequence,
immediately set about cutting off' the head, and having done so, he
suffered the whole of the blood to drain from it. This done, he
determined instantly to get rid of this portion of the frame of his
victim, and wrapping it in a silk pocket-handkerchief, he quitted the
house with the horrible burden. On reaching Camberwell he got into an
omnibus, which conveyed him to Gracechurch-street, and without alarm
for the discovery of the contents of his bundle, he carried it on his
knee during the whole journey. When he left the vehicle he scarcely
knew which way to turn, but a Mile-End omnibus overtaking him as he
reached Cornhill, he jumped into it, and was conveyed to the East end
of the town, still carrying his dreadful load on his lap, in the same
manner in which he had supported it before. On his leaving this second
conveyance, he walked on until he reached the Regent's Canal, and he
pursued the course of it, until he came to the Lock at Stepney. An idea
suddenly suggested itself to his mind, that this was the fitting place
to get rid of the head, and without more ado he "shot it from the
handkerchief into the water." He then directly turned back, and on his
way home he called at Mrs. Davis's, in Bartholomew-close, with whom he
entered into conversation, as described in the evidence. He slept in
Carpenters-buildings alone on that night, but on the morning he went to
Mrs. Gale's lodgings, where he staid until the next day. At an early
hour on the morning of the 26th of December, he proceeded to his own
house, to dispose of the remaining parts of the body. He began by
separating the legs from the trunk, and having done so, he packed them
up in a sack and took them to Cold Harbour-lane (it being quite
daylight at the time), and threw them into the osier bed. He then once
more resumed his dreadful task at his house, in Carpenter's-buildings,
the trunk of the body being now all that he had to get rid of. The sack
and the remnants of a gown which were discovered with the body, were
the only coverings in which he could wrap these remains, and having
securely corded them up, he took the bundle on his back and went out,
undetermined as to the course which he should pursue to dispose of this
remaining evidence of his guilt. A carrier's cart passed him soon after
he reached the public road, and his load being heavy, he requested
permission to place it on the tail-board. This was acceded to, and he
walked behind the cart as far as the Elephant and Castle, at Newington.
The carrier there stopped to procure his dinner, and left him in the
street to take care of the cart; but alarmed lest, during the prolonged
absence of the driver, some accident might occur which should procure
his detection, he called a hackney cab, and having thrown his bundle
under the seat, directed that he should be driven to the Edgeware-road.
On his arrival at the Pine Apple Gate, he quitted the vehicle, and paid
the driver, and the man having turned back, he walked on towards
Kilburn. A favourable opportunity soon presented itself for disposing
of the load, and he deposited it behind the stone in the position in
which it was found two days afterwards. This, also, he declared took
place in the day-time, and he conceived that he underwent less risk in
pursuing his operations thus openly, than in endeavouring to conceal
them under the shades of night. On his return home, he burned the
handkerchief in which he had carried the head, and he also wiped up the
blood from the floor with flannels, which he disposed of by throwing
them down the privy. This confession was not reduced to writing; but
the evident object of the prisoner was to screen Mrs. Gale from the
punishment which awaited her, and to raise a belief of her innocence.
This, however, failed, for the evidence which was adduced with
reference to her implication in the murder, was too clear to admit of
any doubt being entertained; and indeed the general impression was,
that the murder was the result of a pre-conceived determination, both
of Greenacre and his paramour, in order to the accomplishment of which
by the former, the latter only temporarily quitted his house. During
the subsequent imprisonment of Greenacre, he appeared to be little
anxious for the spiritual consolation of the reverend gentleman, who
was the ordinary of the jail. He occasionally employed himself in the
perusal of religious works, but was generally engaged in writing,
although the result of his labours in this respect were, as we have
already stated, usually burned. In the conversations which he had with
the official persons, by whom he was visited, he complained loudly of
the prejudices which had been excited against him by the circulation of
a great many false accounts of circumstances which had occurred in his
early life. He particularly referred to an allegation which had been
made, of his having murdered one of his children, of which Mrs. Gale
was the mother; and he asserted, and Mrs. Gale corroborated the truth
of his declaration, upon her being separately questioned, that the
child had died a natural death; although he admitted that he had
disposed of it, by placing it at the door of a Mr. Dale, in
Rupert-street, Haymarket, by whom it was sent to St. James's Workhouse,
where it lived for nine months.

On Wednesday, the 26th of April, the case of Greenacre was reported to
his majesty by the Recorder, and the following Tuesday, the 2d of May,
was fixed for the execution. The intelligence was on the same evening
conveyed to the prisoner, but he seemed to have made up his mind to the
impossibility of there being any mitigation in his punishment, and was
unmoved. He declared that he cared nothing for death, although he was
sacrificed to the prejudices of the world; but he shuddered at the
thought of quitting life with the brand upon him of a wilful murderer.
He maintained that he had committed no murder, and that he was to blame
for nothing except the mutilation of the body of the deceased. At his
meeting now with the ordinary, he declined his spiritual assistance,
and said that he could find no relief in anything but inward prayer.

On the following Sunday the condemned sermon was preached in the chapel
of the jail by Dr. Cotton, and the most intense anxiety was exhibited
on the part of the public, to procure admission to this ceremony.
Greenacre throughout the service conducted himself with much propriety,
and repeated the responses with accuracy and precision. During the
sermon, however, in which he was spoken of as a murderer, he appeared
to be much incensed; and on his being subsequently visited by the
worthy ordinary, he complained of the application of that term to him,
and not without warmth, he declared, that he thought the observations
which had been made might have been spared. Subsequently, however, he
resumed his wonted composure, and he appeared to receive the attentions
of the clergyman with more satisfaction. On Monday night he was
requested to join the ordinary in partaking of the sacrament, but he
declined to do so; and in the course of a 'conversation which passed
upon the subject, he asserted, that although he believed that the
Saviour was a very good man, he placed no credit in the assertion that
he was the Son of God. To further questions which were put to him, he
said that he believed in the existence of a Deity, and .in a future
state of rewards and punishments, but that he had no doubt that he
should be happy, for that the sufferings through which he had passed in
life were a sufficient atonement for any faults of which he had been
guilty. On Monday night he slept soundly for several hours; but about
four in the morning he arose and dressed himself, and indited several
letters. He had completed these by seven, and at that hour he partook
of some refreshment, and now, for the first time since he had entered
Newgate, he was observed to shed tears. As the hour of eight approached
his agitation increased, but he remained absorbed in silent meditation.
Upon the appearance of the usual officers he submitted with calmness to
the operation of pinioning; and this being completed, he requested as a
favour, that he might not be long exposed to the gaze of the multitude
without. The last words which he uttered conveyed a request that his
spectacles might be given to Sarah Gale; and then, unheeding the
remarks of Mr. Cotton, he joined the procession to the scaffold.

The exterior of the jail meanwhile presented a wondrous scene of
confusion. The mob had begun to collect as early as ten o'clock on the
night before, and at day-break on Tuesday morning, every spot was
occupied from which a glimpse of the scaffold could be obtained. At
four o'clock the erection of the scaffold was commenced; and the
appearance of this instrument of death, as it was wheeled from the
prison-yard, was hailed with three cheers of deafening applause. The
same terrible welcome was given, at a subsequent period, to the
transverse beam when it was raised above the platform; and again to the
executioner, when he came forward to fasten the deadly halter on the
chain which is suspended from it. The pressure of the crowd as the hour
of execution approached became terrific; and many persons were carried
from it, exhausted by their exertions. At a quarter before eight the
bell of St. Sepulchre's Church began to toll, and from that moment the
screams and groans occasioned by the pressure from the two extremities
of the crowd towards the centre were perfectly appalling. When the
executioner again presented himself on the scaffold, however, to see
that all the preparations were complete, every feeling seemed to give
way to that of curiosity; but it became evident that there was a
sensation in that immense assemblage, which would express itself in
clamorous exultation as soon as ever the wretched criminal appeared, to
atone for the blood which he had so unrelentingly shed. No sooner did
those officers who usually precede the criminal to the place of
execution, become visible, than it burst forth with a loud, deep, and
sullen shout of execration against Greenacre, even before that
miserable wretch came under the terrible ordeal of their indignant
glance. As soon as he mounted the scaffold, the populace again
exhibited their detestation of the bloody atrocity of which he had been
convicted, by setting up a wild hurrah of approval of the retaliation
which he was about to endure under the hands of the ministers of
justice. He placed himself at once in the hands of the executioner, who
was thus enabled to complete the final preparations for his death with
unprecedented rapidity. The ordinary then read the commencing verse of
the burial-service, and before it was concluded the bolt was withdrawn,
Greenacre fell, and the vengeance of the law was accomplished. In two
minutes from his first appearance on the platform he ceased to be a
living man. One grasp of his hands was observed on the rope reaching
its full tension,-- nothing more, and then all but the relentless shout
of the multitude, was still. In a few minutes afterwards the mob began
to disperse; but a large concourse of persons remained until nine
o'clock, when the body was cut down amidst a yell of triumph, which
will live long in the memory of those who heard it. On the same night
the body of the criminal was buried within the precincts of the jail,
near to those of Thistlewood and others, who had been executed for
high-treason.

Gale, it may be observed, during the latter part of her imprisonment,
previously to the time of the execution of her late paramour, fell into
a state of great despondency. She had been informed that an interview
with Greenacre could not be permitted; and this, combined with the
certainty of his death, and her apprehensions as to her own fate,
reduced her to a state of the greatest mental weakness. The wretched
woman, after some delay produced by the applications of her friends in
her behalf, was, on the 26th of June, removed from Newgate to the
Hulks, from whence eventually, accompanied by her child, she was
transported.

Having now related the particulars of this atrocious case, we shall
proceed to lay before our readers the sketch which Greenacre himself
published of his life, during the period of his incarceration. It was
in the following terms, and, as will be seen, was written before his
trial.

"Having furnished my counsel and legal advisers with every true and
particular statement of my case, I conceive it to be my necessary duty
towards myself, my family, and a reflecting public, to pen a brief
outline of my history, in the hope of counteracting the vindictive
feeling and public prejudice which have been excited against me,
through falsehood and exaggerated statements that have appeared in the
public newspapers, and which it is my duty to refute, by immediately
committing this narrative to paper, to prove to the world that I am not
that bloody-minded character which is reported of me, to the prejudice
of my character in the minds of those persons in whose hands my life is
placed.

"I am not immaculate; neither am I without many sins of commission and
omission; but that truth may appear, and that justice may be done to my
name when I am no more, should the prejudice of my jury prevail over
the extenuating facts of my case, I proceed to state the circumstances
of my life.

"I was born in 1785, in Norfolk (at a village called Westwinch, two
miles and a half from Lynn, we believe), of honest and industrious
parents, who were farmers. I only, of a large family, relinquished the
business of a farmer, and was put into business in the grocery line, in
the parish of St. George, in the Borough, by my own parents, at the age
of nineteen. From the moment I became a landlord, no tenant of mine
ever questioned the kindness of my disposition; I have been many years
in the possession of three cottages, which I built in Jane-place, Old
Kent-road, and have had many tenants, but never distrained upon any of
them for rent, but have always taken pleasure in assisting them in any
difficulty, and have often, very often, given up to them their back
rents or arrears that unavoidably happen to poor persons in cases of
sickness, and the want of employment. I had also eight cottages in
Bowyer-lane, Camberwell, but I never once distrained upon a tenant in
my life, but have absolutely felt all the sympathy of a near relative,
when my claim for rent has been met by an apology through sickness, in
times of accouchment, and other causes of distress. I can with perfect
safeness say, that of these eleven cottages, and those two in Carpenter
s-place, I never distrained upon a poor tenant in my life.

"Now, as regards my domestic history, I will just refer to a few
demonstrations of my disposition and general character, as a husband, a
father, and a respected friend. I have been a man of affliction, in
losing three amiable companions, with whom I always lived in the most
perfect harmony. It may be added, that I was no fortune-hunter in these
cases; but I always sought after the prospects of my issue, by forming
an alliance where my children might reap the advantages of their
mother's dower on the death of their parents; and I have much
consolation in finding that my children, by each of my wives' parents,
are amply provided for by legacies. Before I pass over this trait in my
character as a husband and a father, the scandalous reports of my
enemies make it necessary to refer to the deaths of my wives. The first
was the daughter of Charles Ware, of the Crown and Anchor Tavern,
Woolwich, to whom I was married at the age of nineteen; my wife
eighteen. I was then in business in the grocery line, by the assistance
of my own parents, who were farmers in Norfolk. My wife died suddenly
of a putrid sore throat. She was attended by that eminent physician.
Dr. Blackburn, who, and whose assistants, admonished me not to go near
my wife to receive her breath; but such being the result of my
feelings, that I could not resist the force of affection, and there are
many persons now living who can bear testimony to the fact, I took the
complaint, and it nearly cost me my life. I engaged a respectable woman
as housekeeper, who, as nurse and housekeeper, has since been in my
service at intervals for a period equal to thirteen years, and who is
now living. My next wife was the daughter of Mr. John Romford, a
considerable land-owner in Essex. By this lady I also had two children.
This wife died of a brain fever, brought on by exerting herself, I
believe, riding on horseback, whilst on a visit at her own relations;
and having an infant at the time, her milk was affected by the fever,
which caused her death. Mr. Culthred, now residing in the Borough,
attended her. My old housekeeper, who nursed my wife at each
accouchment, now became my housekeeper again. I continued a widower
fifteen months, and married Miss Simmonds, of Long-lane, Bermondsey,
with whom I also lived in harmony and affection up to the time I went
to America (May 1833). This amiable companion, with whom I had arranged
to come after I had provided a home for her, died in London, of the
cholera, about three weeks after my departure. By this wife I had seven
children, two only of whom are living. My old housekeeper always
attended as nurse to all my wives, and upon all occasions of sickness,
making a period of near thirteen years. As a sober and affectionate
husband, no person living can deny but this has uniformly been my
character. I have always abhorred a public-house, and the babble of
drunken men. The society of my books, and wife, and children, have
always been to me the greatest source of delight that my mind could
possibly enjoy.

"As a master and a friend, I trust the following statement will show
that kindness and liberality, and a desire to cultivate the friendship
of my neighbours and the tranquillity of my home, have always been the
object of my study, and a pleasure most dear to my heart. My
apprentices and servants have always manifested much pleasure in their
situations, and have always continued with me several years. My
apprentices have always been the sons of respectable persons, and have
generally been the means of recommending each other, through their
connexions with each other's families. I always received a good premium
with each apprentice, one only excepted, who was a cast-off apprentice
from the Foundling, but who became a good servant under a kind master
and mistress, and staid with us many years after her apprenticeship was
expired. I have had seven male apprentices since I commenced business,
in 1814. Two were brothers, the sons of Mr. Falls, who was then
measurer in his majesty's dockyard, Deptford; and my last apprentice,
in 1833, was the son of Mr. Green, of the Royal Oak, Sevenoaks, in
Kent, whose eldest son had served his time, five years, with me, and
with whom I received a large premium. I have always encouraged my
servants and apprentices by very many indulgences and kind treatment,
and have always found them obliging and assiduous in business. I had
one who robbed me. This was the son of a highly respectable tradesman
in London. I gave the boy in charge of the beadle, and, contrary to my
wishes, he was remanded to Horsemonger-lane jail. I applied to the
youth's father, to consult upon his son's escape. This gentleman's
tears and distress of mind I most acutely participated in, and had near
been brought into trouble by refusing to prosecute. No servant or
inmate of my house can say that I was ever intoxicated, or that I ever
lifted my hand against my wife, or caused a tear by harsh treatment.
Now, as a friend, I think I can give the most incontrovertible
testimony; and had it not been for the infamous lying and slandering
newspapers, who glory in any crime for the sale of their dangerous
weapons, I might have received the visits, advice, and assistance of
hundreds of friends, but all are frightened by those horrifying
falsehoods. I have received anonymous letters whilst in jail, which I
have shown to the governor of the prison, and have handed to my
solicitor, wherein the writers express their wishes to aid me, but
durst not avow their names. My counsel also have received instructions
to aid me by the receipt of anonymous letters enclosing money, with the
like expressions of the writers' fear that their names may be known.
Thus it is that I am compelled to give this brief outline of my life,
in the hopes of defeating the power of falsehood and slander.

"I have continued in business twenty years in the parish of St. George,
in the Borough. I have always lived under the same firm, or landlord,
and have always experienced an increasing connexion of customers and
friends. This manifestation of friendship was evinced by my numerous
fellow-parishioners in their electing me to the office of overseer, on
Easter Tuesday, 1832, by the largest vestry that ever assembled in the
parish church of St. George. A poll was demanded, and my friends
increased, and never before or since have there been so many
parishioners polled. These numerous parishioners, with whom I had
resided so many years, would now most willingly aid me by a
subscription or other means, but that they are naturally frightened by
the false and slanderous newspaper reports.

"As a debtor, when in business, no person was ever more punctual in his
payments; and at the time I went to America, my debts, about 150l.,
were never before so trifling, and the number of my creditors were so
few, I had left with my wife the invoices and the cash to pay them; but
her illness and sudden death by the cholera caused the discharge of
those bills to be neglected, when my creditors, who knew that I had
houses, and who, misconstruing the cause of their not being called
upon, proceeded by combining their small accounts to make me a
bankrupt. Never before, I believe, was a person made a bankrupt whose
debts were so trifling as mine. Had fraud been my object in going to
America, I could have easily had ten times the debts and as many more
creditors, with whom I had dealt for many years. I have one creditor
only who has refused to sign my certificate, and from him I never
demanded a stamp receipt, which has saved him a sum nearly equal to the
debt I owed him.

"I have mentioned my abhorrence of public-houses; I trust, therefore,
that the vice of drinking, the foundation of error and crime, may not
be considered the cause of my unhappy accident and subsequent resolve
to put away the body, which has produced my disreputable notoriety. It
was the horror of my feelings, and fear only that took possession of my
mind. I was actuated by no feelings of a felonious or malicious kind.
The unfortunate deceased was evidently very much in liquor, when her
chair went backwards; and had candidly avowed her poverty when I talked
to her on the consequences of our marrying in deception, and of her
having been to a tally-shop to obtain a dress upon credit in my name.
Felonious intentions cannot be attributed to me, since it is well
known, that if she had property it might have been mine in a few hours'
time by the legal right of marriage."

With reference to this autobiography, there is no reason to believe
that any of the main facts which are stated are incorrect, but it
appears that, throughout his life Greenacre had been notorious among
his acquaintance for the violence of his political opinions, and the
unreserved manner in which he stated them. Rumours were afloat during
the period of his imprisonment, that he had been a party to the
atrocious plots of the Thistlewood gang, and that he had escaped from
the room where his coadjutors were apprehended in Cato-street, at the
very moment of the entrance of the officers. This was a story, the
truth of which, however, he utterly denied; but he admitted his
acquaintance with a person implicated in the conspiracy who was
apprehended in his presence, upon an occasion when he went to pay him a
visit. We shall not go into the particulars of the whole of the tales
which were circulated in reference to his past life. The public mind
was so much excited during the continuance of the proceedings against
him, that it would be both unfair and ungenerous to prejudice his
memory by the repetition of every unproved assertion which was made.
The fact which he stated of his being about to start for America on the
day of his apprehension with Gale, was found to be perfectly true; for
it appeared that a portion of his luggage had been put on board the
vessel, which, however, had sailed without its passengers on the 3d of
April. The most remarkable part of his conduct after the dreadful
murder of which he had been guilty, was that which referred to a new
attempt on his part to enter into the bonds of matrimony, by means of
an advertisement in the public newspapers. The specious nature of his
disposition is well depicted in this transaction. On the 23d of
January, one month after the death of Mrs. Brown, an advertisement
appeared in the "Times" newspaper in the following terms:--

Wanted, a partner, who can command 300l., to join the advertiser in a
patent to bring forward a new-invented machine, of great public
benefit, that is certain of realising an ample reward. Applications by
letter only (post-paid), for J. G., at Mr. Bishop's, No.1, Tudor-place,
Tottenham Court-road."

Among the answers to that advertisement was one from a female of great
respectability, whose name and address we, for obvious reasons, abstain
from making public; who, having a little money at her command,
indiscreetly wrote to him on the subject, and afterwards had two or
three interviews with him, without, however, coming to any arrangement.
Greenacre, with that tact for which throughout the proceedings he has
rendered himself so remarkable, clearly saw that it would be more
advantageous to him. if he could form an alliance with the lady in
question, and he accordingly determined, without delay, to make her an
offer of his hand, which he did in a most specious letter, written on
Saturday, the 4th of February, the very day on which the inquest was
held on the limbs of his murdered victim, and probably at the very
moment while it was sitting. The following is an authentic copy of his
letter: --

     "February 4, 1837.
"DEAR MADAM,-- Having had several letters in answer to my
advertisement, yours is the third to which I have applied for an
interview, and is the last one I shall answer. I advertised in the
'Times' newspaper of the 23d of January for a partner with 300l. to
join me in a patent to bring forward a new invented machine, of which I
have enclosed you a printed specification from scientific gentlemen of
property, each anxious to co-operate with me in it; but upon mature
consideration, and by the advice of my friends, I have determined not
to throw away the half of this most important discovery for the
trifling sum of 300l., as it is certainly worth as many thousands.

"It is, therefore, my wish to meet with a female companion, with a
small capital, one with whom a mutual and tender attachment might be
formed, who would share with me in those advantageous pecuniary
prospects which are now before me, and thereby secure the advantages of
my own production.

"No man can have a greater aversion than myself to advertising for a
wife; nevertheless, this advertisement was intended to give an
opportunity, by which I might make propositions of an honourable nature
to one whom I might prefer as a companion for life. It may be, however,
that the first impression from our short interviews has left very
different feelings towards me than those by which I am influenced to
write this letter to you; I hope however otherwise, or at least that
you will not yield to any unfavourable conjectures relative to the
moderation of my views, as regards the sum of money I named in my
advertisement. It is, I think, sufficient to convince you, or any of
your advisers and friends, that property forms but a small share of my
hopes and object, in turning my attention towards a partner for life.

"I am a widower, thirty-eight years of age, without any incumbrance,
and am in the possession of a small income arising from the rent of
some houses. I was sixteen years in a large way of business, which I
relinquished about three years ago, but have lost much of my property
by assisting others and confiding too strongly in the professions of
pretended friends. Under these circumstances, I am induced to seek a
partner, or a companion with a small sum, to co-operate with me in
securing the advantages of this machine, which will be a great public
benefit, and which has long been attempted by many scientific persons,
and is certain of realizing a competency.

"Having given you this plain statement of my situation, I beg leave to
add, that my mind is thoroughly fixed upon making you the future object
of my affections and constant regard. If you should feel disposed to
favour my sincere and honourable intentions, I shall take the liberty
of calling upon you, and hope that you will divest your mind of any
idea beyond that of the most sacred candour and honourable intentions
on my part. Should you feel disposed to communicate any remarks on the
subject by letter, I hope that you will do so.

"Excuse the dissimulation by which I have obtained an introduction to
you, and believe that my present proposal is dictated by every
honourable and affectionate feeling towards you.-- I am, dear Madam,
yours most sincerely,"

     James Greenacre.
     "No.6, Carpenter's-place, Camberwell, Surrey."

The "new-invented machine" referred to in the advertisement, appears to
have been an apparatus for washing linen, as an article of that
description was found in his possession at the time of his being taken
into custody. It was fortunate for the individual with whom the
correspondence was commenced, that the intimacy proceeded no farther
than it did, for inevitable ruin and misery must have followed upon a
matrimonial connexion. The letters to which we have alluded as having
been written by Greenacre on the morning of his death, were addressed
to his relations and to his legal assistants, Mr. Price, and Mr,
Hobler. In both these effusions he maintained the same ground which he
had taken both before and after his trial, that the death of Mrs. Brown
was an accident; and that Mrs. Gale was totally unacquainted with the
death of his victim until she was in custody.

Sarah Gale, it appears, had received a moderate education, and at an
early period of her life is stated to have joined the theatrical corps
of an East-end theatre, under the name of Wiston. From this position
she sunk to that of an "unfortunate," and in that station she is stated
to have been a frequent attendant at the theatres of the metropolis.
While thus circumstanced she became acquainted with a member of the
legal profession, with whom she lived for a considerable time, and by
whom she had one child which died in its infancy. The intimacy with her
protector, however, being broken off, she was considerably reduced, and
was eventually married to a hackney-coachman. She now applied to the
gentleman to whose acquaintance with her we have alluded, and by his
assistance she was enabled to commence business in the borough of
Southwark in a chandler's shop. Her husband soon dissipated all her
profits, and again reduced to poverty by his desertion of her, about
two years before the period of the murder, for her participation in
which she was convicted, she became acquainted with Greenacre, with
whom she lived at intervals up to the time of their apprehension. Her
maiden name was Farr; and the child which remained with her throughout
her confinement, was understood to be that of her husband.

A short memoir of the life of Mrs. Brown shall conclude our notice of
this dreadful case. Mrs. Brown, it appears, was born in the year 1780,
within two miles of the city of Norwich, of respectable parents. Her
maiden name was Gay. At the age of sixteen years she entered into
service in the family of Lord "Wodehouse, at Crimley-hall, but after
remaining there for four years, she determined to come to London. For a
considerable time she supported herself there as a servant, but at
length she was married to a person named Thomas Brown, a shoemaker.
This union proved an unhappy one, and at the expiration of two years
her husband quitted her in order to proceed to Jamaica to claim some
property, to which, by the death of a relation, he had become entitled.
On his voyage he was washed overboard; and his wife, unacquainted with
the precise nature of his claim, was unable to secure the bequest of
her husband's relative. From this period she appears to have lived
constantly in service, and it was supposed by her friends that she had
amassed a considerable property by her savings. She was a person of
reserved disposition, however, and communicated with few as to her
position in life. Her acquaintance with Greenacre appears to have
commenced only about three months before her murder, but the precise
manner in which that connexion originated does not seem to have been
known to her friends.


CHARLES SAMUEL BARTLETT.
Executed for Murdering his Mother-in-law, 15th April, 1837

Illustration: Bartlett Murdering his Mother-in-law

At the Gloucester Assizes on Thursday the 6th of April 1837, Charles
Samuel Bartlett was indicted for the wilful murder of Mary Lewis, his
mother-in-law, on the 10th of September, in the previous year, at
Stapleton, near Bristol.

The case had excited an unusual degree of interest, and the court was
much crowded. On his being called upon to plead to the indictment, the
prisoner said, With the word of God upon my heart and lips, I can
firmly and truly say 'Not Guilty.' This assertion, however, was
satisfactorily and by indisputable evidence disproved. The
circumstances which were detailed by a great number of witnesses were
these:-- The prisoner was a young man of decent parentage and
education, but of a somewhat dissipated disposition; and he had
followed a wandering life as a member of a strolling company of
players, called Ingleby's Company, frequenting fairs, race-courses, and
other such places of entertainment. In the month of August 1836, he
visited Monmouth with his troop; and having become acquainted with the
daughter of a shoemaker named Lewis, he was married to her. He received
45l. as her wedding portion, and a promise of a further amount upon the
death of her father; and after a short sojourn with his wife's friends,
he proceeded to join his party. On the 5th of September, hearing that
her daughter and son-in-law were at Bristol, Mrs. Lewis went to see
them, and she visited them there repeatedly, the prisoner being engaged
in the usual manner in attending the fair. On the 9th of September,
Bartlett was seen in the possession of a horse-pistol; and he sent a
boy to purchase powder and percussion caps, and the boy saw him roll up
a piece of lead in the form of a bullet. Previously to this he and his
mother-in-law had had some difference; but on Saturday, the 10th of
September, they quitted his lodgings together, and were seen walking on
the Stapleton-road. They entered the Mason's Arms, and partook of some
refreshment; and while there Bartlett borrowed a knife from the
landlady, saying that he wanted to cut a piece of wood. He went out to
the back yard with it where the firewood was kept; and on his return to
the house, he was observed to be agitated, and he strove to conceal his
features. Having then paid for the liquor which they had had, he and
Mrs. Lewis went away, and they were seen to turn down a place called
Tebbutt's-lane, leading towards the river Frome. Soon afterwards a shot
was heard; and within an hour the murdered body of Mrs. Lewis was
discovered stretched on the ground. Her dress was disordered, her
bonnet and shawl had been torn from her person, and one of her legs was
found doubled under her, as if in the agonies of death. She was
instantly conveyed to the Mason's Arms; and upon an examination of her
person, she was found to have been shot through the back part of her
head, the ball having passed through her bonnet. Bartlett went to the
Mason's Arms to see the body; and on being introduced to the room where
it lay, he exclaimed, with affected surprise, "Good God! it is my
mother-in-law! "Suspicion had already attached to him, and he was now
taken into custody; and upon his lodgings being searched, a pistol was
found which had been recently discharged, together with a piece of wood
newly cut into the form of a ramrod. The evidence extended into the
most minute particulars in reference to the transaction; and the chain
of proof which was procured, appeared to leave no possible doubt on the
guilt of the prisoner.

The defence which was set up was, that Bartlett had left his
mother-in-law immediately on his quitting the Mason's Arms, and that
the pistol which had been found at his lodgings was one which be had
been in the habit of discharging at the fairs, in order to attract
attention to his employer's booth.

The trial lasted during the whole of two days, and then a verdict of
"Guilty" was returned. Upon the unhappy man being called up for
judgment, he threw himself into a theatrical attitude, and delivered a
set speech of some length, which was distinguished by great force and
vehemence both of style and manner, and produced an extremely strong
and painful sensation throughout the court. He stated in substance that
he should meet his death with firmness and resignation, protesting his
innocence even in his dying moments, and calling upon God to visit with
his awful retribution the murderer of his mother-in-law. Sentence of
death was then passed, and the prisoner was removed from the bar.

On Saturday, the 15th of April, the sentence of the law was carried
into effect upon the wretched criminal. He had been visited by the
clergymen of the jail, but they could not succeed in making any
impression on him; and although in his demeanour he was serious and
respectful, he remained firm and prompt in his denial of the existence
of any circumstances from which an inference of his guilt or even
guilty knowledge could be drawn.

Throughout the whole of the preparations for his execution he
maintained his characteristic steadiness; and he walked from his cell
to the platform without any appearance of wavering, except that his
face became fearfully pale. He held a bible in his hand, and bowed
respectfully to the various officers presiding over this final
operation of the law. When arrived on the drop he gazed on the
assembled multitude, and looked as if he desired to address them. The
executioner motioned for silence; and perfect stillness prevailing, he
spoke in a calm and impressive manner as follows:--

"Englishmen and Fellow-countrymen -- I have a few words to say to you,
and they shall be but very few. Yet let me entreat you, one and all,
that the few words that I shall utter may strike deep into your hearts.
Bear them in your mind, not only now while you are witnessing this sad
scene, but take them to your homes -- take them and repeat them to your
children and friends. I implore you, as a dying man, one for whom the
instrument of death is even now prepared; and these words are, that you
may loose yourselves from the love of this dying world, and its vain
pleasures. Think less of it, and more of your God. Do this; repent!
repent! for be assured that without deep and true repentance, without
turning to your heavenly Father, you will never attain or can hold the
slightest hope of ever reaching those bowers of bliss and that land of
peace to which I trust I am now fast advancing. -- I will say a few
more words. All good Christians and repentant men that behold my
disgrace here, shall -- at least I trust they will -- behold my glory
hereafter; and my last words are -- I am an injured man!" The cap was
then drawn over his face, and in a few moments the drop fell from under
his feet, and he ceased to exist. As an instance of the cool
determination of this wretched man, we may mention, that on being
locked up on Friday night, he inquired if there was a phrenologist in
the town, and on being answered in the affirmative, he expressed a wish
that his head might be delivered to him, and that his trunk, for the
good of society, might be sent to the Infirmary.


JOHN SMITH, alias DAY; JOHN VARNHAM; and GEORGE TIMMS.
Executed For Murdering a Fortune-teller, 29th April, 1837.

At the Norwich Assizes, on Thursday the 6th of April, 1837, John Smith,
alias Day, John Varnham, and George Timms (all of whom were about the
age of twenty-six), were indicted for the wilful murder of Hannah
Mansfield, at Denver, in the County of Norfolk, on the night of Monday,
the 1st of January, in the same year. The unfortunate object of this
violence was a woman of about forty years of age, who resided alone in
a house at Denver, adjoining a common, across which a path led from the
high road to the residence of the deceased, and of a Mrs. Dungay, which
was under the same roof. Being possessed of a small property, (of what
nature it did not appear), this woman had eked out her subsistence by
professing the mysterious trade and occupation of a conjuror and
fortune-teller, in which she had gained much reputation among her
neighbours and such was her success that she had become (unfortunately
for herself), the possessor of a considerable quantity of silver plate,
consisting of cream jugs, tankards, table and tea-spoons, sugar-tongs,
and four salt-cellars. These articles she was wont to keep in a corner
cupboard; and she had been known, on many occasions, boastfully to have
displayed what, for persons in her class of life, was esteemed wondrous
wealth; in addition to which her more intimate friends had frequently
seen her take out her curious old leathern purse, and empty its
precious contents in her lap, and count out her treasures. These latter
consisted of various coins current in England at the beginning of this
century, which the poor fortune-teller used to take an especial pride
in burnishing, and keeping as bright as they had ever been on the day
they first issued from the Mint.

Such being the habits and situation of the deceased, Hannah Mansfield,
it was shown that the prisoner Smith had, about fifteen months before,
had an opportunity of becoming acquainted with them, for he was known
to have called late one evening at Mrs. Dungay's house, when he asked,
"for advice on some losses" but being advised of his mistake, he was
conducted by Mrs. Dungay to the conjuror. There he held a conversation
at the door of the house, while two men, by whom he was accompanied,
stood aloof. Satisfied with the result of his visit he went away, and
nothing more was seen of him till about eight o'clock of the evening
preceding the night on which the murder took place, when it was proved
that he was seen, with two other men described in a manner
corresponding to the other two prisoners, by a boy, on the high road
leading to Denver, at a spot about three miles from that place. Thence
they proceeded to a public-house at Hilgay, where they remained till
nearly eleven o'clock, drinking and spending the evening in the public
room. This was the last time they were seen that day. During the night
a noise was heard to proceed from the fortune-teller's door, by Mrs.
Dungay, and she got up, and opening her window, listened. Nothing more
being heard, no further notice was taken of the circumstance till next
morning, when it was discovered, about ten o'clock, that the poor
creature had been most foully murdered, and her property carried off.
Suspicion rested on the prisoners; they were traced through the snow,
and, upon the clearest testimony, the atrocious deed was fixed upon
them. They were found guilty, and received sentence of death.

During their subsequent imprisonment they confessed their guilt. They
were all men of low station, and procured a livelihood as labourers;
but occasionally employed themselves in the less creditable occupation
of tramps. Lately before the murder they had been engaged as workmen on
the railroad at Berkhampstead. Smith, it appeared, was the leader of
the party, and he had persuaded his companions to assist him in the
execution of his plot. He had obtained information of the riches of the
deceased during a short residence at Downham, in the beginning of the
year 1836. He then determined on robbing her, but was unable to put his
design into execution until January 1837, when he procured the
co-operation of his fellow-convicts. Both of them had expressed
unwillingness to join in the enterprise, but Smith led them on, and he
and Timms murdered the old woman, while Varnham kept watch. Varnham was
respited, and his sentence commuted to transportation; but Smith and
Timms were executed on Saturday the 29th of April, 1837.


GEORGE DARWELL.
Convicted of Embezzling Money to Give to the Mother of his Child.

The scene of the very extraordinary case of this person was Liverpool,
where he had for a considerable time occupied the situation of
confidential clerk to Mr. Wolstenholme, a cotton-broker of that city.
On Saturday the 14th of October, 1837, he was taken in the custody of
Whittle, a police-officer, before Mr. Hall, the chief magistrate of
Liverpool, charged with having embezzled a sum of money amounting to
8,264l. the property of his employer: and at the same time a fat and
somewhat vulgar woman, named Frances M'Lean, alias Flood, alias Butler,
and Richard M'Lean, were charged with having participated in the
proceeds of the robbery.

The circumstances of the case were remarkable, and afforded a striking
instance of the extent of delinquency which may be produced by the
commission of one error. Darwell was about fifty years of age, and It
appeared that some years before his apprehension he had formed an
intimacy with Mrs. M'Lean, the result of which was the birth of an
infant. Alarmed for the effects which a general knowledge of this
circumstance might produce upon his character, he was induced to hand
over to her various sums of money, to secure her silence as to the
paternity of her child; and his own means being exhausted, he at length
gave her money which was the property of his employer. Having thus
taken one false step, every month served to increase his difficulties;
and the new demands which were made upon him, accompanied by threats of
exposure if they were not complied with, in the course of a
considerable length of time, drew from him various amounts, until at
length he had appropriated money to the extent of upwards of 8,000l.,
of his master's property. The abstraction of so large an amount, it may
be presumed, could not long remain undiscovered, and at length Whitty
having received certain information upon the subject, he took the
prisoner into custody. Darwell at once candidly confessed to him his
criminality, and explained to him the manner in which he had disposed
of the money; informing him at the same time that he would find Mrs.
M'Lean residing in Junction-street, Manchester. Whitty, in consequence,
proceeded thither, and finding the male prisoner M'Lean, he demanded to
know whether he was acquainted with a person named Darwell? He answered
in the negative; but the officer having searched the house, found a
great number of documents in the handwriting of Darwell, which appeared
to be letters in which money had been transmitted to the female
prisoner. M'Lean, it was ascertained, had been recently married to the
woman, and it was also found that he had engaged largely in the
business of brick-making, and had a stock valued at between 2,000l. and
3,000l. Mrs. M'Lean was not then in the house, and upon his return to
Liverpool Whitty found that she had just before arrived there, having
started upon another expedition to procure money from Darwell. Upon his
finding her, he acquainted her with the fact of the apprehension of
Darwell, when she declared her regret for what had occurred, and
admitted that she had received about 8,000l. from him; but assured the
officer, that she had always believed that the money belonged to
Darwell himself, whom she took to be a person of property. She
expressed her willingness to give up all that she retained, but
asserted her innocence of any felonious intention. The officer added,
(in his evidence), that he had found books in the possession of the
female prisoner, in which the amounts, which she had received from
Darwell, were regularly entered and posted up; and he ascertained from
them, that since the preceding Christmas, he had paid her no less than
2,273l.

These were the main facts of the case, and a legal gentleman, who
attended for the two M'Leans, contended that there was nothing in the
proofs to implicate them in the felonious charge. The prisoners were
all remanded; but after another examination the M'Leans were set at
liberty, and Darwell was committed for trial.

Between the period of the inquiry before the magistrates, and the final
investigation of the case before the jury, upwards of 5,000l. were
given up by the M'Leans to Mr. Wolstenholme; and a singular
circumstance in the transaction was elicited, in the fact that Mrs.
M'Lean, at the very time at which she was so unscrupulously receiving
such large sums from Darwell, was in the possession of a handsome
annuity, granted to her by a merchant resident in America, in respect
of the same child, which had been the cause of the unfortunate
Darwell's crime.

At the Liverpool sessions, on Friday the 27th of October, Darwell was
put upon his trial. The facts of the case were clear and
uncontradicted, and a verdict of "Guilty" was returned. Mr.
Wolstenholme recommended the convict to the mercy of the court; and in
consideration of the atonement which he had made, by his confession and
interference to procure the return of the money, he was sentenced to
twelve months' imprisonment only.


GEORGE FLETCHER, WILLIAM ROACH, AND THOMAS TAYLOR.
Executed For Murder.

These unhappy men underwent the infliction of the penalty of death for
the murder of an aged pensioner of the 49th regiment of foot, named
William Bennett, on Wednesday evening, the 28th of October 1837.

It appears that Bennett, the murdered man, had lived at Temen-green, a
place about four miles distant from Hertford, for a great number of
years, and he had a pension of one shilling and tenpence halfpenny per
day, which he was in the habit of going to Hertford to receive
quarterly. He went to Hertford for that purpose on the day of the
murder, and called upon Mr. Duncan, the superintendant of the Hertford
police, who accompanied him to receive his pension, which amounted to
nearly ten pounds; and Mr. Duncan observed that at this time he had
more money about him. He left Hertford about four o'clock in the
afternoon, perfectly sober and collected. Nothing more was seen of him
until about half-past four o'clock, when a boy named Bolton met him
about a quarter of a mile from his own house, and he also observed four
men in the wood by the road side, who were evidently watching the
unfortunate man. The boy said to the deceased, "Who are those men?" The
deceased replied, that he knew who they were very well, and he did not
mind them. The boy went on his way, and the deceased was never more
seen alive. A labouring man going to his work about half-past five
o'clock on the next morning, saw the body of a man lying by the
roadside at Temen, and on going close to it he discovered it was that
of the deceased. He immediately gave an alarm, and assistance being
procured, the body was taken to the Feathers public-house, Temen-green,
where Mr. Davies, a surgeon, was sent for. It was then discovered that
the head of the deceased had been literally crushed by repeated blows
of a bludgeon and kicks. It was found that the bulk of the deceased's
money had been taken, as well as his watch and pocket-book, but in his
waistcoat pockets were still a half-sovereign and a small quantity of
silver, and some half-pence. The moment the knowledge of these facts
came to the magistrates of Hertford, they took the most prompt measures
to apprehend the parties who had perpetrated the horrible crime, and
Mr. Duncan, the superintendant of police, received directions to
institute the minutest inquiries upon the subject with that view.
Accordingly Mr. Duncan, accompanied by Knight and Baker, two of his
men, proceeded to the neighbourhood of Temen-green, and they there
obtained information which led to the apprehension of two men, Fletcher
and Sams, the former at Burling-green, near the place where the murder
was committed, and the latter at a beer-shop in Hertford.

Subsequent inquiries led to the belief that two young men, named Taylor
and Roach, were also engaged in the perpetration of the murder; and, in
the course of a few days, the latter was apprehended. For some time
after they were taken into custody, the prisoners persisted in denying
their knowledge of the deceased or of his murder; but after about a
fortnight's imprisonment, they sent for Mr. Carter, a magistrate, to
whom each of them in succession made a statement. The story which they
all related implicated them in an intention to rob the deceased, but
they denied that they had attacked him with the object of committing
murder. Sams, however, they stated, was no party to the actual attack,
although he had consented to accompany them, for that he became alarmed
before they came up with the deceased, lest he should recognise him,
and turned back. The others then advanced, and, getting close behind
the old man, tripped him up and fell upon him. He struggled violently
on the ground, and exclaimed that he knew them, but they robbed him of
his money and then beat him violently. After this they went away and
divided the booty; and on the next day heard that the old man was dead.
Roach now absconded to London, but was taken into custody in the crowd
assembled to witness the procession of her majesty into the City on
Lord-mayor's day, by a police-constable, who recognised him from the
description of his person which had been circulated. They all stated
that Taylor, who was now nowhere to be found, had been the most active
in the murder and robbery; but that he, as well as they, had had no
original intention to commit any violence upon the deceased.

On Friday, the 2nd of March 1838, the three prisoners were put upon
their trial before Mr. Justice Vaughan, at the Hertford Assizes, and
the jury, after a patient inquiry, found Roach and Fletcher "Guilty,"
but acquitted Sams.

Sentence of death was immediately passed on the convicts, and on
Wednesday, the 14th of March, their execution took place. Both the
culprits were mere lads, and the most strenuous exertions had been made
to save them, but without effect. They conducted themselves with much
propriety while they were in prison, but maintained a firm consistency
in their assertion that murder had formed no part of their object when
they first attacked the old man. They met death with much fortitude and
resignation.

In the following month of September, Taylor was recognised at Plymouth,
whither he had gone with the 15th regiment of foot, into which he had
enlisted almost immediately after the murder, in the name of Evans. Pie
was sent back to Hertford, and, at the ensuing Spring Assizes was
tried, convicted, and executed.


WILLIAM FRANCIS ADAMS.
Acquitted of Murdering, but Convicted of Robbing, his Father, and
Transported.

This wretched convict there is too much reason to believe was guilty of
the horrible crime of parricide, as well as that of larceny, of which
he was convicted, although the evidence to show his participation in
the more serious offence was deemed too inconclusive by the jury to
warrant his conviction upon that charge.

At the time of his first trial, on the 16th of March, 1838, Adams had
only recently reached his eighteenth year, and the charge which was
then preferred against him was that of the wilful murder of his father.
Upon this indictment he was acquitted; but within a few days of his
liberation from custody he was again committed to gaol, upon a charge
of threatening an old shepherd who had given evidence against him. Some
new evidence of his guilt was obtained during this imprisonment of the
unhappy youth, and on Thursday the 26th of July he was again indicted
at the assizes held for the county of Buckingham, at Aylesbury. His
acquittal upon the charge of murder rendered it impossible that he
should be tried a second time for that offence; and the allegation in
the indictment now preferred was, that he had stolen a pocket-book
containing notes and cash, the property of his father.

The circumstances which appeared in evidence were these:-- old Adams
was a man of some property, both personal and real, and lived at
Burcot, near Wing, in Buckinghamshire. On the 28th of December, 1837,
both he and his son (the prisoner) were seen by the workmen employed
about the farm to go by different directions towards a place called the
Foxhill cowhouse, which they entered about the hour of half-past two.
From that time the old man was never more seen alive; but his son was
shown to have ridden home at four o'clock on a mare on which his father
had been seen at the hour first mentioned. In consequence of his
non-appearance at nightfall, a strict search was instituted, which
eventually resulted in the discovery of the body, cold and extended
under some hay in the cowhouse, with rifled pockets, and marks of
injury produced by gunshot wounds in his head, which were quite
sufficient to have caused instant death. At the time no suspicion was
aroused against the prisoner, but on the following day he was taken up,
and at the spring assizes tried for the murder of his father. Of this
charge, however, after a trial of nearly fourteen hours' duration, he
was acquitted, and, being set at large, returned to his home, but
shortly after his liberation, in consequence of the further statements
of a fellow-prisoner (who had given at the former trial the most
material testimony of an ample confession by the prisoner, but who had
been discredited, we presume, for want of corroboration by other
witnesses), the young man was again arrested, and, after an examination
before the magistrates, finally committed to take his trial at the
present assizes for the offence of stealing the pocket-book and its
contents as above stated. To support this charge, the former witness,
James Fuel, was now again called, who deposed to the fact of "Young
Adams" having asked him, during the time they were in prison together,
before the first trial, if he could get anybody to get him some money
if he told him where it was to be found? Upon which, his brother
Richard being sent for, Adams wrote two notes, which were given to
Richard with directions to "go by them." These notes Richard now stated
that he showed to three persons who read their contents to him, and who
all now deposed that to the best of their memory (the notes having been
burned and destroyed) they were to the following tenor:-- "This is to
inform you where to get the money. Go to Wing, at Burcot, and inquire
for Adams's farm, and then look round and see where the privy is. On
the right-hand side, over the door, in a hole betwixt the tilings and
the loft, in the day-time, you will find a pocket-book; you will take
the money out of the pocket-book, and let the papers remain in, and
drop it down against the Cock Inn, Wing." The second note was as
follows:-- "The man you have got in hold is innocent. Them as done the
deed find it out." Having possessed himself of this information,
Richard Fuel quitted his residence on Pinner-common, for the purpose of
going to Burcot and taking the money, in conjunction with two others.
They, however, got alarmed, as they said, when they heard that Mr.
Adams had been murdered, and desisted from their intentions; but
afterwards, some other men, with more nerve, to whom they had disclosed
their secret, started on the same errand, and sleeping together at an
inn at Tring, chanced to be overheard by the landlord while they
discussed the whole affair. This person immediately set out himself,
and, going to the house, asked for the prisoner's brother-in-law, to
whom he revealed all he knew of the matter. He, from a very pardonable
motive no doubt, and a wish to keep secret so important a fact, for the
trial of his relative had not then taken place, invited the landlord to
dine, and sending for his lawyer, went in the mean time alone to the
privy, where he found, just as he had been told, the pocketbook of his
father-in-law. This was now produced, and its contents identified, by a
long chain of evidence which we need not particularize, further than by
saying that it was most conclusive.-- Such is the outline of this
extraordinary case, as detailed by the witnesses for the prosecution.

On the other hand, Mr. Andrews addressed the jury, in a speech of great
acuteness and power, stigmatising the whole as a base fraud and
conspiracy between the Fuels and their friends, who had got up this
evidence, improbable and absurd as it was, against the unfortunate
youth at the bar, with a view to secure the pardon of James Fuel, who
having been convicted of felony since the last assizes, could only
become a witness by the pardon of her Majesty. To obtain this wicked
end this plot had been concocted, and to show its falsity witnesses
would be called who would prove from Fuel's own mouth, that he had over
and over again said that he had got a convict, named Mead, to write the
notes, in order that he might say Adams had given them to him, and to
induce the magistrates to take up the affair again and clear him from
the penalty of his own offence.

To substantiate this defence two men were called, named Daly and
Palmer, to the former of whom, when a prisoner, and to the latter also,
who had seen him in the prison, he had repeatedly admitted that he had
spoken falsely, and had got up the charge for the purposes above
mentioned: while another man further swore that Fuel's character was
such that he could not be believed upon his oath.

Mr. Byles having replied upon the whole case, Mr. Justice Park
elaborately, and with the utmost impartiality, summed up the lengthened
chain of evidence in an address which lasted to a late hour. At the
close of his lordship's address, which was delivered in a tone and with
a manner which showed how deeply the mind of the learned judge had been
affected by the painful nature of the inquiry, the jury, after a short
time spent in deliberation, returned a verdict of "Guilty."

The prisoner was then immediately sentenced to transportation for a
term of seven years.


CHARLES KINNAISTER, AND OTHERS.
Executed for the Murder of Australian Aborigines.

Illustration: Australian Settlers Dragging Aborigines to a Place of
Slaughter

The atrocious cold-blooded massacre of which these persons were guilty
is scarcely equalled by any event of a similar character. The scene of
the murder was the colony of New South Wales,-- the victims were the
unoffending aboriginal natives of the country,-- the miscreants by whom
the savage scene was enacted were Englishmen, who, however, from their
sanguinary disposition, do not deserve that they should receive such an
appellation. Fortunately for the vindication of humanity, the
unparalleled barbarities of which they were guilty were discovered, and
their perpetrators brought to justice.

The names of these monsters in human shape were Charles Kinnaister,
William Hawkins, James Perry, Edward Foley, James Gates, John Russell,
and John Johnson. It would seem that all of these were convicts, and
had been transported from this country. They had been assigned as
stockmen or shepherds to some of the settlers in the interior of the
colony. In the month of June 1838, these ruffians, influenced or
induced by what motive has not been discovered, beyond a determination
to extirpate the unhappy natives, set out on horseback in pursuit of
their helpless victims. They were traced in their progress inquiring
after blacks, and at last arrived at a hut near the big river, beyond
Liverpool plains, occupied by the first-named prisoner, Kinnaister.
Here they discovered that a little tribe of about thirty natives, men,
women, and children, including babes at their mothers' breasts, were
congregated in the bush, unsuspicious of danger and unconscious of
offence. This was on Sunday the 10th of June. They immediately
approached their victims, who, terrified at their manner, ran into
Kinnaister's hut for protection, crying for mercy; but they appealed to
hearts of stone, who having thus caught them, as it were, in a trap,
dismounted, followed them into the hut, and, despite of their
entreaties, tied them together with a rope, with the exception of one
woman. This was done without a word being uttered, and with a cool and
bloody determination. When all were thus secured, one end of the rope
was tied round the body of the foremost of the murderers, who, having
mounted his horse, led the way, dragging the terrified group after him,
while his infamous companions guarded them on all sides. Groans and
tears burst from the wretched being's, whose worst fears were excited.
In vain, however, did the aged and youthful of both sexes appeal for
compassion. Their doom was cast. Onward they were dragged till a
fitting place in the bush was reached, and then the work of slaughter
commenced, and, unresisting, were these hapless wretches, one after the
other, brutally butchered. Fathers, mothers, and children, fell before
the previously sharpened swords of these self-appointed executioners,
till all lay a lifeless mass, in death clinging to each other with the
throes of natural affection. But one shot was fired, so that it was
presumed one only perished by fire-arms. The precise number thus
immolated has not been accurately ascertained, but it is computed that
not less than thirty lay stretched on the ensanguined earth. The demon
butchers then placed the bodies in a heap, kindled an immense fire over
them, and thus endeavoured to destroy the evidence of their unheard-of
brutality. Fragments of the unconsumed bones, however, still remained;
but even these were collected, and attempted to be hidden from human
eye. But the vengeance of Providence was not to be thus thwarted; and
although for a time these miscreants imagined they had effectually
disguised their horrible work, circumstances led to their detection and
apprehension. Birds of prey were seen hovering about the spot where the
unconsumed remains yet existed, and stock-men in search of their
strayed cattle were thus attracted to the locality, supposing they
should find their carcasses. In this way it was that the ribs,
jaw-bones, half-burnt skulls, and other portions of human skeletons
were found -- while symptoms of the conflagration in the vicinity were
likewise detected. This led to inquiry, and ultimately to discovery of
the horrible truth. The place was fifty miles from the nearest
police-station, but the whole of the villains were apprehended, and
their own admissions and conduct previous and subsequent to the bloody
work, added to a chain of circumstantial evidence, left no doubt of
their guilt. It chanced, too, that on the night previous to the
murders, a heavy rain had fallen -- and traces were thus discovered of
horses' hoofs, as well as of the naked feet of the wretched natives, on
the way to the field of death.

On the 15th of November, the prisoners were put upon their trial before
the Chief Justice, Sir James Dowling, charged with the murder of a
black, named Daddy, the remains of whose gigantic frame had been
observed and distinguished among the discovered ashes. Every possible
means had been adopted to secure the acquittal of these atrocious
malefactors by an association, which had been formed with the
ostensible object of preserving the property of the settlers from the
incursions of the blacks. The pretence for the diabolical murders which
were committed was the supposed aggressions of the natives in killing
and spearing cattle; and every instance of violence of this description
was carefully brought forward to secure the liberation of the
prisoners, by a verdict of acquittal. The strong prejudice which was
excited against the aborigines was not without its effect, and in spite
of the evidence which was adduced, the jury found the prisoners "Not
Guilty."

There were still other indictments against them, however, which
remained to be tried, and in the month of December they were again
arraigned. Upon this occasion they were not quite so fortunate, and the
men above-named were declared to be "Guilty," and sentence of death was
instantly passed upon them. Renewed efforts were now made in their
favour; but their horrid guilt being proved beyond a doubt, Sir George
Gipps, the governor, determined that the law should take its course,
and on the 15th of December, 1838, the convicts underwent the execution
of their sentence.


ARCHIBALD BOLAM.
Transported for Manslaughter.

Few occurrences of the nature of that which is now before us, have
attracted more marked attention than that of the dreadful and most
mysterious death of Mr. Joseph Millie, assistant-clerk in the Savings'
Bank at Newcastle-upon-Tyne. The discovery of this event took place at
two o'clock in the morning of Friday the 7th of December, 1839, when
flames and smoke were observed to be issuing from the offices of the
Savings' Bank. The aid of the engines having been procured, the fire
was in a short time extinguished, and the police then entered the
house, for the purpose of ascertaining the cause of the conflagration,
and that all danger was passed. Upon their going into the clerk's
office, they were astonished at perceiving Mr. Millie lying extended on
the . hearth-rug, with such wounds upon his person as left no doubt
that he had been murdered. His skull had been literally smashed in, and
his brains were scattered about the room; and what was more singular,
his pockets were found to be filled with coals, as if the object of his
murderer had been to prevent the discovery of his dreadful crime, by
securing the destruction of the body of his victim by fire.

In the adjoining room, they were more alarmed to find that Mr.
Archibald Bolam, the actuary, was also lying on the floor, apparently
insensible. He was lifted up, and some slight wounds were discovered in
his throat, which passed through his stock; but before many minutes had
elapsed he was sufficiently recovered to give an account of the
mysterious affair. He said "I have lately had two or three anonymous
letters, threatening to do me harm; and one was put under the door of
the Savings Bank, last evening, after dark, saying that something would
happen to me at home. In consequence of this, though I generally get my
tea at the bank, I went home, the other clerk, Millie, having
previously gone to his tea. I returned about half-past seven o'clock in
the evening, and finding the door locked as I had left it, I opened it,
and put the key into my pocket. When I got into the bank I saw Millie
lying on the rug, and I thought he had fallen asleep. He also has a
key, and sometimes locked himself in. I then went towards my desk,
intending immediately to go and speak to Millie; but while I was about
to open my desk, I thought I heard some one coming behind, and was in
the act of turning round, when I received a blow on my right temple
from a man in disguise, with his face blackened. I immediately started
up, and ran shouting towards the window, intending to give an alarm, on
which the fellow followed me, and said if I stirred, or made the least
noise, he would serve me as he had served the other man. He struck me
again when I was near the window; and when I was down, I felt a knife
at my throat. Shortly after this I became insensible for a while; but
afterwards my recollection seemed to return, and I heard somebody in
the other office, as I supposed, going about and making a noise. I
dared not make the least outcry. I burnt the threatening letters which
I had previously received. The one which I found last night under the
waiting-room door I left upon my desk. I cannot well describe the man,
excepting that I think he was under the middle size, and spoke roughly,
but apparently in a feigned voice. I had a few shillings in my pocket,
and I think 4l. 10s. in my desk, which was left by Mr. Airey to deposit
on Saturday. In the inner safe I had a further sum of 80l. of my own,
which I kept to meet current expenses." Further than this, Mr. Bolam
said he had no recollection of what took place.

A story so extraordinary at once excited suspicion, more especially
when it was discovered that the apparent object of the supposed
murderer, namely plunder, had been left unfulfilled. The greater part
of the papers and books of the bank were discovered to be undisturbed,
and uninjured by the fire; and although the outer door of the
strong-box was standing open, the inner lock was still fast. The key of
this lock was stated (by Bolam) to have been left by him in his desk,
but it was now nowhere to be found.

At a coroner's inquest held upon the body of the deceased, Bolam was
examined at great length; but the confusion which he exhibited, and the
inconsistency of his declarations still further increased the belief
which was generally entertained, that he had himself committed the
murder, and had fired the house to conceal the act, while he hoped to
divert suspicion from himself by a simulated attempt at violence on his
own person. The inquiries and statements of the police confirmed this
suggestion; and at the conclusion of the inquest, a verdict of "Wilful
Murder" was returned against him, and he was taken into custody. The
investigation, however, was still carried on by Stevens, the
superintendant of the constables of the town, with the most
praiseworthy diligence. At a search of the house of the prisoner new
evidence was procured. This consisted of the discovery of the key which
was missing from the Savings' Bank, and also of a considerable sum of
money in gold, which was concealed behind some books. It was also
ascertained that Bolam had been seen at his own house at a period later
than that at which he stated he had quitted it; and many other minute
facts were learned at variance with his declarations. A new and more
extensive search at the Savings' Bank brought fresh cause of suspicion
to light. The absence of blood on the spot where the prisoner had been
found lying, and the evident fact of the blood having flowed down his
clothes, as if the wound had been inflicted while he was in a sitting
posture, clearly showed the falsity of his story in this particular;
and the further circumstance that three of the most recent
account-books were missing, tended in some degree to supply a motive
for the commission of such a crime by him, although it could hardly be
supposed, that where means so much more easy to procure their
destruction, had such been his object, could have been resorted to, he
would have been guilty of an offence so atrocious in order to attain so
simple an end. The excitement which prevailed upon the subject
throughout the kingdom was very great, and motives and reasons for the
commission of the crime by the prisoner of all descriptions were
assigned; but the most reasonable, and that which was eventually
adopted by the jury upon the trial was, that some misunderstanding
having arisen between Bolam and Millie, the former, in the heat of
passion and anger, had assaulted the latter with the poker, and
destroyed him; and had then arranged the tale which he subsequently
narrated, and the appearances which were exhibited in order to conceal
his guilt.

The sympathy which was created for the family of the unfortunate Millie
was extraordinary. He had been left a widower with four children, and
he had striven hard amidst adversities and vicissitudes of the most
painful nature to maintain his children in a respectable station.
Through the instrumentality of Bolam he was appointed to the situation
which he held, the salary of which was 60l. a year, and he had
performed the duties attached to it with great credit. The managers of
the bank took care that his family should not be left entirely
destitute in consequence of his death, and they liberally provided them
with the means of immediate support; but an equally generous feeling
was displayed by the public, and in less than one month 1000l. were
collected by subscription to be appropriated to their use.

At the Spring Assizes of the year 1839, a bill of indictment was
preferred against Bolam, for the wilful murder of the deceased; but in
consequence of the very strong feeling which then prevailed against
him, and the uncertainty which might be said to exist as to his
obtaining a fair and impartial trial, the conclusion of the proceedings
against him was postponed to the ensuing Assizes.

On Monday, the 29th of July, 1839, he was tried at Newcastle before Mr.
Baron Maule. The case for the prosecution occupied the greater part of
two days. At its conclusion, a great number of witnesses were called to
the prisoner's character. The learned baron, in summing up, after
having remarked upon the evidence produced to substantiate the crime of
murder, said, "The prisoner may be guilty of the death of Millie under
other circumstances. Some difference or altercation may have taken
place between them. The evidence goes to show that there was no
ill-will or malice; but among a thousand causes some spark of anger may
have been kindled and blown up; a scuffle may have ensued, and the man
at the bar may, in a state of excitement, have been the death of the
deceased; and if he were so, and blows passed between them in conflict,
he would have been guilty of manslaughter, and that would furnish
motives enough for a statement which would, in his opinion, screen him
from banishment from his native country and his friends. This view
furnishes motives quite sufficient for the fire as well as for the
other facts. I do not say that this is the inference you ought to draw,
nor has it been suggested on either side; it is for you to consider
it." The jury seem to have adopted this suggestion; and after having
been absent considering their verdict for three hours, found the
prisoner guilty of "Manslaughter."

He was subsequently sentenced to be transported for life, and quitted
the country in pursuance of this judgment.


LEWIN CASPAR, ELLIS CASPAR, EMANUEL MOSES, AND ALICE ABRAHAMS.
Transported for Stealing Gold-dust.

The extraordinary robbery to which these persons were parties, involved
circumstances probably more singular than any other which ever came
before a court of justice. The affair has generally been known by the
name of the "Gold-dust Robbery;" the produce of the plunder being
gold-dust of the value of upwards of 4000l.; and the facts which
attended the investigation of the circumstances most forcibly
illustrated the adage, that "When rogues fall out honest men get their
own." As will be observed from the names of the culprits, the persons
who were convicted were of the Jewish persuasion; and truly, the
proverbial cunning and habits of cheating of these people were most
singularly exemplified throughout the whole course of the inquiry.

On Monday afternoon the 25th of March 1839, the robbery was effected.
It appears that two boxes of gold dust, from the mines of the Brazilian
Mining Company in South America, had reached England on the 18th of the
month, and had been landed at Falmouth from H.M.S. Sea-gull, from
whence they were to be forwarded to London, consigned to Messrs. Marsh
and Co., the agents of the Company. At Falmouth they were put on board
the City of Limerick steam-ship, and on Monday morning, the 25th of
March, they were landed at the wharf of the Dublin Steam-packet Company
at St. Katherine's. On the same morning a letter was received by
Messrs. Hartley and Co., the agents of the Dublin Steam Navigation
Company, in John-street, Crutched-friars, to whom the City of Limerick
steamer belonged, purporting to be from Messrs. Carne and Co., of
Falmouth, apprising them of the transmission of the gold dust, and
instructing them to hand it over to a person who should call at their
office, and produce certain documents. This letter was opened by Lewin
Caspar, a clerk in the establishment; and on the same afternoon a
person drove up to the counting-house, and presenting certain papers
desired that the boxes of precious metal should be delivered to him.
From his manner no suspicion was raised, and the credentials which he
produced, giving a description of the boxes and the marks upon them,
tended to remove all doubt as to the authenticity of the character
which he had assumed. His right to the boxes, therefore, being
apparently established, he paid the wharfage dues, and the trunks with
their golden contents were placed in the cab in which he had arrived.
He gave the foreman of the wharf a shilling for his civility, and then
drove away without the smallest suspicion being excited that he was not
fully entitled to the goods which he had claimed.

In a few hours, however, an authorised agent of Messrs. Marsh, the
consignees, arrived at the counting-house, and making known his
character, and demanding the gold-dust upon the authority of vouchers
which he produced, the fraud was discovered. The contents of the boxes
were valued at 4600l., and as this loss would fall upon the Dublin
Steam-packet Co., the consternation which was created among their
servants at this event may be well imagined. Instant steps were taken
to secure the individual by whom the robbery had been so ingeniously
effected, and Lea, and Roe, police-officers, were engaged to pursue the
necessary investigation. In the course of the same day the cab which
had conveyed the thief to Messrs. Hartley's wharf was discovered, and
the driver questioned, but the only information which he could afford
was, that the individual who had employed him had hired him in
Cheapside, and he had driven him back to Wood-street, where he had
quitted his vehicle and had entered another cab, which proceeded in a
direction towards Holborn. A clue so vague was not easily to be
followed; but the officers pursued their investigation with unabated
vigour and determination, and at length after infinite difficulty they
traced the thief to No.12 New-street, London Hospital; from whence,
however, they found he had now removed to a house in Mansell-street,
Goodman's-fields, with all his furniture, but from which again he had
absconded no one knew whither. From the inquiries made by the officers
they ascertained that the name of this person was Moss; and that he was
foreman to Mr. Hyams, a watchmaker in Goodman's-fields; that before the
robbery, as well as on the day of its commission, he had been observed
to be in frequent and earnest conversation with Ellis Caspar, whose
son, Lewin Caspar, as we have already stated, held the situation of
confidential clerk to Messrs. Hartley and Co. No time was lost in
taking these persons into custody, and then it was elicited from the
servant of Moss, that both those individuals had occasionally visited
her master;-- that on the day of the robbery, Moss, contrary to custom,
went out in his best clothes, and that in the evening he came home in a
cab with two boxes corresponding in appearance with those which had
contained the gold-dust, and the half-burned fragments of which she
subsequently saw under the grate of the sitting-room. Some mysterious
whisperings after this took place between Moss, and his wife, and her
sister; and on the next morning they quitted New-street for
Mansell-street. The description which was given of Moss exactly
corresponded with that of the thief; and the exertions of the officers
were now applied to secure his apprehension.

In the course of the inquiries which were now made, the circumstance of
the purchase of a large quantity of bar-gold by Messrs. Bull and Co.,
bullion-dealers in Cheapside, from Mr. Henry Solomons, a gold refiner
at No, 58, Strand, was elicited, and Messrs. Bull and Co. instantly
afforded every assistance to the police. On Saturday, the 6th of April,
Mr. Solomons was examined at Lambeth street police-office, when he
admitted having sold 1200l. worth of bar-gold to Messrs. Bull; but he
stated, that that gold was the produce of a large quantity of
snuff-boxes and other articles which he had melted, the precise nature
of which he could not describe; that he had received the 1200l. and had
paid a great portion of it away; but finally, he protested against
being further questioned, and refused to give any more information upon
the subject.

At a subsequent examination Mr. Solomons was placed at the bar with the
two Caspars as a principal in the robbery; and then Moss, who upon an
understanding that he should be admitted in evidence against the
prisoners, had surrendered himself into custody, appeared as a witness.
The effect produced upon the prisoners, by his presenting himself in
this capacity, was remarkable; and it was observed that Solomons, no
longer confident, appeared to be applying himself to devise means to be
placed in the position of his late coadjutor. The evidence of Moss
explained the whole transaction, and showed the extraordinary workings
of the system of villainy which was carried on. For the present his
statement was not published, as there were yet other persons to be
secured; but it was understood that it amounted to a complete
revelation of the whole of the circumstances attending the robbery.

On Tuesday May the 7th, two new prisoners were placed at the bar, named
Emanuel Moses, or "Money Moses," as he was familiarly called, and Alice
Abrahams, his daughter, who was a widow; but as there were still other
parties not in custody, who had been participators in the transaction,
it was deemed advisable that secrecy should still be observed upon the
subject of the evidence which had been obtained. From other witnesses,
however, the fact of the sale of a large quantity of gold-dust by Moses
and his daughter to Solomons directly after the robbery was elicited;
and it was also shown that the latter in melting it down, had thrown
copper and silver into it, in order to change its exact character, and
thereby prevent its identification.

On Saturday, May the 25th, another examination took place of the
prisoners, when Solomons was also admitted in evidence; and at length,
on Friday the 21st of June, the prisoners, Lewin and Ellis Caspar,
Money Moses, and Alice Abrahams, were committed for trial.

On Monday, June the 24th, the trial commenced at the Central Criminal
Court, before Mr. Justice Littledale, but it occupied a period of no
less than eight days, only terminating on Tuesday the 2nd of July.

The prisoners were indicted together with one Isaac Isaacs, alias
Davis, not in custody. The indictment alleged the robbery to have been
committed by some evil-disposed person, and then stated that before the
said felony was committed, the prisoners, Lewin and Ellis Caspar, did
feloniously incite and encourage the said evil-disposed person to
commit the felony; it then alleged that Ellis Caspar, Emanuel Moses,
and Alice Abrahams, had received the stolen property, well knowing it
to have been stolen.

Mr. Clarkson stated the facts of the case to the jury, and then
proceeded to the examination of the witnesses.

The arrival of the gold-dust at Falmouth by the Seagull was proved, as
well as its subsequent transmission to London by the City of Limerick,
and its arrival at St. Katherine's on the morning of the 25th of March.
It was then shown that on the 23rd of March, Messrs. Came and Co. of
Falmouth, despatched a letter to Messrs. Hartley, informing them of the
valuable commodities which would be delivered to their keeping; and it
was also proved, that on the arrival of the City of Limerick in London,
the boxes were delivered into the custody of the younger Caspar, the
clerk at the wharf, who promised to take care of them. It was shown
that young Caspar exhibited great anxiety about the boxes, and that on
the messenger coming for them, he at once delivered them over to him,
although he had previously expressed some fears lest the papers which
he brought should not be genuine documents. Caspar on that morning had
gone unusually early to his office; and upon the letter arriving from
Messrs. Carne, he opened it, and subsequently went out. He came back,
however, before any application was made for the gold-dust, and
remained until it was handed over to the messenger who went to fetch
it. When the robbery was discovered, he affected great consternation
and alacrity, and proceeded at once to give a description of the person
by whom the boxes had been obtained; but he so falsified the account
which he delivered, that but for the fact of his having been seen and
observed by other servants in the warehouse, who correctly described
his person, all clue to his identity must have been lost.

Henry Moss, the approver, was then called, and his evidence showed that
a design, such as that which was at length completed, had long been in
contemplation by the two Caspars, but that a favourable opportunity for
putting it into execution did not occur until the month of March 1839.
He stated that he had been acquainted with the elder Caspar, who was a
watchmaker living on Finsbury Pavement, for about sixteen years, having
for some time acted as his foreman. Young Caspar learned the business
of a watchmaker from him; but subsequently he ascertained that he had
procured employment as a clerk in the service of the Irish Steam Packet
Company. He had been frequently in the habit of seeing the two
prisoners during the last sixteen or eighteen months before the
robbery; and in October 1838, at the invitation of Ellis Caspar, he
called upon them at their house. He was subsequently frequently
requested to visit them, but he did not avail himself of the
invitations; and at length the cause of their apparent friendly
disposition was exhibited by old Caspar saying that he wanted him "to
do him a favour." He said that he was willing to do what he could for
him; and then he desired him to meet him at Williams' Coffee-house, St.
Martin's-le-grand, where a person would join them, who would explain
the business to him. He went there and met old Caspar, but he took him
away from the house; and having entered a cab with him, they drove to
Charing-cross, where he said they should meet the person he had spoken
of. They went into a coffee-house, and there they saw Lewin Caspar; but
as the room was crowded the subject was not then broached, and they all
walked out into the park. Here old Caspar desired his son to explain
what he wanted done, and after some preliminary observations he began.
He said that he wanted the witness to carry a letter for him to
Crutched-friars, and to take away some boxes, which he was to deliver
to his father. Old Caspar would give him the letter on the day when he
was to carry it; and he (young Caspar) would give him the boxes. He
added that if he would do them this service, they would amply
recompense him, and that they employed him in preference to a
ticket-porter, who could do the business as well as he, because the
matter required secrecy, as his father must not be seen in it. The
letter which he referred to was to be carried on the next morning; and
he was to meet old Caspar at a coffee-house near Monument-yard. He went
to the specified spot, and presently saw old Caspar; but he said that
he had not yet seen his son, from whom he was to obtain the letter. He
went out, but returned in about a quarter of an hour, accompanied by
his son, who had in his hand what appeared to be a letter. Lewin Caspar
then said that the box which he was to fetch was to come by a ship
which had not yet arrived, and that they must all meet again in the
afternoon; but on their second assemblage at the same place, he
declared that an accident had occurred in two ships having run foul of
each other, in consequence of which the delivery of the box, which was
at the bottom of the cargo, would be delayed until the next day. On
that day they met again; but then Lewin Caspar said that the box would
be too heavy for him to carry, and having given him ten shillings, they
dismissed him with an intimation that they should require his aid on
some other occasion, and that they would write to him. He subsequently
received several notes from them, and met them according to
appointment, and he was then employed in copying various letters, which
from his description of them, appeared to have had the same object of
plunder, as that on which, in the present instance, the gold-dust had
been delivered. At length, on the 24th of March, he met the two Caspars
in Turner-street, Commercial-road. They went with him to his house in
New-street, and then they told him that they should want him on the
next morning, and they desired him to meet them at the corner of
Mark-lane. He went there at half-past ten o'clock, and saw them
together; but Lewin quitted his father, and the latter then came up to
him, and said that he had something to give to him, but did not like to
do so in the street. They, in consequence, went to a Coffee-house in
Mark-lane, and there old Caspar handed a letter and a blue bag to him.
He was desired to take a cab and go to Lewin Caspar, at his office, and
he was told that he would there receive something which he was to carry
to Wood-street, Cheapside. He accordingly proceeded to the office of
Messrs. Hartley, in John-street, Crutched-friars, and having sent in
the letter Lewin Caspar came to him. He compared the letter which he
(Moss) had delivered, with another which he held in his hand, and then
he said that he must go into the office. In a few minutes he gave him
an order on the back of the letter, with instructions that he should
present it at the Dublin Steam-wharf, Iron-gate Stairs, adding that he
should be there as soon as he. The witness, before he proceeded to the
wharf, delivered some articles for his master, and he also took a fresh
cab in Cheapside, having left that in which he had before ridden in
King William-street. On his reaching the wharf he presented the order,
and two boxes were delivered to him by Mr. Bristoll, the foreman, which
he put into the cab. He gave a receipt for them, signed in the name of
Dunn; and he ordered the cabman to drive him to the Cross Keys,
Woodstreet. Ellis Caspar was not there, and the boxes were carried into
the office, but in a few minutes he got another cab, and drove to the
London Hospital. He took one of the boxes and carried it to his own
house, where he deposited it in a cupboard, in his bed-room, and he was
returning for the other, when he met Ellis Caspar. He told him that he
had acted imprudently, in going so near home with the cab, and desired
him to drive about for an hour before he took away the other box, and
then to take it out at a distance from New-street, and carry it home.
He accordingly did so, and having at length quitted the cab at the Iron
Bridge, Commercial-road, he entered an omnibus with the box, from which
he took it to his own house. There he found Caspar waiting for him,
apparently in a great state of trepidation. He told him to send his
servant out of the way, and that he must get rid of the boxes as soon
as possible; but he (Moss) declared, that having received an assurance
that he should suffer no harm from what he had done, he was not afraid.
Caspar said that the officers were already on the look out, and that he
must quit his house immediately; but he answered that he could not do
so, as he had not given notice to his landlord. To this Caspar replied
that he must sacrifice every thing, and directed him to meet him on the
next evening, when he would pay him whatever he required. At eleven
o'clock the boxes were taken into the back parlour, Ellis Caspar, Mrs.
Moss, and the witness, then only being present. The boxes were opened,
as Caspar said, in order that their contents might be divided, to be
carried away; but inside there appeared to be tin cases; and as these
were small, it was decided that they should not be broken, but that
they should be divided among them, and carried off. Caspar then went
away; and after he had retired, the witness and his wife set about
burning the boxes. It was daylight before they went to bed. On the next
morning the witness opened one of the tin cases, and found it to
contain gold ore. He wrapped all the boxes in paper, and put each into
a separate trunk, and they were on that afternoon carried to
Mansell-street, in a truck. On the same evening the witness met Ellis
Caspar at the Horse Guards, and he told him that the boxes must be
again removed. The witness wished him to remove them, but he refused,
saying, that his son was already suspected, and he expected that his
house would be searched. He advised him then to get his sister, Mrs.
Levy, to take a lodging, and to carry away the gold in trunks to her.
They were then to be sent down to Bath, to a direction which he gave,
and the two Caspars were afterwards to go and fetch them. This plan,
however, was subsequently abandoned, and by the desire of Caspar the
witness went out of the way, because it was said that the officers were
in search of him. He went to the house of his father-in-law Davis, in
Coventry-court, and the gold was brought there to him. He kept it for
some time in a cupboard, but then Davis would not let it remain there
any longer, saying, that his (witness) house had been searched, and
Davis and Mrs. Abrahams carried it away in small portions. Mrs.
Abrahams subsequently told him that it had been sold to Solomons, for
2000l.; but he complained that this was short of the actual value, and
she declared that she had taken all she could get. She then handed over
to him an I O U for 1807l., signed "H. S.", and money and bank-notes,
which raised the sum to 2000l. The witness subsequently went out of the
way to Peckham, and other places; but at length disclosed his knowledge
of the transaction, and surrendered himself into custody.

It may be mentioned here as a singular circumstance in the case, that
the witness was induced to give information of what had occurred in
consequence of an apparent disposition on the part of Solomons to
deprive him of the fair price of the gold. So far, too, did all the
parties carry their schemes of mutual plunder, that Mrs. Abrahams
"welled" 13l. which she procured for the shakings of her pockets in
which she had carried the gold-dust, of which she gave no account to
her father or any of the other parties to the transaction.

The evidence of Solomons distinctly implicated both Moses and his
daughter. He stated that on Easter Tuesday the former entered his shop
and intimated a desire to speak to him privately. They went to his
sitting-room, and then Moses informed him that he had a quantity of
gold-dust for sale. He agreed to purchase as much as fifty ounces, at
3l. per ounce, and Moses went away, saying he would send his daughter
with some of the gold, and adding, "Mind, you don't know me, nor I
don't know you." In a short time Mrs. Abrahams entered the shop and
said, that she had brought what her father had spoken about, and she
directly went with witness to his melting-room, which was on the ground
floor, at the back of his house. He put a crucible on the furnace, and
she produced from her bosom and other parts of her dress a large
quantity of gold. He melted it and then placed it in skillets, in which
he took it into the shop and weighed it. There were one hundred and two
ounces. He was alarmed and agitated; and Mrs. Abrahams perceiving his
terror, took his hand and swore a Hebrew oath that she would never
disclose what she knew. Before she went away, he gave her a memorandum
of the weight of the gold, and paid her 350l. in notes and sovereigns
for it. In about three-quarters of an hour she brought more, and she
subsequently went and came six times, producing gold upon every
occasion. The witness had to send to the city for money, and at the end
of the transaction he was still in her debt to the amount of about
2500l. He gave an I O U for the amount, but that was returned to him,
and then he gave her another for 1807l. He also paid her 13l. for some
gold which she produced, and which she said were the shakings of the
bag. The witness went into the minutiae of the transaction between him
and Mrs. Abrahams, and admitted that he for some time refused to pay
his I O U, on the ground that there had been a great stir made about
the gold, and that after his examination at Lambeth-street he had
exerted himself to procure the notes which he had paid to her cashed.
He had sold a part of the gold to Messrs. Bull and Co., and a part to
Messrs. Cock and Johnson, and he had made "good profit "of the
transaction. The total amount which he was to pay Mrs. Abrahams was
3700l.

Both Moss and Solomons underwent long and searching cross-examinations
by the counsel for the prisoners. Each admitted his knowledge of the
felonious nature of the proceedings in which he was engaged, and
neither attempted to deny the feelings which had actuated them
throughout the transaction. A disposition had been shown to put off
Moss with the paltry amount which he had received beyond the I O U for
his share in the transaction. He sought to appropriate to himself the
whole of the proceeds of the robbery in preference to handing it over
to the Caspars: Mrs. Abrahams and her father. Money Moses, cheated
Moss, by declaring that they were to receive much less for the gold
than had been actually agreed to be paid: Mrs, Abrahams, again, cheated
her father, by appropriating to herself the 13l. for the shakings; and
Solomons sought to "Jew" the whole party, by retaining in his
possession 1800l. worth of gold, for which he gave only his I O U, and
for which he refused to pay, in consequence of the stir which was made
about the robbery.

On Monday, the first of July, a variety of legal objections were taken
by Mr. Serjeant Bompas and Mr. C. Phillips on the part of the prisoners
to the indictment, the most prominent of which was, that until, by the
conviction of the thief, the robbery had been proved, the receivers
could not be found guilty. On the part of Lewin Caspar, however, it was
also urged, that the indictment was bad, as alleging him to be an
accessory before the robbery, which was stated to have been committed
by an evil-disposed person, whose name was not mentioned.

These objections were overruled by the learned judge as being
unfounded; but, upon the application of counsel, they were reserved for
discussion in the Court of Error, and on Tuesday, 2nd July, the case
was left to the jury. His lordship's charge occupied a period of eight
hours, and at its conclusion the jury retired.

In about an hour, however, they again came into court, and delivered a
verdict, declaring Lewin Caspar "Guilty of inciting Moss to commit the
felony, and the whole of the other prisoners guilty of the offence of
receiving the gold-dust, knowing it to have been stolen." Ellis Caspar
was declared to have been an accessory both before and after the
robbery, and Alice Abrahams was recommended to mercy, on the ground
that she had acted under the advice and influence of her father.

On the 10th of November in the same year, the objections which had been
raised on the trial were argued before the judges in the Exchequer
Chamber. Their decision was not immediately made known, but on the 6th
February 1840, the prisoners were ordered to be placed at the bar.

Mr, Justice Williams then addressed them, and said that, after a full
inquiry into the objections raised in their behalf, the judges had come
to the conclusion that the judgment upon Lewin Caspar must be arrested,
and that with regard to the other prisoners, they had been properly
convicted. The learned judge then sentenced Ellis Caspar, and Emanuel
Moses to be transported for fourteen years, and Alice Abrahams to four
months' imprisonment.

Upon the application of Mr. Clarkson, Lewin Caspar was ordered to be
detained.

On the 6th of March 1840, Lewin Caspar was again placed at the bar, to
plead to another indictment which had been preferred against him, in
which the error which had been discovered in that on which he had been
already tried was corrected by the "evil-disposed person" by whom the
robbery was committed being stated to be Henry Moss. The indictment
alleged that he had incited and moved Moss to commit the felony, and
Moss was also charged as the principal. Caspar pleaded "Not guilty,"
but Moss, on being brought up, confessed himself "Guilty."

Mr. Clarkson intimated, that the prosecutors were not desirous of
proceeding against Moss, in consequence of his having assisted the due
administration of justice, by disclosing all he knew in reference to
the transaction, and he was sentenced to twenty-four hours'
imprisonment in Newgate.

On the following day Caspar was arraigned upon the indictment against
him, which still remained to be tried.

The same evidence which had been before detailed was now again
produced, Moss being the principal witness in the case, and the
prisoner was found "Guilty."

The learned Judge, in sentencing him to be transported for seven years,
expressed his sincere regret that he had not the power to inflict upon
him a more severe punishment. The prisoner was then removed from the
bar, and was sent abroad, in obedience to the judgment pronounced upon
him.

The positions and rank of all the persons connected with this
extraordinary transaction have been referred to in the course of the
details which we have laid before our readers, with the exception of
Emanuel Moses. There were few persons well acquainted with the vicinity
of Covent-garden to whom the person of this man was not familiar,
although his particular character and practices may not have been so
well known. He was, as we have already intimated, of the Jewish
persuasion, and he resided in the midst of a neighbourhood in which the
fullest opportunities were afforded for his carrying on a system, the
nature of which may be pretty well guessed from the circumstances
disclosed in the case which we have just related. The landlord of "The
Black Lion" public-house, in Vinegar-yard, Drury-lane -- it was pretty
generally known that he was one of the most daring and successful
"fences," or receivers of stolen goods in the metropolis. The
ramifications of his business were well ascertained to extend to every
species of roguery which existed in London, and it cannot but be matter
of surprise, that a person whose reputation was so universally known
should have so long continued, in the very teeth of the authorities, to
pursue his trade of plunder. Such an event as the conviction of "Money
Moses," almost the father of his particular line of trade, produced an
amazing consternation among his fellows; but the metropolis is to be
congratulated, that a person whose character was so notoriously
mischievous, should have been thus removed from the scene of his
operations. During the period of Moses's imprisonment in Newgate, a
striking change took place in his appearance. Originally exhibiting
upon his person all the signs of indulgent living, his confinement
reduced him to the shadow only of his former self; and there were to be
heard amongst his friends, at the time of his receiving sentence,
regrets at his faded aspect, and apprehensions that the voyage to
Australia would complete the work which the air of a prison had
commenced.

It will have been observed, that the manner in which the whole of the
lost property was discovered has been disclosed in the course of our
recital of the extraordinary circumstances of this inquiry. Messrs.
Hartley and Co., upon whom the loss would have fallen in case of the
non-recovery of the gold, suffered comparatively small damage. A very
considerable portion of the gold itself was produced; and, for that
which was not actually forthcoming, we believe there is good reason to
suppose that an equivalent was eventually paid.


JACOB FREDERICK EHLERT, 
A Norwegian Sailor, Executed For Murdering his Captain.

This diabolical murder was committed by Ehlert, the mate of the
Norwegian brigantine Phoenix, upon John Frederick Berkhalt, captain of
the vessel, while she lay in the river at Sunderland. The atrocious
transaction was first brought to light by the discovery of the murdered
remains of Berkhalt in the river at Sunderland, on Friday the 14th of
June 1839, with such appearances upon his body as left no doubt that
his life had been taken away by violent means; and suspicion at once
attached to the crew of his vessel. They were all secured, protesting
their ignorance of the murder, and alleging that the captain had gone
ashore on the night of the previous Tuesday, since which they had seen
nothing of him; but the discovery of marks of blood in his cabin left
little doubt of his having been murdered on board the Phoenix, and then
thrown into the river, in order that his death might be concealed. This
belief was speedily confirmed by the confession of a boy named Daniel
Frederick Muller, aged nineteen, who was employed in the ship, and who
now voluntarily disclosed the whole of the circumstances of the
horrible crime, implicating Ehlert the mate.

His statement was to the following effect:-- On the night of Tuesday
the 11th of June, he had the twelve-o'clock watch, and at about
half-past one Ehlert came on deck and called him below. He asked what
he was wanted for, but he was desired to ask no questions, but to
follow whither he was led. The mate had a hammer and a lantern in his
hand, and he went into the captain's cabin. When there he gave the
lantern to Muller and desired him to hold it, and then he directly
raised his hammer and dealt three tremendous blows on the head of
Berkhalt as he lay asleep. The unfortunate man scarcely moved; but
Muller, terrified beyond measure, exclaimed, "Mate, what are you doing?
"and tried to run away. In this, however, the mate prevented his
succeeding, and seizing him by his arm, he said that he must remain.
The mate then took the body from the bed and slung a rope round the
neck, and he partially clothed it in a pair of stockings and trousers,
and then drew a canvas bag over it. The boy now again attempted to
escape, but the mate threatened to murder him if he went away, and drew
a clasp-knife from his pocket, as if to put his threat into execution;
but he told him that if he remained he would give him 300l., for that
there was plenty of money in the captain's cabin. The boy soon after
went on deck and wept bitterly, and while he was there the mate came to
him and took the skylight off the captain's cabin. He then cut a long
cord off the gear, and going below again he tied it round the body, so
that he could raise it by that means through the skylight. On his again
reaching the deck, he ordered Muller to bring the boat round to the
side, and while he was doing so, the boy saw him throw the body over
the stern. Both then entered the boat, the mate holding the rope which
was attached to the body of the deceased, and they rowed away to the
opposite side of the river. The mate there picked up a large stone, and
they pulled some distance up against the tide. As they went along the
trousers and bag slipped from the body. At length they stopped, and
then the mate fixing the stone upon the body let it go, and it sank to
the bottom. They now returned to the ship, and Ehlert having called the
next watch retired to rest, telling the boy that at four o'clock, the
conclusion of the present watch, he would call him up as if to take the
captain ashore, so that the crew might suppose that he did so. This was
done, and he rowed away the boat as if he had the captain in her. The
night of the murder was dark and rainy. The boy added, that he had done
nothing himself in the way of assisting in the murder, but that he had
tried very much to get away. The mate had, however, threatened him a
great deal so as to prevent his escape, and having compelled him to aid
him in the transaction, had given him instructions what to say in the
event of his being questioned.

Upon this statement, Ehlert was committed to take his trial; and the
boy was also detained in jail to ensure his attendance as a witness.

On Saturday the 27th of July, the prisoner Ehlert was put upon his
trial at the assizes. The evidence of the boy was corroborated by that
of other witnesses in many material particulars, and a verdict of
"Guilty "was returned by the jury.

Sentence of death was instantly passed, amidst the unavailing
protestations of the wretched convict of his innocence. Between this
period and the day of his execution, Ehlert continued firm in his
denial of his participation in the murder, and imputed the whole guilt
of the transaction to Muller, who he said had destroyed the captain
under the very circumstances which he had detailed, as having been
those under which he had committed the foul crime. He said he had
discovered the completion of the deed, and out of compassion for the
boy had omitted to give him up to justice. Muller, however, persisted
in the truth of his tale, and on the 16th of August the miserable
convict was executed.


THE REV. J. E. STEVENS.
Convicted of Sedition.

Mr. James Rayner Stevens was one of the most violent political
preachers of his day. Originally a member of the body of the Wesleyan
Methodists, and a minister of the particular creed which that
respectable sect professes, he was excluded their church by reason of
his interference with political subjects, in a manner which was deemed
unbecoming his character as one of their clergymen. Already highly
popular among the people of the district in which he resided, for his
uniform opposition to those measures which they deemed harsh and
hurtful to their interests, as well as for a mild and amiable
disposition which, it appears, amidst all his violence on political
subjects, he possessed, they were determined that he should not be
without an arena in which he might display his acknowledged but
dangerous powers of eloquence. The manufacturing inhabitants of Ashton,
Dunkenfield, and Staley Bridge therefore quickly erected for him
chapels in each of their respective districts, and here he continued to
exercise his functions as a preacher, up to the period of his
apprehension. As we have already said, mild, amiable, and charitable in
private life, he was a universal favourite amongst his flock; but he
unfortunately sought to gratify their tastes, at the same time that he
obeyed the dictates of his own feelings, in disseminating doctrines
opposed to the maintenance of the existing law, and subversive of the
interests of society. The New Poor Law was his favourite topic of
abuse; and in this he found a ready echo in the breasts of those who
heard him. But from a subject which might be so easily made calculated
to excite dislike towards the Ministers by whom the law was introduced,
he turned to others of a more general character; and in his discourses
in reference to these as well as the first object of his professed
hatred, he was guilty of making assertions and employing arguments
which eventually procured his indictment and imprisonment on a charge
of sedition.

In his sermons Mr. Stevens boldly maintained his principles, and sought
openly to make them known; he contended, not perhaps for their
legality, but that they were such as he had a right to hold and
proclaim; and he frequently loudly called upon the authorities, "if
they dared," to impeach him of his political offences in this respect.
This invitation was given once too often; and at length, on Thursday,
the 28th of December 1838, he was apprehended at Ashton by Goddard and
Shackell, Bow-street officers, on a warrant which had been issued by
two magistrates of Lancashire, and placed in their hands for execution.
Mr. Stevens made no effort to resist the law, and he was immediately
taken to Manchester to be examined by the magistrates there, escorted
by a company of the Queen's Bays. He was lodged in the New Bailey for
that night; but on the next day a public investigation took place.

The charge made against him in the warrant was, that he did, on the
13th of November, at the market-place at Leigh -- for his speech-making
was not confined to his pulpit -- with a great number of evil-disposed
and disorderly persons, assemble together in a tumultuous manner with
banners, flags, and ensigns, and that then and there, by loud shouts,
and by the discharge of fire-arms, they terrified the inhabitants of
Leigh; and that he did, by violent and inflammatory language, endeavour
to excite the people so assembled to violence against the persons and
property of divers of her Majesty's liege subjects in Leigh and its
vicinity. This charge was sought to be substantiated by various
witnesses, who, being inhabitants of Leigh, had heard his speech, and
were able to give a general account of its tendency.

Mr. James Johnson, a linen-draper, proved that on the day in question a
meeting was held at the market-place in Leigh of between two and three
thousand persons, at which the prisoner was present and made a speech.
He described the general effect of the speech. The prisoner, he said,
referred principally to the factories and the existing poor laws. He
condemned the practices in the factories, and advised the people to arm
themselves, and to get guns and pikes and hang them over their
chimney-pieces; they were to have them ready, and then he would come
over, and they should appoint him their leader, and he would tell them
what they were to do. When the grand attack was made, they were to go
to the factories with a dagger in one hand and a torch in the other. He
referred to a particular instance of the alleged mal-treatment of a boy
at the factory of Mr. Jones, and he talked of tarring and feathering
Mr. Jones, and sending him as a present to the commissioners. During
the meeting pistols were fired, and the people shouted. Mr. Stevens
checked the firing of pistols, saying that there was too much cracking.
He said that he had not done "cracking" yet, and that they might crack
again by and by. The witness added, that he saw as many as twenty
pistols among the crowd; and he also observed a person walking about
with a pike, upon which a loaf and a herring were impaled.

William Coward, a constable of Leigh, gave a longer account of the
speech than Mr. Johnson. He said that when he first went to the spot,
Mr. Stevens was addressing the meeting on the condescension of our Lord
in this world. He subsequently quitted this point and went to other
subjects. He quoted the passage, "Vengeance is mine; I will repay,
saith the Lord;" and he added -- What I mean to say is, that God has
perhaps raised you up to fire these buildings (alluding to the houses
round about), and perhaps even that venerable church, which our
forefathers have erected." He advised the people to take away their
families from church, and to save their pennies to buy pikes, and guns,
and pistols. At night there was another meeting by torch-light, at
which Stevens again spoke in the same strain as that which he had
employed in the morning. He spoke about the soldiers and officers, and
said that there was nothing to fear in that quarter, for that the
officers had admitted his writings into their mess-rooms, and that the
soldiers had listened to his preaching, and loved to hear him. He spoke
of the hardships which the people underwent, and declared that if he
lived at Leigh, he would collect the people in parties of from six to
twelve, and go to the poor law guardians and bring out one of their
number; then he would take his coat and waistcoat and shirt off, and,
having got a barrel of tar, he would cover him with it, and he would
give him a pillow of feathers, and feather him, and then he would say,
"Go to roost, thou devil! "At this meeting the same system of
pistol-firing was kept up which had been maintained in the morning, and
there were pikes to be seen, and many of the people carried torches.
The witness added, that he had since seen between one and two hundred
pikes in the cottages of the poor people, which had doubtless been
procured at the instigation of Mr. Stevens's speech. The inhabitants of
Leigh and its neighbourhood were much alarmed at the occurrences of the
meetings. The witness declared his regret at being compelled to give
evidence against a person whom he had known so long as Mr. Stevens,
because he had been acquainted with him when he was esteemed a highly
respectable member of the body of Wesleyans; but he felt bound to state
what he had seen, for he was convinced that since Mr. Stevens had been
in the habit of going to Leigh, there was more irritation among the
people than he had ever known before. Arms had been collected, and he
knew one or two smithies which were wholly employed in making pikes.
These were made principally of steel, and they were fourteen or fifteen
inches long; at one end was a screw, so that they might be fixed into a
staff, and at the other the point was exceedingly sharp. Gentlemen in
the neighbourhood had been threatened to have a pike or a ball through
their bodies; and the people, on going to various shops to buy bread,
had declared that they would "fetch the next at the point of the pike."
The witness further stated, that there were banners at the meeting, on
one of which was the inscription, "The murders of Peterloo shall never
be forgot."

Both witnesses were cross-examined by Mr. Stevens with great tact and
ingenuity, and eventually the conclusion of the proceedings was
postponed until the following Thursday, Mr. Stevens in the meanwhile
being admitted to bail.

The termination of this examination was awaited with great interest by
a large number of Mr. Stevens's friends, and upon his liberation he was
received with the greatest enthusiasm. On the following Sunday he
preached as usual at Staley-bridge, without making any allusion to what
had passed. In the evening he was proceeding to his chapel at Ashton,
where he was informed that the congregation was so great that fears
were entertained lest the building should fall; and eventually the
service was read and the sermon delivered in the market-place by
moonlight, no fewer than ten thousand persons being collected to
witness this extraordinary scene.

On Monday evening Mr. Stevens attended a tea-party at Hyde, where one
thousand persons were assembled. He took a review of the past year, and
dwelt on the prospects of the future. He said that the factory system
was doomed; and that the poor-law could not much longer continue to
exist. He declared that it was so much opposed in Ashton, that a board
of guardians could not be formed; and pointing to a flag which was
suspended against the wall, he said that rather than it should be
established, they should marshal themselves under it, and following the
standard-bearer they would shout its motto,


"For children and wife
We will war to the knife:
Down with the bastiles.
And Stevens for ever! "

On Tuesday evening a meeting was held in Manchester at which Mr.
Feargus O'Connor and others addressed the people, urging them to attend
the examination of Mr. Stevens in thousands and tens of thousands, but
peaceably and without banners, in order to show their gratitude to
their benefactor.

On Thursday at least four thousand persons were assembled outside the
New Bailey, but their conduct was orderly, although they appeared to
take great interest in the fate of their favourite. Mr. Stevens was in
attendance precisely at the hour appointed, and he was loudly cheered,
but there was no appearance of riot. There was one additional witness
now examined, whose evidence was a mere repetition of that of Johnson
and Coward, and on this charge Mr. Stevens was ordered to stand
committed to take his trial at the next Liverpool Assizes. He was
informed that there were other charges which might be brought against
him with reference to the organisation of illegal societies; and it was
also intimated to him, that he would be liberated upon his putting in
bail to the amount of 2000l. for his appearance when called upon. The
crowd immediately dispersed, and in the evening Mr. Stevens was
discharged from custody.

On Thursday the 15th of August 1839, Mr. Stevens was put upon his
trial. The indictment alleged the same offence as that which had been
stated in the warrant, and it was fully supported by the same evidence
which we have already detailed. At the conclusion of the trial, a
verdict of" Guilty "was returned, and Mr. Stevens was sentenced to
eighteen months imprisonment in Knutsford House of Correction, and was
ordered on his discharge to give bail, himself in 500l., and two
sureties in 250l. each, that he should keep the peace for five years.

Mr. Stevens was subsequently removed to Chester Castle, from whence, on
the 1st of February 1841, he was discharged. This liberation took place
eight days earlier than the term of his sentence; but, in consequence
of the death of his father, the Rev. John Stevens, Lord Normanby kindly
consented to the remission of the few days, to enable him to attend the
last sad duties to the deceased.


THE BIRMINGHAM RIOTS
13th of July 1839

Illustration: The Birmingham Rioters Attacking the Firemen

These disgraceful riots, involving the destruction of property to a
very great extent, occurred on the evening of Monday the 13th of July
1839, and were the result of a long course of agitation created by the
exertions of a body of men called Chartists, to obtain the adoption by
Parliament of certain popular reforms of the constitution of the
country, by which they conceived that the poorer classes of Englishmen
might procure for themselves a better system of representation, and,
therefore, a larger share of the government of the country than they
had hitherto possessed. Throughout the history of every civilized state
it is to be observed, that there are always parties whose desires of
reform or alteration of the existing law more than keep pace with the
changes which the legislature deems it fit to make. The violence of the
views entertained by these persons, usually tends to render the
immediate, or even the ultimate granting of their wishes, incompatible
with the maintenance of those rules by which society is governed, so
that whatever may be the eventual estimation in which, in the process
of time, or by reason of the occurrence of events, their views may be
held, a necessity exists for their being presently discouraged and
checked. Of a class such as we have alluded to, are the Chartists.
Denominated from the charter, upon the procurement of which they base
their faith, their principles will be best comprehended by a recital of
the articles of their creed; and as these have been described by
themselves in a petition which they have presented to parliament, we
shall have recourse to their own statement of their views, in
preference to repeating in general terms that which is, in the ordinary
acceptation, the groundwork upon which they proceed.

The petition to which we refer was presented by Mr. Attwood to the
House of Commons on the evening of Friday the 14th of June, and was the
result of numerous meetings held in Birmingham and elsewhere, at which
the principles of the charter were advocated. It was denominated the
"National Petition," and bore the signatures of a vast number of
individuals appended to it; and it was so bulky in its form as to
require to be conveyed into the house upon a platform constructed for
the purpose.

     It was in the following terms: --

"Unto the honourable the Commons of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Ireland in Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersigned,
their suffering countrymen,

"Humbly sheweth,-- That we, your petitioners, dwell in a land whose
merchants are noted for enterprise, whose manufacturers are very
skilful, and whose workmen are proverbial for their industry. The land
itself is goodly, the soil rich, and the temperature wholesome; it is
abundantly furnished with the materials of commerce and trade; it has
numerous and convenient harbours; in facility of internal communication
it exceeds all others.

"For three-and-twenty years we have enjoyed a profound peace. Yet, with
all these elements of national prosperity, and with every disposition
and capacity to take advantage of them, we find ourselves overwhelmed
with public and private suffering.

"We are bowed down under a load of taxes which, notwithstanding, fall
greatly short of the wants of our rulers; our traders are trembling on
the verge of bankruptcy; our workmen are starving; capital brings no
profit, and labour no remuneration; the home of the artificer is
desolate, and the warehouse of the pawnbroker is full; the workhouse is
crowded, and the manufactory is deserted. We have looked on every side,
we have searched diligently, in order to find the causes of a distress
so sore and so long continued. We can discover none in nature or in
Providence.

"Heaven has dealt graciously by the people; but the foolishness of our
rulers has made the goodness of God of none effect. The energies of a
mighty kingdom have been wasted in building up the power of selfish and
ignorant men, and its resources squandered for their aggrandisement.
The good of a party has been advanced to the sacrifice of the good of
the nation; the few have governed for the interest of the few; while
the interest of the many has been neglected, or insolently and
tyrannously trampled upon.

"It was the fond expectation of the people that a remedy for the
greater part, if not for the whole, of their grievances would be found
in the Reform Act of 1832. They were taught to regard that Act as a
wise means to a worthy end; as the machinery of an improved
legislation, where the will of the masses would be at length potential.
They have been bitterly and basely deceived. The fruit which looked so
fair to the eye has turned to dust and ashes when gathered. The Reform
Act has effected a transfer of power from one domineering faction to
another, and left the people as helpless as before. Our slavery has
been exchanged for an apprenticeship to liberty, which has aggravated
the painful feeling of our social degradation, by adding to it the
sickening of still deferred hope.

"We come before your honourable house to tell you, with all humility,
that this state of things must not be permitted to continue; that it
cannot long continue without very seriously endangering the stability
of the throne and the peace of the kingdom; and that if, by God's help
and all lawful and constitutional appliances, an end can be put to it,
we are fully resolved that it shall speedily come to an end.

"We tell your honourable House, that the capital of the master must no
longer be deprived of its due profit; that the labour of the workman
must no longer be deprived of its due reward; that the laws which make
food dear, and those which, by making money scarce, make labour cheap,
must be abolished; that taxation must be made to fall on property, not
on industry; that the good of the many, as it is the only legitimate
end, so must it be the sole study of the Government.

"As a preliminary essential to these and other requisite changes, as
means by which alone the interests of the people can be effectually
vindicated and secured, we demand that those interests be confided to
the keeping of the people.

When the state calls for defenders, when it calls for money, no
consideration of poverty or ignorance can be pleaded in refusal or
delay of the call.

"Required as we are, universally, to support and to obey the laws,
nature and reason entitle us to demand, that in making the laws, the
universal voice shall be implicitly listened to.

"We perform the duties of freemen; we must have the privileges of
freedom.

     "We demand Universal Suffrage.

"The suffrage, to be exempt from the corruption of the wealthy and the
violence of the powerful, must be secret.

"The assertion of our right necessarily involves the power of its
uncontrolled exercise.

     "We ask for the reality of a good, not for its semblance.

     "We demand the Ballot.

"The connexion between the representatives and the people, to be
beneficial, must be intimate. The legislative and constituent powers
for correction and for instruction ought to be brought into frequent
contact. Errors, which are comparatively light when susceptible of a
speedy popular remedy, may produce the most disastrous effects when
permitted to grow inveterate through years of compulsory endurance. To
public safety, as well as public confidence, frequent elections are
essential.

     We demand Annual Parliaments.

With power to choose, and freedom in choosing, the range of our choice
must be unrestricted. We are compelled, by the existing laws, to take
for our representatives, men who are incapable of appreciating our
difficulties, or who have little sympathy with them; merchants who have
retired from trade, and no longer feel its harassings; proprietors of
land, who are alike ignorant of its evils and their cure; lawyers, by
whom the honours of the senate are sought after only as a means of
obtaining notice in the courts. The labours of a representative, who is
sedulous in the discharge of his duty, are numerous and burdensome. It
is neither just, nor reasonable, nor safe, that they should continue to
be gratuitously rendered.

We demand that, in the future election of members of your honourable
house, the approbation of the constituency shall be the sole
qualification; and that, to every representative so chosen, shall be
assigned out of the public taxes a fair and adequate remuneration for
the time which he is called upon to devote to the public service.

"Finally, we would most earnestly impress on your honourable house,
that this petition has not been dictated by any idle love of change;
that it springs out of no inconsiderate attachment to fanciful
theories; but that it is the result of much and long deliberation, and
of convictions, which the events of each succeeding year tend more and
more to strengthen. The management of this mighty kingdom has hitherto
been a subject for contending factions to try their selfish experiments
upon. We have felt the consequences in our sorrowful experience --
short glimmerings of uncertain enjoyment swallowed up by long and dark
seasons of suffering. If the self-government of the people should not
remove their distresses, it will at least remove their repinings.

"Universal suffrage will, and it alone can, bring true and lasting
peace to the nation; we firmly believe that it will also bring
prosperity.

"May it, therefore, please your honourable house to take this our
petition into your most serious consideration, and to use your utmost
endeavours, by all constitutional means, to have a law passed, granting
to every male, of lawful age, sane mind, and unconvicted of crime, the
right of voting for members of parliament; and directing all future
elections of members of parliament to be in the way of secret ballot;
and ordaining the duration of parliaments so chosen shall in no case
exceed one year; and abolishing all property qualifications in the
members; and providing for their due remuneration while in attendance
on their parliamentary duties.

     "And your petitioners," &c.

During a considerable period antecedent to the preparation and
presentation of this petition, the agitation which prevailed at
Birmingham and throughout the neighbouring manufacturing districts was
of a highly dangerous and mischievous character. Excited by the
inflammatory harangues of their leaders, the people had not been averse
to follow the advice which was given them, and to provide arms, ready
to meet and repel any attack which might be made upon them, or to
secure and maintain those privileges to which they deemed themselves to
be entitled. Of the Chartists there were two classes; one, the more
violent, whose hopes or designs were based upon "physical force," in
preference to the quiet consideration and discussion of the question at
issue; the other, who viewed "moral force "as presenting the more
favourable means of procuring a determination of the existing evils.
Pikes and other arms, as may be supposed, were the weapons of the
former, while arguments of a more peaceable character, aided by the
employment of such means as abstinence from labour, and the maintaining
of a period "sacred" to the Charter, were the measures by which the
latter sought to obtain their end.

The cause of violence had been too strenuously urged upon the minds of
the people of Birmingham, to permit of their viewing with much
satisfaction any arguments of a very peaceable character. The general
violence of their tone produced apprehensions among the authorities
that mischief might be anticipated; and unhappily their fears were
realised in a manner as dangerous as it was destructive.

The undisguised and inflammatory language used by many of the Chartist
leaders, rendered it necessary that the magistrates should take steps
to prevent the increase of the popular irritation, by removing from the
power of doing mischief some of those who were its chief exciters. A
body of persons had assembled in London, who were styled "The
Convention," and who were delegates from various parts of the country,
charged to exert themselves to procure the adoption of their favourite
Charter by the legislature; and when the sittings of this mock
parliament -- for it assumed the character and method of business of
the House of Commons -- ceased, its members dispersed themselves
through the country, haranguing their "constituents" upon the subject
of their labours, and engaging them to new exertions to secure the
object which they all had in view.

Some arrests were made of persons, the violence of whose language had
marked them as objects of public notice, and this served for a time to
check the violence of the proceedings of the supporters of the
principles of the Charter; but during the ensuing month it appeared as
if the flame of sedition was smouldering only to burst forth with
renewed vigour. In July new excitement was created. Meetings were
frequently held, both at the Bull-ring and at Holloway-head, by the
Chartists; and on the 4th of that month, a serious disturbance occurred
at the former place.

For the better security of the town, a body of about ninety of the
metropolitan police force had been despatched to Birmingham, under the
orders of Superintendant May. On the day in question an unusually large
meeting was held at the spot pointed out, when banners and flags,
bearing mottoes and other insignia, were displayed. Speeches were made,
in which the most inflammatory language was employed; but, in the midst
of the meeting, the London police, who had marched direct from the
railway-train to the Bull-ring, presented themselves, and required the
dispersion of the crowd. The order was peremptorily given, but no
effort was made to obey it, and force was resorted to, to clear the
spot of its present occupants. The mob resisted with success, for
although the police were a well organised body, and most determined in
their efforts, the number of Chartists to whom they were opposed, and
their evident preparation to meet any attack which might be made, led
to their temporary defeat. For about ten minutes the conflict was
dreadful, and individuals on both sides sustained severe and dangerous
injuries. The police were driven back into Moor-street, and, for a
time, an attack on the prison by the mob was apprehended. Fortunately,
however, the 4th Royal Irish Dragoons, commanded by Colonel Chatterton,
and accompanied by Mr. Scholefield, the mayor, arrived in time to
afford assistance to the civil authorities, and to prevent the riot
proceeding to any more dangerous lengths. The dragoons were soon aided
by the Rifle Brigade, and their formidable appearance quickly inspired
alarm where confidence the moment before had been displayed. The mob
quickly took to flight, but to proceed only to Holloway-head, where a
new meeting was held. Here Dr. Taylor and others addressed them,
exhorting them to abstain from violence; but, in spite of the exertions
of these persons, they committed some acts of serious mischief. During
this riot no fewer than seventeen persons were taken into custody, and
many of these were proved to have been implicated in the disgraceful
proceedings of the evening.

The events of this day were not calculated to produce tranquillity, and
during the remainder of the week Birmingham was in a state of high
excitement. On the following Monday a crowd again assembled in the
Bull-ring, rather from curiosity, however, than any other cause; but
upon the police attempting to disperse them, they obstinately and
pertinaciously refused to retire. The resistance to authority appeared
to be mainly attributable to their dislike for the police, and the
members of that body adopted a course of violence in order to procure
obedience to their directions, that the mob should move on, not likely
to increase their popularity. Blows were resorted to, and, in some
instances, considerable injuries were inflicted upon individuals, and
threats of violence in return were not unfrequently heard; but, by dint
of perseverance, the officers succeeded in the course of the evening in
pushing their way as far as John-street on one hand, and Holloway-head
on the other, and thus procuring the observance of peace; but in the
course of their exertions much violence, though perhaps it was not
unnecessary, appeared to be done to the feelings as well as the persons
of the people.

On Tuesday the town resumed its wonted appearance, and but for the
presence of the London police, and the business-like manner of the
magistrates, who were observed to be actively engaged in the execution
of their duty, there would have been observed but slight evidence of
the late commotions; and the peace of the town being on Wednesday and
Thursday (as it was supposed) firmly re-established, fifty of the
police on the latter day returned to London.

On Thursday evening an address was posted on the walls of the town from
Mr. T. Attwood, M.P., which enjoined the maintenance of "Peace, law,
and order," and in which the honourable gentleman announced, among
other things, that he had fixed Friday the 12th of July instant, for
bringing the national petition under the notice of Parliament.

To the consideration of this question all eyes seemed now to be turned;
but on the appointed night, the motion of Mr. Attwood that the petition
should be considered by a committee of the whole house was negatived,
by a majority of two hundred and thirty-five to forty-six.

The following Monday witnessed the renewal of the excitement at
Birmingham, and the enactment of the most disgraceful scenes of riot
and plunder in that town. In the morning a meeting was held at
Holloway-head, but it proved a failure; and a second meeting was called
for the evening. This was most numerously attended, but at its breaking
up, a very large number of persons proceeded to the Bull-ring, while
others branched off on the road towards Warwick, by which it was
expected that Messrs. Lovett and Collins, who had been sent to Warwick
jail, in default of bail, on a charge of publishing a seditious libel,
on the 6th of July, in the shape of resolutions condemnatory of the
conduct of the police on the 4th of that month, and who were expected
to be set at liberty on that night, would arrive at Birmingham. Between
seven and eight o'clock the mob in the Bull-ring increased very
considerably, and the police, limited in number as they were, received
orders to procure its dispersion. Having met with some resistance, they
were compelled to resort to violence, and they wounded three men
somewhat severely; but now in order to avoid all further cause for
irritation, they were recalled into the yard of the police-office, out
of the sight of the mob, in the hope that the people would ere long
separate. This most desirable effect, however, was not produced, but
the crowd soon exhibited symptoms of tumult, and commenced breaking the
windows of the police-office, and throwing stones into the yard where
the police were drawn up.

At half-past eight the riot may be said to have actually commenced. The
mob at that hour began an attack upon all the lamps in High-street, and
Spiceall-street, and this was immediately followed by a furious assault
upon the windows of the houses there, and then upon the houses
themselves. An entrance was attempted to be forced into many of them;
but the infuriated crowd finding the weapons which they possessed
(clubs and sticks) insufficient to enable them to effect this object,
turned to procure others of a more formidable character. These were
speedily afforded by the palisades surrounding the Nelson Monument, in
the midst of the Bullring, which were speedily wrenched from their
mortices, and thus armed they proceeded to the work of destruction. In
an incredibly short space of time they had forced their way into the
house of Messrs. Bourne, tea-dealers, whose premises were situated at
the corner of the Bull-ring, and Moor-street, and extended to a
frontage of twenty feet in the former, and sixty feet in the latter.
The shutters and doors having yielded to their attack, they were
immediately torn down,-- the warehouses were entered , and pillaged,
and their contents thrown into the street. At five minutes past nine,
so rapidly did they complete their dreadful designs, they turned to the
premises of Mr. Leggett, an upholsterer, which in like manner they
sacked, carrying from it, among other things, large rolls of
bed-ticking, which was speedily spread, like a carpet, over the whole
area of the space on which they were assembled. At a quarter-past nine,
a shout was raised that they should extinguish the lamps, and speedily
the mob ascended every lamp-post, and turned off the gas, and darkness
added her powers to increase the horrors of the night.

At this period the inhabitants of the vicinity were engaged in removing
their families, and such of their property as they could conveniently
carry; for the fury of the mob would evidently call for still further
mischief, before it was satiated. The houses of Mr. Murcott, a
cheesemonger; Mr. Dakin, a tea-dealer; Mr. Horton, a silversmith; and
Mr. Parkes, a tobacconist, were in succession assailed, and the windows
of the shop of the last-named individual were actually battered in with
silver candlesticks, removed from the shelves of Mr. Horton. The
bed-ticking which had been spread over the Bull-ring, was now collected
in a heap, and, as if to afford light to the diabolical marauders, was
set on fire.

Simultaneously with these proceedings another party of rioters had been
engaged in like acts of determined violence. By these the houses of Mr.
Allen, a biscuit-baker, Mr. Perkins, brush-maker, who was the
head-borough of Birmingham; Mr. Arnold, pork-butcher; Mr. Pounteney,
grocer; Mr. Heath, cheesemonger; Mr. Walton, butcher; Mr. Fincher,
leather-seller; Mr. Bliss, (the Spread Eagle,) a person who had never
rendered himself obnoxious; Mrs. Marty a cutler; Mr. Banks, druggist;
and Mr. Gooden, (the Nelson Inn,) were successively attacked, and more
or less injured and pillaged. The mob were about to visit the house of
Mr. Wainwright, liquor-merchant, with the same species of violence,
when, however, their respect for his articles of traffic seemed to
overcome their determination, and a cry of "No! no!" was instantly
raised, and obeyed.

The shout of "Fire!" was now heard, and scarcely had the idea been
expressed when numbers of the rioters were seen carrying heaps of the
burning materials from the streets into the houses of Messrs. Leggett
and Bourne. Within a quarter of an hour the flames burst forth with
awful violence amidst the hellish yells of the rabble. The police nor
the soldiery had appeared, and the astonishment of the peaceful
witnesses to these dreadful scenes at the apparent supineness of the
magistracy, maybe easily appreciated. The alarm of fire was speedily
conveyed through the town, and an engine now drove into the Bull-ring,
but the threats of violence of the crowd compelled the firemen to lash
their horses and escape from the dreadful scene of confusion into which
they had intruded themselves. New efforts were then made by the mob to
carry the fire to other houses, but by good fortune they were
unavailing, and before they could secure their object the whole body of
metropolitan police in the town, under the orders of Mr. Superintendant
May, rushed upon them armed with sabres. This was at a quarter before
ten, and thus for nearly an hour and a half had the town been left to
the unchecked violence of a furious mob. The abject fear with which
they instantly fled upon the appearance now of resistance to their
further mischievous designs, showed the ease with which their previous
proceedings might have been stayed. They were pursued by the police
only to a short distance, and then this body returned to the late scene
of action, in order to procure the extinguishment of the flames which
were still reigning with unabated violence in the houses which had been
the objects of the fury of the mob. The appearance of bodies of
dragoons marching towards the Bull-ring through Moor-street and
High-street served to complete the rout; and the immediate advance of
three hundred of the Rifle Brigade, at once dispelled all apprehension
of future danger.

While a portion of the troops remained in the Bull-ring to aid the
firemen who had now again arrived with several engines, in preventing
the further spread of the conflagration, the rest proceeded to scour
the neighbouring streets, and to clear them of the crowds of people by
which they were still occupied. This they did in excellent style, and
by a few minutes after ten o'clock there were few of the people to be
seen in the vicinity of the Bullring. The flames at this time were
bursting from every part of the burning houses, presenting a spectacle
of awful grandeur. At about eleven o'clock the roof of Mr. Bourne's
house fell in, and by midnight that of Messrs. Leggett had shared the
same fate. The engines continued playing upon the ruins until a late
hour, so as to avoid the possibility of a renewal of the danger.

During the night the police made many prisoners who were charged with
having been parties to the riot.

Throughout the whole of Tuesday the Bull-ring presented an appearance
of desolation which was much increased by the stillness which
prevailed. The whole town was pervaded by a similar gloom; and few
shops, except those in the outskirts, were open. As night approached,
the streets began to exhibit their usual feverish aspect; and,
according to an announcement which had been made, between seven and
eight o'clock a meeting was held at Holloway-head, which was attended
by considerable numbers. Loud complaints were to be heard escaping from
many of the persons present as to the treatment which they had
experienced on the previous night from the police, and threats of
vengeance were held out. Others pointed out the means of revenge by
suggesting the seizure of the cannon in the barrack-yard; but at about
eight o'clock the whole party was suddenly put to flight by the
appearance of a troop of dragoons and yeomanry advancing towards the
spot where the meeting was held. At first a few hisses and groans
escaped them, but presently the advance of the soldiers induced them to
give way, and then they were finally entirely put to rout by the
riflemen, who scoured all the neighbouring streets, many of the more
refractory of the malcontents receiving some slight wounds in the
violence of their opposition to the authority of the law. The soldiers
soon afterwards returned to the town, and charge of the streets was
then given up to the special constables, who had been sworn in in great
numbers during the day, and the police. Parties of the military,
however, were posted at Holloway-head and the Bull-ring, at each of
which places a cannon was placed with a view to awe the people, and to
show the determination of the authorities that any new act of
aggression should be received with becoming firmness. . On Wednesday,
the town seemed to be again restored to quietude, but the military and
constabulary were still on the alert.

During the week many persons were committed to Warwick jail to stand
their trial for having been parties to the riots, and for having
committed depredations in the houses which they had ransacked: but we
shall hereafter refer to the particular cases of these individuals.

With regard to the precise and immediate cause of these distressing
riots, many suggestions were thrown out, without, however, doing more
than showing them to have arisen from a general and undefinable feeling
of discontent, increased perhaps by the supposed harshness of the
conduct of the police-force. The correspondent of a morning newspaper,
who appears to have made assiduous inquiries upon the spot upon the
subject, thus sensibly describes the result of the information which he
was able to obtain. He says,-- "The more opportunities that I have of
conversation with different parties, and different classes of persons
in this town, the more thoroughly am I convinced that the social
condition of the people is disorganised, and that the worst feelings,
consistent with the stability and safety of property, prevail. There is
a bitter and almost universal feeling of hatred amongst the operative
classes against employers, or those who are apparently raised above the
pressing wants and necessities of life. This is the feeling which has
been conveyed to me, not only by bankers and the richest merchants with
whom I have conversed, but it is confirmed to the letter even by
employers whose means are so humble that they toil as hard as the very
workmen to whom they pay wages. One of the latter class of employers
said to me, that what the operatives want is, 'to make every one as
poor as themselves,' to drag all down to their own level, in order that
all may feel how great are the evils of poverty. The general spread of
such a feeling was ascribed by this person to the speeches of the
Chartist leaders, to the doctrines of political economy (if they can be
called so) which they now preach, and to the incitements which they
have held out for the working classes to arm themselves. In this
respect it is plain that great pains have been taken to accustom the
minds of the populace to consider the best means of fighting with the
regular soldiers, and the most suitable means of destroying them.

"Having stated what is the description given to me of the feeling and
condition of the operatives, I next endeavoured to ascertain what were
the notions of the operatives themselves; and I may say that to my
questions, I received but one answer, namely -- that it was a shame to
bring the London police amongst them; that the police had acted very
badly; that they attacked them without telling them to disperse; that
many innocent men, some bringing home their work to their employers,
were struck down by the police; and that in short the town would never
be quiet again until the London police were sent away."

With reference to the number of persons engaged in the riot, the same
writer declared his impression, that no more than two hundred
individuals were actually employed in those scenes of disorder which we
have described. Hundreds looked on without attempting to check the
progress of the events which they were witnessing, exhibiting perhaps
feelings of satisfaction rather than regret, at seeing, as they
supposed, the wealthy shopkeepers reduced to the level of poverty of
themselves; but the persons who were actively engaged did not exceed
the number mentioned. The checking of the riot, according to the same
authority, would have been of easy accomplishment, for the greater
proportion of the mischief was commenced by parties of two and three,
who were not joined by any others until it was perceived that the
attack was successful. Had the inhabitants joined to repel these
assaults upon their property, much of the mischief might have been
prevented, and still more so if the military and police forces had been
brought into operation at the commencement of the proceedings.

The conduct of the magistrates almost immediately became the object of
attack and animadversion; and memorials were presented to the
government that it might be made the subject of investigation. Mr.
Dundas, a barrister, was subsequently appointed to undertake the task
of inquiring into the grounds of complaint made, and we subjoin
extracts of the report which he presented upon the subject to the
Marquis of Normanby, Secretary of State for the Home Department. Having
stated the nature of the memorial presented to the government, in which
it was alleged, that "on the evening of the 15th of July, from
half-past eight to a quarter before ten o'clock, the mayor and
magistrates failed in their duty, by leaving the property and lives of
the citizens unprotected to the violence of an organised mob, although
full and authenticated information had been early given to the mayor
and magistrates of the borough of the intentions and plans of the
rioters," he proceeded to detail the mode in which he had carried on
the investigation, and then he said, --

"I have now the honour to transmit to your lordship the short-hand
writer's notes of the evidence, together with my opinion on the points
submitted to me.

"It appeared on the inquiry, that for several weeks before the day in
question, that is to say, before Monday, the 15th of July last,
Chartist meetings, at times consisting of many hundred persons, were
frequently held in Birmingham and the immediate neighbourhood. These
meetings, although calculated to alarm the peaceable inhabitants of the
place, for the most part passed off quietly; but some of them, and
especially a meeting held on the 4th of July, it was necessary to put
down by the military in aid of the civil power. To preserve the peace
thus disturbed, the Birmingham police was altogether inadequate, a few
constables and street-keepers being the whole force of the borough; but
between the 10th of May and the day in question, upwards of two
thousand special constables were sworn in, ward and section leaders
appointed, and instructions furnished them from the public-office for
organising and effectually employing the men in time of need. For
additional security, two detachments of the metropolitan police were
sent from London on the 4th and 5th of July; and though forty had
returned in a few days after, the rest (about fifty) remained at
Birmingham, and on the day in question were stationed at the
public-office under Mr. May, an active superintendant of the force.

"The usual course of the public-office was for some of the magistrates
to give daily attendance there from about eleven in the forenoon to
three or four in the afternoon, for the despatch of business; but it
appeared that for some time before the day in question not only were
they there in the day-time, but that some of them staid to a late hour
at night.

"The officer in command at the barracks (three-quarters of a mile off)
used to call twice a day at the office, to communicate with the mayor
on the state of the peace of the town; nor should it be omitted, that
an excellent understanding was kept up between the civil and military
authorities, and that on every occasion when the soldiers had been
called upon to act in aid of the civil power, the assistance required
was both promptly and efficiently given.

"Some of the magistrates resided in the town; Dr. Booth's house, for
instance, was about six minutes' walk from the public-office; the mayor
and some others lived in the suburbs; while the houses of a few were
still further off; George Redford, the prison-keeper, lived at the
public-office -- a well-known, confidential, and intelligent man of
business.

"Such was, in general, the state of things at Birmingham, when, in the
forenoon of the day in question, a bellman was heard in several of the
streets, crying a Chartist meeting to be held that day at Holloway-head
at one, or, as it was differently reported, at half-past twelve and
half-past six o'clock. Holloway-head and the Bull-ring, about a mile
from each other, were the usual places of holding such meetings.

"It appeared, also, that at eleven o'clock of the forenoon the
following letter was sent to Captain Moorsom, a special constable of
the borough, who had acted as the medium of communication between the
ward leaders and the magistrates, viz. --

     "Public-office, Monday July 15, 1839, 11 a.m.
"Dear Sir,-- The magistrates here assembled are desirous, with your
permission, to avail themselves of the advantage of your aid and means
in watching and ascertaining the character and proceedings of the
meeting, should one take place, at Holloway-head. Some magistrates will
be in attendance at this office, and quite prepared to act according to
circumstances, and to the nature of the information you may transmit to
them. This is a precautionary measure which the magistrates feel it
incumbent upon them to adopt, although they venture to anticipate a
peaceful issue. They would not have felt themselves warranted in taking
this liberty, but from the encouragement they have derived from your
uniformly courteous, able, and kind co-operation with them during the
existing troubles.
     "I remain, dear Sir, yours faithfully,
     "Captain Moorsom, R.N. 
     "J. K. Booth.

"On receiving the letter at noon, Captain Moorsom arranged with the
Edgbaston ward leader that proper men should be appointed to convey
information to the public-office as to the character of the meeting,
while he himself watched its proceedings; but nothing occurred to cause
any apprehension. By two o'clock about three hundred persons had
assembled at Holloway-head; in an hour or so afterwards the numbers had
diminished, and seemed to Captain Moorsom to be quite insignificant.

"About this time Colonel Chatterton, of the dragoons, called as usual
at the public-office, and was told by the mayor that there was no
occasion to keep the soldiers at the barracks in readiness, since, from
all he heard, the town was quiet. Hence it appeared that the mayor set
no value on the information of Mr. Coburn, who had told him in an
earlier part of the day that from what had been said in his hearing the
day before, at a meeting at Holloway-head, disturbance was to be
expected at night.

"At five o'clock the mayor left the public-office to go home to his own
house, about a mile-and-a-half off, the other magistrates having left
before him; and before going away he gave express directions to George
Redfern, the prison-keeper, that if magistrates were wanted he was to
send or go for him or Dr. Booth.

"It further appeared that later in the evening, about seven o'clock, a
great number of persons (probably about one thousand) was assembled at
Holloway-head, and these, instead of dispersing when they left the
ground, proceeded in a body towards the Warwick-road, to meet (as was
supposed) two Chartists who had been bailed out of prison that day, and
were expected to return to Birmingham that night. From some cause or
other, never satisfactorily accounted for, a mob of men and boys came
back from the Warwick-road, and suddenly arrived by hundreds in the
Bull-ring, about half-past eight o'clock; there they violently set fire
to several valuable premises, burned and destroyed a great deal of
furniture and other property, broke many of the windows of the
public-office (a little way off), and having done the work of
destruction uninterruptedly for not less than an hour, at last they
gave way and retired, either seeing the police had turned out against
them, or expecting the speedy arrival of the military.

"It is here to be observed that Captain Moorsom had been watching the
proceedings of the people at Holloway-head (in the evening), till he
saw them go away; then, thinking they might have adjourned to the
Bull-ring, while in fact they had passed it on their left, he went to
the Bull-ring, and finding nothing that to his mind indicated
disturbance, about eight o'clock he proceeded to the public-office to
report what he had witnessed, and ascertain from the magistrates what
were their arrangements for the night; but though he asked for a
magistrate he did not go or send for one; and having told the
superintendant of police, whom he saw there, that everything was quiet,
he returned home about a quarter before nine, after expressing his
opinion to the Edgbaston ward leader that there was no fear of
disturbance. George Redfern, the prison-keeper, stayed at the
public-office till some time after eight, when a constable came in and
asked for the magistrates, adding that the town was in an excited
state. On hearing this he lost not a moment, but set off to Dr.
Booth's, and thence to the mayor's. He found both of them at home; and
the mayor having joined Dr. Booth at his house, they proceeded to the
barracks as quick as they could, called out the military, and
accompanied them on horseback to the Bull-ring, Whilst George Redfern
was thus away for forty-two minutes, and after he returned to the
public-office, the superintendant of police was repeatedly called upon
to act against the rioters, but he steadily refused, in consequence of
orders that without the military or a magistrate's sanction the police
were not to go out, nor, in fact, did the police begin to act at all
till Mr. Walker (a magistrate) came to the public-office, and with him
they went against the mob soon after half-past nine. It was the opinion
of some, that had the police gone out and acted earlier the mob might
have been dispersed, or at least that the property thus destroyed by
the rioters might have been defended; but it appeared a very doubtful
question.

"Upon such a state of facts, though the evidence will supply a great
deal more in relation to the issue, the mayor and magistrates are
charged with neglect of duty.

"Now, the case must be looked at as it presented itself to the mayor
and magistrates at the time, and not as if they could have foreseen the
extent of calamity, which their want of preparation, their absence from
the public office, or any other circumstances may be thought to have
occasioned.

"Believing then that they acted with perfect good faith throughout, and
considering besides that they took reasonable measures to watch the
proceedings of the Chartists at Holloway-head, that they relied on
information which led them to apprehend no disturbance or outbreak,
that on leaving the public-office in the afternoon at five, the mayor
gave directions to George Redfern, the prison-keeper, to send or go for
him or Dr. Booth, if magistrates should be wanted; and taking into
account that the mayor and Dr. Booth were each of them at home when
George Redfern came for them, I am of opinion that under all the
circumstances, the mayor and magistrates were not guilty of neglecting
their duty on the occasion referred to in the memorial.

"The general orders to the police, which prevented them from acting
when first they were called upon to do so, I think ought not to have
been given; but it is reasonable to believe that the mayor and
magistrates laid on the restraint purely out of consideration to the
men themselves.

     "I have, &c.
     "David Dundas."

This was a report which entirely exonerated the magistrates from all
blame; and leaving this part of the case, we shall now proceed to the
trial of the persons implicated in these transactions, which took place
at the Warwick assizes, in the month of August, in the same year.

On Thursday the 1st of August, a lad named Perry, was first tried for
breaking into the house of Mr. Horton, the silversmith, and stealing a
silver sugar-basin; but he was acquitted. In a second indictment, the
charge made was that he had received the basin well knowing it to have
been stolen. The evidence went to show that the basin had been found in
his possession, and that he refused to give it up; but it appeared that
he had picked it up, and the jury acquitted him, discrediting the
allegation of his felonious intention.

On the next day John Neale, William Shears, John Storey, William Edes,
and Frederick Mason, were tried upon an indictment charging them with
being parties to the riot of the 4th of July, and a verdict of "Guilty"
returned.

On Saturday the 3rd of August, Jeremiah Howell, aged thirty-four;
Francis Roberts, twenty-six; John Jones, twenty-one; Thomas Aston,
fifteen; and Henry Wilkes, twenty-one; were put upon their trial. The
indictment charged them with having at Birmingham, on the 15th of July
1839, with other persons to the number of two thousand, unlawfully and
feloniously assembled, to the disturbance of the public peace, and with
having feloniously pulled down and demolished the house of James and
Henry Bourne. The evidence showed the implication of all except Wilkes,
and with that exception the prisoners were found guilty.

On the same day John Collins, whose name has been already alluded to,
was called in and arraigned upon an indictment preferred against him.
The indictment recited that there had been an unlawful assembly called
together in the town of Birmingham on the 4th of July, and that George
Masters and John Hugh Sweeting, being officers of the London
Metropolitan Police, and being duly sworn in as special constables did,
by order of the magistrates, remove such unlawful assembly; and then it
alleged that John Collins, being a wicked, seditious, and disaffected
person, and endeavouring to bring into hatred and contempt the police
force, and to excite tumults amongst the Queen's subjects, did cause to
be written and published a certain false, scandalous, and malicious
libel on the police and the administration, which were the resolutions
of the National Convention. These resolutions were then set forth.

The libel was proved to have been taken to the printer by the prisoner,
and to have been printed and posted through the town by his directions.
It was in the following terms: --

"Resolutions unanimously agreed to by the General Convention, "Resolved
-- 1. That this Convention is of opinion that a wanton, flagrant, and
unjust outrage has been made upon the people of Birmingham by a
bloodthirsty and unconstitutional force from London, acting under the
authority of men who, when out of office, sanctioned and took part in
the meetings of the people, and now, when they share in the public
plunder, seek to keep the people in social slavery and political
degradation.
"2. That the people of Birmingham are the best judges of their own
right to meet in the Bull-ring or elsewhere, have their own feelings to
consult respecting the outrage given, and are the best judges of their
own power and resources to obtain justice.
"That the summary and despotic arrest of Dr. Taylor, our respected
colleague, affords another convincing proof of the absence of all
justice in England, and clearly shows that there is no security for
life, liberty, or property, till the people have some control over the
laws they are called upon to obey.
     (By order) W. Lovett, Sec.
     "Friday, July 5, 1839."

The prisoner was found "Guilty," but recommended to mercy on account of
his former good character.

On Tuesday, William Lovett, who was the secretary to the National
Convention, was tried upon a similar indictment, charging the
publication by him of the same libel; and after a long and impartial
trial, in which the prisoner defended himself with much tact, a verdict
of "Guilty" was returned.

Several other prisoners were, during the ensuing week, found guilty of
riot, but the prosecutions against many were withdrawn.

On Thursday morning, the 8th of August, Mr. Justice Littledale passed
sentence on the prisoners against whom convictions had been recorded.

Jeremiah Howell, Francis Roberts, and John Jones were first placed in
the dock.

The Clerk of the Arraigns asked the prisoners what they had to say why
sentence of death should not be passed upon them.

Mr. Justice Littledale then put on his black cap, and addressed them.
They had been convicted of felony by a jury of their country, for
demolishing the house of James and Henry Bourne, of Birmingham. This
offence, by the policy of our law, had for many years been punishable
with death; and though of late years many offences which were before
capital had, by the humanity of the legislature, been mitigated, the
punishment for that offence had not been reduced, and it was still
thought proper to retain the punishment of death for it. Even at this
time, as to such offences as remained capital, where there were any
alleviating circumstances, mercy was usually and properly extended.
But, he regretted to say, that their offence was not one of that
description, nor could he, in the discharge of his public duty,
honestly recommend them to mercy. They had been aware that Birmingham
had for some time been in a very excited state. Riots had from time to
time occurred, which it had been found very difficult to suppress, till
at length on the 15th of July they reached their highest pitch --
houses were then demolished and burnt, property to a great value
destroyed, and, but for the interposition of a superior force, the mob
might have had possession of the town, and a much greater amount of
property might have been destroyed, and many lives sacrificed. In this
act of demolition the prisoners unfortunately engaged themselves, and
began the devastation. He therefore found it necessary, as far as lay
in his power, to make an example of those who had been convicted, in
order to prevent similar outrages in Birmingham and other parts of the
kingdom where such things might be contemplated. He hoped that some
benefit to others, at least, would result from their sad example, and
that those who should hear the account of these lamentable outrages and
their result, would be warned by it from the commission of similar
offences. But although he could hold out no hope of mercy here, there
was for them a hope of obtaining it in another world from that Almighty
Being who understood all hearts, and was always disposed to grant it
where there was an humble and true repentance. Their time here was fast
approaching to its end, and they must be prepared to meet their God. He
entreated them to employ that time in true repentance for all their
offences, and endeavour to obtain, through the merits and intercession
of our Saviour Jesus Christ, that mercy from God which they could not
hope for from man. It now only remained for him to pronounce the awful
sentence of the law, which was, that they, Jeremiah Howell, Francis
Roberts, and John Jones, be severally taken to the place from whence
they came, and that they be severally taken from thence to the place of
execution, and there severally hanged by the neck till they were dead;
and (concluded the judge) may the Lord, in his infinite mercy, have
mercy on your souls.

Thomas Aston (the lad who was convicted for the same offence as the
other prisoners) was then brought to the front of the dock.

Mr. Justice Littledale said, in his case it did not appear to him that
the awful sentence of the law, which would be recorded against him,
should be carried into effect, and his life would probably be spared.
He would take time to consider for what his sentence should be
commuted.

John Neale, William Shears, William Edes, Eleazer Hughes, and James
Pomeroy, convicted of misdemeanour and riot, were next placed the dock.

The learned judge, after commenting on the offences of which they had
been found guilty, said he found it necessary in their cases, and in
order to discourage such scenes of tumult, the consequences of which,
when once begun, no man could foresee, and protect life and property in
Birmingham and elsewhere, to inflict a severe punishment. He,
therefore, sentenced them severally to eighteen months' imprisonment in
the House of Correction, and hard labour.

The following prisoners, convicted of the same offence, some of whom
pleaded guilty, and in favour of whom there were mitigating
circumstances, were then placed at the bar, and received the following
sentences:--

     John Drinkworth, twelve months' imprisonment and hard labour.

     James Rhodes, nine months' imprisonment and hard labour.

John Storey, Frederick Mason, and Thomas Salter, six months'
imprisonment and hard labour.

John Taplow, for the same offence (who pleaded guilty), one month's
imprisonment and hard labour.

John Smith, William Clift, and Thomas King, were discharged on entering
into their own recognizances in 40l. each to appear and receive
judgment when called upon.

John Collins and William Lovett were then brought up and asked why the
court should not pronounce sentence upon them for the misdemeanour of
which they had been convicted?

Mr. Lovett addressed the Court:-- Because, in the first place, he was
convinced that the jury were prejudiced against him. He had it from
very good authority that several of them declared their express wish
that all the Chartists should be hanged. That, he submitted, was a very
good reason for a lenient sentence. His lordship would also take into
consideration the evidence on the trial, and the proof of the facts set
forth in the placard, combined with the prejudiced feelings of the jury
-- circumstances which ought to weigh much in the present case.

Mr. Justice Littledale then addressed the prisoners. They stood
severally convicted of having published a seditious libel. He had taken
all the circumstances of the case into his serious consideration. John
Collins had received a good character, and the jury, on that account,
had recommended him to mercy. In Lovett's case, the jury did not so
recommend. At the same time he observed, that Lovett had received a
very good character, and though the jury had not recommended him to the
merciful consideration of the court, he would not on that account make
any difference in their sentence. The sentence of the court was, that
they be severally imprisoned in the common jail of this county for one
year.

They applied to be imprisoned on the debtors' side; but the learned
judge said he had not the power to make such an order.

     The business of the assize was then closed.

The final merciful consideration of the cases of the convicts who had
received sentence of death, exhibited the leniency with which the
government desired to deal with their offences, in spite of their
enormity. On Thursday the 15th of August, a large deputation of members
of parliament waited upon the minister of the crown within whose
department of office the subject came, for the purpose of soliciting
mercy for the condemned men. They happily succeeded in their
philanthropic object, and a reprieve was instantly despatched to
Warwick. It was felt, however, that although the punishment of death
was removed, the infliction of a severe penalty was rendered necessary
by the enormity of the offence, and the sentence of the prisoners was
commuted only to transportation for life.

It would be impossible in the space to which we are limited, to go
through the cases of all the persons who were convicted in the course
of the years 1839 and 1840, for their advocacy, by the violence of
their language, or of their deeds, of the cause of Chartism. Throughout
the greater part of the manufacturing districts of England, the
agitation which prevailed upon this subject was very great, and
repeated and frequent acts of violence were committed, the
participators in which suffered the penalties of their offences; but to
recite each particular case would be little more than to repeat the
same details.

The events of the latter end of the year 1839, when a most systematic
and violent attempt was made to seize the town of Newport, in
Monmouthshire, by an organised band of Chartists, will be found to be
hereafter described; and for a more complete view of the abominable
conspiracy which existed in reference to the advancement of the cause
of Chartism, we must refer our readers to the article in which the
riots of Wales are delineated.


THE CHARTIST RIOTS
1839-40.

The riots which took place at the end of the year 1839, in the
manufacturing districts of England and Wales, will long be remembered
as among the most serious and violent popular commotions which have
occurred in this country in the course of the current century. The
Chartists, whose proceedings we have already alluded to, are alone
answerable for the mischievous "risings "to which the country was made
the prey, and many of them have paid the forfeit of their offences by
the infliction of the punishments of transportation, fine, and
imprisonment.

Among the most distinguished of the Chartist leaders, who were
concerned in the Newport outbreak, which was the most serious of those
to which public attention was directed, was Mr. John Frost, who
previously to the time of his connection with these proceedings had
been a magistrate, and a respectable inhabitant of the borough of
Newport, in Monmouthshire Mr. Frost was well-known to have long
entertained political feelings extending to the extreme of radicalism;
but, considering the situation of trust which he had held in his native
town, it was scarcely deemed possible that he should be engaged in
proceedings, the declared object of which was to subvert the government
of the day.

Preparatory to entering into a description of the circumstances
immediately attending the great Chartist movement against Newport, we
shall give a short narrative of the life of Mr. Frost. At the time of
his conviction, in the month of January 1840, he had just attained the
age of fifty years; his birth, therefore, must have taken place in the
year 1790. At an early period of his life he was deprived of the
paternal care of his father, and the direction of his education
devolved upon his maternal grandfather, a boot and shoemaker at
Newport, in extensive business. The schools of Bristol it was found,
afforded far better means of education than those of Newport; and, to
obtain the benefit of them. Frost was sent to the former place, where
he sedulously laboured to avail himself of the good opportunities which
were so considerately and timely offered to him.

He became early devoted to books, and little relished his grandfather's
business to which he was at first indentured. From these indentures he
was released by the interference of an uncle, then mayor of Newport;
and he became assistant to a woollen-draper, in Bridge-street, Bristol.
Leaving this city he remained for some time in London in the same
capacity; and at last returning to Newport, at the solicitation of his
mother, he took the house and business of a Mr. Thomas, draper and
tailor, the drapery branch of which he carried on until 1812, when
finding himself prosperous, he married his present wife, a distant
relation of his own, and niece to Mr. Foster, the mayor of Newport, who
had been the means of getting him released from his first indentures.

Whilst in London, although not more than twenty years of age, he was
entrusted with the chief management of the business of the house in
which he was engaged. He was particularly esteemed for his sobriety,
and generally spent his evenings at some of the political club meetings
which were then so numerous. In these clubs the unhappy subject of
these records was in the habit of associating with Gale Jones,
Thelwall, Hardy, Galloway, and others of the same school; and although
he spoke but seldom, it cannot be disputed that the lessons which he
there received and the principles which he there imbibed, had a great
influence in directing his mind to that course which he subsequently
pursued.

In the year 1817, Mr. Frost entered into a public political discussion
with Mr. Cobbett, which was the first occasion on which he had been
placed in a conspicuous position before the world. From this period he
became a constant agitator. In all questions, whether of a local or a
general character, he took an active part, and more than once before
his connection with that struggle for Chartism, which was productive to
him of so serious results, he became involved in situations threatening
him with ruin.

In the year 1822 Mr. Frost was subjected to a severe imprisonment, upon
a conviction founded upon a libel published by him against Mr.
Protheroe, the town-clerk of Newport. Upon this subject a writer,
apparently favourable to Mr. Frost and the views which he took upon
this question, thus expresses himself;--

"Up to this period the current of Mr. Frost's life seems to have run
smoothly and prosperously; a happy husband and father, and a prosperous
tradesman, he seemed destined to go through life without a cloud on his
fortunes, when he unfortunately became involved in law proceedings with
a Mr. Protheroe, town-clerk of Newport, and land-steward to Sir Charles
Morgan, a man of great influence in the neighbourhood. The immediate
cause of this quarrel was Mr. Frost's having become bail for a
relation, whom Mr. Protheroe (an attorney) was suing for an alleged
debt of 150l. The legality and existence of the debt were both denied;
but owing, it is said, to some informality, the suit was decided
against the defendant, and in the consequences of this decision Mr.
Frost became involved. Conceiving himself wronged, Mr. Frost, it
appears, threatened to lay a statement of the whole affair before the
public, unless his portion of the loss was refunded. The judgment not
being upon the merits, but merely in consequence of a technical
mistake, he conceived he was not morally bound to pay the money. This
argument it seems was not satisfactory to the plaintiff, and the end
was, that Mr. Protheroe brought an action against Mr. Frost, upon the
ground that this threat of publication was an attempt to extort money.
In the eye of the law it was so, and Mr. Frost had 1000l. damages
awarded against him for this rash step. Mr. Frost immediately sold his
stock, and paid all his creditors, save one relation, who arrested him
for a debt of 200l. Upon this Mr. Frost declared himself insolvent, and
surrendered himself as such."

The matter, however, did not end here; but the writer already quoted
says further: --

"In the mean time his opponent, Mr. Protheroe, had commenced a fresh
action against him for libel. Mr. Frost had, in reference to the former
action, alluded to the jury as being 'packed,' and also asserted that
two of the witnesses, clerks of the plaintiff, were perjured. Upon this
Mr. Frost was tried and found guilty of a libel, for which he paid the
penalty of six months' imprisonment in Coldbath-fields Prison, London.

"Public opinion was, however, in Mr. Frost's favour, though the law was
his enemy. On his return to his native town, after his imprisonment for
this libel, he was met by fifteen thousand of his neighbours, with
banners and music, and so made a sort of triumphal entry into Newport,
ruined by course of law, without having, in general estimation, been
guilty of a shadow of crime."

From this period Mr. Frost continued to reside in Newport, exerting his
influence, upon every occasion, in support of the more popular views
upon the various questions coming under discussion, and advocating,
with considerable effect, the necessity of reform in the corporation of
that small borough. When the Municipal Corporation Reform Bill was
passed, he was looked upon by his fellow-townsmen as the fittest person
to represent their opinions; and, in the year 1837, he was elected
mayor, notwithstanding the strenuous exertions of the party opposed to
him in political opinions. At the same time he held the office of
guardian of the poor of the union in which he lived, under the Poor Law
Amendment Act; and in reference to this law, as well as all others upon
which any popular feeling existed, he espoused the cause of opposition.

At the conclusion of the year of his mayoralty, he was placed on the
list of justices of the peace for the district of Newport, in
consequence of the representations of his fellow-townsmen, by Lord John
Russell, at that time Secretary of State for the Home Department; but,
notwithstanding his elevation to this undoubtedly honourable post, he
continued to employ his greatest efforts in favour of the wishes of the
working classes. In 1838 he joined a society called "The Working Men's
Association," at Newport, and this was the first step which he took
towards that unfortunate termination of his career which subsequent
circumstances brought about. In the course of the ensuing year he was
elected, as the representative of the district of Monmouthshire and its
vicinity, in "The Convention of the Working Classes," an assembly which
met in London in order to endeavour to procure the adoption of the
principles of the "Charter" by parliament. Preparatory to his quitting
Newport to take his share in the discussions which took place at this
Convention, he attended several meetings of the persons by whom he had
been elected, for the purpose of their determining upon the precise
grounds to be taken by him upon his arrival in London. Acting as
chairman at several of them, he made such assertions, and employed such
arguments, as were considered by the officers of her majesty's
government inconsistent with the duties of the office of magistrate,
which he then held; and Lord John Russell in consequence wrote to him,
to demand an explanation of his conduct. A long correspondence took
place, and considerable public excitement was occasioned; but the
result was that, in the month of May 1839, the name of Mr, Frost was
removed from the list of persons in the commission of the peace.

This step upon the part of the government had the effect of raising Mr.
Frost still higher in the opinions of those persons of whom he was now
the professed leader; and, while in the Convention in the metropolis,
he acquired considerable influence, on his return to Newport he was
received with great enthusiasm. In his speeches, the views which he
took, although undoubtedly opposed to the government of the day, of
whom he spoke in no measured terms, were decidedly in favour of the
operation of "moral force," as distinguished from "physical force," in
securing the object which his partisans had in view. It is surprising,
therefore, to find, that on his eventual re-appearance at his native
town, he should have espoused the cause of violence, and should have
consented to take the lead in so formidable a movement as that which
was made under his immediate control and direction.

Frost, however, was not the only individual whose proceedings attracted
attention. Other delegates to the Convention had been appointed from
the same district, and the violence of the declared opinions of one of
them, named Vincent, laid him open to charges against him of a very
serious nature. He was found to have gained great power over the
operatives in the coal and iron districts around Monmouth; and his
outrageous language soon obtained for him the notice of Mr. Phillips,
the mayor of Newport, within whose sphere of action he most frequently
exhibited himself. A prosecution was in consequence determined upon;
and, on the 2nd of August 1839, true bills were found at the Monmouth
Assizes against him, together with other persons, his associates in the
cause of violence, upon a charge of unlawfully meeting together,
intending to disturb the peace and tranquillity of this realm, and to
excite disaffection and hatred to the government and constitution of
the country. Amongst the defendants upon these indictments was Mr.
Frost; but, unfortunately for him, his case was postponed to the
ensuing assizes. A verdict of "Guilty" was returned upon the charge
preferred against Vincent, and he was sentenced to one year's
imprisonment, while his companion, William Edwards, was ordered to
undergo nine months' imprisonment, and John Dickenson and William
Townsend were sentenced to six months' imprisonment.

After this conviction no popular movement took place, but the prisoners
were conveyed, without any attempt at disturbance, to the county jail;
and although many remonstrances were heard as to their being subjected
to the rigorous discipline of the jail, these eventually ceased, and a
prospect of peace and quietude presented itself. While yet the
authorities were congratulating themselves upon the check which
appeared to have been given to physical-force Chartism, however,
information reached them that secret meetings were nightly held in
beer-shops and club-rooms in the country districts, the proceedings at
which were calculated to excite feelings of the greatest uneasiness
amongst the well-disposed subjects of her majesty. Rumours were afloat
that a rising was meditated on the hills, for the purpose of attacking
Newport, and, in the event of success, of marching to Monmouth to
liberate Vincent and the other Chartist prisoners confined in the jail
of that town. From the frequency and vagueness of such reports, little
importance (generally speaking) was attached to them until Sunday, the
3rd of November, when Mr. Phillips, mayor of Newport, obtained
information, to which some credence was attached, that an
insurrectionary movement had been determined on in the Chartist lodges.
The mayor, from the first moment of serious alarm, adopted every
precautionary measure, which firmness, correct judgment, and
indefatigable exertion could accomplish. On the first intimation of
danger, he sent the police-officers to summon all the special
constables to attend him at the King's Head Hotel, at eight o'clock in
the evening. The call was promptly responded to by all the respectable
inhabitants; and it was resolved that, in consequence of the
information received, it was necessary that fifty special constables
should remain on duty in the King's Head Hotel all night, fifty at the
Westgate Hotel, and fifty at the Parrot Inn. The mayor afterwards
adjourned to the Westgate Hotel, where the magistrates held their
sittings; and a detachment of the 45th foot, consisting of thirty
soldiers only, was stationed in the house, under the command of
Lieutenant Gray, it having been deemed advisable that the remainder of
the troop should stay at the workhouse with Captain Stack, where about
two hundred stand of arms were deposited. In the course of the evening
and the night, the special constables, who were on duty parading the
streets, captured many Chartists, armed with pistols, pikes, and other
deadly weapons. The alarm was complete; for, during the whole of the
afternoon, every inhabitant, or stranger, who happened to arrive in
town from the vicinity of the works, brought in the terrifying
intelligence that the ringleaders of the Chartists had been scouring
the hills during the whole of the day, in all directions, and
compelling, by brute force, all who came within their reach to join
their ranks, and that it was highly probable that an attack would be
made upon Newport that night. This induced the mayor to look for
further assistance, and he accordingly sent an express to the mayor of
Bristol, requesting a reinforcement of troops. The morning dawned upon
the affrighted town without apparent danger, but still alarms were
abroad; and, as the hours advanced, business appeared at a complete
stand-still, and no one ventured to open his shop. At eight o'clock
Lieut. Gray, of the 45th, with two sergeants and twenty-eight soldiers,
arrived at the Westgate Hotel, from the barracks at the poor-house,
beyond Stow Hill, the remainder being left under the command of Captain
Stack at their barracks. The gallant lieutenant immediately placed
himself and men under the direction of the mayor; and the brave and
determined fellows were judiciously posted in the room which commanded
the entire extent of the front of the premises. The shutters of the
Westgate Hotel windows were closed, but the entrance was open, and the
passage occupied by special constables with staves, there being no
appearance of a military force from the exterior of the house.

The subsequent circumstances attending this unfortunate affair, are
best detailed by the Attorney-General's speech, and by the evidence
which was produced at the trial; and having merely stated the fact of
the riot having occurred on the 4th of November, 1839, we shall proceed
to the description of the circumstances attending the investigation
before the jury.

The importance of the inquiry was deemed by the officers of the crown
to be sufficient to warrant the issuing of a special commission for the
trial of the prisoners, and the necessary preliminary arrangements
having been made, the business of the commission at length commenced on
Wednesday, the 1st of January, 1840, at Monmouth, Sir N. C. Tindal, the
Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas; Sir J. Parke, one of
the Barons of the Court of Exchequer; and Sir J. Williams, one of the
Justices of the Court of Queen's Bench, being the Judges appointed to
undertake the difficult task of trying the numerous prisoners in
custody; and the Attorney-General (Sir John Campbell), the
Solicitor-General (Mr. Serjeant Wilde), Mr. Serjeant Ludlow, Mr.
Serjeant Talfourd, Mr. Wightman, and Mr. Talbot, being the counsel for
the crown. The counsel engaged for the prisoners were Sir F. Pollock,
Mr. Kelly, Mr. Thomas, and Mr. Rickards.

The whole of the prisoners had been arraigned upon the indictment
preferred against them on a former day, and had solicited to be tried
separately, in obedience to a right conferred upon them by act of
parliament.

Mr. John Frost was the first put upon his trial. He was placed at the
bar at nine o'clock in the morning, and appeared to possess great
confidence.

The Attorney-General then rose, and thus proceeded to address the court
and jury:-- "May it please your lordships, gentlemen of the jury; In
the discharge of my official duty, I have the honour of attending here
to conduct this important prosecution. I hope you will believe that my
only object is, that the facts of the case may be fairly laid before
you; that truth may be fully investigated; that innocence may be
vindicated, if innocence be found to exist; and that you will only
pronounce the verdict of guilty upon clear and convincing proof. It is
highly important that parties accused should be zealously and ably
defended; but it is likewise of importance that the law should be
vindicated; that the peace of society should be preserved; and that,
when crime has been committed, guilt should be brought to punishment. I
think that no one will deny the necessity for the solemn inquiry in
which we are engaged. There has recently been in this county an armed
insurrection; the law has been set at defiance; an attempt has been
made to take possession of the town of Newport; there has been a
conflict between the insurgents and the Queen's troops; there has been
bloodshed; there has been the loss of many lives. Gentlemen, the
intelligence of these outrages has caused great alarm and dismay
throughout the kingdom. Various prisoners, charged with having been
concerned in these outrages, are now accused of having committed the
highest crime known to the law. Not only on account of the importance
of the occasion, but from the forms of the law, it became necessary for
her Majesty to issue a special commission for the trial of those
charged as offenders. A bill of indictment for high treason was found
by a jury of the county against (amongst others) John Frost, the
prisoner at the bar; but still he is presumed to be innocent. All the
indictment says is this, that he should be put upon his trial. I need
hardly caution you, gentlemen of the jury, that you are to dismiss from
your recollection all that you have read, and all that you have heard,
upon this subject. You are to be guided entirely by the evidence, and
you will proceed as if you never had heard of the case until the
indictment was read to you. I further use the liberty of saying that
you are not to regard my statement, either as to the law or as to the
fact. The law you will receive from the venerable judges who preside
over this court -- the facts you will hear from the witnesses, and you
will be guided by the evidence they give, and the credit that you think
their testimony is entitled to. A most important charge is given to
you, for it is one which bears upon the guilt or innocence of the
prisoner. No men can have higher functions to discharge -- the life and
the reputation of the accused are in your hands -- but there are
likewise in your hands the public safety and the public justice of the
country."

Having then referred at great length to the law affecting the case, the
learned gentleman proceeded to say:-- "I shall now, therefore, give you
a short outline of the facts, which I understand will be clearly proved
in evidence before you. For that purpose I must remind you of the
geographical situation of the county in which these disturbances took
place. You are probably well acquainted with what is called the 'hill
district,' in the county of Monmouth. It is of a triangular form,
having for its apex a place called Risca, about five miles from
Newport. The base is at a distance of from fifteen to twenty miles as
you ascend the country. On the west side you have Nantiglo and Beaufort
iron-works -- on the east, Blaenavon, and the hills in the
neighbourhood; Blorage, I think, being one of the heights. The country
is intersected by deep glens, watered by rapid streams; the Rumney
being on the west, and the Sirhowy parallel to it: then come the rivers
Ebbw Upper and Ebbw Lower, which join and flow down towards Newport;
and near to that is Lanthewy, and the river Avon. In that county, as
you are aware, are mines of coal and iron. These mines have of late
years been worked to a very great extent; and those mountainous hills
which, fifty years ago, were almost uninhabited -- a few shepherds'
huts only being scattered up and down, are now the seat of a dense
population, estimated, I am told, at forty thousand persons, employed
in working the iron and coal mines, and in supplying the wants of those
so engaged. I am afraid the population which has thus suddenly sprung
up is, in many instances, not the most peaceable. I am afraid that a
degree of ignorance prevails which is much to be deplored; and that
many of those who live there are subject to be practised upon by
designing men. It would appear that this population had been organised
to a considerable degree by societies established amongst them, so that
on any occasion a command might be issued and circulated amongst the
population, and speedily obeyed. It will appear that the prisoner, John
Frost, who had been for many years a linen-draper in the town of
Newport, possessed extensive influence in this part of the country, the
hill district of the county of Monmouth. Newport, you are aware, is the
place from which the coal and iron obtained in the mines is exported.
It is a considerable town, and great importance is attached to it. It
is on the highway from South Wales to Bristol, Gloucester, Birmingham,
and the north of England. It will appear in evidence before you, that
in the week preceding Sunday, the 3rd of November, a plan was formed
for a general rising of the population of the district, to take place
on the night of that Sunday, when it should arrive. Various
consultations were held, at which Mr. Frost was present. Those
consultations were held chiefly at a place called Blackwood, between
Rumney and Sirhowy. There is a public-house called the Coach and
Horses, where there was a lodge or society, and where meetings were
held, and where it is clear this scheme was devised or matured. There
was particularly a meeting held on Friday before Sunday, the 3rd of
November. Deputies attended at that meeting; there was a return of the
armed force which could be mustered; and it would appear that there the
plan or scheme was laid down which was afterwards to be carried into
effect. What was that plan? It appears that orders were to be issued to
the men to assemble armed on the evening of Sunday, November the 3d.
There were to be three principal divisions -- one was to be under the
command of John Frost himself, who was at that time stationed at
Blackwood. Another division was to be under the command of Zephaniah
Williams. Williams lived higher up the country; he kept a beer-house at
Coalbrook-vale, on the Ebbw, near Nantiglo. He was to collect the men
up the country, and to bring them down towards Newport. The 3d division
was to be under the command of a person of the name of William Jones, a
watch-maker, at Pontypool. He was to collect the people from the north
and west, and bring them down, and they were all to meet somewhere near
Risca or Cefn, and to come on to Newport. They were to be at Cefn about
midnight on Sunday, and, being assembled there, they were to march to
Newport about two o'clock in the morning -- a time when it was expected
that there would be no preparation to receive them; when the
inhabitants would be buried in sleep, and entirely disarmed of all
suspicion or apprehension of danger. They were, when at Newport, to
attack the troops who were there, to take possession of the town, to
break down the bridge which is there across the river Usk, to stop the
mail, and then, by a signal, the success of the scheme was to be
announced. The mail not arriving in an hour and a half after its usual
time, those who were in concert with them in that town would know that
the plan had succeeded, and there was to be a general rising there, and
in Lancashire generally, and elsewhere. Gentlemen, there never was a
charter law universally and instantly established -- there never was
the remotest chance of this scheme being accomplished; but, had it not
most providentially happened that the night between Sunday and Monday
was one of the darkest and most tempestuous that was ever known in
England, it is difficult to conjecture the degree of mischief which
might have been wrought before the insurrection could have been
suppressed, and peace and tranquillity restored. Gentlemen, John Frost,
the prisoner, remaining at Blackwood, the men under his command did
assemble considerably earlier than the other divisions. He crossed over
from Blackwood to a place called Newbridge, on the Ebbw, and came by
Abercairn to Risca and the Welsh Oak, and there he was early in the
night; but, from the difficulties which presented themselves, the other
divisions, which were to come from the upper parts of the country, did
not arrive until long after the expected hour. Zephaniah Williams, who
was to bring the men from Nantiglo, did not arrive till after daylight.
William Jones, who was to bring his division from the north and west,
did not arrive at the appointed time. A man of the name of Britton, who
commanded a party of this division, did arrive in time, but Z. Williams
with the others was too late. John Frost having come to Risca, remained
there until shortly before daylight. It was then thought necessary to
muster the forces there collected, and to march on towards Newport.
There were collected at that time, according to the best computation
that could be made, about five thousand men. Many of them were armed
with guns and pistols, many had spears or pikes, and many were provided
with an instrument called a mandril, which, as I understand, is a short
instrument, made of iron, for picking coal in the mines -- a very
dangerous and deadly weapon if used for hostile purposes -- resembling
a pickaxe in shape; others had scythes fixed on sticks, and those who
had not weapons of this kind were armed with sticks and bludgeons. Mr.
Frost commanded them, and they marched towards Newport. They marched in
military order, five abreast. The word of command was given from time
to time by Frost, and they came down from Cefn by Pie-corner to
Tredegar-park, the seat of Sir Charles Morgan, and through which the
highway of a tram-road passes. By the time they had got to
Tredegar-park, the day had dawned. Here inquiries were made by Frost as
to the position of the military. I may now mention what had been
passing at Newport during the night. Intelligence had been brought to
Newport on the Sunday night of what had been passing in the hills. Mr.
Phillips, who was the mayor of Newport, immediately took measures for
the safety of the town, and special constables were sworn and stationed
at the most important points. There are three principal inns in
Newport, the Westgate, the King's Head, and the Parrot. These inns
commanded the principal streets, and there the special constables were
stationed. The Westgate is in the marketplace, and was considered the
most important station of all. The mayor went to the Westgate with
other magistrates, and sat up the whole night, sending out constantly
for information, and making the best preparations to preserve the peace
and defend the town. When the day dawned intelligence was brought that
the insurgents were advancing, and were in the neighbourhood of
Newport. The mayor had sent a person of the name of Walker, to gain
information. That person had been shot at, and returned dangerously
wounded. The mayor then sent for military assistance. There was in the
neighbourhood only one company of soldiers, under the command of
Captain Stack, who were stationed in the workhouse, which had been
converted into a temporary barracks, and is on the outskirts of the
town. Captain Stack sent thirty of his men to the assistance of the
mayor, under the command of Lieutenant Grey and two sergeants. I
believe the barracks are about half a mile from the Westgate.
Lieutenant Grey brought his men to the Westgate, and in a little time
they were stationed in a room in the inn which it is material,
gentlemen, I should describe to you. That inn is in Westgate-street,
fronting the north. On the east side there is a room, with a
bow-window, looking out upon the street. In that room the military were
stationed. There is a corresponding room on the western side of the
house, where the magistrates were assembled. . Between these two rooms
is a corridor or passage, which you will find was a scene of strife.
The special constables remained before the door of the inn where they
had been placed. The military had not loaded, and it will be a fact
most material to the case, that the soldiers did not load their muskets
till they were fired upon. This being the state of things at Newport as
the insurgents approached. Frost at the head of the body, and giving
the word of command, they reached the machine at Court-y-bella, and
there Mr. Frost inquired respecting the military. He was told by two
boys whom he met at the turnpike, that a number of soldiers had marched
to the Westgate Inn. On that the insurgents divided, and part of them
turned to the left and went up the hill leading to St. Wollo's Church,
whilst another part kept to the right and went towards the town of
Newport, through Commercial-street. This last division afterwards came
up and joined the others. Those who had gone by St. Wollo's or the
Friars, went down Stow-hill, which leads to the Westgate Inn, where Mr.
Frost had been told the military were. Mr. Frost still walked at their
head, and when they had passed a place called the Catholic chapel,
which is close to the back of the Westgate, the insurgents tried to
gain admission to the Westgate Inn by the carriage entrance to the
courtyard, behind the premises I have been describing. That entrance is
from Westgate-street, and when they failed to procure admission there,
they wheeled round to the front of the Westgate Inn. Mr. Frost was
still with them, and, as it will be distinctly shown to you, was in
front of the Westgate Inn at that time. The special constables were
before the door, and the insurgents asked them to surrender; one of the
constables said they would not surrender, on which the command to fire
was given, and immediately the firing began upon the bow-window of the
room in which the military were stationed, and the insurgents attempted
to break through the front door of the porch to the interior of the
house. They used their pikes for the purpose of forcing the door, and
having succeeded, they got into the hall and the passage leading from
the magistrates' room to the room where the military were stationed. It
was now the time for Lieutenant Grey to do what became him as an
officer of her Majesty, and as a good subject of this country, who
wished to preserve the lives of his fellow-subjects, and to take care
that universal confusion should not occur. Orders were given by him to
the military to load. They loaded. I should mention to you, gentlemen,
that the room in which they were stationed was that in which was the
bow-window -- that is, a projecting window having three sides, and not
being circular. The shutters of this window were closed, and the glass
had been broken by the shots which had been discharged. But while the
shutters remained shut the soldiers could not use their guns and fire
on the insurgents. Lieutenant Grey, who on that occasion acted
certainly in a manner which is above all praise, for the moderation,
the firmness, the energy, and intelligence he displayed -- went to open
the shutters of one part of the window; the mayor went to open another
part of the window, and Serjeant Daly to open another. As the mayor
opened the shutters he received two wounds, one in the shoulder and the
other in the hip. Serjeant Daly was also wounded in the head by slugs,
which passed into it, and the gun which he had in his hand had its lock
knocked off by a ball which had been fired by the insurgents. The
soldiers were then ordered to fire. At this time the insurgents had
gained the various approaches to the house; they were in the passage
leading to the room in which the military were assembled, and if the
order to fire had not then been given, there is no reason to doubt that
the military would all have been massacred. The order, however, was
given, and it was speedily and effectually obeyed. The insurgents in
the passage were fired on, and several of them fell and were killed.
The shutters being also removed from the window, the men directed their
pieces through it, and thus had command of the space in which the
insurgents were drawn up. They accordingly fired into the street, and
several of the insurgents were wounded and fell, and the others were
speedily dispersed (Mr. Frost had not been seen after the firing first
began), and they fled in every direction. Zephaniah Williams was about
ten minutes too late, but he did arrive at last with the Nant-i-glo
men, a band almost as numerous as that led by Frost himself. William
Jones, of Pont-y-pool, did not come nearer to Newport than Malpas, but
he was proceeding onward when he heard of the disasters which had
happened to his associates in Newport. He likewise fled, and the men
who were with him dispersed. I should mention that these three parties
in their progress scoured the country and pressed various persons whom
they compelled to march with them, at the same time seizing all the
arms they could find. Mr. Frost himself was seen soon after the defeat
of his associates in Commercial-street, which leads to Tredegar; after
the action was over, he was seen in Tredegar-park escaping into a wood,
and he was apprehended in Newport on the Monday night with pistols and
powder in his pocket. Gentlemen, thus tranquillity was restored, and it
will be for you to say, if these facts be true, whether there is any
reasonable doubt of the guilt of the prisoner Frost. And how are those
facts to be proved? With regard to the main circumstances, no doubt
whatever can be entertained; and I shal.1 prove the facts by witnesses
who are above exception, who were unconnected with the circumstances,
and who were employed in trying to establish peace and to restore
tranquillity. With regard to the declarations made by Frost, which I
have avoided to detail for the present, the proof of these will much
depend on the evidence of persons who were concerned with him in the
insurrection. When my learned friend comes to remark upon their
testimony, he will probably call them accomplices; but, gentlemen,
whether they are voluntary or compulsory witnesses, there is no doubt
that their evidence ought to be received with great suspicion, and
weighed with anxious care; but if you do sift it, and find no good
reason to doubt its veracity, you will not hesitate to believe the
evidence given by such individuals. In such cases evidence of this kind
must be laid before the juries who try them; for it is evident that
treasonable conspiracies are not concocted in public; and how can they
be proved but by the employment of spies and informers, whose evidence,
it is true, is generally condemned and often disbelieved In this case,
however, I purpose to call no spies, no informers -- for none such were
employed -- but I propose to call persons who were engaged more or less
in the insurrection, and who, I submit, may be trusted if their
evidence be consistent, and if it be corroborated as to the main points
to which they will speak. On that evidence no doubt will exist in your
minds with regard to the guilt of the prisoner. Gentlemen, it gives me
sincere satisfaction to find that he is defended by gentlemen of the
first eminence and the first talent at the bar of England. All that
zeal, learning, and eloquence can accomplish, will be achieved in his
cause, so that the result of this trial must satisfy the public justice
of the country. I own it seems to me, that my learned friends will have
a difficult task to perform. I think they will hardly deny the law of
treason as it was laid down by Mr. Justice Foster and Lord Tenterden;
and here was an insurrection of men, formidable from their numbers, met
for a public purpose, and actually engaged in conflict with the Queen's
troops, not accidentally, or in a sudden affray, but publicly, with
premeditation and design. Will my learned friend say that it was a
private object the prisoner sought to obtain? What this was I am at a
loss to conjecture. It was not private revenge, or a private grievance.
The insurgents did not meet for the purpose of discussing petitions to
be presented to the Queen, or to either of the houses of parliament. It
was not a meeting arising out of disputes between the masters and
servants engaged in the coal and iron trade. It was not a sudden
outbreak arising from want of employment, or the want of food; for, I
believe, that if inquiry be made, it will turn out that the coal and
iron trade has not been in a more prosperous condition than it was when
this insurrection occurred; that the wages of those employed in it were
high, and that those persons who were engaged in the insurrection had
no pretended private grievances which they wished to redress. What
conclusion then must be drawn from this if the witnesses speak the
truth? That they assembled for a public object with an armed force to
change the law and the constitution of the country. Unless this offence
be satisfactorily made out there can be no question, gentlemen, that it
will be your duty to acquit the prisoner, and that you will have great
satisfaction in doing so; but if the evidence clearly and
satisfactorily establishes the case against him, you will no doubt act
the manly part which it will be your duty to perform. You will not
shrink from your duty, whatever may be your feelings. It imports all
persons, whatever may be their situation, that the law shall be
respected and obeyed: whether they possess landed property, or if they
are merchants, or tradesmen, or labourers. Whatever may be their
situation whether it be high or humble, it imports them all that such
tumults as this should be suppressed, and, for the sake of example,
that punishment should take place. I have given you a short outline of
the facts of the case. I have no doubt that the witnesses who will be
called and examined will receive from you the most careful attention,
and that you will listen, with the respect due to them, to the
arguments which may be adduced in favour of the prisoner. On these it
will then be your important duty to pronounce your verdict of 'guilty'
or 'not guilty;' and I have no doubt that you will do so with justice
towards the prisoner, and with satisfaction to the public justice of
the country."

The learned Attorney-General having concluded his address, the first
witness, named Samuel Simmons, was called.

Sir F. Pollock rose to submit an objection to the court, to the
examination of the witness. It appeared that by various statutes, the
prisoner was entitled to the delivery of a copy of the list of
witnesses to be examined at the trial, and also of a copy of the
indictment, and of the panel. The statute of the 7th William III.
entitled the prisoner to the delivery of a copy of the indictment five
days before the trial, and to the delivery of a copy of the panel two
days before the trial. The statute of the 7th Ann, c. 21, s. 11,
provided that "when any person should be indicted for high treason or
misprision of treason, a list of the witnesses who should be produced
on the trial for proving the said indictment, and of the jurors,
mentioning the names, professions, and places of abode of the said
witnesses and jurors, should be also given at the same time that the
copy of the indictment was delivered to the party indicted." It then
further provided in favour of the prisoner, that "a copy of all
indictments for the offences aforesaid, with such lists, should be
delivered to the party indicted ten days before the trial, and in the
presence of two or more credible witnesses, any law or statute to the
contrary notwithstanding." In the present case the list of witnesses
had been handed to the prisoner on the 17th of December, but the copy
of the indictment had been served on the 12th of the same month. The
distinct provisions of the act therefore had not been complied with.

The Attorney-General, on the other side, contended first, that the
objection was too late, and that it ought to have been made before the
arraignment of the prisoner on the indictment, when the formal error,
if any had been committed, might have been remedied by fresh service;
but secondly, that in fact there was no error at all, for that the
service of the copy of the list of witnesses and of the copy of the
indictment before the time required by the act of Queen Ann was
advantageous to the prisoner, and that their not having been handed to
him both together could not be deemed by the court to be sufficient
ground for setting aside the proceedings, or for directing an acquittal
of the prisoners.

In answer to these arguments, which occupied the whole day, Chief
Justice Tindal said, "It seems to me that the prisoner's counsel have
raised a very great doubt, and the point is one which requires serious
consideration. It is the more important as the same objection may apply
itself, under existing circumstances, to several other cases. We
propose, therefore, to take a course in the present case, to prevent
the possibility of any hasty decision operating to the disadvantage or
prejudice of the prisoner on the one hand, or to the prejudice of
public justice on the other. We shall allow the trial to proceed, and
take the opinion of her Majesty's judges on the subject, in the event
of the result of the trial on the present occasion making such a
reference necessary."

On the 2nd of January the learned counsel for the crown proceeded to
the examination of witnesses in support of the allegations against the
prisoner. The evidence was corroborative of the statement made by the
learned Attorney-General, and it is unnecessary to repeat the facts
which were sworn to. Sir Thomas Phillips, the mayor, who had been
knighted, and Captain Grey, who had received a new rank in consequence
of their gallant and praiseworthy exertions in defence of the town,
were called and examined, but they in effect related the same story
which had been detailed in the opening speech.

The next witness called was Thomas Walker, the special constable, who
had been wounded. He stated that he went out by order of the mayor to
make observations upon the district towards Risca, which is about six
miles from Newport. He found several parties of men on the road,
apparently armed; and at Risca he heard shots fired, and some cheering.
On his return he was stopped by about sixteen men, and he was stabbed
by one in the thigh, while another fired a pistol at him, the ball from
which inflicted a very severe wound. He managed to reach Newport, but
on his arrival there he was so weak as to be unable to walk any
further; and having reported himself to the mayor, he was carried home
and put to bed.

The mode by which the men, under the command of the prisoner, increased
the number of his followers, was detailed by several witnesses, who
were labouring men, residing on the different lines of march taken by
the Chartists. From their testimony, it appeared that every cottage was
attacked and the male inhabitants forced to take such implements as
they might possess, (fit to be employed as offensive weapons,) and
accompany the main body. In case of refusal, or of disinclination being
exhibited to obey the orders which were given, force was used, and
persons were set to guard those who appeared likely to attempt to
escape. Out-scouts, it was also proved, were appointed to watch the
districts in the neighbourhood of the Welch Oak, and the various places
of meeting, and upon the approach of any strangers, they were directly
seized and carried before some of the leaders for examination. Chartist
lodges were shown to have been established throughout the whole
district of country surrounding Newport; and at the meetings which were
held antecedent to the insurrection, collections were made for the
purpose of defraying the expenses of the purchase of arms to be used
against the authorities of the town.

Other witnesses were called, who deposed to facts implicating Zephaniah
Williams and William Jones, as well as the prisoner Frost, and proved
the employment of great violence by them and their followers.

The evidence as to the apprehension of Frost, was that of Mr. Thomas
Jones Phillips, clerk to the magistrates of Newport. Having proved the
issuing of the warrant for the prisoner, he said "On Monday the 4th of
November I went to Mr. Frost's house with the superintendant of police,
but he was not there. I afterwards went to Partridge's house, but not
in search of Mr. Frost. I had a search warrant for Partridge's house. I
went to the house attended by some special constables. It was between
the hours of seven and eight o'clock at night. I knocked at the door,
but no notice was taken. I then attempted to enter the house, but
finding the door fastened, I called out 'Partridge,' and he said 'I am
gone to bed.' I said 'Get up and open the door, or I must force it
open.' The door not being opened, I forced it open. I heard the cross,
that seemed to fasten the door inside, falling down, and then, when the
door was open, I saw Mr. Frost standing within two yards of it. He was
facing me. The cottage in which Partridge lives is a very small one,
and the door opens from the street into the room. There is no passage.
I walked up to Mr. Frost, and laid my hand upon his shoulder on one
side, while Mr. Rogers, who was with me, laid his hand on his other
shoulder, and said to Mr. Frost, 'He was a prisoner.' Mr. Frost said,
'Very well, I will go with you directly.' I said, 'No, I am not yet
prepared to go with you,' for I had the search warrant to execute. I
then searched the house. Mr. Frost appeared to me (at the time) to be
very much fatigued; and he himself told me that he felt very
uncomfortable. He walked arm-in-arm with me from Partridge's house to
the Westgate Inn. He was not searched till he got to the Westgate Inn.
There were found upon him three pistols, a powder-flask, and some
balls. The balls I believe were loose in his pocket. The pistols were
all loaded."

This evidence, which was concluded at the end of the fifth day of the
trial, completed the case for the prosecution.

Sir F. Pollock, on the following Monday morning, proceeded to open the
case for the defence. The learned gentleman occupied more than five
hours and a half in addressing the jury; commenting in the most able
manner upon the whole of the vast mass of evidence which had been
adduced, and contending that there was nothing in the conduct of the
prisoner, or of his associates, which could in the slightest degree
warrant a presumption that they had assembled for the purpose of
committing any offence which could be supposed to amount to
high-treason. He urged that the probability was, that the assemblage
took place with a view (on the part of the Chartists), to exhibit their
power, and, by making a general movement, to procure the release of
Vincent, their partisan, at that time undergoing an imprisonment, on a
charge of sedition, in Monmouth jail; and that some prisoners having
been made from amongst them, they had gone to demand their liberation,
and had become exasperated by the harsh measures adopted against them
by the authorities.

Several witnesses were called with a view to support these suggestions,
and to show that the first act of aggression was on the part of the
soldiers; and many persons gave the prisoner an excellent character for
humanity and general mildness of disposition.

Mr. Kelly then proceeded to sum up the whole of the evidence, on the
part of the prisoner, in a most able speech, and he was followed by the
Solicitor-General in reply.

Towards the conclusion of the eighth day's proceedings, the Lord Chief
Justice addressed the jury upon the whole case. At six o'clock the jury
retired to consider their verdict, and in about half an hour returned
into court, and declared that the prisoner was "Guilty" of the offence
imputed to him, but recommended him, generally, to the merciful
consideration of the crown.

On the following morning, the 9th of January, Zephaniah Williams was
put upon his trial. As we have already entered so fully into the facts
proved against the prisoner Frost, it would be useless to repeat the
evidence adduced in any of the subsequent cases, which was merely a
repetition of that already given. On Monday the 12th of January, this
prisoner was called upon for his defence, when he appeared dreadfully
affected. His counsel had already addressed the jury at great length in
his behalf, and he contented himself with denying that he ever
entertained any notion of the kind imputed to him, and solemnly
protested that he never had the least design of revolting against the
Queen. He was found "Guilty," but, as in the case of Frost, was
recommended to mercy.

William Jones was then put on his trial, and on Wednesday he was also
pronounced "Guilty," with a similar recommendation to mercy.

It now became the duty of the learned judges to proceed to the
consideration of the indictments preferred against the other prisoners,
in custody for minor offences alleged against them. Charles Walters,
Jenkins Morgan, John Rees, Richard Benfield, and John Lovell, confessed
themselves guilty of the charges laid against them; and the
Attorney-General withdrew the prosecutions against Edmund Edmunds,
James Aust, George Turner, and Solomon Britton, in reference to the
propriety of whose indictment great doubts existed. On the same day
several other prisoners pleaded guilty to charges of conspiracy, riot,
pike-making, burglary, &c.; and on Thursday, the business of the
special commission was terminated by the learned judges passing
sentence on the prisoners.

Frost, Williams, and Jones, were first brought up; and their lordships
having gone through the usual forms put on the black caps, and:--

Chief Justice Tindal addressed the prisoners in the following words:--
John Frost, Zephaniah Williams, and William Jones, after the most
anxious and careful investigation of your respective cases before
juries of great intelligence and almost unexampled patience, you stand
at the bar of this court to receive the last sentence of the law, for
the commission of a crime which, beyond all others, is the most
pernicious in its example, and the most injurious in its consequences,
to the peace and happiness of human society -- that of high-treason
against your sovereign. You can have no just ground of complaint that
your several cases have not met with the most full consideration, both
from the jury and the court; but as that jury have, in each of them,
pronounced you guilty of the crime with which you have been charged, I
should be wanting in justice to them if I did not openly declare that
the verdicts which they have found meet with the entire concurrence of
my learned brethren and myself. In the case of all ordinary breaches of
the law, the mischief of the offence does, for the most part, terminate
with the immediate injury sustained by the individual against whom it
is levelled. The man who plunders the property, or lifts his hand
against the life of his neighbour, does by his guilty act inflict, in
that particular instance, and to that intent, a loss or injury on the
sufferer or his surviving friends; but they who, by armed numbers, or
violence, or terror, endeavour to put down established institutions,
and to introduce in their stead a new order of things, open wide the
flood-gates of rapine and bloodshed, destroy all security of property
and life, and do their utmost to involve a whole nation in anarchy and
ruin. It has been proved in your case, that you combined together to
lead from the hills, at the dead hour of night, into the town of
Newport, many thousands of men, armed in many instances with weapons of
a dangerous description, in order that they might take possession of
the town, and supersede the lawful authority of the Queen therein, as a
preliminary step to a more general insurrection throughout the kingdom.
It is owing to the interposition of Providence alone, that your wicked
designs were frustrated. Your followers arrive by daylight, and, after
firing upon the civil power and the Queen's troops, are, by the
firmness of the magistrates, and the cool and determined bravery of a
small band of soldiers, defeated and dispersed. What would have been
the fate of the peaceable and unoffending inhabitants, if success had
attended your rebellious designs, it is useless to conjecture. The
invasion of a foreign foe would, in all probability, have been less
destructive to property and life. It is for the crime of treason,
committed under these circumstances, that you are now called upon
yourselves to answer; and by the penalty which you are about to suffer,
you hold out a warning to all your fellow-subjects, that the law of
your country is strong enough to repress and to punish all attempts to
alter the established order of things, by insurrection and armed force,
and that those who are found guilty of such treasonable attempts must
expiate their crime by an ignominious death. I do, therefore, most
earnestly exhort you, to employ the little time that remains to you, in
preparing for the great change that doth await you, by sincere
penitence and fervent prayer; for although we shall not fail to forward
to the proper quarter that recommendation which the jury intrusted to
us, we cannot hold out to you any hope of mercy on this side the grave.
And now doth nothing more remain than that the Court pronounces (to all
of us a most painful duty) the last sentence of the law, which is,
'That each of you, John Frost, Zephaniah Williams, and William Jones,
be taken hence to the place from whence you came, and be thence drawn
on a hurdle to the place of execution, and that each of you be there
hanged by the neck until you be dead, and that afterwards the head of
each of you shall be severed from his body, and the body of each,
divided into four quarters, shall be disposed of as her Majesty shall
think fit; and may the Lord have mercy upon your souls.'"

The prisoners received the announcement of their fate with the utmost
firmness, yet propriety of demeanour. They were the only persons in the
crowded court whom the fearful nature of the sentence, and the low,
solemn tone, in which it was pronounced, did not most deeply affect.

The prisoners were then removed from the bar, and the clanking of their
chains was painfully audible.

Charles Waters, John Lovell, Richard Benfield, John Rees, and Jenkin
Morgan, were next placed at the bar, and, as in the former case, were
addressed by the learned Judge with great solemnity. Their cases,
though sufficiently aggravated, presented features of palliation which
entitled them to an extension of mercy, and their lives would be
spared. "At the same time (said his lordship), looking to the active
and prominent share which each of you has taken in the lawless
proceedings at Newport, on the fatal 4th of November, we cannot hold
out to you the hope of further mitigation than that you must be
prepared to leave your native country and probably for the remainder of
your lives. For the present, and with the object of obtaining such
mitigation of the execution of your sentence, it is our duty to pass
the sentence required by law;" which his lordship did in the form
adopted with the other prisoners.

All the prisoners received the intimation that they should be
transported with some indication of surprise. Rees alone leant his head
upon the bar and wept.

Notwithstanding the extremely perilous situation of the unfortunate
men, who were thus convicted and left under sentence of death at
Monmouth, during the whole period occupied in their trials their
brother Chartists throughout the county persisted in pursuing their
reckless and mischievous career. In the immediate vicinity of Monmouth,
small armed bands associated themselves for the purpose of deterring
the attendance of jurymen and witnesses at the trial; but the active
interference of a large body of the London police-force, sent down with
a view to the preservation of peace and good order, effectually
prevented the success of their schemes. Rumours were industriously
circulated, as well before the commencement of the proceedings of the
special commission as during their continuance, that a new rising was
intended, to procure the release of the prisoners from custody; and the
most active preparations were made to meet any outbreak which might
occur; but it eventually turned out, either that the reports were
unfounded, or that the devisers of the plots wanted the courage or the
means to carry them into execution. In Sheffield, Dewsbury, and many of
the northern towns, the Chartist agitation was kept up, avowedly
without the least consideration for the wretched prisoners; and, by the
vigorous agency of the police, the most atrocious plots were discovered
and frustrated.

In the metropolis, too, the work of disaffection was apparent. Repeated
meetings took place, and schemes of the very worst character were
devised; and, on Tuesday the 13th of January, the government received
private information that an insurrection was to break out on that night
or on the following morning, and that the firing of London in various
parts was to be the signal for a general rising throughout the country.
Orders were in consequence instantly transmitted to the Horse Guards,
for the preparation of a sufficient force to repel any treasonable
attack which might be made; and here, as well as at all the barracks in
the vicinity of the metropolis, and at the Tower, the whole of the men
were put under arms. The metropolitan police-force and the city
constables received orders to be ready for immediate action, and the
London Fire-engine Establishment -- a body of most enterprising and
active officers -- formed into a fire-police, was placed in readiness
to employ their exertions to assist the municipal authorities to
suppress the supposed intended conflagration.

The alarm, which was necessarily spread through the metropolis in
consequence of these warlike preparations, however, turned out to be
without cause; for although on that night a very large meeting of
Chartists took place at the Hall of Trades, in Abbey-street,
Bethnal-green, there was no attempt at violence. The conduct of the
speakers at this assemblage, indeed, sufficiently showed the extremes
to which they desired their followers to go; and a subsequent meeting
on the following Thursday proved that they were not quite so harmless
as their apologists would have had it supposed. At this convention,
held, as it was announced, for the purpose of discussing the existing
state of the working-classes throughout the country, upwards of seven
hundred persons attended, the majority of whom seemed to be individuals
of low rank. At nine o'clock the committee came upon the platform, when
Mr. Neesom was called to the chair. After the chairman had detailed the
objects for which the meeting had been called, Mr. Spurr, who had on a
former occasion taken an active part in the discussions, rose to
propose the first resolution. After a few preliminary observations, he
contended that the only way to preserve the peace was to be prepared to
wage war; and in support of such an assertion he thought it would be
well deserving the attention of the meeting to bear in mind the words
of a celebrated person, "to put their trust in God, and keep their
powder dry," which was received with loud cheering. On silence being
restored, the speaker was about to proceed, but a body of police
appearing at the door with drawn sabres, caused the greatest possible
confusion. The chairman entreated the meeting not to be disturbed, as
it was held on constitutional principles, but in order not to give
their enemies an opportunity of succeeding, he hoped there would be no
breach of the peace committed. The police then, having blocked up every
avenue leading to the room, prevented all present from retiring, and
proceeded to search their persons. Daggers, knives, sabres, pistols
primed and loaded, and other weapons of an offensive character, were
taken from many of them, while upon the floor were discovered others of
a like description, evidently thrown away by their owners in order to
enable them to escape detection. Twenty-one of the persons who were
taken into custody on this occasion unarmed, were detained in the
Trades Hall, and eleven others, upon whom pistols and daggers had been
found, were removed to safe custody, in order to await their
examination before the magistrates. Upon subsequent inquiries taking
place, several of them were discharged, while, however, others, with
new prisoners subsequently secured and identified as parties to the
meeting, were tried and convicted at the Old Bailey Sessions, and
sentenced to various terms of imprisonment.

The accounts received from some of the country districts also, showed
that the conduct of the Chartists there was still more alarming;
although from the vigilance of the police, and the constant watch kept
on their movements, ail serious mischief was prevented.

At Sheffield a plot of a most fearful description, which had for its
object the burning of the town, was discovered to have been formed, and
considerable preparations towards carrying this diabolical attempt into
execution were found to have been completed. The magistrates
immediately procured the assistance of the military, and the most
anxious exertions were made to render any attack which might be
attempted futile. It was ascertained that a midnight meeting was to be
held among the Chartists on the night of Saturday, the 11th of January;
and Colonel Martin, commanding the troops in the vicinity of the town,
was called upon by the magistrates to render them such assistance as
should be necessary to prevent any outbreak. In the outskirts of the
town it was found that the Chartists had assembled in great numbers,
and were prepared to undertake any mischievous attack which might
appear to their leaders to be proper. The police, who were stationed in
the roads to gain intelligence of their proceedings, were repeatedly
fired upon and wounded; and one individual, who, from his dress, was
mistaken for one of their body, received no fewer than twenty-seven
slugs in his neck and shoulders from repeated discharges at him. In the
course of the night a great many persons were taken into custody, and a
large quantity of muskets, pikes, daggers, a species of instrument
intended to impede the progress of horse soldiers, with three long and
sharp prongs, called a cat, with powder, balls, and hand-grenades, were
secured. In the darkness of the night large bodies of men, armed with
muskets and spears, were seen moving from various points towards the
town; but, upon their approaching as far as the pickets which had been
thrown out, they appeared to come to the conclusion that their scheme
had been discovered, and that therefore their attack would be repelled,
and they turned back and marched off into the country districts. During
the whole of Saturday night and of Sunday, the greatest degree of
excitement prevailed throughout the neighbourhood of Sheffield, and
frequent seizures of combustibles and arms took place in houses in the
suburbs.

The prisoners who were taken were instantly conveyed before the
magistrates for examination, and Samuel Holberry, Thomas Booker, his
son William Booker, James Duffey, William Wells, John Marshall, Thomas
Penthorpe, Joseph Benison, and William Martin, were eventually
committed to York Castle for trial.

Throughout the whole week, great alarm prevailed among the
well-disposed inhabitants of the town; and the military continued in
possession of the principal places of strength to prevent any new
effort against the public peace.

The exhibition of violence on the part of the Chartists, however, was
not confined to Sheffield; but at Dewsbury a simultaneous rising took
place. On the Saturday night the town was seized by a number of armed
men; and the private watchmen, six in number, were compelled to fly.
Mr. Hale, an inhabitant of the town, who was acting as inspector of the
watch, was fired at, although without effect, and the mob kept the
neighbourhood in a state of terror during the whole night by the
constant discharge of fire-arms. In Heckmondwicke, and other villages,
similar scenes were enacted; and it was afterwards learned that the men
who thus disturbed the public peace, were proceeding to join the
Sheffield Chartists, but before morning all of them had dispersed.

While these disturbances, however, had occupied the attention of the
authorities in the North, in London the government and the law officers
of the crown had been occupied in determining the fate of the prisoners
under sentence at Monmouth. The questions for the consideration of the
judges, reserved at the time of the trials of Frost, Williams, and
Jones, for in each the same points arose, were argued before the
fifteen judges in the Exchequer Chamber; and after a most lengthy and
learned discussion, extending through three days, the case terminated
on the afternoon of the 28th of January.

The conclusion arrived at by the judges was communicated by the Lord
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas to the Home Secretary, in the
following letter: --

     Westminster-hall, 28th January, 1840.
"My Lord -- I have the honour to inform your lordship that the argument
upon the three cases of The Queen v. Frost, The Queen v. Williams, and
The Queen v. Jones closed this afternoon, and that the judges, after
considering the subject, have come to the following determination upon
the two questions which have been argued before them, viz:-- First -- A
majority of the judges, in the proportion of nine to six, are of
opinion that the delivery of the list of witnesses was not a good
delivery in point of law.

"But secondly -- A majority of the judges, in the proportion of nine to
six, are of opinion that the objection to the delivery of the list of
witnesses was not taken in due time. All the judges agreed that if the
objection had been made in due time, the effect of it would have been a
postponement of the trial in order to give time for a proper delivery
of the list. The result, therefore, of the determination of the judges
is, that the conviction is right.

"I have the honour to remain, my lord, your lordship's faithful and
obedient servant,
     "N. C. TIDAL.
     "The Lord Marquess of Normanby, &c. &c. &c."

On the day following the receipt of this communication, at a Privy
Council which was held, it was determined that the lives of the
convicts must be forfeited to the laws of the country, and the
following letter was transmitted to Monmouth: --

     Whitehall, January 29, 1840.
Sir -- I am to signify to you the Queen's commands that the execution
of the sentence of Death, passed upon Zephaniah Williams, John Frost,
and William Jones, now in the jail at Monmouth, be respited until
Thursday the 6th day of February next. But the prisoners are to be
distinctly informed that the sentence of the law will then be carried
into effect.
      am, sir, your obedient humble servant,
     "Normanby.
     "To the High Sheriff of the County of Monmouth."

The governor of the jail, in obedience to these instructions, delivered
a copy of this letter to each of the prisoners, and they appeared
perfectly composed, and as if they had never entertained any hopes of
mercy being extended to them. Every exertion had been made in the
metropolis in the meantime with a view to procure the mitigation of the
sentence of the prisoners. Petitions from all classes poured in to the
Home Office; but all were declared to be of no avail, and it was not
until Friday evening, the 31st of January, at a late hour, that her
majesty's ministers came to a resolution to spare their lives. Sir
Frederick Pollock used his greatest efforts to procure this desirable
end; and having had no fewer than six interviews with Viscount
Melbourne upon the subject, he had given up his task in despair, when,
urged by Lord Brougham once again to see the premier, the learned and
indefatigable advocate retired with the promise of her majesty's
ministers, that the crimes of Frost and his two wretched partners in
guilt should not be expiated on the scaffold.

On the following evening an express was sent off to Monmouth, bearing
intelligence of this decision on the part of the government; and on
Sunday night it arrived in that place. The reprieve, however, was
accompanied by an order for the immediate removal of the prisoners to
the hulks; and a military escort having been procured, at half-past one
o'clock on Monday morning, the prisoners were roused from their beds,
informed for the first time of their altered fortunes, and ordered
instantly to prepare themselves for their removal. The wretched men had
already taken leave of their families, supposing death to be
inevitable, and their first feelings at their escape can be well
imagined. They were now supplied with refreshments; and at two o'clock
they were hurried into the prison van, and, escorted by a troop of
lancers, were conveyed to Chepstow, and there put on board the Usk
steamer, to be carried to Portsmouth, from whence they were to be
transported for life.

In the course of the time during which the prisoners lay at Portsmouth
awaiting the sailing of a vessel for New South Wales, renewed attempts
were made to procure their freedom. Petitions from many districts,
numerously signed, were presented, in which the impolicy of tarnishing
the annals of a month in which the nuptials of the young queen were to
be celebrated was urged; and even parliament was occupied with the
discussion of the propriety of the steps taken by the government. In
the House of Commons and in the House of Lords motions were made with a
view to obtaining the pardon of the prisoners, but the ministers of the
Crown, in a wise exercise of the duties of their office, strengthened
in their opinion upon the case by that of the learned judges, before
whom the prisoners were tried, declined to recommend that Her Majesty
should make any further alteration in the sentence of the prisoners.
The following letter. Conveying the sentiments of the judges upon this
occasion, was produced in both Houses of Parliament: --

     Westminster-hall, January 31st, 1840.
My Lord -- As to the law, the uniform practice has been, so far back as
we have any means of knowledge, that if the judge upon the trial of an
indictment feels any serious doubt as to an objection that occurs in
point of law, he decides the point against the prisoner, and allows the
trial to proceed, reserving such point of law, in order that he may
take the advice and opinion of all the other judges thereon. After
consulting them, and hearing argument thereon (if thought necessary)
the opinion of the judges is taken, and that of the majority binds the
judge who has reserved the question. If that opinion should be against
the prisoner, the law is suffered to take its course, and the sentence
which has been passed remains. If the opinion of the judges is in
favour of the prisoner, the constant course is for the judge who tried
the prisoner, and passed the sentence, to apply to the Secretary of
State for a free pardon. And this course in no way depends on any
consent, express or implied, on the part of the prisoner; the judge
pursues it at his own discretion, and decides the point for the present
against the prisoner, giving him the benefit of further consideration
and advice with the other judges. And this course is pursued for the
manifest purpose of preventing a failure of justice; inasmuch as if the
judge decided under his immediate impression, supposing it to be in
favour of the prisoner, and directed an acquittal, there could be no
new trial, although upon reference to the other judges his own opinion
was held to be wrong. On the other hand, if the opinion of the judge is
at the time unfavourable to the prisoner, it can be reserved by that
course, and if erroneous set right.

"With respect to the statement in the memorial, of what took place at
the trial, so far as relates to ourselves, we cannot but remark, that
the learned counsel labour under a complete misapprehension, at which
we are the more surprised, as we expressly stated that no distinction
would be made between this and other cases tried at the assizes, but
that it must follow the ordinary course.

"At the time of the discussion, we all of us entertained serious
doubts, more or less strong, on the objection that was raised before
us. And if the law had obliged us to come to an immediate and final
decision, without the power of consulting the judges, which the law
does not, we were not prepared, without much further consideration, nor
without hearing the argument on the part of the Crown concluded, to
come to any determination on the point. We therefore followed the
ordinary course pursued on similar occasions, decided the point against
the prisoner by allowing the trial to proceed, subject to the revision
before referred to.

"We beg to inform your lordship, that we think the circumstance stated
and relied on in the memorial; viz,, that two of the judges under the
special commission ultimately declared their opinion in favour of the
objection, does in our judgment make no difference whatever; nor do we
think that any inclination in their minds at the time of the trial
ought to affect the question; the law is taken from the majority of the
judges when consulted.

"Under the circumstances above mentioned, we beg leave to represent to
your lordship, that in our opinion there is no ground whatever to
entitle the prisoner, John Frost, to a free pardon.
     "N. C. TINDAL.
     "J. Parke.
     "J. Williams.
     "To the Most Noble the Marquess of Normanby, &c."

While these proceedings were going on in London, on the 26th of
January, Bradford, in Yorkshire, was made the scene of acts of
conspiracy against the government; but as the particulars of this
affair appear in the allusion to the trial of the conspirators, which
we make hereafter, we shall not here further refer to it.

The trial of those prisoners whose names we have already mentioned as
having been parties to the Sheffield conspiracy, came on at the York
assizes on the 16th of March, before Mr. Justice Erskine.

The court was at an early hour besieged by parties anxious to obtain
admission. In a part of the hall a great number of pikes, knives,
daggers, and fire-arms of various kinds, were laid in readiness to be
produced at the trial. On the table in the court was a large basket
containing pistols, muskets, balls, powder, and shells of various
kinds, some of them nine or ten inches in diameter, and bound round
with great quantities of pitched twine.

At nine o'clock his lordship entered the court, and was immediately
followed by the Attorney-General (Sir John Campbell) who had gone down
specially to conduct these prosecutions.

Samuel Holberry, Thomas Booker, William Booker, and James Duffey were
put to the bar. Wells, included in the same indictment, had pleaded
guilty.

The prisoners were charged with a conspiracy to violate the law, to
create insurrection, and to disturb the public peace. The inquiry
extended to a very great length, but the most interesting evidence was
that of one of the associates of the prisoners, named Samuel Powell
Thomson. He said, "I had been in Sheffield about three years in January
last. I became a member of the Secret Association the first or second
Sunday after the disturbance in Wales, some weeks before Christmas. I
belonged to a class held at Valentine Benison's, in the park. I
attended meetings from time to time there and at other places. There
was a room in Figtree-lane.

There were two sorts of meetings, one a public meeting, to which any
one was admitted, the other a secret one for those who were made
members. I knew Samuel Holberry. I got acquainted with him the latter
end of August or the beginning of September. He attended the meetings
in Figtree-lane. I saw him on Sunday, the 5th of January; it was at his
own house. There were some other men I had seen at the Chartist public
meetings. Holberry said he had been to Dewsbury, and he was happy to
tell us that the day, and the hour, and the moment were settled when a
unanimous rise would take place, but only two people in each town were
to know the time. He had pledged his word, he said, that no place of
worship should be destroyed, and no provision stores. We then went to
the room in Figtree-lane, where there was a party of members belonging
to the Secret Association. Holberry repeated what he had previously
said, and said the time would be short, but he was not allowed to make
it known to any but two. He said he had another journey to go, and
would want some money. He had to go round by Nottingham and that
district. He mentioned Sutton and Ashfield. We began to make a
subscription of 10s. or 11s. I gave sixpence." The witness having
detailed the occurrences at subsequent meetings at which he was
present, and at which the quantity of arms in the possession of the
conspirators was calculated, went on to say:-- "On the Saturday
Boardman desired me to come to the Figtree-lane room about three
o'clock. I went and found several men there, one of the name of Cooper.
Samuel Holberry came; he told us to follow him. We went to a
public-house in Lambeth-street. We went into the lodge-room up stairs.
We found a person of the name of M'Catterick and others. Holberry
spoke; he stated that the first thing to be done was for us all to
assemble, and be at the Town-hall and Tontine exactly as the clock
struck two, as they were first to be taken. That the classes were to
come up to take them. One was to come up first from every class, and
then two, and then the whole body. Boardman said he could bring about
fifty. I said I could bring fifty. M'Catterick said he could bring
about forty. Duffy said he would bring sixty-four. The Irishmen present
began to talk about getting arms. It was decided that they should go to
the shops where weapons were exposed for sale, and break them open.
They were to shut the gates of the Tontine, and barricade them with the
coaches. In the Town-hall, one part was to occupy the lower floor and
the other the upper. They began to talk about the "cats." It was
decided that they should be thrown between the barracks and the
Tontine. Holberry said, that he and eight others would go, after the
soldiers were called out, and fire the straw chamber. One was to climb
the spout and throw a fire-ball into the straw-chamber. They were also
to fire the riding-school. The ones and twos who were to come up first
were to assassinate all the watchmen they met. We remained in
Lambert-street till nearly six o'clock. Holberry said they had agreed
as to what was to be done, but they had not agreed provided they were
put off. In that case they were to 'Moscow 'the town. I was in company
with fourteen or sixteen belonging to my class. I took these men to
Burke's class, in Mill-lane. They were generally armed. William Wells
brought three daggers, and gave them to me; he wished the name to be
filed out. We remained at Burke's till two o'clock. Burke dipped some
torches in turpentine. A person came down from the council, which had
met at Lambert-street, and brought word we were to meet at the top of
Watery-lane. We set off thither, about twenty-four of us. We got there
near about three o'clock. We then came back to Tobacco-box-walk. We met
a few Irishmen of Duffy's class. They said they were seeking Duffy. I
accompanied them to Duffy's house. The people were armed with dirks,
and weapons of that sort; some with pistols. We then went to Burke's.
We did not find him at home. As I was coming from Burke's house to my
father's I was stopped by a policeman on the Ladies'-bridge, and taken
to the Town-hall. I have seen Booker at these meetings, I think on the
Friday."

Cross-examined: I took a promise of secrecy. I remember the terms of
it: "Will you do all that lies in your, power, even to the loss of your
own life, and the shedding of the blood of the tyrants?" That was the
first part. The person replies, "Yes." The second part was, "I do most
solemnly and sincerely promise, in the sight of Almighty God, and the
assembly here present, that I will assassinate any one who shall betray
the secrets of this meeting, and bear assassination if I should
betray." This was what I said; I revealed these secrets, but not till I
was taken as a prisoner. I consider the oath I have taken to-day
binding on my conscience. The witness was further cross-examined with a
view to show that he was unworthy of belief.

Several other persons were subsequently called, whose testimony was
corroborative of the statements which had been made, and the jury
having been addressed by the learned counsel for the several prisoners,
a verdict of "Guilty" was returned.

On the following day John Clayton, John Marshall, Thomas Penthorpe, and
Joseph Bennison, pleaded guilty to an indictment charging them with a
seditious conspiracy to procure arms and disturb the public peace in
the town of Sheffield, on the 12th of January; and William Martin was
convicted of uttering certain seditious words in the room in
Figtree-lane.

On the 18th of March the trial of the conspirators in custody for the
affair at Bradford took place.

Robert Peddie, William Brooke, Thomas Drake, James Holdsworth, and Paul
Holdsworth, were put to the bar charged with a seditious conspiracy to
oppose the law.

The most important evidence in this case was also that of an
accomplice, named James Harrison; and his testimony showed the
implication of all the prisoners in a plot to attack and burn the town.
Peddie, who with Marsden had come from Scotland, was to assume the
whole command; and it was agreed, that arms should be procured and
other means taken to oppose the constabulary and military forces. The
statement of the witness as to the arrangement for the attack was as
follows: --

"They were to meet at the Green-market, as near two o'clock as
possible, but not later. When they got to the Green-market, they were
to take possession of the Bazaar and the Piece-hall for ammunition, and
the Newsroom was to be the depot for the men. Peddie said they would
soon set the colliers to work, and make holes through the walls of the
News-room, to put the cannon through; and they were to get food and
clothes. After they had done with Bradford they were to take the cannon
and the baggage-carts with shoes, clothes, and provisions, and go to
Dewsbury. 'We shall gain strength,' he said, 'as we go; if we have five
hundred in the morning we shall have two thousand at night.' From
Dewsbury we were to make our way up to London. I went to the
Green-market a little after two o'clock. Peddie was there; George
Flynn, Isaac Holloway, and Paul and James Holdsworth. There were near
thirty; some had guns, some pistols, some pikes. Peddie had a belt with
a pistol and dagger. Peddie asked if I had seen Turner? I said I had
not. Peddie said 'I don't know what the man is doing to be so much out
of his time. I have had possession of the Green-market near half an
hour. We have got two watchmen prisoners,' and he pointed to the shed.
I went across the market to look at the watchmen. I saw Brook that
night at the New Inn, after I left the market. He was with another man,
coming into the town. He returned in about ten minutes. He asked me to
take a walk through the town, and see what was going on. On the way to
the Court-house we met some foot-soldiers; and at the Court-house the
cavalry were coming out of the yard. Brooke said 'It is a plain proof
we're deceived, for the magistrates know as much about it as we do
ourselves.' We went down towards New-street. We saw some people in the
distance. Brooke said, 'I have something about me; if these are
constables I shall be taken.' We were stopped, and Brooke was taken
into custody. They searched me, and let me go. I saw Paul Holdsworth on
the Sunday evening, about nine o'clock, in Nelson-street. I know Smith,
an orange-seller. He lives down a passage leading out of Nelson-street.
Holdsworth was going there; he had something in his hand like a brush
handle, about six feet long. He was one of the sentries over the
watchmen in the shed. James Holdsworth was in the Green-market. He had
a spear."

Other evidence was adduced, showing the intention of the Chartists to
be to secure the town; and that they had gone fully armed for the
purpose of attaining their object. Several of the witnesses admitted
that they were parties to the design, and that they were taken into
custody; but were subsequently induced to make a statement of the
circumstances within their knowledge.

For the defence it was argued that the whole story related, bore the
character of fabrication; and that none of the expressions imputed to
the prisoners, at all warranted the jury in coming to a conclusion that
they were guilty of sedition.

The jury, however, found a verdict of "Guilty." At the conclusion of
the assizes, the learned judge passed sentence upon the prisoners who
had been convicted: --

Samuel Holberry was sentenced to be imprisoned in the jail of
Northallerton for four years, and at the expiration of that period to
be bound, himself in 50l., and to find two sureties of 10l. each, to
keep the peace towards her Majesty's subjects. Thomas Booker, to be
imprisoned at Northallerton for three years, and to be bound, himself
in 30l., and to find two sureties of 10l. each. William Booker, his
son, to be imprisoned two years at Northallerton, and to be bound in
his own recognizance in 20l., to keep the peace for two years. James
Duffy, three years in Beverley jail, and at the expiration of that
period to enter into his own recognizance of 20l., to keep the peace
for three years, and to find two sureties of 10l. each. William Wells,
one year's imprisonment, and at its expiration to enter into his own
recognizance of 20l. to keep the peace for one year. John Marshall,
Thomas Penthorpe, and Joseph Bennison, otherwise Benson, convicted of
riot, were sentenced to two years' imprisonment at Northallerton, and
to enter into their own recognizances of 20l. to keep the peace for two
years. William Martin, for using seditious language was sentenced to
twelve months' imprisonment, without hard labour, in the jail at
Northallerton.

Robert Peddie, William Brooke, Thomas Drake, and Paul Holdsworth, for
conspiracy, with intent to create riot at Bradford, were sentenced --
Peddie to be imprisoned in Beverley House of Correction for three
years, and to enter into his own recognizances for three years, in the
sum of 30l., and find two sureties of 10l. each. William Brooke, three
years' imprisonment in Northallerton House of Correction, and to enter
into his own recognizances of 30l. to keep the peace. Thomas Drake, to
be imprisoned in Beverley jail for eighteen months, and enter into his
own recognizances of 30l. for three years. Paul Holdsworth, three years
in Northallerton House of Correction, and the same recognizances as
Brooke.

John Walker, Joseph Naylor, John Riding, Phineas Smithies, Hutton, and
Rishworth, convicted of riot at Bradford, were sentenced to
imprisonment; Walker, Naylor, Riding, and Rishworth, for two years in
Wakefield House of Correction, and to enter into their own
recognizances of 30l. each, and Hutton and Smithies eighteen months in
the same place, recognizances 30l.

In the course of the assizes many other convictions for sedition, for
seditious publications, and other offences of a like character, took
place.

At Monmouth, Henry Vincent and William Edwards, persons who were long
notorious for their opinions -- the former of whom (as we have stated)
had already been convicted of an offence of a similar description, were
indicted for having conspired with John Frost, to subvert the
constituted authorities, and to alter, by force, the constitution of
the country.

The trial crime on before Mr. Baron Gurney, on the 20th of March; the
case for the prosecution being conducted by Mr. Serjeant Talfourd, Mr.
Richards, and Mr. Whateley.

Several witnesses were called, whose testimony was adduced with a view
to show the nature of the language employed by the prisoners. Vincent
was the principal orator; but he was proved to have been supported by
Edwards and Frost. The tenor of his speech was condemnatory of the
whole course of proceeding of the government, with threats against both
Whigs and Tories; and it contained a declaration of the intention of
the Chartists to rise on the 6th of May in the year 1839 (the meeting
being held on the 1st of January), if the charter was not granted
before then, and send the ministers to "look for lodgings at New York,"

The jury delivered a verdict of "Guilty;" but in consideration of the
long imprisonment which the defendants had already undergone,
recommended them to mercy.

They were sentenced, Edwards to fourteen months', and Vincent to twelve
months' imprisonment.

At Liverpool, on the 6th of April, R. W. Jackson, R. J. Richardson,
William Butterworth, and Bronterre O'Brien, were tried before Mr.
Justice Coleridge, on an indictment charging them with sedition.

The meeting at which the sedition was alleged to have been spoken, was
held on the 23rd of April, 1839, at Batty's Circus, Manchester,
pursuant to a placard which was posted through the streets. The four
defendants were there; and their speeches sufficiently indicated their
political opinions to be of the most violent description. Various
expressions were proved to have been used, by which the adoption of
force was recommended, and the jury found the prisoners "Guilty."

In the course of the ensuing three days, several other convictions for
sedition took place, at the same assizes, before the same learned
judge. Many prisoners, whose cases presented circumstances of a
mitigating character, were allowed by the government prosecutors to be
discharged upon recognizances to keep the peace; while others, who had
been convicted of being parties to riots, which had occurred at Wigan,
Bolton, and Ashton, were allowed to plead guilty, with a view to the
mitigation of their sentences.

On the 9th of April, Mr. Justice Coleridge passed sentence upon the
prisoners.

Richardson and Butter worth, who had long been known as connected with
the Chartists and their proceedings, were sentenced to be imprisoned in
Lancaster Castle for nine months, and at the expiration of that time,
to enter into their own recognizances in 100l., with two sureties in
50l. each, to keep the peace for three years. Upon Jackson being placed
at the bar, his lordship said "that it was a melancholy thing to find a
person of his station in society, attending such meetings as those
which had been referred to in the evidence. He was a minister of
religion, presiding over its services in a chapel where Christians met
for sacred worship; and yet he was found at a public meeting, using
language which one would have rather expected from the lips of one who
had been a follower of the camp, than a member of a sacred profession.
He had talked, if a constable came to his house to search for arms, of
presenting to him the sharp end of the pike, the muzzle of the gun, and
what came out of it. He must, in passing sentence, consider his
station, abilities, and power of injuring society." He was ordered to
be imprisoned for eighteen months, and to enter into his own
recognizance of 500l., with two sureties in 250l. each, to keep the
peace for three years.

Mr. O'Brien was next brought up. He was one of the most popular leaders
of the day, and was notorious for the active part which he had taken
throughout the whole of the proceedings of the Chartists. Upon his
being informed that a sentence of imprisonment would be passed upon
him, he implored the court rather to send him out of the country for
life, declaring that he had no hope of England in its present state.
His sentence was similar in its terms to that of Mr. Jackson.

Mr. Jackson was then sentenced to six months' further imprisonment on a
second indictment against him, and the following prisoners received the
judgments appended to their names for their participation in the
mischievous events which had recently before occurred.

George H. Smith, to be imprisoned in the House of Correction at Preston
for eighteen months, and to enter into his own recognizance in 500l.,
with two sureties in 100l., to keep the peace for three years. John
Kaye, six months; recognizances in 200l., with two sureties in 50l.
Christopher Doyle, nine months; recognizances in 300l., two sureties in
100l. each. William Barker was sentenced to eighteen months'
imprisonment in the House of Correction at Kirkdale, with hard labour.
Frederick Davidson, six months, with hard labour. Samuel Scott, eight
months' imprisonment; to enter into his own recognizance in 100l., with
two sureties in 50l. each, to keep the peace for three years. Charles
Morris, twelve months' imprisonment; recognizances in 100l., with two
sureties in 201. Daniel Ball, eighteen months' with hard labour;
similar recognizances. Peter Murdin, six months' imprisonment with hard
labour. William Willoughby, three months' with hard labour.


FEARGUS O'CONNOR, ESQ.
Convicted of the Publication of a Seditious Libel.

The trial of Mr. Feargus O'Connor came on at York, before Mr. Justice
Coleridge, on the 17th of March 1840, when the Attorney -general
appeared to conduct the prosecution on the part of the crown. The
information charged the publication of two seditious libels in a
newspaper called the "Northern Star," of which the defendant was
proprietor and editor, upon the 13th and 20th of July in the preceding
year.

The Attorney-general, in opening the case to the jury, read the libels
which were complained of. The first consisted of a report of a speech
made by the defendant himself, at a meeting which, in the "Northern
Star," was designated "The Rochdale Defence Fund Meeting." This speech
was highly inflammatory in its terms, and was directed against the
government. Mr. O'Connor congratulated the people upon the successes
which they had already achieved, but recommended them to maintain the
ground on which they stood, and not to listen to the propositions of
the government. He recommended the employment of physical force in
opposition to any attempt to put down their cause by force; and having
entered into a long tirade against the expenses of the government, and
the vast sums of money which were paid to the bishops and lawyers, and
the disparity between this expenditure and that which was incurred for
the paupers of the country, he said, that all he contended for was,
that these immense disparities should no longer exist -- that the poor
man should have his store-house, and his cottage should be his
sentry-box -- that he should have, as his friend Bussey recommended, a
flitch of bacon on one side of the chimney, and a musket on the other,
so that the musket might defend the bacon. He would never descend to
catch a fleeting popularity by going too far; but the moment they were
provided with arms, they would be in a condition to defend those rights
which were still left to them, while government would be induced to
give up those of which they had been deprived. In their progress
towards political emancipation, they had three stages to go through --
to create, to unite, and to direct. They had created opinion, and they
were united in it, and, when it was properly directed, their victory
would be complete. The learned Attorney-general having urged that these
passages contained strong incitements to insubordination and violence,
proceeded to refer to a notice of another meeting at Newcastle in the
same paper, where similar doctrines were promulgated, which were
approved of and supported by the editor. He then proceeded to the paper
of the 20th of July, which contained the report of a speech made by Mr.
William Taylor at Manchester, who strove, from various expressions in
the Bible, to show the justice of the cause which they supported. In
the course of his address he said:-- What it is for a people to be in
captivity, I need not tell you; that you are captives I need not tell
you. Though they (Parliament) have given twenty millions the
emancipation of black slaves, they would not give twenty shillings for
the emancipation of the white slaves. I need not tell you that you are
slaves, slaves bearing a great burden, slaves bearing a great load,
slaves enduring great toil, slaves under the most oppressive system of
government, and slaves that alone must work out their own freedom. Now
if you ask, 'What shall we do?' I will tell you what God says you
should do, and you will find that in the second verse of the fifteenth
chapter of the book of Jeremiah. The prophet says, 'And if the people
inquire What shall we do? whither shall we go? thou shalt say to them.
Thus saith the Lord: Those that are for death, to death; such as are
for the sword, to the sword; such as are for the famine, to the famine;
and such as for the captivity, to the captivity.' What are we to do,
then? (Loud cries of 'Fight! fight! fight!') I'll tell you what we are
to do. The people must become united together in one mind. Let not
religious sentiments divide your interests. Whatsoever your religious
sentiments are, look for peace here and not so much up yonder; look for
happiness here as well as in the future. Look for comfort here as well
as in days to come. Look for happiness in your cottage, by your
fire-sides, and happiness with your families; look to the lessening of
the hours of labour; look for the overthrow of the present wretched
system. Your will will be God's will, and God's will is, that his
people should be free. What are we to do? We are to be free, and no
mistake; we are to be free, whatever the cost; we are to be free,
however great the difficulty to accomplish it; we are to be free,
though we wade through streams of blood. Though we pass through streams
of trouble, we are to be free by the best means we can; we are to be
free, by the only means we have left. Now, the people may ask. What are
the means left? I am not going to blink the question; I'm not going to
teach you a doctrine I don't believe myself. We will go back again to
the old book, and I will ask you, or any minister, whether we read, in
either ancient or modern history, of any nation in bondage becoming
free without the use of physical force?" In the same report was a
speech of Mr. Bronterre O'Brien, which was spoken of as a long and
eloquent address, and in which doctrines of a similar kind were
broached. The latter part contained an incitement indirectly to
interfere with the administration of justice, and to put an end by
force to judicial proceedings. "He had some news to tell them, not that
he told them to do the same; only having heard it, there was surely no
more harm in telling news than selling it. Now the people of Newcastle
had decided upon adopting a certain plan during the assizes, not that
he advised the meeting to follow it -- no, not by any means. When their
representatives were brought up for trial, unless contrary instructions
came down from the Convention, the brave men in the north were
determined on that day to have a universal strike; and, assembling
round the trial-house in their mighty strength, would send word to the
judge that they were standing outside waiting for an acquittal. The
effect would be wondrous. He did not advise them to do so, because it
would be against the law, and they knew how illegal it was. He had now
an important question to ask them; were they up to the mark? (We are!)
By that he meant, were they provided with all legal and constitutional
appliances, wherewith to bring these cursed profit-mongers to their
senses? (Yes!) He could tell them no plainer, but if they did not by
this understand what he meant, why they would soon. He bid them cast
aside their braggadocios, and by fierce looks and something shining
over their chimney-pieces, to be determined; for until something in
earnest like this were done, the government, who knew all about them
through their spies, would take advantage of their want of
preparedness, they having already cannons of enormous calibre,
fire-arms, &c., manufacturing in large quantities. He was determined to
stand by his constituents to the death, reduced though he was by
exertion in the public cause, and, if needs be, die in the last ditch
in their defence."

The necessary evidence as to the publication of the libels, and the
proprietorship of the newspaper having then been given, Mr. O'Connor
was called upon for his defence. He addressed the court at great
length, and some demonstrations of applause from the auditors were
heard at the commencement of his speech, but immediately silenced. "He
said he thanked the Attorney-general for this prosecution. His
character had been aspersed for seven long years, and the
Attorney-general had given him an opportunity of defending it. He came
under great disadvantages before a Yorkshire jury. He had been
represented as a spoliator of property, as an advocate of physical
force, as inciting the poor against the rich. He would be able to
disprove all these charges, and would show from sources they could not
dispute, what his real sentiments were. There was nothing in his own
speech, garbled as it was, that could be a basis for these accusations.
His true sentiments were to be found in the leading articles of the
paper, and to them and to his conduct throughout life he would appeal,
to show that he entertained no such doctrines. It was not he, or those
who acted with him, who had given rise to physical force Chartism, It
was the act of the Attorney-general (with whom he had once sat in the
House of Commons), and of his party, who had turned the moral force
Chartist into the Chartist advocating the use of physical force, and
drove them to armed meetings by putting down the meetings where they
'morally' discussed their grievances. In the present case the intent
was everything; without the intent alleged there was no libel; and it
was to be remarked, that if the advice said to be given was so
pernicious, it had not been acted on at Newcastle. The course of
justice was unimpeded, and the persons who had used these speeches were
acquitted. It was absurd to say he adopted and approved of the
doctrines in these speeches, because in the report they were
interspersed with cheers. He never said that arms give rights, but he
was of opinion that rights gave arms, and arms protected them. He
complained that great offenders had been passed by, while he was
prosecuted. He complained of the hardships imposed upon him by the mode
of proceeding ex officio the abuse of which had been one of the causes
of the revolution of 1688. It was going to the jury with the opinion of
the Attorney-general against him, that he had been guilty of an
offence, and it gave the Attorney-general the benefit of the last word.
Mr. O'Connor quoted a number of authorities as to the law of ex officio
informations, and proceeded to read at length a great number of
passages from the leading articles of the "Northern Star," and from his
speeches reported there, to show that he had always opposed the
doctrine of physical force, making comments as he proceeded on the
conduct of Mr. O'Connell, on the Whigs, the Attorney-general, the
language of the London morning papers, Mr. Muntz of Birmingham,
physical force, moral force, his own character, and a great variety of
other topics. His speech lasted nearly five hours, and he concluded by
declaring that he was, and always had been, a Chartist, and determined
to have all the five points, but peaceably. He asked from the jury but
justice; he asked not for mercy; and if their verdict should consign
him to a dungeon, he would at least go there with his principles
unsullied.

The Attorney-General having addressed the jury in reply, a verdict of
"Guilty" was returned, but judgment was respited until the following
term, in consequence of an application by the defendant on the ground
that he should be able to produce affidavits in mitigation.

The illness of Mr. O'Connor prevented his appearing in the Court of
Queen's Bench, to receive judgment until the 11th of May. Affidavits
were then put in disclosing grounds for the mitigation of the sentence
of the defendant, and tending to absolve him from the imputation of
having excited the people to acts of violence. Mr. O'Connor
subsequently also addressed the court, and was followed by the
Attorney-General in reply.

The judges having then consulted together for a short time, Mr. Justice
Littledale, as senior puisne judge, pronounced sentence. After stating
the nature of the prosecution and the evidence in favour of it, he said
that though the defendant might argue that his speeches and writings
had never excited people to physical force, still no one could doubt
that these speeches and writings had that tendency. The law could not
suffer publications of this sort, so dangerous to the peace of society,
to be made with impunity. The sentence of the court on the defendant
was, that he should be imprisoned in the Castle of York for eighteen
calendar months, and that he should then find security for his good
behaviour for the space of two years, himself in 300l. and two sureties
in 150l. each.

Mr. O'Connor was in consequence removed to York Castle, and upon his
arrival there was placed upon the felons' side of the prison. Strong
arguments were employed by his friends against this course being
adopted; and it was urged, that having been convicted of a misdemeanour
only, he should be removed to the debtors' side, where he would not be
subjected to such hardships as those which he would experience in the
place in which he was confined. Petitions to parliament were drawn up
and presented, that Mr. O'Connor's quarters should be changed; but the
members of the government declined in any way to interfere with what
was in reality a mere internal arrangement of the jail, for which the
visiting justices alone were answerable.

In quitting the subject of Chartism, we may present our readers with
what we believe to be a correct statement of the number of persons,
who, since the month of January 1839, have been imprisoned by reason of
their connexion with the illegal proceedings taken with a view to the
adoption of their principles. Of the persons thus convicted there were
about half-a-dozen licensed victuallers, one barrister (Mr. Feargus
O'Connor), one magistrate (Mr. Frost), and one surgeon (Mr. Peter
Murray M'Douall). The remainder were, with a few exceptions, all poor
and uneducated men.


Place                                         No. confined.
Chester, County Jail                               29
Durham, County Jail                                 3
Kent, House of Correction                           1
Lancaster    
Lancaster Castle                                    5
County Jail and House of Correction, Kirkdale     156
House of Correction, Preston                        3
Lincoln, Lincoln Castle                             1
Middlesex    
House of Correction, Giltspurstreet                 1
Ditto, Coldbath-fields                             13
Jail of Newgate                                     3
Westminster Bridewell                              13 
Monmouth,    
County Jail                                        63
House of Correction, Usk                            4
Northumberland, House of Correction, Newcastle     19
Nottingham,     
County Jail                                        23
House of Correction, Southwell                     12
Somerset, County Jail, Ilchester                    3
Surrey, Queen's Bench Prison                        2
Warwick, County Jail                               28
Wilts    
County Jail                                         8
House of Correction, Devizes                        1
Worcester, Jail and House of Correction             3
York,    
York Castle                                        69
E. Riding, House of Correction, Beverley            2
N. Riding, House of Correction, Northallerton      12
W. Riding, House of Correction, Wakefield          19
Brecon, County Jail and House of Correction        12
Glamorgan, House of Correction, Swansea             1
Montgomery, Jail and House of Correction           50
Total                                             559



JAMES OWEN, GEORGE THOMAS, alias DOBELL, AND WILLIAM ELLIS, alias
LAMBERT.
Canal Bargemen who Raped and Murdered a Passenger.

The case of these prisoners is scarcely excelled in brutal atrocity by
any of those by which it is preceded.

The prisoners were tried at the Lent Assizes at Stailford on the 16th
of March 1840, on an indictment which charged them with the wilful
murder of Christina Collins, on the 17th of June 1839, at the parish of
Rugeley, in the same county.

On the part of the prosecution a great number of witnesses were called,
from whose evidence the circumstances appeared as follows: --

The deceased, Christina Collins, wife of Robert Collins, was by
business a dress-maker, and had resided for some time at Liverpool,
supporting her husband, who found it difficult to obtain employment
there, by her needlework. Her husband being very anxious himself to
obtain work for their mutual support, resolved upon a journey to
London. He accordingly left Liverpool, and arriving in London was so
fortunate as presently to meet with a situation according to his
wishes. Upon this he wrote a letter to his wife at Liverpool, inclosing
her a sovereign to assist her upon her journey, that being all the
money he could command, and requesting that she would immediately come
to him in London. She left Liverpool, and having little money beyond
the sovereign received from her husband, took her passage by one of
Messrs. Pickford and Co.'s fly-boats, as being the cheapest conveyance
to London. The three prisoners, with a boy named Musson, had the care
of the boat, Owen being the captain. Deceased entered the boat at
Preston Brook. It was proved that the boat arrived at Stoke-upon-Trent,
in Staffordshire, at noon on Sunday the 16th of June, and left that
place again about four o'clock the same afternoon, the deceased being
then on board. The boat proceeded thence to Stone, where it arrived
about eight the same evening. At Stone the deceased complained to a
check clerk of the canal company that the prisoners were becoming
inflamed with liquor, and said, that she was afraid of going on in the
boat with them. The deceased, however, went on with the boat from
Stone, having got out there and walked by the towing-path side some
distance. About dusk they were met by another boat, when some gross
language in reference to the deceased was used by one of the prisoners,
and a short time afterwards they were again met, and the prisoners used
expressions in reference to their intentions as to the deceased of too
disgusting a nature for publication. About twelve o'clock on Sunday
night the boat arrived at a place called Hoo-mill-lock. By the side of
the lock was a house occupied by the lock-keeper and his wife. They
were both awoke at midnight by loud cries of distress, and immediately
opened their bed-room window, when they perceived the boat in question
in the lock. The deceased was in the boat, and upon the prisoners being
asked who she was, they replied that she was a passenger, and that her
husband was in the boat with her. Proceeding a little farther, they
came to a place called Colwich-lock, and after they quitted that place
the deceased was not seen alive. The body of the deceased was found in
the canal at a part of the canal known as Brindley's bank, between
Colwich-lock and Rugeley, and about three miles from the former place.
The prisoner Owen appeared in great alarm when seen by a woman early on
Monday morning. He stated that a passenger was lost and must have
drowned herself, and he believed that she must be deranged, for that
she had constantly been calling out, "Collins, Collins, oh, my
Collins!" The arrival of the boat at Fazeley at six o'clock on Monday
morning was proved, when, in consequence of suspicions against the
prisoners, they were taken into custody and examined. Before any
questions were asked them about the deceased, they had abused her with
oaths and foul language, saying, that if she had chosen to drown
herself they could not help it. The cabin of the boat was searched, and
in it were found the bonnet and shoes of the deceased, the bonnet being
very much crushed.

The remaining evidence against the prisoners consisted of a declaration
made by Owen, on his apprehension by Harrison, the headborough of
Fazeley, to whom, in answer to an observation that the deceased had
been found in a very shallow part of the canal, he intimated that she
was dead before she reached the canal; and a similar confession,
attended with a detail of other circumstances, which he made to a
fellow prisoner named Orgill, while in custody in Stafford jail.

The prisoners, it appeared, had been tried at the summer assizes at
Stafford in the year 1839 for the rape upon Mrs. Collins, a bill of
indictment for the murder having then been also preferred and found.
The prosecution for the rape rested upon evidence similar to that which
we have just detailed, added to the testimony of two surgeons, who
swore that the capital offence of violation had been committed,
apparently with great barbarity; but the jury deemed the proofs adduced
insufficient to warrant them in pronouncing a verdict of conviction.
Upon the indictment for the murder being then proposed to be proceeded
with by the learned judge, an application was made on the part of the
prosecution for the postponement of that trial until the next assizes,
on an affidavit, which stated that there were grounds for believing,
that further evidence of a very important character might then be
produced. This evidence was the testimony of a man named Joseph Orgill,
who had been just before convicted of bigamy, and sentenced to eighteen
months' imprisonment, and who had received from Owen a narrative of the
circumstances attending the commission of the crime upon the deceased
woman. The application was immediately acceded to; and upon
representations at the Home Office, a free pardon had been granted to
Orgill to enable him to become a competent witness upon this
investigation.

Orgill was now called, and he stated that he was a prisoner in Stafford
jail at the same time with the prisoners. On Sunday, the 21st of July,
he attended the Jail Chapel in company with them, and slept with the
prisoner Owen at night. After witness and prisoner Owen were in bed
they talked of the crimes with which they stood charged, when Owen told
witness he knew he should be hung, from the lesson taken from the Old
Testament read in the chapel in the morning, which was concerning the
hanging of Saul's sons. Owen then made a statement to witness, speaking
of the charge for which he and the others were in custody, informing
him that they (the prisoners) had some whiskey on board the boat, which
they stole and drank; that they then used the woman roughly, and she
got out and walked on the towing-path. The greater part of the rest of
the statement is unfit for publication; but it amounted to an
admission, that the capital offence charged in the former indictment
had been committed upon the unfortunate woman by all three of the
prisoners, and that her struggles to escape were so great that, in
their belief, she died, and they then threw her overboard.

The supposition of the prisoner as to the cause of death, however, was
now clearly contradicted by a surgeon, who stated that there could be
no doubt that the deceased had come to her death by drowning.

On behalf of the prisoners every effort was made by the counsel who
were employed by them to negative the circumstances of suspicion proved
against them, but in vain, and a verdict of "Guilty" was returned by
the jury after mature deliberation.

Mr. Baron Gurney, before whom the prisoners were tried, immediately
passed upon them the sentence of death, pointing out to them the awful
situation in which they were placed by the dreadful crimes of which
there could be no doubt they had been guilty, and warning them that no
prospect of mercy in this world could be held out to them.

For a considerable time after their conviction, neither of the wretched
convicts exhibited the slightest degree of compunction or regret for
their past offences. They persisted in making repeated declarations of
their innocence; and so far did they carry their asseverations that a
respite was granted from the day first named for their execution, to
the 18th of April, in order that full inquiries might be made at the
Home-office into the circumstances attending their guilt.

This investigation tended but to confirm the impression of the justice
of the conviction and sentence on the two prisoners, Owen and Thomas,
(alias Dobell); but some facts which were elicited induced the grant of
a further respite in the case of Ellis.

On the day before execution, Thomas became in some degree softened, and
he and Ellis, who was not aware of the distinction drawn in his favour,
made some disclosures as to the mode of life of persons of their class,
of the most frightful description. The scenes which they described as
of daily occurrence amongst the boatmen were dreadful. Thieving was
said to be an accomplishment reckoned highly valuable; and men who
possessed the greatest powers of pilfering the cargoes, by reason of
their adroitness, were described to be invariably selected by the
captains of the barges as best fitted to undertake the employment
tendered to them. Ale, spirit, or other liquids, were abstracted from
the casks by means of syphon pumps, which were in common use in the
boats; and drunkenness being the common and necessary consequence, the
boatmen were stated to be prepared for the perpetration of offences of
the very worst description.

On the morning of the execution the three prisoners were again visited
by the chaplain, when they appeared much more firm than they had before
been, and perfectly ready to meet their execution. They all asserted
that they knew nothing of the manner in which their murdered victim met
her death, as they were all intoxicated at the time.

The drop had been erected at an early hour in the morning in front of
the county prison. About twelve o'clock the three culprits were
summoned from their cells to the chapel of the prison, in order to
partake of the sacrament. Owen and Thomas were supplied with
prayer-books, which they held with an unwavering hand, and repeated the
responses in an audible voice. Ellis, not being able to read, had no
book. The chaplain went through the service in a manner the most
impressive and affecting, though his utterance occasionally was almost
overpowered by the strength of his emotions. At its conclusion Owen and
Thomas were conducted to the press-room. Ellis remained, and was then
informed by the governor, for the first time, that Her Majesty had been
pleased to respite his execution. The governor communicated this
information in a most feeling manner, and Ellis received it in a very
proper spirit: he wept much, and appeared thankful for the mercy
extended to him. At his own request he was conducted to the press-room
to take leave of Owen and Thomas. The governor accompanied him, and
made known to the other two that a further respite had been received
for Ellis, and that he would not be executed with them. On this
communication being made, it was difficult to ascertain which of the
men felt the most acutely. Ellis burst into tears, and taking each of
his former associates by the hands, kissed them most affectionately,
and exclaimed repeatedly, "God bless you, dear boys! "This conduct of
his appeared to overcome the feelings of both the men, particularly
Owen, who wept bitterly.

The period of execution was now announced by the solemn sound of the
prison bell. Soon afterwards the mournful procession moved from the
press-room to the lodge of the county prison. The men walked with a
firm step, and ascended the steps of the drop without assistance. The
executioner immediately placed the ropes round their necks, shook hands
with them, and as the chaplain pronounced the words, "In the midst of
life we are in death," the fatal bolt was drawn, and the wretched men
ceased to live.

The concourse of persons who witnessed the execution was almost
unprecedentedly great. It was supposed that there were nearly ten
thousand persons present. Every spot, remote and near, from which a
view of the drop could be obtained, was occupied -- walls, trees, roofs
of houses, &c., being fixed upon by many as convenient places from
which to view the scene. The three thoroughfares approaching the jail
were densely crowded as far as the sight could reach, and the
neighbouring gardens were filled with people. No peculiar feeling was
displayed when the men made their appearance on the drop; though when
it fell the females, who were very numerous, gave partial vent to their
emotions.

The punishment of the prisoner Ellis was subsequently commuted to
transportation for life.


WILLIAM RACE,
Convicted of Manslaughter for a Joke that Went Wrong.

Illustration: A Joke which Went Disastrously Wrong.

The case of this prisoner affords a remarkable proof of the folly of
practical jokes, and the mischievous results which may proceed from
them.

Race was indicted at Bury St. Edmunds, on Monday the 30th of March
1840, for the manslaughter of Thomas Buck. It appeared that the
prisoner was a vendor of hot-spice gingerbread at fairs; and the
deceased was a well-known itinerant son of Thespis in that part of the
country, who presented the primitive drama in all its original
simplicity to the wondering rustics. Sometimes, when "deep tragedy"
failed in its natural effect upon the popular mind, Buck, always
fertile in the resources of his art, though, perhaps, not overflowing
with other resources, would have recourse to the ready expedient of
producing a "sensation" which is called by the learned "practical
joking," and by the vulgar "larking." One of the rural actors, not in
Buck's "legitimate drama," but in his "larks," was the hot-spice
gingerbread artist, whose cakes and "nuts" were not more spicy than his
jokes. On the evening laid in the indictment, the theatrical booth,
with its uncovered stage in front, had been erected on the classic
ground of Felsham, celebrated for its fair -- the corps dramatique
appeared on the stage in front of the booth, and, in the flaming robes
and sweeping drapery of the tragic muse, endeavoured to attract the
attention of the motley crowd, who were just then busily intent upon
the performances of a neighbouring juggler, whose comic grimaces and
fantastic gambols they greatly admired. Under these circumstances, the
solemn pomp and tragic splendour of Buck's stage, paraded as it was by
heroes of herculean proportions and stentorian voices, and by heroines
of matchless grace and disdainful beauty, lost its powers of attraction
-- it did not "draw" an audience,-- and it was necessary, for many
reasons, that an audience should be assembled. The gingerbread baker,
who, perhaps, had cause to take an interest in the finances of the
company, and who had frequently before, as was stated, enacted the part
of one of the dramatis personæ of a "lark," saw that this was the
moment when a decisive blow ought to be struck to detach the admiring
crowd from the too successful juggler, and bring them to Buck's theatre
by the attractive influence of some novelty. He, therefore, with the
best intentions towards Buck and his company, went up to a
"property-man" who had a gun in his hand, took it gently from him, and
asked him whether it was loaded; the other told him that it was loaded
with powder and wadding only, upon which the manufacturer of gilt
gingerbread said, "I will have a lark with Buck, and bring people on
the stage." Having said this, he ran up the steps of the outside stage,
presented the gun at Buck, and discharged it within two feet and a half
of his body. Buck reeled, and fell into the arms of one of the
orchestral performers; and the spectators, thinking the whole thing an
excellent piece of acting, rapturously applauded. But alas! it was no
acting at all. The wadding had penetrated his side, and inflicted a
rupture of the heart, of which he almost instantly died. Buck's "poor
play of life" was over, and the curtain fell that evening on a deeper
tragedy than the company had performed for many a year.

An excellent character for kindness and humanity was given to the
prisoner by many persons, which the learned judge took into account in
sentencing him, upon being pronounced "Guilty of Manslaughter " by the
jury.

After some admonitory remarks upon the danger and criminality of
indulging in "larks" and practical jokes with fire-arms, his lordship
ordered him to be imprisoned for one month.


JAMES AND WILLIAM LIGHTFOOT.
Executed for Robbery and Murder.

These unhappy men were labourers, and were born and brought up in the
neighbourhood of the spot, where they committed the inhuman and
premeditated murder, for which their lives were eventually taken away
by the executioner.

They were tried at Bodmin, in Cornwall, on the 30th of March, 1840,
before Mr. Justice Coltman, on an indictment, which charged them with
the wilful murder of Mr. Nevill Norway, a timber merchant, residing at
Wadebridge, in the same county, on the 8th of the preceding month of
February. [Editor's Note: He was the great-grandfather of the novelist
Nevil Shute.]

The case excited the greatest interest in the remote district in which
it occurred, as well from the high estimation in which the unfortunate
deceased gentleman was held, as from the circumstance of his murder
having been effected by two brothers; each of whom, since their
apprehension, had sought to fix the guilt of the transaction on the
other. At an early hour in the morning on which the trial was appointed
to take place, every corner of the Court-house was crowded with
persons, many of whom had travelled a considerable distance, in the
hope of obtaining a glimpse of the culprits.

At nine o'clock in the morning the learned judge entered the court, and
the prisoners were then immediately placed at the bar. They betrayed
little agitation at the awful position in which they were placed, and
surveyed the assembled multitude with great coolness and
self-possession. Up to the time of their trial, they had been kept
apart in the jail in which they had been confined; and they now
observed each other with evident mutual dislike and mistrust.

The circumstances of the case, as they were proved on the trial, were
as follows:--

Mr. Norway was a highly respectable timber and general merchant,
residing at Wadebridge, about nine miles from Bodmin. In the course of
his business he was in the habit of visiting the different markets in
the neighbourhood, and on the 8th of February, he attended the market
at Bodmin. About four o'clock that afternoon he had his purse in his
hand, and was in the act of paying some money, when the prisoner,
William Lightfoot, walked close by him, and must have seen what he was
doing. Shortly before ten in the evening, he left Bodmin on his grey
horse, accompanied by another person, who, however, left him, after
they had proceeded about three miles on the road, and Mr. Norway was
observed to pursue his course towards Wadebridge. A farmer of the
neighbourhood was shortly afterwards going to the same village, and
when about two miles from it he saw a grey horse on the road, saddled,
but without a rider. He tried at first to overtake it, but the horse
struck into a gallop, and he gave up the race; but his curiosity was
excited, and upon meeting some men on the road, and making inquiry,
they told him they thought it was Mr. Norway's horse. This induced him
to call at Mr. Norway's house, and he found the horse standing at the
stable gate. The servants were called out, and spots of blood were
found upon the saddle. A doctor was immediately summoned, and two of
the servants sallied forth on the Bodmin road, in quest of their
master. It may be remarked that this road was extremely lonely, and
very hilly; and altogether presenting a most favourable place for the
commission of any atrocious act. The servants pursued the course of the
road, and having got about two miles, one of them perceived something
shining in a small stream of water, or rivulet, on the right hand side.
This led to a further examination, and it proved to be the body of
their unfortunate master, lying on his back in the stream, with his
feet towards the road, quite dead.

The body was directly placed on the horse, and conveyed home, and Mr.
Tickle, the surgeon, proceeded to examine it. He found that the
deceased had received injuries about the face and head, produced
apparently by heavy and repeated blows from some blunt instrument,
which had undoubtedly been the cause of death. A wound was discovered
on the chin, into which it appeared as if some gunpowder had been
carried in its infliction; and the bones of the nose, the forehead, the
left side of the head, and the back of the head, were fractured in a
most frightful manner; severe lacerations of the flesh having been
caused by the blows with which the injuries had been dealt. An
immediate examination of the spot where the body of Mr. Norway was
found, took place, and on the left hand side of the road a pool of
blood was discovered, from which, to the rivulet opposite, there was
distinctly visible a track, as if produced by some heavy body being
dragged from one to the other. Around this spot were marks of
footsteps, as if, in the language of one of the witnesses who was
examined, there had been "a scramble" there; and at the rivulet there
were also indications of a man having been there recently before. In
the course of the subsequent search in the vicinity of this spot, it
became obvious that two persons had been engaged in the murder, and
that they had remained, as if on watch for their intended victim,
pacing backwards and forwards, in an orchard attached to an uninhabited
cottage close by. The hat of the deceased was picked up immediately
near the spot where the murderers' footsteps were distinguishable, and
at a distance of about a foot and a half or two feet from the pool of
blood, was picked up the hammer of a pistol, which appeared to have
been newly broken off. Other appearances were observed, which gave
clear indications that a terrible struggle had taken place; but at this
time no circumstances transpired, which could in the slightest degree
tend to cast suspicion upon any one.

Upon the pockets of the clothes of the deceased being examined, it
became obvious that robbery had been the object of the attack upon him.
His purse and money, and a tablet and bunch of keys, were found to have
been carried off; and all efforts to find any of the missing articles
in the neighbourhood of the scene of the murder proved ineffectual.

Every exertion was now made to discover the perpetrators of this
diabolical crime, and large rewards were offered for evidence which
should tend to point them out. Jackson, a constable attached to the
London police, was sent for; and through his exertions, facts were
elicited which distinctly showed that the prisoners were the men who
were the real offenders. A man named Harris, a shoe-maker, was first
brought forward, who recollected having seen the prisoners on the night
of the murder, in the immediate vicinity of the brook where the body
was found; and a man named Ayres, who lived next door to James
Lightfoot, having suggested that every man, who was out late that
night, should be made to account for his time, stated that he
recollected having heard his neighbour, the prisoner, enter his house
at a late hour; and having communicated something to his wife, which,
although the partition between their houses was very thin, he could not
hear, she and her child began to cry. This led to an examination of the
prisoner's house, on the 14th of February, and a pistol was found,
without a lock, concealed in a hole in a beam, running across the
ceiling. The prisoner attempted to account for the pistol being broken,
by saying, that he had done it in killing a cat; but his manner being
suspicious, he was taken into custody.

He was directly carried before a magistrate, by whom he was remanded
until the 19th of the same month; and on the 17th his brother William
was also secured, in consequence of a conversation which he had had on
the 14th, with a man named Vercoe, upon the subject of the murder; in
which he had suggested that Ayres was the cause of his brother's
apprehension, and that if his brother were punished, he must be so too,
for that "they were both in it." He was also examined before a
magistrate, and he directly made the following confession:--

"I went to Bodmin last Saturday week, the 8th instant, and in returning
I met my brother James, just up at the head of Dunmeer Hill. It was
just come dim like. My brother had been to Egloshayle Burlawn, to buy
potatoes. Something had been said about meeting; but I was not certain
about that. My brother was not in Bodmin on that day. Mr. Vercoe
overtook us between Mount Charles turnpike-gate, at the top of Dunmeer
Hill, and a place called Lane End. We came on the turnpike-road all the
way till we came to the house near the spot where the murder was
committed. We did not go into the house, but hid ourselves in a field.
We did not see Mr. Abbott's waggon. My brother knocked Mr. Norway down.
He snapped a pistol at him twice and it did not go off. Then he knocked
him down with the pistol. I was there along with him. He was struck
whilst on horseback. It was on the turnpike-road between Pencarrow Mill
and the directing-post towards Wadebridge; and it was last Saturday
week. I cannot say at what time of the night it was. We left the body
in the water, on the left side of the road coming to Wadebridge. We
took something. It was money, in a purse; but I do not know how much.
It was a brownish purse. There were some papers, which my brother took
and pitched away in a field, on the left hand side of the road behind
the house. They were pitched away at the head of the field into some
browse or furze. The purse was hid away by me in my garden; and
afterwards I threw it over Pendavey-bridge: the lower side of the
bridge. My brother drew the body across the road to the watering. I
threw away the purse last Friday. The contents of it were not examined
before it was thrown away. We did not know who it was before we stopped
him. When my brother snapped the pistol at Mr. Norway, Mr. Norway said
'I know what you are about, I see you.' We went home across the fields.
We were not disturbed by any one. It was not above three or four
minutes before we left him. The pistol belonged to my brother; I don't
know whether it was broken; I never saw it afterwards; and I do not
know what became of it. I never advised my brother to burn it; and I
don't know whether it was soiled with blood. I did not see any blood on
my brother's clothes; we returned together from the spot, crossing the
river at Pendavey-bridge, and crossed Treraren fields over Treraren
ground, across a field or two to Burlawn village. My brother then went
to his house, and I went to my own house. I think it was handy about
eleven o'clock; but I cannot tell more than what I think about the
time. I saw my brother again on the Sunday morning. He came up to my
house. There was nobody there, I believe, but my own family. He said,
'Dear me, Mr. Norway's killed.' I did not make any reply. I went to bed
as soon as I came home on the Saturday night."

The prisoner upon this was remanded to Bodmin Jail, where his brother
was already confined; and, on his way to that place, he pointed out a
furze-bush in which the tablets and keys of the deceased gentleman were
found concealed.

On the 19th the prisoner James Lightfoot was carried back from Bodmin
to Wadebridge for re-examination, and upon this point the evidence of
Jackson, the policeman, was taken at the trial, to prove a confession
made by the prisoner, corresponding in effect with that which had been
made by his brother, though he strove to fix on him the guilt of the
commencement of the murderous attack.

The evidence of this witness was corroborated by that of another
constable, who was in the same chaise with them; and the turnkey of
Bodmin Jail also swore, that very shortly after William Lightfoot had
been in prison, he said to him that his mind had been so much troubled
that he had told Mr. Molesworth the whole truth. That he and his
brother had met by appointment, and were determined to have some money;
that when Mr. Norway came up, James snapped his pistol at him twice;
that he (William) then gave him a blow with a stick; that he fell off
his horse, and that James struck him with his pistol.

Other evidence was produced, the effect of which was to corroborate the
statements of the two prisoners; but, when called upon for their
defence, the wretched men declared themselves innocent of the offence
imputed to them.

The learned judge having then summed up the evidence, the jury returned
a verdict of "Guilty."

Mr. Justice Coltman passed the awful sentence of death in the most
feeling terms.

The prisoners exhibited no agitation or want of firmness during the
address of the learned judge, and, at its conclusion, were directly
conducted from the bar to the interior of the jail.

Up to this time, as we have already stated, the miserable brothers had
been allowed no opportunity for communication, and the discrepancy
between their stories exhibits distinctly enough the object of each to
screen himself, and to secure the conviction of the other. The double
confession, however, prevented the attainment of their desires, and
they both fell just victims to their crimes. After the passing of the
sentence on them, they were carried to the same cell, and were now, for
the first time, allowed to approach each other. They had scarcely met
before, in the most hardened manner, they commenced mutually
vituperative attacks, and even proceeded to blows. The immediate
interference of the jailors prevented a continuance of this disgraceful
scene, and the wretched convicts were once again removed to separate
apartments.

For several days the unhappy culprits exhibited the most callous
indifference to their situation.

On the 7th of April they had a farewell interview with their families.
It was of the most distressing description. After the departure of
their wives and children, they appeared to be conscious of the awful
situation in which they were placed; they became communicative, and
listened more attentively to the exhortations of the Rev. F. Kendall
and the Rev. W. Molesworth, whose parishioners they were. Great hopes
are indulged that the unhappy men were actuated by sincere feelings of
repentance.

On Sunday morning, the 12th of April, they attended the chapel
belonging to the jail, when an appropriate sermon was preached by the
chaplain, from Acts xvi. v. 25 --"And at midnight Paul and Silas prayed
and sang praises unto God; and the prisoners heard them;" and, in the
afternoon, the Rev. F. Cole, of St. Feock, delivered an impressive
sermon, from Romans vi. v. 23 --"The wages of sin is death;" to which
the prisoners paid the deepest attention. After the service they
returned to their cells, ate and drank heartily what was given them,
retired to bed at the usual hour, and slept soundly all night.

Monday, the 13th of April, had been fixed upon as the day of execution;
and on that morning, shortly before eleven, Mr. Smith, the
under-sheriff, proceeded to the cells, when portions of Scripture were
read by the Rev. Mr. Kendall, and the sacrament was administered to the
prisoners by the Rev. W. Molesworth. During the whole of this trying
scene the brothers evinced the greatest fortitude. They were then
conducted across the yard to the place of execution, preceded by the
clergyman, reading the burial service --"I am the resurrection and the
life," &c. The unhappy men were ghastly pale, but were perfectly
collected, walked with a firm step, and ascended the ladder without the
slightest assistance. Before being placed on the drop, they shook hands
with the persons around them, and thanked the clergymen and others for
their kindness and attention. They each then requested the conveyance
of some last communication to their families, and, in a few moments,
the drop fell.

Upwards of ten thousand persons had assembled to witness the dreadful
end of the unhappy wretches, and but little commiseration was exhibited
for their fate.

It is highly creditable to the inhabitants of Cornwall to state, that
no less a sum than 3500l. was collected between the time at which the
murder was committed and that of the execution, for the use of the
destitute widow and family of the murdered man.

The execution took place at Bodmin, on Monday, the 13th April, 1840;
the prisoner, William Lightfoot, being thirty-six years of age, while
his brother, James, had only attained his twenty-third year.


RICHARD GOULD, alias ARTHUR NICHOLSON.
Tried for Murder, but Convicted of Burglary.

The early life of this most atrocious malefactor is involved in some
degree of uncertainty, as, from his sullen and dogged indifference
during the period of his confinement in jail, but few particulars
concerning his parentage and education could be obtained from him. From
his own statement, at the period of his trial he was only twenty-three
years of age; and there is good reason to believe, that although upon
all occasions he stated his name to be Richard Gould, he was born of
respectable parents, whose name was Nicholson. His father carried on
the business of a publican; but, having failed, he determined to
emigrate to Van Diemen's Land with his family, and the necessary
preparations for the voyage were made. Our hero, however, whose
disposition had always exhibited him to be a person of unsteady
determination, at the last moment rejected the offer of his father to
accompany him, and, having secreted himself until the period of the
departure of the vessel in which he was to have sailed, had passed, at
the age of eighteen years found himself his own master, and without
employment, in London.

In a condition of absolute destitution, he was driven to seek for the
means of livelihood; and, devoid of the knowledge or the introduction
requisite to procure for him a situation in exact consonance with the
rank of life in which the condition of his parents had entitled him to
move, he accepted an engagement as pot-boy at the Duke of Cumberland
public-house. Red Lion-street, Spitalfields. In this condition, by no
means calculated to lead him to form connexions or habits likely to
improve his position in society, he appears to have made acquaintances
by whose instrumentality he was gradually conducted to the vices of
dissipation and intemperance, and, after about twelve months'
employment, he was discharged by his master. From this time he seems to
have supported himself in a loose and discreditable manner for about a
year and a half, at the expiration of which time he called at the house
of his late master, and informed him, that he had enlisted in the
Hussars. Subsequently, he again made his appearance there, saying that
he was about to proceed to Ireland, where he hoped to obtain employment
as an engineer; and, about three weeks before his apprehension on the
dreadful charge of murder, upon which he was subsequently tried, he a
third time called, saying that he had just returned from the trip, the
nature of which he had described upon his former visit.

This statement, however, appears to be untrue; for during a
considerable portion of the period of his absence, he was known in the
neighbourhood of Islington, where he was employed as a pot-boy at the
Barnsbury Castle public-house.

It was upon the morning of Tuesday, the 17th of March 1840, that the
murder was discovered for which Gould was eventually indicted. Mr. John
Templeman, the unfortunate victim of this most dreadful crime, was
about seventy years of age at the period of his death. He resided in
one of numerous small cottages erected in an open space called
Pocock's-fields, near Barnsbury Park, Islington, principally occupied
by persons of the poorer grades of life. He lived by himself, and was
possessed of a small income, arising from the rents of one or two
houses which belonged to him in Somers Town. The supposed miserly
habits of the old man, and the great desire which he appeared to
entertain to be considered rich, and which he exhibited by constantly
boasting of his property, were the undoubted causes which led to the
dreadful catastrophe by which he was deprived of life.

It appears that on Monday the 16th of March, he went as usual to Somers
Town to collect the money due to him for the rent of his houses; and
having called upon his tenants, he received of them 6l., the whole of
which was paid him in silver, except one half-sovereign. Upon his
return home, he sent for a Mrs. Thornton, who acted as his charwoman,
and who lived in an adjacent cottage, to whom he communicated the fact
of the receipt of the money; and having instructed her to procure
various trifling articles of which he stood in need, at about six
o'clock he retired to rest. On the following morning Mrs. Thornton sent
her daughter to the house of the deceased with some of the commodities
which she had been directed to purchase, and she knocked at the door,
and called Mr. Templeman by name. No answer was returned, and she went
back and informed her mother of her inability to obtain admittance to
the house; and then upon Mrs. Thornton proceeding to the cottage and
looking in at the bed-room window, she was horror-stricken at finding
the unfortunate old man stretched upon the floor brutally murdered. For
a time she was at a loss to know what proceedings to take in reference
to this most dreadful transaction; but being aware that the deceased
had a grandson, a solicitor, in Mortimer-street, Cavendish-square, she
determined to await the arrival of her son-in-law, a Frenchman, named
Capriani, who was employed as a night-watchman at Sadler's Wells
theatre, in order that he might take the necessary steps in the affair.
At eleven o'clock in the day he returned home; and then upon his being
made acquainted with what had occurred, he at once proceeded to the
residence of Mr. Templeman, jun., to inform him of the murder, omitting
altogether to give any information to the police of the discovery which
had taken place. During the absence of Capriani, the baker who was in
the habit of delivering bread at the cottage of the deceased arrived,
but was met by Mrs. Thornton, who sent him away, saying he would get no
answer there; but Mr. Templeman, jun., soon after making his
appearance, the police were called in, and informed of the horrid
transaction.

A minute examination of the house of the deceased then took place; and
from the appearances which presented themselves, it became evident that
the murder had been committed in the most savage manner. The body of
the deceased lay extended on the ground, covered only with a
night-gown, his hands being bound in front with a strong cord, and his
eyes being also bandaged with a stocking bearing marks of blood. The
bed was completely saturated with blood, and the floor presented
indications of a desperate conflict having taken place. On examining
the body, several severe wounds were found at the back of the head; the
forehead was completely dashed in by a violent blow from some heavy
instrument; the nose and both jaw-bones were broken; and the mouth was
severely bruised and mutilated; while three of the teeth of the poor
old man, wrenched from their sockets, were found lying on the carpet.
The house, which consisted of two rooms only, was in a state of great
confusion. The drawers had been forced open, and the box in which it
was known the deceased kept his money had been ransacked of its
contents. In the sitting-room the pipe of the deceased was found lying
upon the table, and beside it lay a number of books of a religious
tendency exhibiting the manner in which the old man had spent the later
hours of his life. Upon the search being continued, to ascertain the
means by which ingress had been obtained to the house, it was
discovered that the outer shutter, which was of slight materials,
having been first forced open, a pane of glass in the parlour window
had been broken through, and then a hand might have been introduced to
open the door on the inside.

The circumstances which had hitherto been disclosed left but little
clue to the murderer, but some suspicion being attached to Capriani
from the delay which had taken place in the discovery of the murder by
him to the police, he was taken into custody. The examinations which
were made by the police in the course of the ensuing day or two,
however, satisfactorily proved that Capriani was in nowise implicated
in the horrid affair, and he was discharged; but soon afterwards Gould,
and a man and his wife, named John and Mary Ann Jarvis, were
apprehended. The evidence which was discovered in reference to these
persons soon demonstrated the innocence of the man Jarvis, and he was
set at liberty; and subsequently, although a close intimacy was proved
to exist between Gould and Mrs. Jarvis, it was found that no such
proofs remained against the latter as to induce a probable belief of
her guilt, and she too was discharged from custody.

Gould, in the mean time, underwent many examinations at Hatton Garden
police-office, upon the charge of being concerned in the murder, the
utmost interest and excitement being occasioned by the mystery
connected with its committal. It would be useless to go through the
history of the investigations which took place before the magistrates,
and also before the coroner, upon this case; but there can be little
doubt, that if those functionaries had not suffered themselves to be
led away by feelings with respect to the comparative importance of
their respective offices, inconsistent with the due performance of
their duties, and that if the police had, in the ordinary language of
their calling, "managed the case well," a conviction which every one
now must believe would have been a proper one, would have secured to
justice the punishment of a most heinous offender. Such portion of the
evidence which was brought forward at these various examinations, as
could legally be produced against the prisoner, was adduced upon his
trial at the Old Bailey; and we shall proceed to describe that inquiry,
and the occurrences which subsequently took place.

The case came on to be tried before Mr. Baron Alderson, at the Central
Criminal Court, on Tuesday, the 14th of April, Mr. Chadwick Jones
appearing as counsel for the prosecution, and Mr. Chambers conducting
the defence of the prisoner. Witnesses were examined as to the facts
which have been already detailed; and other persons were produced, from
whose testimony it appeared that the prisoner for some time before the
murder had lodged in the house of a Mrs. Allen, who lived in
Pocock's-fields, near the cottage of the deceased. The most important
facts proved against him were, that previous to the murder he had
frequently declared to many of his companions that he was greatly in
want of money, and that he had suggested to one of them, a pot-boy at
the Duchess of Kent public-house in the Dover-road, that he knew an old
man who had got money, for that he had seen him flashing about a 50l.
note; that he knew where to put his hand upon it in the drawer where it
was kept, and that it was "just like a gift" to him, and that he wished
he could get "a right one" to assist him in the robbery. Other
witnesses proved that he had expressed to them a desire to procure "a
screw" and "a darkey" (meaning a picklock key and a dark lantern), to
"serve" an old gentleman in a lonely cottage; and the concluding
evidence was that of Mr. and Mrs. Allen, his landlord and landlady, as
to his conduct on the night of the murder, and of some police-officers,
who proved the discovery of some money in the rafters of the wash-house
of Allen's cottage, corresponding in its denominations with the silver
which had been paid to Mr. Templeman by his lodgers at Somers Town.

Allen's evidence was as follows:-- "I live at Wilson's Cottage,
Pocock's Fields, Islington. I know the cottage in which the deceased
lived. I have known the prisoner about twelve months; he has lodged at
my house several times, and he came to lodge there seven nights before
this occurrence took place. I remember the 16th of March; and at that
time, from circumstances that occurred, I am confident that he had no
money. On that day the prisoner went out between eight and nine o'clock
without having any breakfast. He had on a pair of shoes which I sold
him, and they had nails in them. The prisoner wore them constantly. He
returned home about three o'clock in the morning, and he immediately
went into his room. My wife said to him, 'Richard, is it early, or
late?' and he replied, 'It is early.' The prisoner got up between eight
and nine o'clock the next morning, and came into my sitting-room, and
passed through into the wash-house, which leads to the privy. He staid
out from five-and-twenty minutes to half-an-hour, when he returned into
the house and went out at the front door. I did not observe anything
unusual in his appearance. The prisoner returned home about seven
o'clock in the evening, and in the mean time I had heard of the murder
of Mr. Templeman, and I told him of it. The prisoner said it was a
shocking thing, and he asked me if I considered Mr. Templeman could
have done it himself. I said, 'Richard, how can a man bind his own
hands and eyes?' The prisoner then appeared agitated, and said his
inside was out of order, and he went into the yard, and remained for a
few minutes. My attention had been attracted to the prisoner having a
new pair of shoes on, and I had a suspicion. I asked him about them,
and he said that his cousin had given them to him. He then asked me to
get him some bacon and beer for his supper, and I fetched it for him.
He gave me a shilling to pay for it. I asked him where he had been so
late on the night before. He said he had been at the Rainbow, and had
stopped there until twelve o'clock at night, and when he came out he
met some friends, who detained him. Before this time I had a piece of
wood in my possession, which was about a foot and a half long. The
prisoner went to bed about nine o'clock, and I bolted him in and gave
information to the police. He accounted to me for the possession of the
money by saying that it had been given to him by his relations.

Mrs. Allen's evidence was to the same effect; but she proved in
addition, that a stocking in which the money was found concealed
belonged to the prisoner.

The evidence otherwise was of a very general description, and although
many expressions of a very suspicious character were attributed to the
prisoner by the witnesses, none of them amounted to an admission by him
of his guilt. The jury, after having received the customary charge from
the learned Judge, returned a verdict of acquittal.

During the whole of the time occupied by this investigation, the
avenues of the court, as well as the court itself, were crowded to
excess by persons anxious to obtain early information as to its result.
The verdict of the jury appeared to excite considerable dissatisfaction
in the minds of many persons; and so great was the anger exhibited by a
great portion of the populace, that the prisoner deemed it prudent to
accept an offer of protection which was made to him by the sheriffs,
and to remain in the Compter prison until the popular clamour should
have in some degree subsided.

While there, a very great degree of commiseration appears to have been
unjustly excited in his behalf. Mr. Alderman Pirie, a gentleman for
whose humane feelings and intentions every one must give him the
highest praise, offered to Gould that he should quit this country, and
that he should proceed in a vessel of his own, on the point of sailing
to Sydney, to that colony; and the wretched culprit, conscious of his
guilt and of the dangerous position in which he stood, at once accepted
the offer which was so liberally held out to him. A few days sufficed
to show how far the humanity of the worthy alderman was misapplied. A
man was committed to the Compter from the Mansion-house, upon a charge
of stealing from his employers a quantity of tea, entrusted to him for
delivery. His answer to the allegations made against him was
unsatisfactory; and in the Compter he was imprisoned in the same ward
in which Gould was suffered to remain. Upon his second examination he
started a line of defence, which it was thought would afford him a
moderate chance of escape. He imputed to two men, that they had met him
in the street, and having given him a shilling to go on an errand for
them, had run off with his tea. The men whom he pointed out were
eventually taken into custody, and they proved to be two of the persons
who had given evidence upon Gould's trial, and whose false impeachment
this fellow had basely procured for the purpose of revenging himself
upon them for their having stated that which was undoubtedly true. The
two men were fortunately able satisfactorily to prove that they were
elsewhere at the time of the supposed robbery; and the other prisoner
was conveyed to Newgate to await his trial.

In the mean time, Gould, exulting in what he then supposed to be the
success of his scheme, had been removed on board the Elizabeth, the
vessel in which he was to be conveyed to Sydney, and which lay at
Gravesend. She was on the point of sailing, when the government,
hitherto supine in its exertions to secure the discovery of the
perpetrators of this most diabolical murder offered a reward of 200l.
for their apprehension.

An idea was entertained that for the reward Gould would disclose all he
knew upon the subject, for that he knew something was obvious, and
Otway, a police serjeant, was despatched to communicate with him upon
the subject. A long conversation took place, in the course of which the
reward was hinted at, and Gould expressed his willingness to open a
communication, provided some portion of the booty sufficient to satisfy
him for the loss of his passage were guaranteed to him; but on the next
day, he was surprised at finding that he had again got into the custody
of the police, a warrant having been executed upon him, in which he was
charged with being a party to the robbery which had been committed in
the house of Mr. Templeman, on the night of the murder.

He was carried to London loudly complaining of the breach of good faith
on the part of serjeant Otway, and on being conveyed to Bow-street, he
repeatedly expressed his willingness to disclose all he knew upon his
being liberated. This condition, however, was refused to be acceded to,
and in the hope of obtaining the reward, on the 11th of May he made a
statement to the following effect.

He said, that "the robbery of Mr. Templeman's house had been talked
over for some time, by himself, Jarvis, and his wife, but it was not
finally agreed upon until the morning before that on which it took
place. He was then at Jarvis' house but he did not remain long, as
Jarvis expected his brother, but before he went away, Jarvis went into
the garden and got a piece of wood used as a dibber, and bored a hole
in the handle and passed a piece of string through it so as to hang it
on his arm. He then went to the Rainbow public-house and got drunk and
went to bed at his lodgings. He was to have gone to Jarvis' on the next
morning, but he lay in bed so late that Mrs. Jarvis came to fetch him.
Jarvis had given her a message how it was to be done, and he (Gould)
was not to go near the place until after the public-houses were closed.
Mrs. Jarvis told him that she had prepared breakfast and that there was
no fear of being noticed, but he went again to the Rainbow, and
remained there until twelve o'clock at night. At that hour he went to
Jarvis' house, and in a few minutes they went to Mr. Templeman's
together, Mrs. Jarvis standing at the door of her own cottage to give
an alarm in case of necessity. He (Gould) removed a piece of paper
which was pasted over the window, and introducing his hand opened the
door, and then he and Jarvis went in. He broke open a box which was in
the sitting-room, and found some silver, and Jarvis went into the
bed-room. Jarvis now suggested, that as the notes had not been found
they must be under the old man's head, and that they might quiet him
and fasten him. They had brought a cord with them, and Jarvis directly
struck the old man with the dibber. He jumped out of bed as if to
resist their attack, but the blows being repeated he was overpowered
and his hands tied. They then continued their search for the notes, and
they were found in the drawer in the box from which they had taken the
silver, but upon their looking at them they found that they were
useless, for they were barbers' notes upon 'the bank of fashion.' The
deceased by this time had in some degree recovered, and exclaimed 'I
know you,' upon which Jarvis declared, that he had rather finish him
than be found out, and went into the bed-room. He (Gould) ran out of
the house and was presently followed by Jarvis, and they went together
to the house of the latter. Mrs. Jarvis was still standing on the
look-out. He wanted to divide the money, but Jarvis said 'No, you had
better plant (conceal) it, for the cottages here will all be frisked
(searched).' He then took the dibber away and threw it into the New
River, and he also threw the dark lantern which they had used into a
pond in Pocock's Fields. Before he went away he agreed to meet Mrs.
Jarvis the next morning at the Three Goats' Heads, Wandsworth-road, and
when he quitted them he said that he would then show himself as quickly
as he could. He went accordingly to a coffee-shop near the Angel, at
Islington, and remained there for an hour and half, and when he
returned home it was two o'clock. He went to bed, and on the next
morning he placed all the money with the exception of 9s. in an old
stocking, and put it where it had been found. He then proceeded to the
Three Goats' Heads, and soon after he was joined by Mrs. Jarvis, who
had her child with her. They went to Lambeth together, and he bought a
pair of boots for 7s. 6d., and he sold his old ones in the New Cut.
They subsequently went towards home, Mrs. Jarvis on quitting him
desiring him not to go near her cottage that night, as there was a rare
'stink 'about it."

The villainy and falsehood of this declaration, except as regarded his
own guilt, was soon clearly proved, for on the very same day on which
it was made it was contradicted by the prisoner, but while as regarded
Mr. and Mrs. Jarvis it was distinctly shown to be false, the prisoner
had told so much of the truth as to enable the police to trace out so
many new proofs as to leave the most conclusive evidence against him.

He had already been acquitted of the murder, and it was impossible that
he should be tried upon any fresh indictment upon that charge; but it
still remained open to the friends of the deceased to prefer against
him a charge of burglary, subjecting him to a penalty of transportation
for life. The statement of facts with regard to the dark lantern, and
the purchase of the pair of shoes made by the prisoner, was plainly
corroborated by investigation; and while he had unsuccessfully
endeavoured to procure the new implication of Jarvis in the murder, he
had unwittingly afforded evidence that he had himself committed the
burglary with which he now stood accused.

Upon this latter charge he was indicted at the sessions of the Central
Criminal Court, on the 22nd of June, and the same evidence which had
been before adduced having been again brought forward, together with
proof of those additional facts admitted in his own confession, he was
found "Guilty."

Mr. Baron Parke, in addressing the prisoner, declared that there could
be no possible doubt that he had been guilty of the murder of the
unhappy deceased, and that he was justly brought to punishment. He
sentenced him to be transported for life.

The prisoner, during his confinement in Newgate upon this new charge,
made a most desperate attempt to escape, in company with a
fellow-prisoner; but their schemes being discovered by the
ever-watchful and most excellent governor of the jail, Mr. Cope, and
frustrated, he became much impressed with the dreadful situation in
which he had placed himself. At his trial he conducted himself with
much firmness, cross-examining the witnesses with considerable tact --
and subsequently addressing the jury and court upon the case, with
boldness and effect; but upon his hearing the verdict of "Guilty,"
which was returned, he lost his presence of mind, and became deeply
agitated. During the period occupied by the learned judge in passing
sentence, he recovered his self-possession, and at the conclusion of
the address, he skipped away from the bar with great alacrity.

The terms of his sentence of transportation were subsequently carried
out; but the prisoner was not removed from this country without having
made a fresh effort to secure his escape.


THOMAS PATTESON
Convicted of Manslaughter, March 10th, 1840

The trial of this person took place at Aylesbury, on Tuesday, March
10th, 1840, before Mr. Baron Parke, when the indictment charged that
the prisoner had been guilty of the manslaughter of John Charles, on
the 21st of October previous, at Buckland, in Buckinghamshire. The case
excited a great deal of interest in the county, from the condition in
life of the deceased and the prisoner, who were both respectable
farmers, and from the close intimacy which had long existed between
them, as well as from the mysterious manner of the death of the former.
Though the coroner's jury returned a verdict of manslaughter only, the
prosecutors sent up a bill of indictment for murder to the grand jury,
which they ignored.

The main circumstances of the case were, that on the:20th of October
1839, the deceased John Charles went, about ten o'clock in the
forenoon, to the "Boot," on Buckland Common, where he had some beer;
and while there, the prisoner came in to take lunch, about twelve
o'clock. They remained talking and drinking together until about five
o'clock in the evening, when the landlord, John Edwards, came in, with
whom they had some more drink. About half-past ten o'clock at night
they rose to go away, their road being the same to pretty near their
respective homes. Before they went, however, Charles said, "I think I
am the best man now, let us walk the chalk;" meaning that he was the
less intoxicated of the two. "Walking the chalk" is, in this part of
the country, the test of drunkenness, and the experiment is performed
by the attempt to walk straight upon a chalked line drawn across the
floor, or by walking along the straight line between two layers of
bricks where the floor is of that material. The experiment was tried in
this case, and the result proved that Charles, the deceased, was the
less affected by drink of the two; and he therefore undertook, as is
usual between two companions on such occasions, to see the other safe
home. Neither of them ever reached his home, for the deceased perished
on the way, and the prisoner having been taken into custody the same
night, remained in Aylesbury jail up to the day of the trial. The first
person who made known the dreadful catastrophe was the prisoner
himself, who, about half-past twelve o'clock on the same night, in a
very wild and still intoxicated state, went to Johnson, the policeman,
in the town of Tring, about two miles from the place where the death
took place, and told him "he had killed a man." At first the policeman
did not believe him, thinking it the mere folly of drink; but he
persisted, and said he would take him to the place where the body lay.
The policeman then went with him, and in a lane leading to the homes of
both parties, the body of the deceased was found lying on its back on
the grass, in a place not exactly on the road, but where a gap in the
field, which was the termination of a footpath running parallel with
the lane inside of the hedge, led into the road. That path was one
which had been made by people going through the adjoining land to avoid
a bad part of the road; and having passed that portion of the road,
they came into the road again. The prisoner, before the body was found,
had told the policeman that he was sure the person he had killed was
"Joe Kibble, the sweep of Tring, who had been sent by Humphrey Bull to
kill him." Humphrey Bull was the relieving officer of the union, of
which both the prisoner and the deceased were guardians, and was of
different politics from the prisoner, the latter being a liberal, and
Bull a conservative; but they were on good terms; and nothing could
show more strongly the strange state of delusion which the effects of
intemperate drinking had wrought upon the prisoner's mind on that fatal
night, than that he should give as a reason for killing one of his
friends, that he believed him to be an assassin sent by another friend
for the purpose of murdering him! On examining the body of the
deceased, it was found to bear marks of dreadful beating on the head
and face, which had produced great effusion of blood. The bones of the
nose were completely broken, and a surgeon deposed to a concussion of
the brain, as one of the effects of the violence which caused death. In
the pockets of the deceased were found a ten-pound note, a five-pound
note, and some sovereigns. On the notes being taken out of the pocket,
the prisoner immediately exclaimed, "These are the two banknotes which
Bull gave Joe Kibble to murder me!" At that time nobody present was
aware that the body was that of farmer Charles. So far from that, the
policeman actually sent a person to the house of Charles, to ask him to
come to see the body. The prisoner had previously told the police that
he had been going home from the Buckland Inn, with his friend Charles,
but the latter parted from him somewhere on the road, he could not tell
where. The probable solution of the mystery is, that the deceased, who
was proved to be, when in his cups, of a jocose disposition, and rather
addicted to the too-often dangerous practice of practical joking, or
what is vulgarly called, "larking," had, in going home that night,
resolved to frighten Patteson, who, though a man of prodigious bodily
strength, was known to be rather deficient in courage, and had before
expressed fears of going home by that lonely road. With this view, it
is supposed that Charles, taking advantage of the very drunken state in
which Patteson was, slipped away from him among some trees which stood
at the entrance of the footpath which we have before described, and
which ran parallel with the road along which Patteson had to proceed to
his home. A. high bank and hedge would screen any person going along
this pathway from the view of another on the road. At the place where
the pathway led again into the road, at the gap, there was a mound of
earth with an open space between that and the hedge, so that a person
coming from the gap might, by going partly behind that mound, be
concealed until he came suddenly in view, and this is probably what the
deceased did in order to frighten his companion; and the position of
the body near the gap when found seemed to strengthen that supposition.
Whether the deceased laid hold of the prisoner before the latter saw
him or not must remain for ever involved in obscurity, as the
panic-terror into which Patteson was suddenly thrown, operating upon
the drunkenness, caused him to destroy the unfortunate man immediately;
and it is probable that from his strength, his first blow knocked him
senseless. The prisoner said, that, while he was beating the supposed
murderer on the ground, he asked him "who sent him to kill him," and
that he pronounced the name of "Bull" three times. This of course was
the mere hallucination of the temporary frenzy produced by drunkenness
and terror. When the prisoner and deceased left the inn together, the
latter had a knobbed walking-stick in his hand, the other had none. The
stick was found under the body of the deceased, but not marked with
blood, or presenting any appearance that could show that it had been
used in inflicting the wounds by the prisoner. Those wounds the surgeon
was of opinion were inflicted by the fist only. The prisoner was in an
agony of grief as soon as he was made aware that it was his friend and
companion Charles that he had so unwittingly slain, and continued in a
state of deep affliction, even up to the time of his trial.

On behalf of the accused, evidence was adduced which showed that he was
a most amiable and respectable man.

Mr. Baron Parke, in summing up the evidence, told the jury that if they
were of opinion that the delusion which operated on the mind of the
prisoner, and led to the perpetration of the fatal act, was caused by
such an alarm of personal danger as would not have produced a similar
effect upon the reasonable mind of a sober man, they must find him
guilty of manslaughter, otherwise the act would be excusable homicide.

The jury returned a verdict of "Guilty of manslaughter," accompanied by
a recommendation to mercy.

Mr. Baron Parke, in pronouncing judgment, observed, that from the time
he had read the depositions he believed the fatal act of the prisoner
to have been the result of a delusion produced upon a mind which
intoxication had deprived of the control of reason; that the prisoner
never had the slightest intention of killing his friend, with whom it
was proved he never had any quarrel, was clear beyond all doubt. It was
not right that he should, however, go altogether unpunished, but in
consideration of his having already suffered five months' imprisonment,
he should sentence him to be imprisoned for two months only, hoping
that this case would be a warning to all who heard it of the danger of
indulging in intemperate habits.


JOHN TURNER FLYNN
Convicted of Forgery and Transported for Life, 11th April, 1840

This person was convicted of an offence of a most mischievous
description.

He was indicted at the Old Bailey sessions, on Saturday the 11th of
April, 1840, for feloniously uttering and putting off a forged order
for the payment of money, and a forged certificate, knowing the same to
be forged, with intent to defraud the Commissioners of Chelsea
Hospital.

The evidence which was adduced in the progress of the case, showed that
the prisoner was a person of extremely respectable connexions, and was
at the time of his trial in the fiftieth year of his age. At an early
period of his life he entered the navy, and in the course of a long
service was present at many actions, in which he is reported to have
behaved with much gallantry. Having obtained the rank of lieutenant, he
was engaged by her late majesty, Queen Caroline, the unfortunate
consort of George the Fourth, as commander of a yacht, in which her
majesty took frequent excursions, during her residence on the
Continent. In this capacity he gained the confidence of his royal
mistress, and she was known to place much reliance on his ability and
zeal in her service. On her majesty's return to England, Lieutenant
Flynn accompanied her, and he was subsequently examined as a witness
before the House of Lords, in the course of the inquiry, which took
place into the conduct of her majesty. Subsequently to this period,
Lieutenant Flynn was supposed by many of his friends to have had the
honour of knighthood conferred upon for his exertions in favour of the
government, and he was generally known as Sir John Flynn. He was
shortly afterwards married to a person of respectable connexions, by
whom he had several children. In the year 1831, Lieutenant Flynn, with
a view to increasing the means which he possessed of supporting his
family, at that time resident at St. Malo, procured for himself a
licence to act as a prize agent, an occupation frequently followed by
persons in his situation, and considered by them as in no degree
derogatory to their rank. In the course of his professional engagements
he was compelled to make frequent trips from France to England, and he
became acquainted with Mr. Beresford Ayton, a Navy-agent, who proposed
to put him in the way of increasing his business. With this view he
introduced him to Mr. Holgate, a clerk in the Prize Office at Chelsea
Hospital, and an agreement was entered into, that the latter should
furnish the names of soldiers who were entitled to prize money,
together with the amount standing opposite to their names, and the
transactions in which they had been engaged, and by which their claims
were authorised, (although such a course was opposed to the duties of
his office,) while Lieutenant Flynn should allow him two and a half per
cent, upon all sums recovered from the prize commissioners, by reason
of such information,-- the presumed object being, that Flynn should
find out the soldiers, and by informing them of the fact of their being
entitled to put forward their claims, procure them to make application
for such sums as properly fell to their share.

Flynn, however, determined to apply this information to a purpose the
same in effect as that which Holgate supposed him to possess, although
his object was to apply to his own use all the money which he obtained.
With this view he applied, in 1835, to Mr. E. A. Théleur, a friend,
residing in Great Marlborough-street, to receive any letters which
might arrive at his house, addressed for him, and to receive such
moneys as should become payable to him, and retain them for his use.
Mr. Théleur at once consented to this course, and on the 20th of August
(in that year) he received a letter from Nantes.

Among the names handed to Flynn by Holgate, was that of George Langley;
who had been a Serjeant of the St. Helena regiment of artillery at the
time of the capture of Buenos Ayres, in 1806, and who was entitled to a
sum of 177l. for prize money. In the course of 1835 an application was
received at the Prize Money Office, at Chelsea Hospital, purporting to
be that of Langley, and dated from Nantes, in which the applicant
requested that an order might be sent to him, for the amount standing
against his name. An answer was returned, acquainting Langley, that by
lapse of time his claim had fallen to the ground, for that no such
applications were listened to, if not made within six years of the time
of the money becoming due, but informing him that if he gave a
satisfactory excuse for his neglect, the prize-money commissioners
might grant the prayer of his petition. In reply to this communication,
another letter from Langley was received, and upon the statement
contained in it, an order was transmitted to him, with directions that
it should be filled up in a certain manner, and that a certificate,
signed by certain persons as to his identity, should be sent back, upon
the return of which the money would be paid.

The order and certificate required were received by Mr. Théleur, in the
letter which reached him, which purported to be signed by George
Langley, and which, besides, requested that he would procure money for
the order enclosed. While Mr. Théleur was reading the letter Lieutenant
Flynn called upon him, and when the letter and its contents were shown
to him, he declared that it was quite correct, and expressed a wish
that that gentleman would procure payment to be made to him, as the
order was drawn up in his name. Mr. Théleur, in consequence, proceeded
to Chelsea Hospital, and on the 24th of the same month, a check for the
amount was handed to him, for which he gave a receipt. On the following
day he obtained cash for the check, in obedience to the expressed wish
of Flynn, and he then paid over the amount to him, on his giving him an
acknowledgment for it.

Subsequently some suspicion arose, and Holgate being questioned, he
disclosed what he had done to Mr. Bicknell, the solicitor to the
commissioners of Chelsea Hospital. Inquiries were in consequence
instituted, and it eventually proved that Serjeant Langley had died
within six months of the taking of Buenos Ayres, on board the Woolwich
man-of-war, on his way back to St. Helena; and that, therefore, the
application made in his name must have been fictitious, and that the
certificate as to his identity, which purported to be signed by certain
individuals resident at Nantes, was false, inasmuch as that no such
persons were in existence.

Mr. Théleur, who had now removed to St. Germain, in France, was in
consequence written to, and the explanation which he gave of his
participation in the affair at once cast suspicion on Flynn, who was
eventually apprehended and brought to trial. On the night before the
investigation, which took place before the jury at the Old Bailey, it
was ascertained that the order and certificate, as well as the letters
of application to the prize-money commissioners, were written by a
young woman who had been a member of Flynn's family, but who had been
since married; but in consequence of her absence from London, it was
impossible to obtain her testimony to account for the circumstances
under which she had been induced to draw out those documents.

These circumstances constituted the evidence laid before the jury upon
the indictment preferred against the prisoner. For the defence, it was
suggested, that some person more designing than the prisoner had
imposed upon him; but the jury returned a verdict of Guilty,
accompanied by a recommendation to mercy.

It was stated, that there were other prosecutions against the prisoner
of a similar character, and that frauds to a very great extent had been
committed upon Chelsea Hospital.

Mr, Baron Alderson in passing sentence upon the prisoner declared, that
he felt the deepest regret at finding a person of his rank in life
placed in such a situation. He had hitherto borne a good reputation,
but the crime of which he had been found guilty was of a most
aggravated character:-- it was one which might have robbed the soldier
of the hard-earned fruits of his valour, of his meritorious sacrifices
for the safety and honour of his country. A short time before, for such
an offence he would undoubtedly have been consigned to an ignominious
death, and he feared that the laxity with which the existing law was
carried out, would compel the legislature to re-enact that dreadful
punishment for such crimes as his. He would take care that the blood of
no man should rest upon his head; and although it was his intention, as
it was his duty, to present the recommendation of the jury in the
proper quarter, and he should not stand in the way of the mercy of the
Crown, he considered it to be his imperative duty to pass a sentence of
transportation for life.


ALEXANDER M'LAGHLIN SMITH
Tried for Murder, but Found Insane, 21st of July 1840

The brutal and sanguinary murder for which this unhappy man was tried,
was that of Mr. William Duke, the chief police-officer of Huddersfield,
in Yorkshire. Surrounded as it is by circumstances of the very greatest
barbarity and atrocity, it is no small relief to find that the person
by whom the dreadful deed was committed was insane, and therefore
legally irresponsible for his acts.

The scene of this dreadful transaction was thus described by an
eyewitness. He says, "On Tuesday the 28th of April, after tea, I paid
one of my usual visits to our beautiful public exhibition, and while in
conversation with a friend, I heard the cry of 'murder,' and rushed out
of the back door, close to which stands our prison and the
prison-house. The crowd around soon told me in what course to direct my
steps, and I immediately entered the prison-house. The first object
that struck my attention was Dawson, one of our police-officers, seated
in a chair, literally stifled with the blood which he was stroking from
his head and neck, and which was streaming from other parts of his
body. All was consternation and horror. The cries of Mrs. Duke, and
other females, that her husband was murdered, induced me to hasten to
the prison-yard, there to witness a scene that beggars description.
Blood was so largely scattered in every direction that the place
resembled a slaughter-house. There I found Duke, our head
police-officer, weltering in his blood, pale with exhaustion, and Mr.
Wrigley, surgeon, on his knees, vainly attempting to stop the bleeding.
I rushed back to the front door -- sent for all the surgical assistance
to be found, and then returned to the scene of horror to hear the
piteous request of the dying officer, "Don't remove me, doctor, don't
be so cruel -- let me die here!"-- nearly his last words.

"On my first entrance into the prison-yard the door of one of the cells
had just been locked, and the horrid imprecations of a wretch were
heard amidst a scene that was calculated to appal the stoutest heart. I
soon learnt the melancholy tale, that this cell contained the author of
deeds that will long live in the memory of the inhabitants of
Huddersfield, and for which there is no parallel in this town since the
murder of Mr. Horsfall, in the days of Luddism, that very day
twenty-eight years ago, and about the same hour, and in a similar
beautiful season. I shall briefly state what I learnt, and which was
corroborated at the coroner's inquest. A Scotch gardener named
Alexander MacLaughlin Smith, who for the last twelve months has been
located about Elland and Halifax, where he is well known, and has been
an object of dread from his violence, was in the act of bargaining for
a plant, and wishing to take advantage, he was given in charge to
Dawson, a police-officer, about four o'clock in the afternoon. Being
slightly affected with liquor he resisted, and became very rough,
especially when taken into the prison yard, where he made an attempt to
injure Duke with a pruning-knife. This, however, was taken from him,
and a leg and a wrist chain were put on him, and he was locked up. He
then became outrageous, and continued so until about six o'clock, when
Duke, Dawson, and Dalton, the three police-officers, agreed to meet and
secure him more closely. Duke opened the door of his cell, and asked
what he meant by his conduct; when the prisoner (who, although chained,
was not fastened to the wall) answered that he would let him know, and
with an open pruning-knife in his hand, rushed out and instantly
stabbed Duke, who ran, followed by the prisoner and Dawson. Dalton ran
in a contrary direction, and met the three half-way round the prison.
Duke was laid prostrate, and Dawson in close contact with the prisoner,
bleeding, when Dalton, fortunately having a staff, knocked the knife
out of the hand of the prisoner, and with assistance secured him.

"It was in this position that I found the parties, and shortly after
poor Duke was removed into his house, his wounds washed, and all
medical aid afforded, but he breathed his last about ten minutes after
he was removed, and in about twenty minutes after his deadly encounter.
Dawson was removed to the infirmary, where he now lies with hopes of
recovery, notwithstanding he has received ten or twelve wounds, some
very severe, one of which is nine inches long and deep to the bone.
Duke's wounds are horrid to describe, some six inches long by two and a
half deep; but the one that was the immediate cause of death, was in
the inner-side of the thigh, four inches long and two and a half deep,
which cut through two-thirds of the femoral artery.

"The dreadful news of the murder spread rapidly, and crowds assembled
around the prison. The wretched prisoner in his frenzy rejoiced in his
success, and regretted he had not killed more. I remonstrated with him,
but was only threatened with the same fate, could he reach me. The
wretch was shortly after doubly pinioned, and left for the night. The
morning came; I was kindly permitted to see the prisoner, whose mind
still remained callous, without a symptom of remorse, or the slightest
regret, save that he had hurt his own fingers!

"To-day (Wednesday) an inquest was held at the George Inn, before
Thomas Dyson, Esq., and a highly respectable jury. The whole town was
in a ferment, and when the prisoner was brought in an open carriage, in
his blood-stained clothes, and with his unwashed hands, with an air of
savage indifference, nay even a smile on his countenance, the
expression of indignation was fearful! Before the jury gave their
verdict, the coroner asked the prisoner if he had any questions to ask,
when, with fiendish look and sarcastic sneer, he replied, 'Me ask any
question? Are you satisfied with what you have got? Then be doing!' The
jury then, without removing from their seats, unanimously agreed to a
verdict of 'Wilful Murder.' Shortly after the prisoner was committed
and driven off to York Castle, to take his trial at the next summer
assizes, amidst a dense crowd, whose suppressed indignation under the
horrid exciting circumstances of this tragic scene does them great
credit.

"The prisoner is about thirty-four or thirty-five years of age, with
sandy hair: he stands about five feet seven inches high, is strongly
built, and very broad in the chest: he has a peculiarly savage aspect.
He is a native of Scotland, and has a wife and two children at
Stirling, in indifferent circumstances, from whom he has long been
absent. During the whole of this tragic exhibition he manifested the
utmost callousness and indifference, even approaching to scorn. Not
even the bloody knife or the bloody soaked clothes, when produced in
court, had any apparent effect on him; and to all appearance the
probability of a violent death has no terrors to him. From first to
last he remained unmoved! On his road to York he was the same, and
unreservedly stated, that he thought no more of killing men that acted
to him as the police had done than of killing bullocks."

The wretched man during his confinement in York Castle exhibited such
symptoms as could leave no doubt of his insanity, and the necessary
precautions against his doing any further mischief were taken.

Dawson, the second object of his attack, after remaining in the police
infirmary during upwards of a month, was sufficiently recovered to
resume his duty, but he was still in a state of considerable weakness,
from the great loss of blood which he had experienced.

The trial of the prisoner took place at York on the 21st of July 1840,
before Mr. Baron Rolfe, when the facts which have been already detailed
having been proved by various witnesses, evidence of the insanity of
the prisoner was given.

The jury, in consequence, acquitted the prisoner, and he was ordered to
be detained during Her Majesty's pleasure.


HARRISON FLATHER
Imprisoned for Larceny.

We cannot refrain from presenting to the notice of our readers the
circumstances of this very singular case.

At the assizes at Carlisle, on the 23rd of February 1841, Harrison
Flather was indicted for stealing five sovereigns, a purse, and a pair
of ear-rings, the property of Morris Davis.

It appeared from the opening statement of the counsel for the
prosecution, that the prosecutor, Mr. Morris Davis, was a Pole, and had
been for some time resident in Carlisle, where he carried on business
as a furrier. The prisoner was writing-master to the grammar-school,
and was on this account probably selected by the prosecutor to give him
lessons in the English language, and especially in writing and
accounts. In the course of this employment a friendship sprung up
between them; and Mr. Flather was finally made, the confidant of the
prosecutor in a matter of great delicacy, and was employed by him to
conduct a correspondence with a young lady, to whom the prosecutor had
become attached. Two letters were addressed by Mr. Davis to Miss Moore,
the lady in question, the prisoner Flather being employed as
amanuensis. Miss Moore was absent from Carlisle when these letters were
sent to her residence; but immediately on her return she enclosed them
to the prosecutor, and there, so far as she was concerned, all
correspondence ceased. It appeared, however, that letters continued to
be written in her name to the prosecutor, which he received through the
Carlisle post. In these, reasons flattering to Mr. Davis were given for
a renewal of the correspondence. Mr. Flather continued in Mr. Davis's
confidence, read and explained the letters when received, wrote the
answers, and to his hands the delivery of them was confided. Early in
the correspondence, however, a circumstance occurred which, had Mr.
Davis been better acquainted with the feelings and manners of English
women, would certainly have awakened his suspicions; this was an
application for money, specifying the precise sum which the lady
wanted. Many of these applications were made, and always complied with.
Among others was one on the 19th of November 1840, which formed the
subject of the present charge. An application was made for five
guineas, and, in replying to it, Mr. Davis took the opportunity of
further inclosing a purse and a pair of jet ear-rings, which he had
purchased for the purpose. One of the shillings enclosed was somewhat
remarkable, being marked with the letter "A" on the head of the
impression. About a month afterwards an inquiry took place, and it then
appeared that Miss Moore knew nothing whatever of this pretended
correspondence, and had never received any letter or communication from
Mr. Davis whatsoever, except the two first, which she had promptly
returned. The prisoner was apprehended; his house was searched; and
there was found the identical shilling which Mr. Davis had so inclosed
to Miss Moore some time before, and committed, as he had committed the
other inclosures, to the hands of the prisoner.

To support this statement in evidence, Mr. Morris Davis and other
witnesses were called. The simple Pole detailed the circumstances under
which he had been so impudently bamboozled by the prisoner with much
ingenuousness. He had set great store upon the supposed effusions of
Miss Moore, which amounted to between twenty and thirty in number, and
kept them tied up in a bundle in his parlour. On the Friday before the
Christmas-day preceding the prosecution, however, he quitted his
sitting-room, while the prisoner was there, for a short time, and, on
his looking for the love-letters a few days afterwards, he found that
they were gone. The letters were usually couched in the most
affectionate terms, commencing "My dear, dear love," and terminating,
"Your ever affectionate betrothed wife, E. Moore;" but the greater part
of them contained requests for the loan of money, the amount of the sum
demanded varying from 2l. to 5l. He invariably complied with the
demands made, and advanced in all no less than 85l. Flather always took
away the letters; and the answers either came by his hands or through
the post. He never had any suspicion that anything was wrong until he
learned that Miss Moore was at Liverpool at the same time that he
supposed she was writing to him from her residence at Carlisle.

On his cross-examination, Davis admitted that he was a person of
inferior education, and that he was scarcely able to read or write his
own or any other language. He had paid Flather a guinea for the
instruction which he received from him, and a guinea for the
love-letters; but the schoolmaster frequently took his meals at his
house. Flather had also kept his books and had written
business-letters; and since this prosecution an attorney had applied
for the amount of an alleged claim he had upon him in this respect,
which, however, he had not paid. In reference to the love affair the
witness said, that he knew nothing of Miss Moore except that she had
dealt at his shop, and that she had never personally favoured his
advances. After the first two letters had been returned, he asked her
whether she had sent them back, and she answered in the affirmative. He
replied that he was satisfied; but subsequently he was induced to
recommence the correspondence, upon receiving a note, apparently from
her, stating that she had been compelled to discourage his addresses in
obedience to the wishes of her friends, and that she was desirous of
maintaining a communication with him. In subsequent letters she made
appointments to meet him, which, however, were invariably postponed;
and she even went so far as to speak of running away with him to Gretna
Green, for which purpose he sent her 5l. in obedience to her request;
but this scheme was also abandoned.

Miss Moore, of Paternoster-row, Carlisle, was called to prove that she
had never written letters to the prosecutor, and had never received any
from him through the medium of the prisoner; and other witnesses spoke
to the facts opened by the prosecuting counsel, as well as to the
additional circumstance that green-edged paper, like that on which Miss
Moore's supposed letters had been written, had been found in the
possession of the prisoner.

The jury found the prisoner "Guilty." He was then tried upon a second
indictment, charging him with a like offence in reference to some of
the other sums which he had obtained of the prosecutor, and a similar
verdict was returned.

Mr. Justice Maule immediately sentenced him to be confined in the House
of Correction for sixteen months.


RICHARD MOORE
Transported for Forgery.

At the Central Criminal Court, on Saturday the 6th of February 1841,
Richard Moore, aged thirty, was indicted for feloniously uttering and
putting off a forged note, purporting to be a genuine note of the Salop
bank, for 5l. well knowing the same to be forged, with intent to
defraud Messrs. Glyn, Halifax, Mills and Co., the bankers, of
Lombard-street.

The circumstances which transpired in the course of the investigation
were of a remarkable character. Mr. Moore was a person of gentlemanly
appearance, and was a member of a highly respectable Irish family,
possessed of good means. The unfortunate young man when he came of age
received a property sufficient to have placed him in a situation above
the common rank. Naturally wild and unsettled in his disposition, he
soon became involved in all the gaieties of the metropolis of his
native country; but he ere long changed the scene of his actions to
London. Here he entered even more largely into the amusements of life;
and few years had elapsed before he had dissipated the greater part of
his possessions. The gambling-table had served in a great measure to
produce this unfortunate effect, and to the gambling-table he resorted
for the purpose of renewing those means of which it had already
deprived him. Every effort served but to plunge him deeper into
difficulty; and at length he was driven in despair to a method of
retrieving his lost fortunes which rendered him open to a prosecution
for putting off forged notes.

The circumstances proved in reference to the particular case upon which
he was first tried were these:-- On the evening of the 31st of January,
the prisoner, accompanied by a gentleman who was in the habit of
visiting the billiard-rooms of a person named Cooke, at No.358, Strand,
entered those rooms, and after a short time, sat down to play loo with
a party. He played throughout the evening with varied successes, paying
his first losses with what appeared to be genuine country bank-notes;
but when he rose to quit the room, he was in debt to Cooke, the keeper
of the house, in the sum of 80l. which he had advanced to him. He gave
his I.O.U. for the amount, stating his address to be Wright's Hotel,
Strand, and went away. In the course of the evening Cooke had given
change for nine of the notes which had been paid by the prisoner; and
in the morning he sent his wife into the city to procure cash for them
at the various banking-houses at which they purported to be payable.
She received the money for some of them; but at length, upon her
presenting a note at Messrs. Glynn and Co.'s, she was detained. She
immediately explained what she knew of the transaction; and her husband
having been sent for, he confirmed her statement, and they were
liberated, On that evening a note was taken to Mr. Cooke by the porter
of the Hotel Fricour, Leicester-square, which was written by the
prisoner, in which he expressed his regret at having disposed of notes
which he had discovered were forged; but he assured Mr. Cooke of his
desire at some future time to repay him what he had lost, saying, that
he had received the notes on the day before from a school-fellow in
payment of a bet upon a race which he had won some time before. Cooke
accompanied by Forrester, the city officer, who had been engaged to
trace the prisoner, immediately proceeded to the hotel from which the
letter was dated, and found the prisoner in the coffee-room. They
directly took him into custody, and he made no effort to escape or to
deny the guilt imputed to him.

Subsequent inquiries proved that the notes which the prisoner had put
off were genuine impressions of the plates prepared for the various
banking companies, by whom they purported to have been issued, but all
that part of them which gave them the character of genuine instruments,
including the signature of the director, was forged. The exact means by
which these impressions had come into the possession of the prisoner
was a mystery; but upon application to Messrs. Perkins and Co. of
Fleet-street, who had prepared the plates, it was elicited that it was
their custom to send out to the various country banking firms proof
impressions of the plates which they had engraved as specimens of their
work. The notes uttered by the prisoner were of this character, and
they bore upon them evidence of the employment of great ingenuity in
their preparation. The specimen notes were invariably issued, pasted
upon card-board of considerable thickness; it appeared that the notes
in question had been removed from the card-board, but being of
insufficient substance, by reason of their being impressions on India
paper, a piece of paper of the ordinary quality used in the genuine
notes had been placed upon the backs of them so as to give them all the
appearance of the notes in common circulation. The signatures appended
to them did not appear to have been copied from any of the original
notes; and in some instances, indeed, names had been employed entirely
dissimilar to those of any of the directors of the bank.

Mr. C. Phillips, who was retained as counsel for the prisoner,
addressed the jury on his behalf, urging that in truth he had no
intention which was actually dishonest, and suggesting that the
unfortunate man having been deprived of his property by gamblers, had
sought to recover it back again by means, undoubtedly dishonest, but
scarcely more blameable than those which had been employed by those by
whom he had been fleeced. He was informed that it was by no means
uncommon for flash notes to be employed by persons connected with
gambling-houses, as a means of decoying their prey; and he asked
whether, in truth, the prisoner had been guilty of anything more
dishonest. The absence of all evil intention had been plainly shown in
the immediate notice which he had given of the notes which he had put
off being fictitious, and this at least was a point in the case which
entitled him to some consideration.

The jury returned a verdict of "Guilty," but recommended the prisoner
to mercy upon the ground suggested by the learned counsel.

The prisoner was then indicted upon a second charge, of uttering two
notes of the respective amounts of 5l. and 10l., with intent to defraud
the Boston Bank.

The means employed by the prisoner in putting off these notes were very
similar to those which he had used in the former case. The offence was
alleged to have been committed on the 28th of January; and it appeared
that on that night the prisoner went to a notorious gambling-house
situated at No.7, Leicester-square, kept by a person named Thompson,
and demanded to know whether there was any play, and what bank there
was. He was informed that the bank contained 130l., and Chappell, the
attendant in the rooms, offered to play with him, in default of there
being any one else there. They played, and in a short time Chappell won
70l. which the prisoner paid in what appeared to be country bank-notes,
of various denominations. The prisoner declared that he had no more
money left then; but asked whether, if he went for some more, the rooms
would be open when he returned. He was answered in the affirmative, and
in about fifteen minutes he went back. At this time Thompson, the
keeper of the rooms was there, and the prisoner having played again, by
about four o'clock in the morning he had lost 75l. more, which he also
paid in notes of the same description as those which he had before put
off. He said he would fetch more money, if the rooms would be open; but
Thompson expressed some unwillingness to allow any more play, as the
usual time for closing the house had passed. The prisoner, however,
went away and returned, but he found the door closed. He appeared angry
and excited, and insisted upon having his revenge, and Chappell at
length let him in. By nine o'clock in the morning he had lost 380l. in
addition to the sums which he had previously paid; and he handed over a
Manchester bank-post bill for 300l., and another for 80l., and then he
went away. In the course of the day Thompson and Chappell went into the
city to procure change of the country notes, and they obtained cash for
some of them, which were not payable in London, at a bullion-dealer's
in Cheapside, upon the deduction of two and a half per cent.; but upon
their presenting some others at the banking-houses at which they were
payable, they were taken into custody. They explained their characters
and the manner in which they had obtained the notes, and were set at
liberty. When the prisoner was taken into custody, a letter was found
on his person addressed to Thompson, which, it appeared, he was about
to despatch to that individual, in which he declared that he had just
discovered that he had been imposed upon, and had paid him with forged
notes, but offered to give him bills of exchange for the amount which
he owed him, at various dates.

The defence in this case was the same as that which had been before put
forward, and the inquiry was attended with a similar result,-- the
conviction of the prisoner.

Mr. Justice Coltman, who was the presiding judge, in passing sentence
upon the prisoner, remarked that his offence was materially aggravated
by the station in society which he had held, and the education which he
had received. In a commercial country, where so much depended upon the
proper maintenance of the public securities, forgery could not be
looked at as a slight offence. In this case the safety of the
commercial transactions of the country might have been peculiarly
affected, and a severe example was called for. His lordship then
sentenced the prisoner to be transported for fifteen years.


PATRICK MAXWELL STEWART WALLACE; and MICHAEL SHAW STEWART WALLACE
Transported for Inciting a Person to Cast Away and Destroy a Merchant
Ship.

The crime of these prisoners was of a most heinous description, and
fully entitled them to receive that measure of punishment which, by the
sentence of the court, they were directed to undergo. They were persons
of respectable origin and connexions, and had for some time carried on
business in the city of London as merchants. They were tried at the
Central Criminal Court, at the March sessions, 1841, on a charge of
inciting one Edmund Loose to cast away the ship Dryad.

The indictment contained twenty-six counts and charges: First --"That
one Edmund Loose, late of London, mariner, on the 10th of November, in
the third year of her present Majesty's reign, being the captain of a
certain vessel called the Dryad, the property of Alexander Howden and
others, did, with force and arms, upon the high seas, within the
jurisdiction, &c,, feloniously, unlawfully, and maliciously, cast away
and destroy the said vessel, with intent thereby to prejudice the said
Alexander Howden and another, against the form of the statute in such
case made and provided; and further, that Patrick Maxwell Stewart
Wallace, late of London aforesaid, before the said felony was committed
in form aforesaid, namely, on the 1st of August in the year aforesaid,
did feloniously and maliciously incite, move, procure, aid, counsel,
hire, and command the said Edmund Loose the said felony, in manner and
form aforesaid, to do and commit, against the form of the statute in
such case made and provided, against the peace, &c.; and further that
Michael Shaw Stewart Wallace, late of London aforesaid, before the said
felony was committed, &c., did feloniously and maliciously incite, &c.,
the said Edmund Loose the said felony in manner and form aforesaid, to
do and commit, against the form of the statute," &c.

Second count -- The same as the first, but without naming the owner of
the vessel.

Third count -- Stated the intention of the prisoners to have been to
prejudice and defraud Pedro de Zulueta, and others, the owners of
certain goods, laden and being in and on board the said vessel,
belonging to Alexander Howden and others.

Fourth count -- The same as the third, but omitting the name of the
owner of the vessel.

The other counts stated the said Edmund Loose's intention to be, to
prejudice and defraud various individuals, and that the prisoners did
feloniously and maliciously incite the said Edmund Loose to commit the
said felonies.

The proceedings commenced on Wednesday the 3d of March, when Mr.
Jervis, as counsel for the prisoners, took an objection to the
proceedings. Edmund Loose, who was charged as the principal felon, did
not appear to plead, and he contended, that it was incompetent for the
court to try the prisoners upon the indictment, alleging them to be
accessories only in the absence of Loose. He admitted that they might
be tried for a substantive felony, but that was not the nature of the
offence alleged.

The Attorney -general contended that, by the Act 7th Geo. IV. chap. 64,
sect, 9, the accessories could be tried in the absence of the principal
felon.

After some further discussion, the court ruled that the prisoners could
be tried for a substantive felony, according to the statute, and that
they might proceed upon the present indictment; but he left the
question open, so that the prisoners might have the advantage of a more
full consideration of the point.

The Attorney-general then elected to proceed separately with the trials
of the two prisoners, and the case of Patrick Maxwell Stewart Wallace
was determined to be taken first. The evidence produced in the two
cases, however, was exactly similar, and the statement of the facts
proved in one of them only will be sufficient to put our readers in
possession of all that was material to the inquiries.

The evidence was divided into two classes, the first of which referred
to the conduct of the two prisoners in procuring excessive policies of
insurance to be effected upon the ship and cargo; while the second
related to the demeanour of Loose, the captain of the Dryad, on her
voyage, from which it was sought to prove that he had wilfully cast
away the vessel.

With reference to the first part of the case, it was shown that the
Dryad was a brig, of which one-fourth share belonged to Messrs. Howden
and Ainslie, ship-brokers, while the remaining three-fourths were the
property of the prisoner Michael Wallace. The latter had purchased his
share of a Mr. Gillespie in the year 1838, for 1600l.; and the vessel
after that was docked and rendered a first-class ship, an outlay of
600l. having been made upon her. In July 1839, the Dryad was chartered
to Messrs. Zulueta and Co., merchants of Liverpool, for a voyage from
that port to Santa Cruz, for 300l.: Michael Wallace acted as ship's
husband, and he directed Messrs. Howden and Ainslie to effect policies
of insurance upon the vessel in 2200l., and upon the freight in 300l.
These policies were accordingly effected in the office of the Marine
Insurance Company. In the same month, however, other policies were
effected in respect of the same ship by directions of the two Wallaces.
In the Alliance Insurance Company, a policy for 715l. was effected on
goods; in the General Maritime Insurance Company, a policy for 1265l.
was likewise effected on goods; in the Neptune Insurance Company, a
policy of 700l. was effected on the ship and outfit, and a policy of
687l. on goods; in the Mutual Marine Insurance Company, a police of
600l. was effected on goods; and another policy for 650l. was also
effected by Messrs. Bahr and Bearing, of Liverpool. Independently of
these policies, an insurance to the amount of 3000l. was also effected
by Messrs. Zulueta and Co. at Lloyd's, in respect of the cargo which
they sent out by the vessel. The total amount, therefore, insured upon
the Dryad and her cargo was 10,117l.; of which, deducting the value of
Messrs. Zulueta's policy, and of that effected by Messrs. Howden and
Ainslie, 6617l., stood in the names of the prisoners -- a sum far
exceeding the real worth of their interest in the vessel and her cargo.
The Dryad having arrived at Liverpool, Messrs. Zulueta proceeded to
load her with such goods as they wished her to convey to Santa Cruz.
About three hundred tons were put on board, and on the 7th of September
the vessel sailed from port. When she had gone, the prisoner Michael
Wallace informed Stott, an agent whom he had employed, that he had put
some goods of his own on board, although it would have been contrary to
his agreement with Messrs. Zulueta if he had done so. In January 1840,
a claim was sent in to the various insurance offices for the amount of
the policies effected as for a total loss of the Dryad. Some
conversations took place between Patrick Wallace and Stott, in which
the former made use of expressions which seemed to imply that Loose,
the captain, had purposely lost the ship, but the greater part of the
insurances were paid to the two brothers, and placed to their accounts
at the banking-houses where they usually deposited their money. The
return of some of the seamen of the Dryad to London, subsequently
enabled the parties to the policies to obtain evidence confirmatory of
suspicions which they had entertained with regard to the loss of the
Dryad; and in the month of November 1840, Patrick Wallace was taken
into custody. His brother, Michael, at that time was living in
Tredegar-square, Commercial-road; but upon inquiries being made for
him, he was found to have absconded, and his house was discovered
furnished throughout, but abandoned by its occupants. On the 16th of
December, however, Michael was also secured, having been found living
in a small row of houses in the outskirts of Lancaster, whither,
according to his own account, he had gone that he might not be called
upon to give testimony against his brother.

The evidence for which it was sought to prove that the Dryad had been
wilfully cast away, a fact which, it may be observed, was necessary to
be shown as an ingredient of the offence charged against the prisoners,
was as follows:--

Ronald Maxwell said -- I sailed as first mate in the Dryad on a voyage
from Liverpool to Santa Cruz. Captain Loose engaged me in Liverpool on
the 4th of September, 1839, to go from Liverpool to Santa Cruz, from
Santa Cruz to St. Jago, and thence to Swansea. I have commanded a ship
in the South American trade, and I have crossed the Atlantic
frequently. I have been to the West Indies, and I know the navigation
of those seas. On the 4th of September we took in a few cases of
hardware and a few kegs of paint. They came from Zulueta' s, and I
signed bills for them. From the time I entered the ship to the time we
sailed, we took no goods on board except Zulueta's. I locked the ship
up at night, and saw her again in the morning. One-third of the hold
remained unfilled. After I went on the 4th of September there was no
earthenware taken on board, nor were there any cases of flannels,
cloth, or prints. There were no barrels of butter, beef, or pork taken
on board, except for the ship's use. There were on board two tierces of
beef and four barrels of pork. That was scarcely a sufficient quantity
for the outward voyage. When a vessel sails for a place such as Santa
Cruz, it is usual to take provisions for the homeward as well as the
outward voyage. We went out of the dock on the 6th, and sailed on the
7th of September. We had ten hands on board, including the boy and the
captain. We went through the North Channel. It is not unusual,
according to the wind, to go by the North Channel. Captain Loose
ordered me to get tackles rove and coiled in the long-boat, that she
might be ready if she were wanted. We had no logline when we sailed. I
endeavoured to make one of spun-yarn, but I found that it was too
heavy. We had no proper log-line while I remained on board. The
log-board was choked when I endeavoured to sound, a short time after we
got to sea. I tried to clear it out, but I could not do it. I told
Captain Loose of it, and he said nothing particular. The pump was never
made to suck. There was a chronometer on board, I think, but I never
saw it. I frequently asked to use it, but Captain Loose would not allow
me to see it. We pursued our course to the West Indian seas. There is
generally a course laid down on the chart as a guide. About longitude
59 deg. W., Loose deviated from the proper track, and steered to the
northward. We first made land at Virgin Guarda. I told the captain that
I had seen the land, and he came on deck, where he remained several
minutes. A few minutes afterwards I observed breakers ahead and low
land. The breakers denoted a reef, and the low land was Anagada. We
were about five miles from it. I observed it about six o'clock in the
morning. I told the captain that I observed breakers a-head, and he
jumped out of bed, and came on deck. Benjamin Shooltz was at the helm,
and I told him to put the helm down, and put the ship round to keep her
off the breakers. The captain then ran to the wheel and put the helm
up, and the ship went direct on towards the breakers. Loose took the
wheel himself, and remained at it a short time. Two of the crew came
into the waist and complained of the captain, and they said that they
would take the helm themselves and put the ship round, for they were
not going to be lost. Upon this the captain left the wheel and Shooltz
took it. He put the helm down again and the ship came round. When the
helm was put down, the ship just cleared the breakers. In a few minutes
she would have been on shore. When the ship came round, the captain
said he did not think she was so near. Before the ship came round, the
captain told me to mind my own d--d business, and take the
studding-sails down. He also said that he would have me tried for
mutiny for taking charge of the ship. This happened on the 17th of
October. On the 19th we were on the Silver Keys, to the north of St.
Domingo. He ought, I consider, to have gone by the south side of St.
Domingo, between Antigua and Guadeloupe, to get to Santa Cruz. The ship
ought to have been nearer the shore to avoid the Silver Keys. They are
laid down on all the charts I have seen. About half-past six or seven
o'clock in the morning, I saw a rock on the larboard bow, about three
or four fathoms off. I told this to the captain, and he came on deck. I
pointed the rock out to him. The captain said he could not see it. He
had his telescope in his hand. The water a-head was discoloured. This
indicates a shoal in these seas. One of the crew from the fore-yard
called out, "Rocks under the fore-foot!" and I and the captain ran
forward and looked over the bow. I saw the rocks, and Captain Loose
said, We are lost! we are all lost!" Immediately afterwards the ship
struck, and remained fast for fifteen or twenty minutes. Loose ordered
the jolly-boat to be hove overboard, and we put tackles over the
long-boat to save ourselves. After about twenty minutes she got off.
She afterwards struck another rock, and remained upon it a few minutes,
but then dragged past it. The captain was putting a "life-preserver" on
during this time. By the second rock the rudder was unshipped. We now
trimmed the sails, to keep the ship before the wind. I wanted to make a
temporary rudder, and I asked the captain to allow me to take some
spars to do so, but he refused, and said we were in a pretty state -- a
ship at sea without a rudder -- we had better have been all asleep a
few days before, and have allowed the ship to run ashore at Anagada.
The carpenter at length made a temporary rudder, and on the 20th we got
to St. Domingo. Until the 22nd we proceeded along the coast. We ought,
in order to avoid the breakers, to have kept further off. We were
frequently near them, and the crew had all their clothes packed up
ready if the ship should strike. On the 22nd we were near a reef off
Cape Hayti, and the jury-rudder unshipped. The captain asked me what
was best to be done; I said there was no danger if we were to put in to
the harbour. He asked Shooltz and another what they thought, and they
said that the harbour was before them, and they thought they could get
in. Loose said he would not do so, for he had no pilot on board, and if
anything happened to the vessel he should lose the insurance. I then
said that we might put out to sea and replace the jury-rudder, and
stand in and get a pilot the following morning. The captain went to bed
at eight o'clock. I saw a sail about nine on the larboard quarter. I
mentioned this to the captain, and he came on deck. I said she was a
large ship, probably a man-of-war, and she could give us assistance if
we ran down to her. We could have easily gone down before the wind. The
captain would not allow us to go down, and he went to bed again. At
daybreak we were to the south-east of the entrance of the port. We saw
a ship to the north of the port. We were steering towards the reef, and
we could see the breakers ahead. They were probably two miles off.
Loose was on deck about seven o'clock in the morning. The Dryad was
then steering towards the reef, in the direction which he ordered. The
ship we saw to the northward fired a gun, and we found it was the
Bencoolen. This was to warn us that we were running into danger. The
Bencoolen had a union jack hoisted for a pilot, but Loose would not
allow me to hoist one, saying if the pilots were too lazy to come off
without a signal, they might stay ashore. The Dryad kept the same
course until a pilot came on board. When I told Loose that the ship to
the northward had fired a gun and hoisted a signal, he said that was
nothing to him. The pilot came on board about eleven o'clock in the
forenoon. The captain called him aft and showed him the jury-rudder,
and asked him if he would take charge of the vessel. He said he would
if the crew would work the ship in. He then took us into port. This was
on Wednesday the 23rd of October. I left the Dryad on the 2nd of
November. I assigned a reason to Loose for leaving the vessel. I was
paid my wages (excepting 2l.) by Captain Loose, and I went on board the
Bencoolen. [[The witness pointed out on the chart the course taken by
the Dryad, and showed the track that he considered she ought to have
gone]. There was nothing in the state of the wind or weather to induce
the captain to keep the ship so near the shore at St. Domingo.

Benjamin Shooltz examined: In 1839, I shipped on board the Dryad at
Liverpool for Santa Cruz. I have recently come from the coast of
Africa. I came to England seventeen days ago. Captain Loose engaged me.
We had very little provisions on board, and we were poorly furnished
with spare spars, &c. The captain frequently told me to keep the
longboat always in good order and ready for sea at once. We hove in
sight of Anagada on a Thursday. I saw the breakers and called Maxwell
the mate. We were about four or five miles from them. I received orders
from the mate to put the ship round, and he then went to the captain.
When I brought the ship round, she was going from the breakers. When
the captain came on deck, he cursed me, and asked me who gave me orders
to put the ship about. He took the helm and brought the ship round
towards the reef again. I said to the captain, "I took the orders
myself, and I did not wish to put the ship on a reef in broad
daylight." When the captain put her up again, the crew all came aft to
him, and asked him what he intended to do. He did not keep the helm
long, and I went to it when he went below, and put it down, and the
ship went away and cleared the rocks. If she had gone on two minutes
longer, she would have been on the rocks. Two days afterwards we were
on the Silver Keys. We saw breakers ahead, and a lump of rock a little
on the larboard side. I had the helm at this time. When I saw the
Silver Keys, I hailed the mate, and he went down and informed the
captain. When the captain came up, he said he did not see the rock. He
had his glass then. I saw the rock with my naked eye. A man on the
fore-yard, about five minutes afterwards, shouted out that there was
about four feet water under the keel, and he saw rocks. The captain was
on deck, but he did nothing. Shortly afterwards the vessel struck. The
captain was very frightened at the time, and cried out "What shall we
do, lads?-- we are lost!" The longboat was lying on the gripes off the
ship, and the jolly-boat lay upon her. This is the usual way they are
stowed away. When the ship struck, the rudder unshipped. This was about
seven o'clock in the morning. The captain went to the helm shortly
after the Dryad struck. The day before we made St. Domingo, the strap
came off the jury rudder. At that time the captain's life-preserver was
on deck. The crew told him if he put that on, they would cut it all to
pieces. We were then five miles from Cape Hayti. There was no reason
for keeping so close to the shore as we did. I remember the night
before the gun was fired; that night we kept out to sea. We were about
five miles from the breakers when the gun was fired, and we were then
steering direct upon them. The ship's course was not altered when the
gun was fired. The previous night the captain asked me and Davis, the
second mate, what we should do, as we had got no rudder. We said that
the best way would be to keep out to sea, and stand in for Hayti in the
morning. We had not signalled for a pilot on board the Dryad. When the
pilot came on board, he easily put the ship round and took us into the
harbour, where we remained nine or twelve days. Many complaints were
then made by the crew to the captain. We made an effort to be permitted
to leave the ship at St. Domingo, but we were not allowed by the
captain. The mate left the Dryad on the 2d of November. On the 5th we
sailed from Hayti, and on the 10th the Dryad struck on the reef at Cape
Cruz. About ten minutes before, we struck on a small lump of rock. We
saw the reef all the day before, but the ship's course was not altered
to avoid it. I was acting under the orders of the captain when the ship
struck. He was on deck all the night. She struck about half-past two
o'clock in the morning. The captain never was on deck all night before.
A man named Simpson was at the helm, and the captain told him to run
away, or he would get hurt. The crew came on deck and spoke to the
captain. The ship did not make a drop of water that night. I sounded
one of the pumps frequently. No orders were given to the crew to get
the ship off the reef, and he went below. In my judgment, the ship
might have been got off, as the vessel was making no water. The captain
left all the sails up. The crew were willing to work if they had been
directed. If an anchor had been put out and her sails dowsed, she might
have got off. A canoe came off to us. There were Spaniards in it, and
the captain asked if there was a town near, and he was told there was
one about thirty miles over the mountains. The Spaniards also said
there was a consul ashore. The captain went ashore in the boat. He came
back and said he had been to the Spaniard's house. The crew, with the
exception of Simpson and myself, went ashore. The ship made no water at
this time. When the captain was ashore, we made sail with the other
boat and went round the ship. At her stern we found a cigar-box and a
bolt attached to it. The water was clear, and we took it up. We found
several letters and some leaves of the log-book in it. Loose came back
from the shore that night, and the next day he had a conversation with
me and the crew. He took the long-boat with him and we all went to
Jamaica, where the protest was noted. We kept the letters, and at one
time produced them to the captain, and he snatched them away from
Simpson, and gave him four pound-notes for them. This was two days
after we got to Jamaica. After we went to Jamaica, none of us went back
to the vessel. Before I left the ship I found a hole under her stern.
No rock could make such a hole. It was big enough to admit my
shoulders. The previous day she made no water, and I told the captain
so. It was on the evening of the next day I discovered the hole. The
weather was not at all boisterous then. The position in which the ship
was could not account for the hole. I sounded her after finding the
hole, and found five feet of water in the hold. The next day we left
for Jamaica. The vessel could then have been got off. I saw the hole
from the inside. It was in the state-room, which was locked. The
captain saw it plainly, being in the cabin where it was. From the time
we struck upon the Silver Keys the crew kept their clothes in bags in
readiness to leave the vessel, expecting she would get upon a reef. It
is my opinion that the ship was wilfully cast away by the captain.

The witness, in cross-examination, admitted that he had sworn to the
protest which had been drawn up at Jamaica, and had stated in it that
he believed the vessel to have been accidentally lost. He stated that
the effect of the contents of the papers which he had picked up when
the vessel was on the rocks was an intimation from the captain that he
had cast away the ship intentionally; but he also said that the
cigar-box in which they were contained lay at a depth of six fathoms,
and that he had fished it up with an oar. He imagined that Loose had
himself cut the hole which was found in the stern of the ship.

Other evidence was given, from which it appeared probable that Captain
Loose was dead, and by which the various sums of money received on
account of the policies of insurance were traced to the possession of
the two prisoners.

Mr. C. Phillips, on behalf of Patrick Wallace, addressed the jury in a
powerful speech, urging that the evidence of Shooltz was not worthy of
credit, and that without that evidence the case was incomplete; and
also contending that the policies of insurance which had been effected
were by no means so excessive in their amount as to lead to the
positive conclusion that they had been effected with a view to the
destruction of the vessel. He alluded with great force to the death of
Loose, and his consequent inability to put such questions on the
cross-examination of the witnesses as might lead to the development of
the truth; and he urged that the jury having found that a protest was
made at Jamaica, describing the loss of the vessel to have been
accidental, which was signed not only by Shooltz, but by four other
persons besides him, and the captain, they would take that to be the
truth, and would on that ground acquit the prisoner.

Lord Chief Justice Tindal summed up the case to the jury, and after
some consideration they returned a verdict of "Guilty."

On the next morning Michael Wallace was put upon his trial; but as we
have already stated, the facts proved against him were so precisely
similar to those which were adduced in evidence in the case of his
brother, that they need not be detailed. At the end of the second day's
trial, after a speech to the jury from Mr. Jervis, who appeared for the
defence of this prisoner, in which he again urged the same topics which
formed the grounds of defence in the former case, a verdict of Guilty
was returned.

     The two brothers were then placed at the bar to receive sentence.

The Lord Chief Justice in delivering judgment said that it would of
course depend upon the decision upon the point of law whether the
punishment which he should direct them to undergo would be carried out.
The prisoners had been found guilty, after fair and impartial trials
before intelligent juries, of the offence of having feloniously incited
one Edmond Loose, the captain of the ship Dryad, wilfully to cast away
that ship for the purpose of defrauding the underwriters. He felt bound
to say that he was perfectly satisfied with the verdicts which the two
juries had found in the respective cases of the two prisoners. It was
an offence of very grave importance, tending to check the spirit of
mercantile adventure, and the commerce of this country, because it was
aimed at defrauding those persons upon whose responsibility much of
that adventure and commerce depended. It was to be observed that the
loss in this case had fallen upon the underwriters, and the checking of
their business might produce serious results. The effect of a policy of
insurance was to cast upon a company a loss which, if it fell upon one
individual only, might be ruinous in its consequences; and it could not
but be observed that the numerous insurance companies of this city
could no longer exist unless their proceedings were protected by the
law, and offences directed against their fair and honest gains were
punished with its just severity. In this case there were circumstances
of great aggravation, because the result of the foul crime which had
been committed might have been not only the loss of property, but of
life. The penalty applied by the law to this offence was no longer
capital. He rejoiced at that, but at the same time he felt that it was
his duty to visit the offence of the prisoners with a severe
punishment. The sentence of the court was, "That the prisoners should
be transported beyond the seas for the respective terms of their
natural lives." The prisoners were then removed from the bar.


DAVID SAMS
Transported for Burglary.

The name of this hardened offender has been already before our readers,
and his case will show how unavailing are the most solemn warnings to
the mind naturally addicted to crime.

The first offence alleged against Sams was that of the robbery and
murder of an old pensioner named Bennett, at Tewen, near Hertford. For
that crime he was tried with two other young men named Roach and
Fletcher at the Herts Assizes, when, although there appeared to be very
little moral doubt that he had been the original concoctor of the
scheme, and had actively assisted in the perpetration of the horrible
crime imputed to him, owing to a failure of the necessary legal
evidence as to his identity, he was acquitted, but his two unhappy
companions were convicted and subsequently executed. Almost immediately
after this, Sams committed another robbery, and was tried and
convicted, and sentenced to six months imprisonment. Shortly after this
period of imprisonment had expired, a young man named Thomas Taylor,
who had also been charged with being concerned in the robbery and
murder of the old man, was taken into custody, and upon his trial Sams
was admitted as witness for the Crown, and he then detailed all the
circumstances of the murder, and stated that it was committed by the
two men who were executed, Taylor, and himself, and that they divided
the money between them. Upon this evidence, and other corroborating
testimony, Taylor was convicted and executed.

It might have been thought that such circumstances as these would have
induced Sams to change his wicked courses, the more especially as some
of the gentry in the neighbourhood of Hertford interested themselves in
his behalf, and obtained him employment, whereby he might have earned a
reputable subsistence, but he speedily resumed his old habits, and his
employers could keep him no longer.

He now quitted the vicinity of the scene of his crimes and his
disgrace, but, led on either by want or some worse inducement, he was
again guilty on two separate occasions of acts of felony, for which he
was apprehended and imprisoned.

On his discharge he was again thrown upon the world, and he once more
ventured to the scene of his early life. Old recollections seem but to
have reproduced new acts of crime, and at length he was secured while
in the very act of breaking into a farmhouse at Ware. For this offence
he was tried at the Spring Quarter Sessions for the county of Hertford,
held in March 1841, the Marquis of Salisbury sitting as Chairman. The
evidence was too clear to admit of a doubt being entertained, and a
verdict of Guilty was returned.

The Marquis of Salisbury, in passing sentence, observed that he never
knew an instance of so hardened a criminal as he appeared to be. He
thought he should be neglecting his duty to the public if he did not
pass upon him the severest sentence of the law; which was, that he be
transported for the term of his natural life. The convict heard the
sentence with the greatest coolness, and at its conclusion nodded to
one or two of his old companions in the body of the court, and walked
away laughing from the bar.


WILLIAM STEVENSON
Transported for Larceny.

The charge preferred against this person, and of which he was found
guilty, was that of stealing from his employers, Messrs. Mercer and
Co., of the Maidstone Bank, a bag containing 500l. in gold. For this
offence he was tried at the Maidstone spring assizes, on the 17th of
March 1841, before Lord Denman, when the following remarkable facts
were proved in evidence: --

It seemed that in the month of October, 1839, Mr. Mercer wrote to his
London agents, Messrs. Masterman, the bankers, to remit to him fifteen
hundred pounds in gold, and five hundred pounds in silver, and that sum
was accordingly placed in seven bags, one containing a thousand pounds
in gold, another five hundred in gold, and five bags, each containing
one hundred pounds in silver, and the whole were placed in a box, of
which Messrs. Masterman and Mercer had each a duplicate key, and the
box was then committed to the care of Wallis, one of the Maidstone
coachmen, to be conveyed to that place. The box was duly carried to
Maidstone, and the prisoner, who acted as porter at Mr. Mercer's bank,
was sent to fetch it, and he brought the box to the bank about seven
o'clock in the evening, and it was taken from him by Mr. Mercer, jun.,
who unlocked it and took out the bags of coin, and, without examining
them, placed them in the strong chest; but he observed that at this
time there were only six bags, namely, one large one, which he supposed
contained the fifteen hundred pounds in gold, and the five bags of
silver. The next morning, upon the money being examined, it was found
to be five hundred pounds short of the proper quantity of gold, and on
a communication being made to Messrs. Masterman, the loss of the second
bag of gold was discovered.

No clue whatever at this time could be obtained as to the perpetrator
of the robbery, but no suspicion was entertained of the prisoner, and
he was retained in the prosecutors' service until the following month
of January, when, for some act of misconduct, he was dismissed. Shortly
after this, the prisoner set up in business in the town as a grocer,
and some other circumstances coming to the knowledge of the
prosecutors, induced a suspicion that he was the thief, and a
search-warrant was obtained and placed in the hands of Faucett, the
superintendant of the Maidstone police, who proceeded to the prisoner's
house, and, upon searching it, he found a number of watches and
time-pieces. When the prisoner was told by the officer what was the
nature of the charge against him, he denied all knowledge of the
robbery, and told him he might search where he pleased. The officer
then asked what money they had in the house, and about seven pounds in
gold and silver were produced by the prisoner's wife. He asked whether
they had not got any more money, and the prisoner's wife went up to the
bed-room with him, and she produced from between the bed and the
mattress a bag, containing forty-five pounds, in sovereigns and
half-sovereigns. He also found an I O U for 10l., signed by a person
named Merston, who proved that the prisoner lent him ten sovereigns
upon it, and that he was paying him interest.

It was also proved that before the robbery the prisoner had only been
in the receipt of a pound a week, and that he was in very poor
circumstances; and it appeared that after he was discharged he had
purchased two houses in Maidstone, for which he paid 350l., and the
payment was wholly in sovereigns and half-sovereigns. Further it was
shown, that the prisoner had taken the grocer's shop and had paid a
considerable sum for goodwill and stock in trade, without having any
means to do so, except, as was suggested, by that of having committed
the robbery.

Mr. Sergeant Shea made a powerful address to the jury on behalf of the
prisoner, and said that the sole evidence by which it was sought to
convict him of the crime imputed to him was his being in possession of
an amount of money which the prosecutors chose to consider he could not
have been possessed of by his own means. The learned counsel said,
however, that he hoped to be able to satisfy the jury that the money
the prisoner had spent was his own property.

Some witnesses were then called for the purpose of showing that at the
various elections in the borough sums of money had been given to the
prisoner, and it was elicited that a vote was always worth something,
and one witness went so far as to say that he considered his vote worth
15l.

Several other witnesses were examined, but although it was admitted
that money had been given to the prisoner in sums of 8l. and 10l. at
different times, the witnesses said the money was only given out of
charity, and the evidence did not in the slightest degree show a
probability of the prisoner being lawfully in the possession of the
money he had expended.

Lord Denman then summed up the evidence, and went through the whole of
it in the most careful and impartial manner, and concluded by leaving
the case in the hands of the jury, who, after a short deliberation,
returned a verdict of "Guilty."

The learned judge, addressing the prisoner, said that no person who had
heard the evidence adduced could doubt, for a moment, that he was
guilty of the offence imputed to him. It was a very serious one, and he
felt himself called upon to pass a severe sentence. His lordship then
ordered him to be transported for fourteen years.


JAMES INGLETT
A Cow-doctor, Convicted of Manslaughter for Giving a Potion to a sick
Neighbour

The case of this unfortunate person excited considerable interest in
the vicinity of the place where it occurred, as well on account of the
peculiar circumstances by which it was surrounded, as of the great age
and high respectability of character of the accused. Inglett at the
time of his trial had attained the age of ninety-four years; he was
indicted at the Huntingdon assizes on the 19th of March 1841, for
feloniously killing and slaying one Elizabeth Harlett, by administering
to her a quantity of arsenic.

The very venerable person who stood charged with this offence had for
many years carried on the business of farmer and "cow-leech," and in
the latter character was in the habit of administering medicines to
various kinds of cattle. His great age and his long acquaintance with
the healing art had caused him to be regarded with much respect among
the simple people of his neighbourhood, where his character had been
unexceptionable. The deceased, who lived in the village of Houghton,
near Huntingdon, was taken ill during the year 1840, and the parish
apothecary used all his art to restore her to health, but in vain.
About Christmas the prisoner was called in to see her, and he
immediately administered to her a dose of liquid medicine, which made
her very sick, and caused her great suffering, but she got better after
taking it; and on the morning of the day when the fatal potion was
given to her by the prisoner, she was, as her sister said, "quite
purely." On the morning of Monday the 11th of January, the prisoner
called to see her; as soon as he had left the house, one of her sisters
saw standing on the mantelpiece of the room in which the deceased was
sitting a cup full of a similar medicine to that which he had before
administered to her, and which had made her so sick and ill. When,
three or four hours afterwards, this sister went again into the room,
she found the deceased very unwell, and the cup standing empty on the
table. The deceased got much worse towards night, and from that time
till her death she was constantly sick, and suffered excruciating pain,
with almost intolerable thirst. Early on Wednesday morning, January the
13th, having taken some opium pills, she fell into a quiet doze, and
soon afterwards death put an end to her sufferings, and she woke no
more. No suspicion was then entertained of her having died any other
than a natural death, and in due time she was buried. When she had been
ten days in the earth, however, various rumours got abroad respecting
the cause of her death; and the county coroner directed the body to be
exhumed, and a jury to be summoned. Two surgeons examined the
disinterred body, and found it in a generally healthy state, the organs
being sound and free from disease, but the stomach and bowels were much
inflamed; and the jury returned a verdict that she had died from the
incautious and improper administering by the prisoner of "a certain
noxious, inflammatory, and dangerous thing to the jurors unknown;" and
the old man was committed to prison for manslaughter.

At the time of the inquest the nature of the "thing "to which the
verdict referred in terms so vague had not been ascertained; but the
contents of the stomach of the deceased were preserved, and afterwards
subjected to the usual tests of the presence of arsenic. Ammoniacal
sulphates of copper and of silver, and sulphuretted hydrogen gas, were
applied to the contents of the stomach, and the green and yellow
precipitates, indicating the presence of arsenic, followed. In addition
to this, the one infallible test, the reproduction of the arsenic
itself, left no doubt that the deceased had taken that dreadful poison
shortly before her death. It appeared by the evidence of a chemist's
shopman, that three or four months before, the prisoner bought of him
an ounce of arsenic, but as he was in the habit of using that drug in
the manufacture of his cattle ointments, the purchase excited no
suspicion at the time. In order to show that it was the prisoner by
whom or by whose direction the poison was administered, it was proved
that on the morning of the death of the deceased he called at the house
in which she had breathed her last, and a conversation ensued between
the relatives of the unfortunate woman and himself, in which he almost
in terms admitted that the fact was so. After some introductory
matters, a sister of the deceased told him "it was his 'stuff' that had
killed her;" to which he replied, "that could not be, for he had only
given her half a grain, whereas he had given his own son, and others, a
grain and more, without any harm." The sister rejoined, "Then it was
too strong for her stomach;" to which the prisoner answered, "Like
enough, poor thing! for her stomach was almost gone." This, and his
observation on the day of her funeral, that "he would not for 20l. have
given her anything if he had known it, for he'd rather have done her
good than harm," constituted the evidence on which the prosecutor
relied for proof of his having been the hand which administered or the
advice which directed the arsenic. The family of the deceased spoke
very favourably of his kindness and attention to her in her illness.

The Lord Chief-Justice Tindal told the jury that they must first
satisfy themselves whether, in point of fact, the deceased had died
from the taking of arsenic, and whether the prisoner had administered
it. If they were satisfied of those two facts, they would then have to
say whether the prisoner had conducted himself so rashly and with such
gross negligence as made him liable to an indictment for manslaughter.
The question was, whether, in reference to the nature of the remedy he
applied, he acted with a due degree of care and caution, or whether he
acted with rashness and gross negligence. If they were of opinion that
he acted with gross negligence and want of due and proper caution, he
was in point of law guilty of the crime with which he was charged upon
this indictment.

The jury consulted together for some time, and then returned a verdict
of "Guilty."

The Lord Chief-Justice in passing sentence observed, that the ends of
justice would be answered by the responsibility to which the prisoner
had subjected himself being generally known. If any person presumed to
administer medically a deadly poison, being grossly ignorant of its
character and effects, or with rash negligence in its use, and death
ensued, he would be liable to be convicted of the offence of
manslaughter. Such a person might have no evil intention, and indeed
might be actuated by a desire to alleviate the sufferings of a
fellow-creature, but it behoved him to proceed with caution and care.
At the time of life at which the prisoner had arrived, it would be
useless cruelty to inflict upon him a severe punishment; and as he had
been already in jail during six weeks, the court would sentence him to
a further imprisonment of fourteen days only.

The old man, who appeared to possess his mental and physical powers
almost unimpaired, paid great attention to the case as it proceeded.
His respectful demeanour, silvery hair, and mild countenance, secured
for him considerable compassion in court, which was strongly increased
by the sorrow depicted in his countenance for the deed, of which he had
been so unwittingly guilty, and his known reputation for amiability of
disposition.


