




THE NEWGATE CALENDAR


Edited by Donal Ó Danachair

Volume 6








Published by the Ex-classics Project, 2009
http://www.exclassics.com
Public Domain




 

The Gibbets



CONTENTS


DAVID OWEN  Tried and executed for a diabolical attempt to murder his sister, her 
husband, and their servant maid, 4th April, 1818	6
MARY STONE	11
GEORGE CHENNEL AND J. CHALCRAFT	13
CHARLES HUSSEY	29
ROBERT JOHNSTON	30
SAMUEL SIBLEY; MARIA CATHERINE SIBLEY; SAMUEL JONES; his son; 
THOMAS JONES; JOHN ANGEL; THOMAS SMITH; JAMES DODD and 
EDWARD SLATER	31
ROBERT DEAN	34
HENRY STENT	37
PEI	51
JOHN SCANLAN and STEPHEN SULLIVAN	55
MRS MARY RIDDING	58
SIR FRANCIS BURDETT	59
ARTHUR THISTLEWOOD, JAMES INGS, JOHN THOMAS BRUNT, RICHARD 
TIDD AND WILLIAM DAVIDSON	62
PHILIP HAINES AND MARY CLARKE	68
JOHN SMITH	74
DANIEL DOODY, JOHN CUSSEN, alias WALSH, JAMES LEAHY, MAURICE 
LEAHY, WILLIAM DOODY, DAVID LEAHY, DANIEL RIEDY, WILLIAM 
COSTELLO, AND WALTER FITZMAURICE, alias CAPTAIN ROCK	77
PHILIP STOFFEL AND CHARLES KEPPEL	80
HENRY FAUNTLEROY	81
CORNELIUS WOOD	83
EDWARD HARRIS, alias KIDDY HARRIS	86
GEORGE ALEXANDER WOOD AND ALEXANDER WELLESLEY LEITH	93
EDWARD GIBBON WAKEFIELD, WILLIAM WAKEFIELD AND FRANCES 
WAKEFIELD	94
WILLIAM CORDER	99
JOSEPH HUNTON	109
ESTHER HIBNER THE ELDER, ESTHER HIBNER THE YOUNGER, AND ANN 
ROBINSON	114
WILLIAM BANKS	116
WILLIAM BURKE	119
CAPTAIN WILLIAM MOIR	135
JOHN SMITH, alias WILLIAM SAPWELL	138
JOHN ST JOHN LONG	141
JOHN TAYLOR AND THOMAS MARTIN	144
JOSEPH PLANT STEVENS	145
LEWIS LEWIS, RICHARD LEWIS, DAVID HUGHES, THOMAS VAUGHAN, 
DAVID THOMAS, AND OTHERS	146
JOHN AMY BIRD BELL	152
JOHN BISHOP AND THOMAS WILLIAMS	154
JOHN HOLLOWAY	160
HENRY MACNAMARA	162
DENNIS COLLINS	163
JONATHAN SMITHERS	165
JAMES COOK	168
WILLIAM JOHNSON	170
JOB COX	172
GEORGE FURSEY	173
JAMES LOVELACE and others	177
PATRICK CARROLL	180
ROBERT SALMON	181
JOHN MINTER HART	182
JAMES GREENACRE	183
THOMAS MEARS AND OTHERS	185
FRANCIS LIONEL ELIOT, EDWARD DELVES BROUGHTON, JOHN YOUNG 
AND HENRY WEBBER	192
FRANCIS HASTINGS MEDHURST	194
GEORGE CANT	194
WILLIAM JOHN MARCHANT	199
ROBERT TAYLOR	200
FRANCOIS BENJAMIN COURVOISIER	204
EDWARD OXFORD	209
THE EARL OF CARDIGAN	215
WILLIAM STEVENSON	218
JAMES INGLETT	219
HUFFEY WHITE AND RICHARD KENDALL	221
RICHARD CORDUY	223
PRIVATE HALES	224
MARTHA DAVIS	225
JOHN ROBINSON	225
LEVI MORTGEN AND JOSEPH LUPPA	227
ELIZABETH MIDDLETON	227
JOHN MUCKETT	228
PATRICK M'DONALD	229
JAMES BULLOCK	230
FREDERICK SMITH ALIAS HENRY ST JOHN	231
SAMUEL OLIVER	232
THOMAS WHITE AND WALTER WYATT	232
APPENDIX I	233
APPENDIX II	235
APPENDIX III	237
APPENDIX IV	239
APPENDIX V.	240
APPENDIX VI.	241
APPENDIX VII.	247
APPENDIX VIII	249
APPENDIX IX	252
APPENDIX X	258
APPENDIX XI	260
APPENDIX XII	290
APPENDIX XIII	296
APPENDIX XIV	306
APPENDIX Voluntary punishment of Gentoo widows on the death of their husbands
	319
APPENDIX Trial by ordeal of the Hindoos in the East	322
APPENDIX Chinese punishments	322
APPENDIX Turkish Punishments inflicted on knavish butchers and bakers.	324
APPENDIX Benefit of clergy.	327
CONCLUDING NOTE	328



DAVID OWEN  
Tried and executed for a diabolical attempt to murder his sister, her 
husband, and their servant maid, 4th April, 1818

	THE attempt of DAVID OWEN to murder his sister, her husband, and their 
maid servant, is one of those instances of desperate depravity which reflect disgrace, 
not merely on the age, but on human nature itself. On the 26th September, 1817, about 
one o'clock at noon, this man, who was a cow-keeper, came to town from Edmonton, 
and proceeded to the house of his brother-in-law, also a cow-keeper, in Gibraltar-row, 
St. George's-fields. After knocking at the door, he was admitted by the maid servant, 
who called out to her master and mistress that Mr Owen was there; and Jones coming 
forward to meet him, the execution of his diabolical purpose commenced. He first 
attacked the man Jones, whom he wounded dreadfully in the belly and the hand, so far 
as for some seconds to deprive him of sense and motion. He then flew at Mrs Jones, 
his own sister, and inflicted upon her several shocking wounds: he stabbed her in the 
forehead, cut her severely, though not dangerously, between two of her ribs, and 
having thrust his knife in her mouth, drew it clean through the face to the ear, 
lacerating her tongue, and laying her cheek completely open. The ruffian last struck at 
the servant girl, whom he seriously cut in the face and one of her hands, besides 
dividing the main artery of her arm.
	The poor wretches, though faint and almost insensible with terror and loss of 
blood, contrived to make their way into the street, where they were immediately 
observed by their neighbours, and were carried into the adjoining houses till medical 
assistance could be procured. In the meantime, the assassin had fastened the door of 
Jones's house, and with loud imprecations threatened to destroy any person who 
should dare to approach him. This threat, together with the impression of the horrible 
scene before them, and the circumstance of Owen (a remarkably large and powerful 
man) being armed with two knives, completely deterred the multitude, though soon 
consisting of many hundreds, from attempting to enter the house. Police-officers, 
however, were sent for, and on their arrival, and after the interval of nearly an hour, it 
was determined to break into the house and seize the desperate villain. For this 
purpose a great number of persons armed with pokers and crow-bars, some with 
ladders at the windows, and some on the ground, made a simultaneous attack on the 
house, and bursting it open above and below, rushed in with great force.
	They found Owen on the first landing place, standing with an air of defiance, 
and whetting his knives one upon the other, as if for the purpose of rendering them 
more effectually murderous. One of the officers, however, without a moment's delay, 
struck him a violent blow with a crow-bar on the head, which knocked off his hat and 
staggered him; and another instantly took advantage of his tottering, seized one of his 
legs, and threw him on the ground. Still the ruffian was able to resist, which he did so 
obstinately, that the officers were compelled to beat and even wound him severely 
about the face and body, before he was subdued to a state of acquiescence. During the 
scuffle within, thousands of the multitude, indignant and horrified at the dreadful deed 
of blood which had been perpetrated, assembled outside of the house, with arms of 
various kinds, in order to prevent the possibility of his escape.
	When overcome by the superior force of his opponents, he exhibited all the 
rage of a madman, and could only be moved by main force; his arms and legs being 
confined by strong ropes. Holmes, the most active of the officers, then sent for a 
hackney-coach, and had his prisoner lifted in and driven to Union-hall, where he 
underwent a partial examination before Mr Evance, the Sitting Magistrate.
	Nothing could exceed in horror the terrific and bloody spectacle which he 
exhibited on this occasion; he was covered both with his own blood and that of his 
unhappy victims, from his head to his feet, and had more the appearance of a demon 
than of a human being. On being placed at the bar, he fixed his eyes upon a Jew 
attorney, named Cohen, and gnashing his teeth, he exclaimed, "You have been the 
cause of this!" Upon the evidence of Holmes, he was committed to Horsemonger-lane 
gaol, whither he was followed by some hundreds of persons, who overwhelmed him 
with their execrations. He had received a severe cut on the head, and one of his 
fingers was nearly severed from his hand; his legs and arms were also severely 
bruised.
	As to the motive of this savage barbarity, it appeared, that some years back. 
Jones and his wife brought up from Wales two lads, the sons of Owen, whom they 
treated as their own; educating and supporting them in the best manner their 
circumstances would permit. The prisoner, Owen, in the mean time, carried on the 
business of a publican, at Edmonton, and having been guilty of some act of 
unkindness towards his brother-in-law, Jones, the latter thought proper to commence 
an action at law against him for the board and education of his two sons. In this action 
he employed the Jew attorney, Cohen, whom Owen addressed with so much bitterness 
on his entering the office. Cohen lost no time in furthering the views of his client, and 
proceeded without delay to serve a copy of a writ on Owen, at his house at Edmonton. 
The effect of this proceeding was so powerful upon Mrs Owen, that she actually died 
two days subsequent to the writ having been served; and to this event, melancholy as 
it certainly was, may perhaps be traced that hatred which at last led to the dreadful 
scene we have been describing. The action was, in the meantime pursued, but upon 
being brought into court, a reference was recommended and adopted, and the facts of 
the case were submitted to the arbitration of Mr Barrow and Mr Reynolds.
	It appeared that a set-off was made by Owen against Jones's bill, in which he 
charged the latter for the work and labour of his sons, during the number of years they 
had been living with him; and as it appeared that the boys had been very generally 
employed in assisting Jones in his business of a cow-keeper, this set-off was admitted, 
and an award actually made in favour of Owen, over and above the sum demanded by 
Jones, of £100. The effect of this award was to drive Jones and his wife from the 
possession of some premises which belonged to Owen, situate at Newington. These 
premises Owen let to other tenants; and on his coming up to look after his rent, to his 
surprise and vexation, he found the house deserted, and the late occupants gone. It 
turned out, that the tenants had been detected in carrying on an unentered soap-work, 
and had found it convenient to fly, without the usual notice to the landlord.
	The effect of this discovery on the mind of Owen was such, added to the 
recollection that his law-suit with his brother-in-law was the original cause, not alone 
of his present loss, but of his wife's death, as to produce a temporary fit of phrenzy, 
during which he determined to he fully avenged by the death of him whom he 
conceived to be the original offender. He immediately went to a house in the 
neighbourhood, where he dined and having increased his passion by the use of 
spirituous liquors he set out on his atrocious expedition, in which he succeeded in the 
melancholy manner we have already detailed.
	The parties were all Welsh; Jones and his wife about forty years of age; the 
servant girl about twenty; Owen between forty-five and fifty, a man of remarkably 
formidable size and strength. The age of the eldest son was about eleven; both this lad 
and his brother had always preferred the society of their uncle and aunt to that of their 
father; and upon the elder one devolved the whole management of his uncle's 
business, consisting of an extended milk-walk. The servant girl, Mary Barry, had 
lived with them from her infancy, and was sincerely attached to them, She was a 
witness for Jones before the arbitrators, a circumstance which may perhaps account 
for the enmity of Owen towards her.
	While Owen was being removed to Union-hall, surgical aid was procured for 
the wounded, and the opinion given by Mr Dixon, surgeon of Newington, was, that he 
considered the husband likely to die; the wife dreadfully, though not mortally, 
wounded; and the girl, though very seriously hurt, likely to recover. The man and the 
servant were, at the recommendation of the surgeon, taken to one of the hospitals, and 
Mrs Jones was carried back to her own house.
	Jones's house exhibited a most desolate appearance, from the means that were 
taken to apprehend the assassin. The sashes at the back of the house had been forced 
out; and from the numbers of persons who pressed upstairs together, the bannisters 
were completely demolished.
	In consequence of the weak and doubtful state in which the victims of Owen's 
sanguinary attack remained, no further inquiry into the particulars took place till the 
10th of October following; and, indeed, the wretched prisoner himself had suffered so 
much from the severe treatment he had necessarily received in his capture, that he also 
was unfit to be removed at an earlier period.
	Although it was not positively known that the prisoner would be examined on 
that day, yet several hours previous to the examination an amazing number of persons 
assembled, and the business of the office suffered considerable interruption. The 
Magistrates therefore thought it expedient to remove the prisoner into a private room 
for examination.
	At one o'clock Mr Jones and Mary Barry arrived in a hackney-coach from St. 
Thomas's Hospital, under the care of a surgeon and two nurses; they were so weak as 
scarcely to be able to stand. At two the prisoner was brought into the room and 
confronted with Jones and the servant; the latter fainted as soon as she saw him, and it 
was with difficulty that Mr Jones was roused to sensibility. When he recovered, he 
exclaimed, "God! I thought I saw him with a knife in his hand." The magistrate 
ordered the prisoner to be taken out of the room, as his presence so much agitated the 
prosecutors. About two Mrs Jones arrived in a hackney-coach, also extremely weak, 
and the magistrates proceeded to hear evidence.
	Mary Barry, the servant, stated, "On the 26th of September last, a little after 
one o'clock in the afternoon, I was at home with my master and mistress, and heard a 
knock at the door; I opened it, and saw the prisoner; without saying a word he forced 
himself in; my master was in the back room; I called out, "Mr Owen is here!" and my 
master then came out of the back room into the passage, where he met the prisoner. 
The prisoner immediately took from under his coat a large pointed carving-knife, and 
without speaking made a blow at my master, who lifted his hand to defend himself, 
and prisoner cut and struck him dreadfully on the hand. My mistress then came out, 
and she and I attempted to save my master, and take away the knife. I got hold of it, 
and he drew it through my hand, and cut me very much, and then he began cutting and 
slashing away at random, and cut us all three; he cut me on the arm, stabbed me in the 
neck, and wounded me in the forehead. I then ran out, and called for assistance, and 
came back again, and found my master lying on the floor in the back room, bleeding 
very much, and the prisoner lying over him, with a knife under my master's clothes, 
and apparently sticking in his side; when I returned to the house, a young man 
returned with me, and he assisted, and we held Owen's arms and got the knife from 
him, I was then taken by some persons to the hospital.
	Mr Jones deposed to the same effect, and added, that the cut he received 
across the hand in the passage disabled him from offering much defence; and he soon 
became insensible; when he recovered, he found himself dreadfully cut in the neck, 
and part of his left ear off, He formerly had a law suit with prisoner, but had not 
spoken to him since August, 1816.
	Mrs Jones stated, that during the struggle between them all in the passage, she 
heard prisoner say, "You wretches, I'll kill you all," She received several cuts about 
the head and face, and a stab in the side: saw the prisoner attempt to stab her husband 
in the side; then became senseless, having bled excessively.
	Charles Hopkins, the young man alluded to in Mary Barry's evidence, stated, 
that he saw Barry run out of Jones's house, covered with blood, and calling for 
assistance; he went into the house with her, and saw Mr Jones on the floor bleeding 
very much, and prisoner lying over him, with the knife apparently in Jones's side; saw 
him seize Mrs Jones and pull her down; Mrs Jones called out to take the knife from 
him; the servant and he, by their united efforts, succeeded in getting the knife away 
from him; he gave the knife to Holmes, the constable, and then went to the hospital 
with Mr Jones and the servant.
	Holmes, the constable, stated, that on hearing the alarm, he immediately went 
to the spot, and saw Owen standing on the defensive at Jones's house, with a knife in 
each hand; with great difficulty he secured him, searched him, and found in his 
pockets two other knives and a razor case.
	On the prisoner being asked, if he had anything to say, his Solicitor advised 
him to reserve himself for trial. The respective parties were bound over to prosecute; 
and he was committed for trial to Kingston Assizes.
	The prisoner seemed unmoved at the recital of the horrid deeds of which he 
had been the perpetrator, and appeared to eye the objects of his revenge with a 
malignity that it is difficult to describe. The fatal instrument was produced by Holmes, 
rusted with blood; it was a carving-knife fourteen inches long, and the blade about an 
inch and a half wide. The magistrate said it was a transaction as horrible as ever 
disgraced a civilized country. The prisoner was sent off to gaol in a coach, amidst the 
execrations of about two thousand spectators.
	On the 4th of April, 1818, he was arraigned at the Kingston Assizes, on an 
indictment for cutting and maiming John Jones, and the whole particulars of the 
dreadful tale already narrated, were fully proved against him.
	Several respectable witnesses were called on his behalf, who gave it as their 
decided opinion, that the prisoner had not been in his senses. He had a fever nine 
years before, and since then they thought him subject to melancholy and insanity. He 
used to walk, to shove his arms backwards and forwards, and to speak to himself, like 
a madman. His eyes had a wildness in them. He laughed, sang, and danced the night 
he was committed to gaol. The loss of his wife and of his property deranged his mind. 
He frequently exclaimed "Lord! Lord!" and complained of pain in his stomach. He 
had always been remarkably mild-tempered, humane, and civil. It was proved that the 
prisoner had a law suit with John Jones, who was his brother-in-law.
	The jury, after some deliberation, found a verdict of–Guilty. After a pause, 
their foreman recommended him to mercy, in consideration of the respectable 
testimony borne to his character.
	The Judge immediately pronounced sentence of death, and assured the 
prisoner that he could not reasonably expect that the recommendation of the jury 
would have any effect. When the Judge was proceeding to pronounce sentence, two 
ladies, friends of the prisoner, screamed and fainted away, and were carried out of 
Court. The prisoner preserved the same unchanged look of composure throughout the 
trial, and when sentence was pronounced.
	There were two other indictments, for feloniously stabbing Margaret Jones, 
the prisoner's sister, and Mary Barry, in the same place, and on the same occasion, but 
they were not prosecuted.


MARY STONE  
Tried for Child Murder on a charge preferred by her sister, August 1818

	THE following trial, which took place at the Surrey Assizes, in August 1818, 
exhibits, whether the charges which it involved be true or false, a degree of moral 
turpitude never surpassed in any case ever submitted to the consideration of a Jury in 
a British court of justice.
	Mary Stone, aged 29, was charged on the oath of her sister, Harriet Hampton, 
with having wilfully murdered a female child of which she (the prisoner) was the 
mother, in the month of September, 1816, at Richmond.
	The prisoner, who was a most interesting-looking young woman, was placed 
on the seat near the table, as she appeared too weak to support herself in the usual 
place where the prisoners stand to be arraigned. She seemed quite dejected, and worn 
down; her features, which were remarkably intelligent and expressive, indicated 
extreme anxiety and emotion. On being arraigned in the usual manner, and called on 
for her plea, she replied, in a faint but agonizing tone of voice, Not Guilty.
	The prosecutrix, Mrs Harriet Hampton, a fine young woman, about 19 or 20 
years of age, was then put into the witness box. On casting her eyes towards where the 
prisoner sat, she burst into tears, and exclaimed, with great apparent anguish, "O, my 
sister, my sister!" The prisoner fainted during her sister's agitation, but was speedily 
recovered; the latter after having been taken out into the open air, was soon 
sufficiently well enough to give her evidence, which she did with less apparent 
embarrassment than might have been expected. Her evidence was as follows:-In the 
month of September, 1816, I think on the 25th, I slept, as was my custom, with my 
sister, Mary Stone. About two o'clock in the morning she said she was in extreme 
pain, and shortly after she was delivered of a female child; it cried, and I wanted to go 
out and call in assistance, but she would not let me. Very shortly after the child was 
born, it might be about half past two or three o'clock on the morning of the 25th 
September, my sister forced her hand into the infant's mouth, and choked it, and then 
thrust the body into a pan under the bed. She afterwards threw herself on the bed, and 
got up in a moment as if to do something; I then said I'd cry out, and call for some 
body to come in: my sister replied, that if I attempted to do so she would kill me at the 
instant, and then kill herself; I was therefore so frightened that I desisted from 
attempting to give any alarm. My sister left the body in the pan on that night, and on 
the following one made up a fire in the room, and tried to burn it, but the flesh made 
such a crackling noise that she was afraid it would be heard, and she took it off the 
fire and replaced it in the pan. The next morning she took it downstairs, and burnt it in 
the copper to ashes–she then cleaned the copper out, and threw the ashes on the 
dunghill.
	On her cross-examination by the Common Sergeant, who was counsel for the 
prisoner, she said:-- I first told this story about twelve months ago, or shortly after I 
got married. I let it out one night in my sleep, and on being questioned the following 
morning by my husband, I confessed the truth to him; my husband is not here to-day. 
My sister kept the house we lived in at Richmond; it was a small house, having only 
three rooms, and being thinly partitioned, so that what passed within might be heard 
by the neighbours. My sister and I always slept in the same bed; my sweetheart then, 
but husband now, slept in the opposite room to ours; a man of the name of Davis 
Kenyon, and my brother generally slept in the third room. I never said that my sister, 
who was an unmarried woman, was pregnant before this matter took place. I don't 
know that anybody noticed it, for she generally slept in bed for a time before she lay 
in. When she killed the child I was afraid to alarm anybody lest she would carry her 
threat into execution of making away with us both. My sister used me very ill since 
this transaction; her ill usage commenced about a fortnight after it happened; she then 
threatened to turn me out of doors, and wished that every bit I put in my mouth might 
choke me. She disliked my marriage, though I never had the smallest ill-will to her, or 
expressed myself to that effect to anybody. I never said to Mrs Wilkes that I would 
ruin the prisoner, or that I wished her dead to get the £500 out of the Bank. I never 
said that as I was not of age I could not get the money yet, or hoped that she might die 
first. I believe we are entitled to £500 which is in the Bank; Messrs. Smith and Walton 
are the trustees for my brother, sister, and self. My brother told my husband of our 
having this property, but I never mentioned it to him, because I did not know exactly 
how the money stood. My sister had a child before this last, it is a grown boy, has 
always lived with her, and she treats it well; she reduced her last child's bones to 
ashes, and threw the ashes on the dunghill. This is what I said before the magistrate.
	The case for the prosecution being closed, the prisoner was called on for her 
defence, but she declined saying anything. The following witnesses were called in her 
behalf:-- 
	Mrs Elizabeth Wilkes said, that in September, 1816, she lived at Trentham, 
where she knew the prosecutrix, but not the prisoner. Her husband worked with her in 
shoe-making. Witness repeatedly heard the prosecutrix wish for her sister's (the 
prisoner's) death; saying on such occasions, that she wanted her money. She 
remembered her saying on one particular occasion, "I wish she was dead, for then I 
would have the money, and my husband and I could get into business on our own 
account." About three weeks after the marriage of Harriet Hampton, she complained 
to witness, that the prisoner demanded 3s. a week from her husband for the time his 
wife had lived with her before she knew him; and she added, "I am afraid she will get 
the amount from the trustee, Mr Smith, who is her friend."
	Mr Walton, of Kingston, proved that he was a trustee under the will now 
produced, by which £500 was bequeathed to the prisoner, her brother, and sister, with 
the benefit of survivorship. The married sister was not yet of age.
	Mr Justice Abbott, who presided as judge on this extraordinary trial, in his 
charge to the jury, observed, that the consideration to which their attention was now 
called, presented, in whatever way it could he viewed, one of the most melancholy 
instances of human depravity which the mind could well conceive. If they believed 
the witness for the prosecution, they must convict the prisoner of the foul and horrible 
crime of the murder of her own new-born child; if they disbelieved her, they must 
decide that one of two sisters had falsely and infamously conspired against the life of 
the other, in the shocking expectation of thereby coming a short time sooner to the 
possession of some small property than she was likely to do in the usual course of 
things. In either alternative the reflection was most revolting. The story, as related by 
the prisoner's sister, undoubtedly went to show, that she herself had not acted as she 
ought if her own statement were correct, for she not only, by her own confession, was 
present at the murder, but had refrained from giving the slightest alarm, and also 
concealed it for the long period which had intervened between the alleged 
commission of the act, and the time when she gave the information. It was for the jury 
to say whether, taking the story altogether, they could look upon it as entitled to their 
credence. Nothing was surely more improbable than to believe that a woman in a 
small house like the prisoner's, with every little room at the moment occupied, and the 
thin partition so communicating with the adjoining houses that what passed in one 
was audible in the other–nothing, he repeated, could be more improbable than that a 
woman should have, without making the smallest noise, or expressing the slightest 
pain, so as to be audible outside her room, have borne the generally severe and acute 
pains of childbirth. There was not, besides, the smallest evidence to show that 
anybody had seen the prisoner in a state of pregnancy before this occurrence was said 
to have taken place, and it was most unlikely that an unmarried woman could have 
evaded observation in such a state. If the body were burned in the manner described, 
how had it happened that the very offensive effluvia arising from such a process had 
never attracted the notice of anybody in this small house? Taking the whole statement 
together, it stood unconfirmed by the testimony which might, were it true, be adduced 
in its support. The learned Judge concluded by observing to the Jury, that if the 
prisoner had really committed the act in the manner described, nothing was more 
unlikely than that she should have quarrelled, and almost immediately after the fact, 
with the person who balanced her life in her hands.
	The Jury, without hesitation, returned a verdict of Not Guilty, and the poor 
unhappy young woman was restored to her anxious friends, amidst the heartfelt 
sympathies of a numerous auditory, who had one and all shuddered with horror during 
the whole time that the revolting details of the accusation were in progress.


GEORGE CHENNEL AND J. CHALCRAFT  
Executed August, 1818 for the atrocious murder of Chennel's father and his 
Housekeeper, at Godalming

	EARLY On the morning of Tuesday, Nov. 10, 1817, a man who had ordered 
some shoes to be made at Mr Chennel's, shoemaker, at Godalming, called for the 
purpose of ascertaining if they were done. On opening the door, the first object that 
caught his eye was the body of Mr Chennel's housekeeper stretched on the floor, with 
her throat cut in a shocking manner. He was terrified at the sight, and called in some 
of the neighbours; they found the floor covered with blood, and the old woman quite 
dead and cold. They proceeded upstairs, and were horror-struck at the sight of Mr 
Chennel lying on the ground, with his head nearly severed from the body. His body 
was bruised in various parts, as if very recently done, from which it was inferred that 
he must have had a very severe struggle with the murderers; and he was quite cold, 
which circumstance led the parties to suppose that the diabolical attack and inhuman 
murders were committed on the preceding night.
	Upon a farther examination of the body of the housekeeper, it was found that 
her skull was fractured; and a hammer which Mr Chennel used in his business, that 
was found on the ground, appeared to have been the instrument with which the blow 
was given, as the face of it exactly corresponded with the mark upon the skull.
	Immediate information was given to the magistrates in the neighbourhood of 
the dreadful transaction, and they caused an immediate investigation for the purpose 
of discovering the perpetrator or perpetrators of the murders; and every person was 
summoned, whose evidence could afford the least clue to the discovery of the 
offenders.
	The son of Mr Chennel, who lived at some distance from his father, was 
apprehended on suspicion of being concerned, and underwent an examination; when it 
appeared by the evidence, that on the Monday night previous to the murder he was 
drinking at a public-house a short distance from his father's, and that between nine 
and ten o'clock be left the public-house for a short time, and returned, and remained 
there drinking a considerable time. He solemnly denied all knowledge of the affair, 
and no other evidence then transpired to implicate him than the circumstance of his 
being absent from the public-house on the evening when the murders were committed, 
although it appeared that his habits of living had been dissolute, and had occasioned 
great uneasiness to his parent, who was well known to possess considerable property. 
On the following day, a coroner's inquest was held on the bodies; and the evidence 
elicited on that occasion tended to fix more strongly the violent suspicion already 
existing of George Chennel, the son, having been concerned in the murders, although 
the crime was not sufficiently brought home to him to induce the Jury to implicate 
him by their verdict; they accordingly returned a verdict of "Wilful Murder against 
some person or persons unknown," in full confidence that another Jury would decide 
upon the guilt or innocence of the accused.
	Chennel had undergone one or two examinations before the magistrates at the 
Town Hall, before any suspicion was excited as to his having had an accomplice in 
the horrid deed; hut circumstances at length transpired, which involved in the same 
suspicion of guilt his late father's carman, J. CHALCRAFT, a man of universal bad 
character, and the constant associate of the accused parricide. The zeal and activity of 
the magistrates, succeeded in producing a chain of evidence which converted the 
floating suspicions against both prisoners into almost absolute certainties; and 
Chennel and Chalcraft were ultimately committed to take their trials for the parricide 
and murder.
	A variety of circumstances procrastinated the trials of the prisoners charged 
with these atrocious murders till the 12th of August, 1818; when George Chennel and 
J. Chalcraft were arraigned for the wilful murder of O. Chennel, at Godalming, on the 
10th of November preceding; and, on a second indictment, for the murder of Eliz. 
Wilson; by fracturing the skull with a hammer, and cutting their throats.
	Mr Gurney, as leading counsel for the crown, stated the case to the jury in a 
speech most admirable for the lucid arrangement of the circumstances. In his 
preliminary observations, he said, that even the horrid crime of murder had its 
gradations of atrocity; it was aggravated when committed by the strong upon the 
feeble and unresisting–when by the servant against his master–and above all, when by 
the son against his aged father. The two last were the dreadful charges imputed to the 
prisoners–the one being the son, and the other the servant of the deceased. He did not 
mention this to excite their passions; on the contrary, they must not suffer themselves 
to be transported by their indignation at the crime, to be caused, by a premature 
judgment, to pronounce the accused guilty. With respect to that evidence from the 
result of which they must form their opinion, it must of necessity be collected from a 
variety of circumstances, all tending to the same end. The murderer did not do his foul 
deed in the presence of witnesses: No; he chose night and solitude for the perpetration 
of his crime.
	The deceased Mr Chennel was a respectable tradesman at Godalming, and was 
also a man of considerable property. The prisoner Chennel was his son, and the other 
prisoner his carman, and had been so for many years, he having a little farm in 
addition to his trade of a carrier. Eliz. Wilson, the other person murdered, was a 
harmless old woman, who had been also for many years his housekeeper. The 
prisoner Chennel lodged in the town of Godalming, and usually took his meals, but 
did not lodge at his father's, and it would be proved, had not that filial feeling which a 
son ought to have for a father. On the morning of Tuesday, the 11th of November, 
about seven o'clock, the town of Godalming was alarmed with the account that Mr 
Chennel and his housekeeper were both found murdered in their house, which was in 
the middle of the street at Godalming, the old gentleman in his bed, and the 
housekeeper in what was called the front kitchen. They were last seen alive at about 
eight o'clock on the Monday evening, and from circumstances the murder must have 
been committed from nine to ten o'clock. The old gentleman was a very regular man, 
and went to bed usually at nine; his housekeeper sat up after him for some time, and 
usually retired to rest at ten. He was found in his bed, and therefore it was done after 
he had retired; she was found in the kitchen at work, not having been to bed, and the 
work which lay near her was a shirt of the prisoner's, which she was mending; it was 
therefore presumed that it was before her usual time of going to rest. The person also 
who lived in the next house, and whose bedroom adjoined to Mr Chennel's, went to 
bed at ten o'clock, and could hear anything that passed in his room, did not hear any 
noise after that hour. In addition to this, a person was passing the house about half-
past nine, and heard a scream, and afterwards something fall, but did not suspect 
anything of the dreadful deed which was then most probably in perpetration.
	The next morning, when a farming servant of Mr Chennel's came to the stables 
for the horses at about six, he found Chalcraft there, as usual; and it was the conduct 
of Chalcraft that excited suspicion against him. They dressed their horses, and went to 
the house where usually the old gentleman and his housekeeper would be stirring at 
that hour, The door was open, but no one appeared; at length Chalcraft went into the 
front kitchen, and the other heard him calling his master, but no answer. Now it would 
be proved that the murdered body of the housekeeper lay in such a position, that when 
he opened the door he must have seen it, and, indeed, must have stepped over it to get 
to the stair-foot door, and therefore his affecting not to see it was matter of great 
suspicion. in addition to this, when the alarm was given, he stated that his master was 
murdered upstairs before he or anyone had been upstairs. He was known to be the 
constant companion of the other prisoner, Chennel, and therefore he was immediately 
sent for, and on searching the box of Chennel, two one-pound bank notes were found, 
one of them slightly tinged with blood, which notes would be traced to the possession 
of the father a few days before. The prisoner at once acknowledged the notes had been 
his father's, and said his father gave them to him on the preceding Sunday; he should, 
however, call evidence to prove that the prisoner, in the early part of Monday, could 
not pay a sum of 8 1/2d.; but about ten o'clock on Monday evening, after the murder 
was supposed to be committed, he went to the Richmond Arms, in that town, and 
squandered money very profusely.
	As they were both suspected, they were required to say where they had been, 
and whether they were together on the Monday evening. They both agreed that they 
had not seen each other since the preceding Friday. The falsity of this statement would 
be abundantly proved, for both Chalcraft and Chennel were seen on the spot at half-
past nine on the evening of the murders, and Chennel was seen standing at the very 
passage which led to the deceased's house; and a witness afterwards passing by, saw a 
woman walking backward and forward before the door, apparently on the watch. This 
woman, it was now evident, was one Sarah Hurst, an accomplice; and Chalcraft was 
seen walking towards his home, Hurst following him; and Chennel at the same time 
went back to the Richmond Arms, which he had left some time before, he insisting 
that he went to look after a woman, and was gone so short a time, that the pipe he left 
behind him was burning when he returned. It was also singular, that Chalcraft had a 
short time before declared that "there would be a bigger blow up before long than 
Godalming had ever seen." With respect to Chennel the prisoner, he was separated 
from his wife, and was in the constant habit of using invectives against his father and 
the old woman. These were the circumstances of suspicion; but in addition to this, he 
should call Mary Hurst, the accomplice of the deed.
	The Jury knew that an accomplice was an infamous character, and ought not to 
be believed unless confirmed by other testimony; and, in justice to the prisoner, be 
was bound to state that this accomplice, Hurst, had accused A and B–he would not 
mention names, who, upon investigation, were clearly innocent, They would hear the 
whole case, and decide impartially.
	A great mass of evidence was then adduced in support of the statement made 
by the learned counsel, from which the following is selected as bearing upon the most 
important points of the criminality of the prisoners.
	John Currington was farming servant to the late Mr Chennel. He saw his 
master about a quarter after seven, on the Monday evening. He went to the house on 
Tuesday morning at half-past six. He took some horses from a field to the stable 
behind the house, and there saw Chalcraft. The door was open. Chalcraft had the corn-
sieve in his hand. Witness had never found that door open before, till his master had 
risen. His master used to leave the corn in two peck-measures at the top of the stairs. 
The key was usually kept within the door of the front kitchen. To get that key it was 
necessary to enter the kitchen. Witness, after cleaning his horses, went up to the back 
kitchen to breakfast, with George Sweetman. They found the door on the latch. 
Chalcraft went home to breakfast. When he came back, they went to harness their 
horses. He returned about half-past seven. They brought out their horses into the 
street: no person was up in the house. Witness told Chalcraft that he wanted small 
beer for breakfast, and told him that the back kitchen door was open. Chalcraft said, 
how the deuce did that come open? Mr Millner, the shoemaker, rattled at the front 
door to waken his master; then Chalcraft and witness went down the passage, went 
through the cellar, and called his master three or four times. Witness did not see how 
far he went, but heard him call. Witness heard the door of the kitchen rattle. After 
having called, Chalcraft came back the way he went through the cellar. Prisoner 
afterwards rapped the window in front with his whip at the chamber where Mr 
Chennel slept. Chalcraft returned down the passage again, and unlatched the kitchen 
door, when witness or prisoner found a puddle of blood by putting down his hand. 
Prisoner then shoved the door to. Witness mentioned to prisoner that it was blood. 
They went up the passage as fast as they could, and gave the alarm. Chalcraft asked 
whom he should call. Chalcraft met Mr Earl, who came to the house. People then 
collected.
	Examined by the Judge.-- Witness said, that when he observed it was blood, 
by dipping his finger in the puddle, Chalcraft made no reply. The prisoner being asked 
if he had any questions to put to the witness, replied no.
	John Knight jun., deposed, that he came to Chennel's passage about half-past 
seven. Chalcraft was then standing at the entrance of the passage from the street. 
Witness went to the door of the kitchen, followed by Chalcraft. Having opened the 
door, he saw the body of the woman lying on the ground. The door could not open 
completely on account of the body. Chalcraft did not enter; and when witness asked 
him to go upstairs, he replied he could not go, and seemed very much agitated. 
Prisoner just looked in, and witness did not go up. A person opening the kitchen door 
to call upstairs must have seen the body.
	Mr Henry Causton was next door neighbour to Mr Chennel. On Tuesday 
morning witness heard the alarm. Chalcraft was standing in the middle of the road, 
with his arms folded. Prisoner said, "My master and Bet are both murdered to-night." 
Witness said, "Good God! what do you mean, Chalcraft?" He answered, "Bet lies in 
the kitchen, and master is upstairs." Witness directly went down the passage, and saw 
the housekeeper lie on the floor of the front kitchen. Witness went and informed his 
family, and made an alarm. He thought the body of Mrs Wilson had been moved a 
little, as the door could not otherwise open wide; the door to the passage came against 
her head as she was first lying. Witness did not take particular notice of the marks of 
violence, but observed blows on the temple, and the hand had nearly been cut off. 
Witness did not go up into Mr Chennel's chamber. The prisoner, Chennel, did not live 
in the house with his father, but he frequently had his meals there. The prisoner and 
his father lived on very bad terms. Witness had heard the prisoner Chennel make use 
of expressions regarding his father about a month or two months before his father's 
decease. The expressions conveyed vile names, and he wished he were dead. His 
language for several years past was so much against his father that witness had often 
shuddered at it. The expression of a wish that his father were dead had been used 
about a year before. His language against the housekeeper was violent. He wished his 
father would turn her out of doors, as she told his father tales of him, and was making 
mischief between them.
	John Earl is a shoe-maker in Godalming, and used to work for the late Mr 
Chennel. He recollected the Monday when the murder took place. He heard of the 
murder about twenty minutes before eight, in the street, and saw the prisoner standing 
with his hands folded. He said, "For God's sake, John Earl, come over, we cannot find 
master anywhere, and there is blood in the kitchen." Witness went, followed by 
Chalcraft, to the kitchen door, and saw Elizabeth Wilson lying on the floor, with her 
throat cut. Chalcraft leaned against the door. Witness said, "Here lies Bet, murdered, 
and no doubt master has met with the same fate." Chalcraft went for the constable. 
Witness then let the shutters down, but could see the body before the window was 
opened, from the light of the door. Witness, with two or three others, went upstairs, 
the staircase door being shut. They went into Mr Chennel's bed-room; saw him in bed, 
with his throat cut, and blood on the clothes. The body was covered up to the head. 
Witness then went into the housekeeper's bed-room. There was no appearance there of 
the bed being slept on. He then went down, and saw Chennel at the front door of the 
side kitchen, outside in the passage. Witness said, "George, a bad job has happened 
to-night; here lies poor Bet, murdered, and your father has met with the same fate in 
his bed." Prisoner said, "O dear, what is to he done?" Witness said, "Won't you go up 
and see your father?" Prisoner made no reply, but went immediately upstairs, 
accompanied by witness. As soon as he went into the room, he took one look at his 
father, and sat down on the left of the room, holding his handkerchief to his face, and 
making a mournful noise. Witness went downstairs, and left prisoner there with the 
constable, who had come into the room a little before. On getting downstairs, witness 
was shown a knife all stained with blood. It was the knife of the deceased; witness had 
often seen and used it before. Witness remained two or three hours about the house; 
he saw Chalcraft afterwards in the shop, and asked him why he did not go into the 
house; Mr Austin had asked the question why he did not go and see his master, and he 
answered he could not, because he had seen the man who was murdered at Petersfield.
	Richard Stedman went up into Mr Chennel's room on the Tuesday morning 
with the last witness and Austin. He there saw Mr Chennel lying with his skull 
fractured and his throat cut. The blood about the wound was dry, and showed that the 
murder had been committed some time. He did not turn the clothes down so as to 
observe if there was blood on the bed. He examined the body of the housekeeper, and 
found a knife resting against her body, with the point on the brick; the blood was dry 
on the knife; the apron and handkerchief were bloody, but dry. The knife was a large 
case-knife. He remarked the state of the wound on the woman, and it appeared to have 
been done a considerable time, as the blood was dry. The arm of the woman, which 
witness felt, was cold.
	John Kean, the son of the keeper of the House of Correction at Guildford, on 
the discovery of the murder, went to Godalming. He examined the premises of Mr 
Chennel, and found a hammer covered with blood. He compared that hammer with 
the wound on Mr Chennel's head, and the end appeared to fit one of the marks. 
Chalcraft was committed to witness's custody. He had a smock-frock on when he took 
him. He examined him, and found spots of blood on the right sleeve of the frock.
	Isaac Woods, the constable at Godalming, produced the fatal knife; a case 
knife with a wooden handle. It was still covered with blood, and produced a shudder 
in the court when it appeared. He produced likewise the hammer: it was a hammer 
used by shoe-makers, sharp at one end and round and blunt at the other. The prisoner 
Chalcraft appeared to look steadfastly at the last instrument.
	William Parsons, a surgeon at Godalming, was made acquainted with the 
melancholy event about ten minutes before eight. He went into the house by the 
kitchen, where he saw Elizabeth Wilson on the floor, with her throat cut, and other 
marks of violence on her head. She was cold and stiff. The wounds appeared to have 
been inflicted a considerable time, and the wounds were flaccid and cold. He went 
upstairs to Mr Chennel's room, where he found him a corpse, reclining on his right 
side, with his throat cut and his skull fractured. Witness thought life was suspended by 
the blows of the hammer, and his throat afterwards cut, and the reason why he thought 
this was the course of the proceeding was, that there was not such a flow of blood as 
would have appeared if the throat had been cut first, while the pulsations of the heart 
were still active.
	George Austin remembered Tuesday, the 11th of November, and saw 
Chalcraft when he was looking up to his master's windows. Witness called him into 
Chennel's shop, and asked if he would like to see the bodies, and he said No. Witness 
asked him why; and he answered, Because I never saw but one man murdered, and 
that was the man at Petersfield. He asked, if he saw that man murdered, and he said 
No, I saw him afterwards. Witness then asked him again to go, remarking that they 
would do no harm, and he said he would not go for all the town. Prisoner seemed 
much agitated. Witness turned round him, and perceived a spot, which he considered 
to be blood, on the right arm. This was before he was taken into custody. On the 
following day witness went with Kean and Chalcraft to the house of the deceased. 
Kean asked if he would go and see the bodies, and he said he would, and they all went 
together. They passed through the shop, Chalcraft stepped over the body, and they 
went upstairs. Kean then asked if he knew which was his master's bedroom. He 
answered, No. He did not know any more than the child unborn, not being upstairs 
before. They went in, and Chalcraft said, There he lies, poor old man, one of the best 
masters I ever had. When going down, witness asked the prisoner to take the position 
he was in when he called his master in the morning: he took the position, and the 
witness described his attitude from a model. [The description could not be intelligible 
in words; but the object of the examination went to prove, that in the morning when 
the prisoner went to call his master, he must have seen the body of the housekeeper, 
though he made no mention of it.] Witness asked him, why he did not open the door 
and pass through to the stairs, instead of going round, to which the prisoner answered, 
"If you knew the pedigree of it as well as I do, you would have done as I did." 
Witness asked Chalcraft on Wednesday, when in custody, when he saw George last, 
(meaning Chennel,) and he answered, "On Friday last, ploughing." Witness saw 
George Chennel on the Tuesday night at his (witness's) mother's house, when he said 
that he had left the Richmond Arms on the Monday night to go and see a lady; and 
that he was not gone above four or five minutes; and when he returned, his pipe was 
out.
	Benjamin Kean, a constable at Guildford, took Chalcraft into custody by order 
of the magistrates. He searched Chennel's lodgings at his landlady's, and particularly a 
chest, where he found two £1 Bank-notes, and 14s in a tin box, One of the notes had 
the appearance of blood, they both had that appearance, but one was more faint than 
the other.
	James Steelworth lived at Godalming. The prisoner, George Chennel lived at 
his house. He identified the notes found in Channel's trunk. One of them had marks of 
blood, the other had not.
	Thomas Simpson Allathorp, warehouseman, Gate-street London, swore that he 
paid the two notes to Mr Chennel on the 4th of November. He knew the two notes by 
taking them of a Mrs Baker, whose name he had put on them. He put the notes which 
he had received from Mrs Baker, on the 3rd of November, among his other notes, and 
paid two to Mr Chennel, on the 4th of November.
	William Coombes, waiter at the Angel Inn, Godalming, remembered the 
evening of the discovery of the murder; Chennel was at their house on that evening 
with Sarah Hurst. He observed Sarah Hurst and Chalcraft whispering together. He 
heard nothing but these words, said by Sarah Hurst, "Hold your tongue, Chalcraft, I 
want to hear no more of it." This ended the whispering. He saw Chennel on August 
last, and said to him, "George, when your business is arranged, you will go and live 
with your father." Chennel answered he would go home to eat and drink, but not to 
sleep, because the housekeeper would know at what hour he came home. He hoped 
some morning, when he got up, he should find her with her throat cut; and if he met 
the men coming out of the door who had done the murder, he would not tell of it 
though he were to be hanged for it himself; and that if he found them both so, he 
should not be the least sorry; nor even if he committed the murder himself, should he 
think he had committed any sin.
	James Ayles, a wheelwright at Godalming, remembered Chalcraft coming to 
his shop in November last. Witness asked him, "What does Great George (meaning 
Chennel,) do now?" Prisoner answered, "D--n me, I do not know what he does. He 
goes on letting off fire-works at the Richmond Arms. There will be a bigger blow-up 
in Godalming than ever was known. You will soon hear of it."
	Johnstone, a drayman in Godalming, went to Hasscombe with his dray on the 
Monday before the discovery of the murders. George Chennel, the prisoner, went with 
witness. He put up his horses there. Chennel asked him to pay a pot of beer for him, as 
he had only 2d. in his pocket, and had left his money at home. They had beer and 
tobacco. When they had gone out, Chennel said to the landlord, "Miles, I have no 
money, but I will make it up to you another time."
	Elizabeth Stillwell, the wife of Stillwell, in whose house Chennel lodged, 
remembered the morning of the murder. She did not see Chennel on the Monday, but 
she heard him go out on Monday morning at ten o'clock, and he did not return that 
day. He came home after midnight on Monday between twelve and one: she left the 
door open for him. On the Saturday previous the prisoner owed her five weeks' rent, 
and he then promised to pay her on Monday. Witness had lent him 10s. before, and 
lent him some more on the Saturday night to buy his wife some brandy. He asked 7s., 
and witness lent him 5s., and he promised to return the whole on Monday.
	Charles Woods, on the evening of Monday, in the street near Mr Chennel's 
house, saw two persons going down the passage dressed in round frocks. They were 
near the door of the kitchen. This was about half-past seven. Those persons were 
conversing together. Witness went away, and on returning about ten minutes 
afterwards, saw them still in conversation. He went away and returned a third time, 
when he found them in the same position. There was a light in a baker's shop opposite 
that east a reflection down the passage. He knew the prisoners very well, and believed 
those persons to be them.
	William Stillwell lives in Godalming, and remembered the circumstances of 
Mr Chennel's death. He saw Chalcraft on Monday evening, at half-past seven, about 
forty yards from Mr Chennel's, going towards Chennel's house. He met Sarah Hurst 
about 14 or 15 yards behind him, going the same way, but slower than the prisoner.
	James Tidy keeps the Richmond Arms, at Godalming. The prisoner, George 
Chennel, was at his house on Monday, the 10th November. He came at seven o'clock, 
and called for a pint of beer, then a pennyworth of tobacco, and then another pint of 
beer. He paid for the beer, which came to 8 1/2d. He then went away, leaving his pipe 
on the table where it lay. It was about nine o'clock. There were several persons in the 
house, but none in his company. A person of the name of Fisher sat by his side. Fisher 
and the prisoner went away together. About a quarter before ten he returned quite 
alone. Then they had another pot; Chennel left his house about half-past eleven. 
Chennel was in witness's house on the Friday preceding, when he said, he wished his 
father's housekeeper were dead, and if he saw anyone murder her he would not tell of 
it. He had heard prisoner frequently wish the housekeeper dead.
	William Cooper, hostler at the Red Lion, remembered standing at the door 
about a quarter past nine, and remembered bidding Fisher good night. Witness heard 
something over the way, turned his lantern, and saw Chalcraft and Chennel a few 
minutes after he saw Fisher. The prisoners were standing then face to face. Witness 
saw them go down towards Chennel's. They had both smock-frocks. Continued there 
about ten minutes, but saw nobody returning; must have seen them if they had.
	William Cobely lives at Godalming. On the night before he heard of Mr 
Chennel's death, saw Chennel and Chalcraft standing together. He knew them at the 
time. In going down the town he passed Mr Chennel's. When near Mr Chennel's house 
he heard a very sharp scream, apparently of a woman. He thought the scream came 
from Chennel's passage. Witness walked about eight or ten paces, and saw a woman, 
who was apparently looking for something, and then he perceived Chennel standing 
right in front of the passage, in the centre of it. Chennel appeared to have come up the 
passage, as he did not see him till then. The prisoner was speaking to the woman. 
After the scream he heard a great fall. Witness then went to Bridge-street, and stopped 
there ten minutes. In passing, he went through Chalcraft's passage. In coming back, 
witness met Chalcraft going home between Mr Chennel's and his own house. Witness 
wished Chalcraft good night, which salutation prisoner exchanged.
	Mary Morley, on the Monday night, passed Mr Chennel's passage at a quarter 
past nine, and saw Chalcraft and Chennel just within the passage. Chalcraft looked out 
just as she passed.
	Sarah Hurst, the accomplice, appeared deeply affected, and could scarcely 
stand. She lived in Godalming, and knew the prisoners; saw Chalcraft at five in the 
evening of Monday, the 10th of November. He asked if she should be down the town 
that evening, and she answered she did not know if she should. He said he wished she 
would, giving no reason for his wish. She told him she would come down if he 
wanted her. Nothing more then passed. She saw him again a little after nine, a few 
doors below Mr Chennel's. He was then alone. She asked what he wanted. He 
answered, that he wanted her to stand by Mr Chennel's door to watch. Nothing more 
then passed. He went to Mr Chennel's house, and witness walked in front of the 
doorway backward and forward. She remained there for some time, but could not tell 
how long. She saw George Chennel going in too when Chalcraft went. After Chalcraft 
came out, she heard a screech from within doors, Chalcraft said, when he came out, 
"Is that you Hurst?" and she said, "Yes." She asked him what they had been doing? 
He answered, "We have done for them both." Witness saw some blood on his round 
frock sleeves, by the light of two candles in the opposite window. Witness asked how 
it came there, to which he answered, "It was the blood from them two." Chennel came 
up while they were talking from the passage, and asked who Chalcraft was talking to. 
He said he was talking to Hurst. One or two persons passed at this time. They parted–
Chalcraft went down the town, and Chennel went up. Witness likewise went up. The 
next night she was in company with Chalcraft, and he offered her £4 to keep it a 
secret at a public house. She told him she would not have it, as she did not want the 
money. He spoke in whispers. This happened in the Angel Inn. She told him at last to 
hold his tongue, she did not want to hear any more of it. She saw him on Wednesday 
evening coming from Mr Wood's house in the custody of Pattock. She asked him how 
he got on, He said, "All well, Sarah, at present."
	This wretched woman underwent a severe cross-examination, from which it 
appeared that she herself was an old offender against the laws, and, as far as 
concealment went, deeply implicated in the guilt of the prisoners; but as her evidence 
as to the particulars of her share in the atrocious crime was supported by collateral 
testimony, it was received by the court, and appeared conclusive against the prisoners.
	The evidence for the prosecution being closed, the prisoners were asked what 
they had to say in their own defence.
	Chennel gave an account of the transactions of the Monday, which he read 
from a paper. The account did not very much vary from what appeared in the 
evidence and his previous statement. He persisted in saying that he used the same pipe 
when he returned to the inn as he had used before he left it. He went through the 
transactions of the night at the Richmond Arms nearly as given by the master of that 
house. He mentioned a good deal of irrelevant matter about his conduct on the 
Tuesday morning, which it is unnecessary to repeat.
	Chalcraft, when asked what he had to say, said he would state his defence if 
the Jury would give attention. He likewise gave an account of his conduct on the 
Monday, stating what he did at the different hours, but brought in manythings that had 
no reference to his exculpation. He delivered this story, introducing the most minute 
circumstances, and the most trifling dialogues, without the least stop or 
embarrassment, in a firm voice, and with great composure of manner. The only sign 
of anxiety or agitation that appeared was a quivering in his lips, which he found it 
necessary to wet frequently with his tongue. He concluded by declaring, "What I have 
said is true, so help me God!"
	Witnesses Were called in behalf of the prisoners, but their testimony was of no 
consequence.
	The Judge (Mr Sergeant Lens) then proceeded to address the Jury, and sum up 
the evidence. He was not aware that he could do anything more in this important case 
than merely recapitulate the accounts given by the different witnesses of the conduct 
of the prisoners during the hours between eight and eleven on Monday, the 10th of 
November. If they could rely on any part of Sarah Hurst's evidence, the decision of 
the Jury would be short and infallible. The conclusion would be inevitable, if her 
word could be trusted; but her conduct did not tend to establish her credit. She, 
according to her own account, was appointed to watch while the murder was 
committing, and was, therefore, a party in the murder. She had charged others with 
the crime, and it was difficult to say whether her charge was the effect of malignity, or 
the mere wanderings or delirium of her mind. Whatever was the cause, her evidence 
was proportionally affected by it; and the Jury were to consider how far a person of 
such character was to be listened to. The evidence on which the Jury were to form 
their judgment included the minute points of time, of situation, of conduct, of 
declaration, and language. The declarations of Chennel's hatred were important; but 
the Jury were to consider that the expressions he used with regard to his father and his 
housekeeper, coarse and violent as they were, extended over a long course of time, (as 
much as a year) before the fatal deed; and the Jury were to judge whether they were 
the infatuation of criminality, unconsciously avowing its designs, or loose idle words, 
that had no definite meaning, and were never intended to avow any purpose. He 
thought that these expressions could hardly be taken to convey what they meant; and 
though they were not to be forgotten, as evincing a general disposition to evil, and 
rendering what happened more probable, they were not to be relied on as declaring the 
intention of murder, which no man in his senses who meant to commit the crime 
would previously declare. The learned Judge then went over the different parts of the 
evidence, and showed its bearing on the guilt or innocence of the prisoners with great 
penetration, discrimination, and impartiality.
	The Jury almost immediately returned a verdict of Guilty against both the 
prisoners. Very little change took place in the appearance or countenance either of 
Chalcraft or Chennel when the verdict was pronounced.
	The learned Judge then proceeded to pass the awful sentence of the law, 
apparently much affected. He told the prisoners that they had been found guilty by a 
Jury of their countrymen, after a most mature and patient investigation of their case; 
and he might now mention what he had studiously abstained from hinting before, that 
he thought the conclusion they had come to the only one to which any reasonable man 
could come on the evidence against them. After the long examination into which the 
Court had already entered, he felt that he could not much longer make a demand on 
their attention, but he could not omit stating to the prisoners the situation in which 
they stood with regard to the deceased. The one of them stood in the relation of a son–
a relation which should always create the utmost reverence and love; the other in that 
of a servant, which should always command duty and respect. Murder committed in 
these relations could scarcely admit of aggravation; but the crime in their case had 
been aggravated by circumstances of almost unexampled atrocity. The one had lifted 
up his hand, not only against his father, but that father aged and feeble; and the other 
against a master whom he himself had denominated kind and benevolent. If they had 
not yet prepared their minds by repentance to supplicate that God whom they had 
offended, they should employ the few hours that yet remained for that purpose, 
without uselessly denying their guilt, and endeavour to place their souls in a state to 
receive pardon in another world for a deed like this. He had now only to pronounce 
the awful sentence of the law, which was, that they be taken hence to the prison from 
whence they came, and on Friday next carried to the place of execution, there to be 
hung by the neck till dead, and their bodies afterwards be given to be anatomised and 
dissected according to the statute. This being the sentence of the law, the Lord have 
mercy on their souls.
	The prisoners were then led away, Chalcraft protesting that he was "as 
innocent as the child unborn," and Chennel saying nothing. The latter was about 40; 
he was a stout made man, rather inclined to be corpulent, with the outline of a good 
face, apparently rendered heavy and dull by the effects of indolence and irregular 
habits. He was dressed in a black jockey coat, a striped waistcoat, and a black 
neckerchief. He displayed, on his entrance into court, the utmost indifference to his 
situation, and did not appear to be much touched by anything that occurred. The 
prisoner Chalcraft appeared in a smock frock, with a coloured handkerchief tied 
carelessly about his neck; he had all the rustic appearance of his situation, joined to a 
considerable degree of acuteness in his eye and general intelligence in his 
countenance; he seemed secure and confident, but at the same time earnest and 
attentive.
	The execution of these atrocious murderers took place, according to their 
sentence, on the 14th of August; and it was thought due to public justice and public 
feeling, that the neighbourhood which had been alarmed and horror-struck at the 
atrocity of their crime, should likewise witness their punishment, and hear their 
confession, if disposed to make any. General convenience happily agreed with this 
arrangement, as Godalming, where the murder was committed, is only four miles 
distant from Guildford, where the trial took place; and there was no danger that an 
overwhelming crowd would create any confusion. The expected confession, however, 
was not made; and from the time that they were taken into custody (which was more 
than nine months previous to their execution), they seemed to have entertained hopes 
of an acquittal, and therefore avoided any serious thoughts of their situation.
	Chennel, both in Horsemonger-lane gaol, and at Kingston, during the Spring 
assizes, seemed as fearless and indifferent as if his conscience had been at ease; and 
though not apt to assert his innocence, unless when questioned on the subject, 
appeared to make no doubt of his getting off, as he expressed it, by the insufficiency 
of the evidence, or the ability of his counsel. He, therefore, smoked his pipe, and 
drank his beer, when it was procured him, with as much apparent relish as if his mind 
were clear from guilt, his life secure from punishment, and his confinement only 
temporary. Though he showed no contempt for the truths or exercises of religion, 
admitting implicitly the one, and joining without reluctance in the other, his conduct 
plainly evinced that his mind was not impressed, and his reverend instructors had to 
lament that his devotions were languid and formal. His temperament, naturally 
phlegmatic, was never excited to any spiritual consideration. There seemed no conflict 
in his mind between the secret consciousness of guilt and a desire to reveal it. He 
appeared taciturn, sullen, and incommunicative, more from native apathy than from 
premeditated design; and a kind of stupor, or sottishness, contracted by long habits of 
idleness and intemperance, prevented him from being interested about anything but 
the supply of his present wants, or the gratification of his appetites.
	His fellow prisoner and coadjutor in murder was of a very different character. 
His education had been entirely neglected, he could not even read, and he had 
likewise run through a long course of iniquity; but his intellects were acute, and his 
feeling strong. He was always more communicative, and seemed at times, by some 
expressions which he used, disposed to relent into a confession, when probably the 
remembrance of an oath of secrecy which they had mutually taken before the 
commission of their crimes prevented him from making a disclosure of them. He 
seemed to wait for the commencement of confession on the part of Chennel, and 
sometimes desired him to confess, (a phrase which, we are aware, may admit of 
different meanings); but as the latter revealed nothing, he resolved likewise to keep 
his oath and the horrible secret, partaking probably to the last in the hopes of an 
acquittal.
	They were led back to their cells at the termination of their trial, determined to 
persist in their denial of guilt, and resolved rather to take the chance of pardon for 
unconfessed crimes in another world, of which they had no habitual or vivid 
impressions, than to brave the horrors of their fellow men in this by admitting the 
monstrous atrocity of their crimes, They, however, allowed that appearances were all 
against them, that the Judge was merciful in his direction to the Jury, that the Jury 
were attentive to the evidence, and just in a mistaken verdict, and that if they had been 
in the situation of either they must have behaved as they had done. At the same time 
they declared their innocence–Chennel with less vehemence, and only when 
questioned; Chalcraft repeatedly, and with stronger asseverations.
	They joined that night with more earnestness in religious exercises with the 
Rev. Mr Cole, the ordinary of Guildford gaol, and slept afterwards four or five hours. 
When the reverend gentleman was about to leave Chennel, he asked him when he 
would wish to see him again, to which the latter replied, with seeming earnestness, 
"The sooner the better." The Rev. Mr Mann, the excellent ordinary of Horsemonger-
lane gaol, who had been very attentive to them when confined there previous to their 
trial, was sent for express after their conviction, and arrived on the following morning. 
He immediately visited the prisoners, and after joining with them in religious 
exercises, offered to hear anything they had to say respecting the crime for which they 
were to suffer, endeavouring to impress their minds by a suitable address, with the 
obligation under which they lay to the offended laws of their country, to society, to 
their neighbourhood and their families, to make a full disclosure, but telling them at 
the same time their confessions must be voluntary, and that he did not wish to extort 
from them more than they were disposed to reveal. To this address they remained 
insensible, and answered it by protesting their innocence.
	The day previous to their execution, their families visited them, and to them 
likewise they declared that they were innocent. Chennel's son and wife performed this 
melancholy office; from his wife he had been separated for some time. They had only 
one son, then five years of age, who lived with his grandfather, and who had only left 
old Chennel's house on a visit to his mother, two days before the parricide was 
committed. It did not transpire at whose suggestion he was removed; if at that of his 
father, it would be a strong circumstance in support of his premeditated design to 
perpetrate the crime of which he was convicted. Chalcraft left a wife and six children, 
three of them being by a former marriage; his first wife was said to have died a victim 
to his licentious and profligate habits, and he took his second from the workhouse, 
where he himself was sent to be cured.
	The Rev. Mr Mann and Mr Cole visited them late at night, and were requested 
by them to come early. They accordingly went a little before seven o'clock, nine being 
the hour appointed for the procession leaving Guildford. They found the prisoners 
nearly in the same state of mind as when they had left them the previous evening. 
They first went into the cell of Chennel, whom they found up and waiting for them. 
There appeared to be little change upon him since his trial. He was dressed in the 
same clothes, and had the same heavy, inanimate, sullen and inexpressive look. Mr 
Mann again addressed him on the subject of his confession, after asking him the state 
of his present feelings. He told him, that however he might conceal his crime from 
men, he could not elude the all-seeing eye of that God before whom he was in a few 
hours to appear. He informed him, that there were certain crimes which he was not 
required to reveal to the world, and for which he had to account to his Maker alone; 
but that crimes against society should be confessed for the satisfaction of society. It 
was a duty he owed to his country, friends, and neighbourhood, to make a full 
disclosure of the latter; it was the best sign he could give of his repentance for having 
committed them, and he hazarded his salvation by leaving the world with a lie in his 
mouth, in declaring his innocence, while conscious of his guilt. He begged him to 
understand at the same time, that the confession, to be satisfactory, must be voluntary, 
and that he did not mean to extort anything which he was not willing to communicate. 
To this considerate admonition, uttered in the most feeling manner, Chennel returned 
no other answer, than that be had nothing to confess; that he was perfectly innocent of 
the crime charged, and that his life had been sworn away by false testimony.
	Mr Mann then proceeded to the cell of Chalcraft, and, to an admonition of the 
same import, received a similar answer, impressed only with more vehemence. The 
two prisoners were then conducted into the same cell, (the gaol at Guildford being 
without a chapel,) to join in devotional exercises, and to receive the sacrament. When 
the communion elements were brought, and the Bibles and Prayer-books laid on the 
table, Mr Mann again embraced the opportunity, before those sacred emblems, of 
making a feeling address to the prisoners on their situation and prospects, if they 
partook of the sacrament with a lie in their mouths, and having again put the question, 
whether they had anything to disclose, they replied successively that they were 
innocent and the service proceeded. Chennel received a Prayer book. Chalcraft, who 
could not read, was requested to attend. The psalms which the Rev. gentleman read 
were the 51st and 90th, the lessons were the 7th chapter of Job, and the description of 
the Last Judgment under the parable of the Shepherd separating the sheep from the 
goats in Matthew.
	Chennel joined in the service, and read the responses with an audible though 
feeble voice, and in a languid manner. He was several times observed to be more 
attentive to the trifling inconvenience of a fly buzzing about his ears, than to the 
sacred duty in which he was engaged; and during the reading of the prayers he 
yawned three or four times, as from fatigue or listlessness, which he could not 
conceal. In short, the whole of his behaviour and manner was that of a man 
completely besotted in his intellects, or hardened in his crimes, dead to any feelings of 
remorse, incapable of any spiritual reflection, and insensible to anything but visible 
objects. If it be allowable to make such an allusion on so solemn an occasion, his 
character strongly called to mind that of Barnardine in Measure for Measure, "a man 
that apprehends death no more dreadfully but as a drunken sleep; careless, reckless, 
and fearless of what's past, present, or to come; insensible of mortality, and 
desperately mortal." Chalcraft seemed more attentive, and by the expression of his 
face appeared to apply to himself those parts of the service that had a reference to his 
wretched situation.
	When Mr Mann had communicated himself and administered the communion 
to the other clergyman who accompanied him, he made a pause, and again in a most 
solemn manner, addressed the prisoners on the subject of confession. He described to 
them the nature and objects of the Holy Communion, and conjured them not to risk 
their salvation by participating in it unworthily; informing them, that they could not 
taste the sacred elements with true dispositions, unless they were prepared to go into 
the presence of their God, which they could not do safely with unrepented sins and 
unconfessed crimes. The question being again put to them, they severally protested 
their innocence: their hardened guilt affected the two Reverend gentlemen to tears. 
They proceeded, however, to administer the elements, and the two prisoners 
communicated with every appearance of reverence and awe.
	When the service was concluded, the two clergymen formerly mentioned, 
together with others who attended, left the cell, and the Rev. John West, of Stoke, 
went in to converse with them. By addressing them on their awful situation, they 
were, for the first time, melted into tears; but still they refused to confess; Chennel 
saying that, whatever crimes he may have committed, be was not guilty of that for 
which he was about to suffer; and Chalcraft echoing the words without variation.
	At nine o'clock the Under-Sheriff arrived, the waggon or caravan which was to 
convey the criminals to the place of execution was brought to the prison door, the 
various officers were at their posts, and the prison bell tolled the hour of departure. 
The two prisoners were then brought out, with irons on their feet, their hands 
pinioned, and the rope with which they were to be hung round their waists. Chennel 
was dressed as on his trial, in a black jockey coat, a striped waistcoat, and gray cotton 
pantaloons. Chalcraft had on a new smock frock. The back part of the caravan was 
occupied with a platform, provided with steps on which they were to ascend to be tied 
to the gallows. The executioner, with a drawn sword, sat in front of the platform, with 
the two turnkeys on each side of him; the Rev. Mr West sat with his back to the 
horses, with Chalcraft on his right hand and Chennel on his left. The cavalcade then 
proceeded towards Godalming.
	The crowds that were assembled at Guildford, Godalming, the neighbourhood, 
and even parts of the country more remote, were immense, and lined the road as far as 
the eye could see. In the narrower places they were pressed together so closely as to 
be endangered by the horses, and raised clouds of dust that literally enveloped them. 
All the heights on the road were crowned with multitudes, and where an open space 
occurred they spread out so as to cover it. The greatest part of the crowd consisted of 
farm servants, in their usual costume, and few persons, perhaps, had ever witnessed 
the assembly of so many smock-frocks and straw hats. During the mournful 
procession, the two prisoners seemed to be very attentive to the Reverend gentleman 
who sat between them and directed their minds to suitable topics of reflection and 
consolation. He read to them the 18th and 25th metre psalms, and the 102nd Bible 
psalm, the 53rd chapter of Isaiah, and two hymns from a collection of sacred hymns. 
The prisoners still refused to confess, though several times pressed to do so both by 
the clergyman and one of the turnkeys.
	The procession arrived at the place of execution about 11. The gallows was 
erected on an extensive meadow to the north of Godalming, which, together with the 
neighbouring heights, was covered with people of all conditions. It was surrounded 
with a ring made of rope, within which only the caravan and the officers were 
admitted. The prisoner Chalcraft seemed a good deal shaken, and hung his head on 
one side. He had urged Chennel to confess, if guilty, by which he perhaps alluded to 
other crimes, but no confession could be obtained. When the caravan stopped under 
the gallows, the Rev. Mr Mann came out of the Sheriff's carriage and ascended it. He 
again repeated his question, whether the prisoners had anything to communicate, and 
was answered in the negative. An officer, who knew Chalcraft, and to whom he said, 
that on arriving at the place of execution he would "tell the whole pedigree of it," now 
came up, and asked if he was ready to perform his promise and make confession. He 
now refused and protested his innocence.
	Chennel was first taken up the platform, probably to allow time and 
opportunity, while the rope was adjusting, for his fellow-prisoner to make disclosures; 
but still nothing could be gained from him. Seeing all importunity vain, the 
executioner proceeded to his work, and tied both to the gallows. Chennel, as soon as 
he ascended, requested that the cap might be drawn over his eyes, to prevent his face 
from being seen by the spectators, many of whom had known him in other days. He 
then stood firm and upright without the least motion. Chalcraft trembled and had 
nearly required support. Mr Mann ascended the platform, and addressed to Heaven in 
their behalf an excellent and affecting prayer, at which Chalcraft became very much 
agitated, and his fellow-prisoner somewhat moved. No appearance of a design to 
confess being made, the platform was drawn from under them, and they were 
launched into eternity. They both seemed to struggle a little when thrown over, but the 
executioner soon terminated their sufferings by drawing down their heels with great 
force.
	After hanging an hour, their bodies were cut down and given to two surgeons 
of Godalming, Mr Parsons and Mr Haynes, for dissection. They were received into 
the waggon which conveyed them to the place of execution, and extended on the 
elevated stage which had been constructed in the vehicle. The procession of officers, 
&c. was then re-formed, and the remains of the murderers were conveyed in slow and 
awful silence through the town of Godalming, until they arrived at the house of the 
late Mr Chennel. Here the procession halted, and the bodies of Chennel and Chalcraft 
were removed from the waggon into the kitchen of the house, one of them being 
placed on the spot where the housekeeper Eliz. Wilson, was found murdered. After 
this, the surgeons proceeded to perform the first office of dissection, and the bodies in 
this state were left exposed to the gaze of thousands, who throughout the day eagerly 
rushed in to see them, The effect of this awful scene may be imagined but not 
described. The horror and reflection, however, which it excited, will, it is hoped, 
produce that salutary warning and effect, which may in future prevent the recurrence 
of those horrible deeds, which gave rise to the spectacle.
	Thus these two great criminals suffered the penalty of their offences near the 
spot where the most atrocious part of them was committed. We say a part, because 
there is now great reason to suspect that the complicated and premeditated atrocity of 
their last act, by which the one imbrued his hands in the blood of an aged and feeble 
father, and the other of a kind and benevolent master, their hardened insensibility 
before trial, and their persevering denial of guilt after conviction, were only the effect 
and the climax of a long course of crime and violence. The impunity of past deeds of 
blood had probably led them to believe that they had a "charmed life," while their 
necessities, arising from their profligacy and irregular habits, prompted to fresh 
excesses of plunder and murder. It will be recollected that Chalcraft gave as a reason 
for refusing to see the body of his murdered master, the shuddering feeling with which 
he had viewed the man murdered at Petersfield. From what has since transpired, there 
is every probability that his reason for disliking the sight was the same in both cases, 
namely, his connexion with the act of murder. It is singular that he and Chennel were 
at the place at the time the former crime was perpetrated, and that some of the clothes 
of the victim were found near Godalming where Chalcraft lived.
	Another murder, too, was perpetrated at Farnham, and the two criminals were 
there at the time, while the knife found in the house appeared to be one of Chennel's 
father's. Other acts of the kind have been attributed to them; indeed they would appear 
to have prowled about like wild beasts, whose appetite for spoils and blood was as 
keen as that of a hungry tiger. The person whom they last murdered, and for whose 
murder they were executed, besides standing to the culprits in a relation which should 
have secured him from their violence, was an excellent and respected man. His 
murderer was his only son, his only child. He had treated him with great indulgence; 
he had set him up as a master farmer, after he had deserted the profession to which he 
bred him; he had supplied his wants when by idleness and profligacy he had 
squandered his property; he had taken and offered to maintain his child; he had 
rescued him from prosecution when by forgery on himself and his brother he had 
exposed himself to that fate which he ought to have suffered; for this he had 
mortgaged his small freehold estate, and he would have given his all to reclaim him, 
when he imbrued his hands in his blood.
	The reader may perhaps think that we have entered into too minute details on 
these executions, but they will excuse us when they think of the useful lessons that 
may be learned from it. The fatal effects of profligacy and depraved habits in the 
lower classes, leading to the most atrocious guilt, by first deadening the feelings, 
besotting the understanding, and hardening the heart, were never more eminently 
exemplified; and we shall think no details too minute, and labour misspent, which 
may impress deeper so important a conviction. 


CHARLES HUSSEY  
Who murdered a Wealthy Tradesman and his Housekeeper, and was 
executed on 3rd of August, 1818

	ON the 31st Of July, 1818, Charles Hussey, who had been a sailor in the East 
India Company's service, was indicted at Maidstone Assizes for the wilful murder of 
Mr Bird, a retired tallow-chandler, who lived at Greenwich, and his housekeeper, 
Mary Simmons, aged forty-four.
	Mr Bird had amassed a considerable fortune, and he and his housekeeper were 
in the habit of attending Greenwich church regularly, but one Sunday morning, 9th of 
February, they were absent. The beadle of the parish went to Mr Bird's house and, not 
getting any response, forced an entrance at the back. On entering the house a shocking 
spectacle presented itself. The body of the housekeeper was found lying in the 
passage, the skull being frightfully fractured, apparently with a hammer. In a parlour 
adjoining the passage was found, lying on the ground, the body of Mr Bird, with his 
arms stretched out, and his skull fractured in the same manner as that of his 
housekeeper. On the other rooms of the house being examined, it became obvious that 
plunder had been the object of the murderer; and it was found that the pockets of the 
deceased had been rifled of the keys of the various drawers and boxes which were 
found above-stairs, marked with blood. Some silver spoons, etc., had been stolen, but 
it was unknown what other property had been carried off.
	An inquest was held in the course of the week, but no circumstances were 
elicited to lead to the discovery of the perpetrator of the deed. During the three 
succeeding weeks several persons were apprehended on suspicion, but nothing 
material could be alleged against them. At length the murderer was pointed out by his 
own sister. This woman was married to a man named Godwin, and resided with her 
husband at Peckham. About a week after the murders had been committed, her 
brother, Charles Hussey, came to her house and said he was going to see his brother, 
who resided at Basingstoke. He said he should return in a week, but he did not do so 
for nearly a fortnight. She then said to him: " Oh, Charles, I have been so uneasy 
during your absence! I have had such frightful dreams, and could not think what 
detained you." He replied, " Why, what could cause you to dream? " and appeared 
greatly agitated. After he had gone away Mrs Godwin said to her husband: " I think 
there is something in Charles's box there should not be." With one of her own keys 
she opened the box, when she saw a couple of watches, which had belonged to the 
late Mr Bird. As Hussey did not return according to promise she informed the police, 
who, on searching the box, found Bank of England notes all marked with Mr Bird's 
initials. A search was made for Hussey, and some considerable time later he was 
taken into custody in Oxfordshire by a publican, named Poulton. Hussey declared his 
innocence, but his criminality was too plain to be doubted, and he was found guilty. 
He was executed on the 3rd of August, 1818. 


ROBERT JOHNSTON  
Executed for Robbery, On 30th of December 1818, after Shocking Scenes on 
the Scaffold

	ROBERT JOHNSTON was a native of Edinburgh, where he spent the first 
part of his life without reproach. His parents were poor, and Robert was employed as 
a carter. In his twenty-fourth year he got into bad company, and was engaged in the 
robbery of a chandler in Edinburgh, and being apprehended he was brought to trial 
with two others, and found guilty. His companions had their sentence commuted to 
transportation for life, but on Johnston the law was ordered to be put in force.
	The execution was directed to take place on the 30th of December, 1818, and 
on that day the judgment of the law was carried out, but under circumstances of a 
most extraordinary nature. A platform was erected in the customary manner, with a 
drop, in the Lawnmarket; and, an immense crowd having assembled, the unfortunate 
culprit was brought from the lock-up house at about twenty minutes before three 
o'clock, attended by two of the magistrates, the Reverend Mr Tait and the usual other 
functionaries. The customary devotions took place, and the unhappy wretch, with an 
air of the most undaunted boldness, gave the necessary signal. Nearly a minute 
elapsed, however, before the drop could be forced down, and then it was found that 
the toes of the wretched culprit were still touching the surface, so that he remained 
half suspended, and struggling in the most frightful manner. It is impossible to find 
words to express the horror which pervaded the crowd, while one or two persons were 
at work with axes beneath the scaffold, in the vain attempt to hew down a part of it 
beneath the feet of the criminal. The cries of horror from the populace continued to 
increase with indescribable vehemence; and it is hard to say how long this horrible 
scene might have lasted had not a person near the scaffold, who was struck by a 
policeman while pressing onward, cried out: "Murder!" Those who were not aware of 
the real cause of the cry imagined that it came from the convict, and a shower of 
stones, gathered from the loose pavement of the street, compelled the magistrates and 
police immediately to retire. A cry of "Cut him down–he is alive!" then instantly burst 
from the crowd, and a person of genteel exterior jumped upon the scaffold and cut the 
rope, and the culprit fell down in a reclining position, after having hung during about 
five minutes only. A number of the mob now gained the scaffold, and taking the ropes 
from the neck and arms of the prisoner removed the cap from his head, and loosening 
his clothes carried him, still alive, towards High Street; while another party tore the 
coffin prepared to receive his body into fragments, and endeavoured unsuccessfully to 
demolish the fatal gallows. Many of the police were beaten in this riot, and the 
executioner, who was for some time in the hands of the mob, was severely injured.
	In the meantime the police officers rallied in augmented force, and retook the 
criminal from the mob, at the head of Advocates' Close. The unhappy man, only half 
alive, stripped of part of his clothes, and with his shirt turned up, so that the whole of 
his naked back and the upper part of his body were exhibited, lay extended on the 
ground in the middle of the street, in front of the police office. At last, after a 
considerable interval, some of the police officers, laying hold of him, dragged him 
trailing along the ground, for about twenty paces, into the office, where he remained 
upwards of half-an-hour, while he was attended by a surgeon, bled in both arms, and 
in the temporal vein, by which suspended animation was restored; but the unfortunate 
man did not utter a word. In the meantime a military force arrived from the Castle 
under the direction of a magistrate, and the soldiers were drawn up in the street, 
surrounding the police office and place of execution.
	Johnston was then carried again to the scaffold. His clothes were thrown about 
him in such a way that he seemed half naked, and while a number of men were about 
him, holding him up on the table, and fastening the rope again about his neck, his 
clothes fell down in a manner shocking to decency. While they were adjusting his 
clothes the unhappy man was left vibrating, upheld partly by the rope about his neck, 
and partly by his feet on the table. At last the table was removed from beneath him, 
when, to the indescribable horror of every spectator, he was seen suspended, with his 
face uncovered, and one of his hands broken loose from the cords with which it 
should have been tied, and with his fingers convulsively twisting in the noose. 
Dreadful cries were now heard from every quarter. A chair was brought, and the 
executioner, having mounted upon it, disengaged by force the hand of the dying man 
from the rope. He then descended, leaving the man's face still uncovered, and 
exhibiting a dreadful spectacle. At length a napkin was thrown over his face, amidst 
shouts of "Murder!" and "Shame, shame!" from the crowd. The unhappy wretch was 
observed to struggle very much, but his sufferings were at an end in a few minutes. 
The soldiers remained on the spot till the body was cut down, and as it was then near 
dusk the crowd gradually dispersed.


SAMUEL SIBLEY; MARIA CATHERINE SIBLEY; 
SAMUEL JONES; his son; THOMAS JONES; JOHN 
ANGEL; THOMAS SMITH; JAMES DODD and EDWARD 
SLATER  
Deluded followers of Joanna Southcott, the sham prophetess, tried for 
rioting, 13th of January, 1819

	A MOST lamentable instance of the effects of infatuation and religious 
enthusiasm was exhibited before the sitting magistrate, at Guildhall, London, on the 
13th of January, 1819, when Samuel Sibley, and Maria Catherine Sibley, his wife; 
Samuel Jones; his son, a boy of ten years' old; Thomas Jones, John Angel, Thomas 
Smith, James Dodd, and Edward Slater, a boy of twelve years' of age; were brought 
up from the Compter, by two officers of the Cordwainers' Ward, who had with great 
difficulty, and at the hazard of their own lives, rescued the prisoners from the fury of 
an immense mob, in Budge-row, Cannon-street, about ten o'clock on the previous 
morning.
	These deluded people, it was ascertained, were disciples of the lately famous 
Joanna Southcott, of whom the public have heard so much, and conceived themselves 
directed by God to proclaim the Coming of Shiloh on Earth: for this purpose they 
assembled at the west end of the town, in order to enter the only gate of the great city 
(Temple-bar), through which they marched in procession about nine o'clock in the 
morning, They were each decorated with a white cockade, and wore a small star of 
yellow riband on the left breast; Sibley, who led the procession, bearing a brazen 
trumpet adorned with light blue ribands, and the boys carried each a small flag of blue 
silk.
	In this manner they had proceeded through Fleet-street, up Ludgate-hill, and 
along St Paul's Church-yard, to Budge-row, a great crowd following them, increasing 
continually as they proceeded. Having arrived, as they supposed, in the middle of the 
great city, they halted, and began to perform their ceremonies. Sibley sounded the 
trumpet, and proclaimed the second coming of the Shiloh, the Prince of Peace, on 
earth; and his wife cried aloud, "Wo! wo! to the inhabitants of the earth, because of 
the coming of the Shiioh!" This cry was repeated several times, and joined in with a 
loud voice by the others of the company.
	The crowd was by this time immense, every avenue was stopped up, and the 
passage of carts and carriages rendered impossible. The mob began with laughing and 
shouting at these miserably deluded people, and at length proceeded to pelting them 
with mud and every sort of missile they could procure; they, on their part, being most 
of them stout young men, resisted; the fight became general and tremendous, the flags 
were torn down, and Sibley and his associates with great difficulty preserved, by the 
exertions of the officers, from falling victims to the infuriated rage of the mob, and 
conveyed to the Compter. Their appearance, when put to the bar, bespoke the danger 
they had gone through; the men had been all rolled in the mud, and Sibley bore 
evident marks of violence in his face. The tattered remnants of the paraphernalia used 
on this singular occasion were also produced, and excited in the minds of all present a 
mixed sensation of pity and disgust at the assumption of holy functions and heavenly 
agencies in which the deluded fanatics had so impiously indulged.
	On being called upon by the magistrate, Mr. Alderman Bridges, to give an 
account of their conduct, in thus disturbing the public peace, Sibley, with an air of 
authority, directed the others to be silent, and, addressing the alderman, said, he 
regretted there was no time for him to enter into the particulars of the mission of God 
to him. He had been commanded by a voice, through the boy Slater, to announce that 
the Prince of Peace was come upon earth. He was commanded to proclaim the Second 
Coming of Shiloh, in the same manner, and with the same authority as John the 
Baptist had proclaimed his first coming. This proclamation he was to make three 
times in the midst of the great city, by the sound of the trumpet. He and his 
companions were obeying the commands of God, and in so doing had conducted 
themselves peaceably, and interfered with no one, when they were attacked by the 
mob.
	He was proceeding to explain the nature of the visions with which the boy had 
been favoured, and his wife was raising her voice to bear testimony to the fact of the 
Shiloh being on earth, whom she said she had had in her arms four times, when the 
magistrate interrupted them, and observed, that it was evident, if they were not insane, 
that they were acting under a strong delusion, and pointed out to them how much 
better they would have been employed in pursuing their regular avocations, than in 
being the cause of public riot, and endangering their own persons; recommending 
them to desist from any repetitions of their gross absurdities and delusions.
	The men in reply said, it was right they should obey God; but they would do 
whatever the magistrate directed, and desist from any further proclamation, assuring 
him at the same time that nevertheless the Shiloh was come.
	The Alderman said he would not rely on their promise, and should detain them 
all in custody till they could procure him some better assurance than their own words 
for their peaceable demeanour in future. They were accordingly conveyed back to the 
Compter in two coaches to protect them from the mob: one of the men on stepping 
into the coach, unbuttoned his coat, displayed his yellow star, and placing his hand on 
it, proclaimed that it was God's colour.
	On the following morning, the whole party of these self-created heralds of 
heavenly news were again brought up before the sitting magistrate, Alderman 
Christopher Smith.
	Sibley was again the spokesman, and, in reply to the magistrate, who inquired 
if he had ever been in Bedlam, said, the gentlemen might laugh, but he was not mad, 
but had investigated the business thoroughly before he was convinced. He believed 
the Bible from cover to cover, and could point out the prophecies which were now 
fulfilling. He then went into a long rhapsody of nonsense respecting the visions with 
which the boy had been favoured by God, and declared he had witnessed miracles 
performed by him. In the course of his long address, he quoted the Scriptures very 
fluently, and concluded by referring, in justification of his belief, to the passage in 
which it is said, "in the latter days your old men shall dream dreams, and your young 
men see visions." Being asked what place of worship he attended, he replied, his 
church was his own house, No. 3, Gooch-yard, Upper Whitecross-street; there were 
about thirty of them who met there frequently, to read the Bible and receive 
commands of the Lord. He had now received command from God to desist from any 
further proclamation; and if the Prince Regent were to collect all the money in the 
world, and lay it at his feet, he dared not do it; the magistrate might therefore rely 
there would be no repetition of their previous conduct.
	In this declaration he was joined by his wife and the rest of his associates, who 
all declared aloud, that they dared not now proceed any further in this business. On 
this assurance on their parts, they were discharged with a suitable admonition from 
the worthy Alderman, and thus terminated this very singular mission.
	The leader of this redoubtable troop, Sibley, held the dignified station of 
watchman, in the neighbourhood of St. George's Fields; and the rest of the maniac 
band was composed of journeymen mechanics and labourers, with their wives. The 
whole were grossly ignorant and stupid, but most inveterate1y conceited, and 
evidently acted under a full impression of the divine nature of the cause in which they 
were embarked. 


ROBERT DEAN  
Executed for the dreadful murder of a child, at Leeds, 1819

	THE trial of this case at the Kingston Lent Assizes in 1819, excited universal 
interest, and attracted immense crowds at an early hour of the morning to gain 
admittance to the court, but not one-twentieth part of the anxious throng could find 
accommodation.
	The circumstances of this singular transaction were as follows:-- On Friday 
evening, the 16th of October 1818, between six and seven o'clock, Robert Dean, who 
was a watch engraver, went, as he had been in the habit of doing, to visit the mother 
of the child, who lived near the Elephant and Castle, St. George's-fields, and she 
asked him to take tea; while he was there he nursed and played with the child until 
about six or seven o'clock, when he went away with Mrs. Albert's brother, Williams, 
who had been his fellow apprentice. They proceeded as far as the Obelisk, when they 
separated, and the prisoner returned and took the child again into his lap, and put his 
hand in his pocket to get some halfpence, saying he would go and buy some apples for 
his little Mary; he then took the child up in his arm, and asked her if she would have 
an apple, and many other trifling questions, such as, Do you love me? Do you know 
who I am? &c. He then went out with the child, but being absent rather long, and the 
mother feeling alarmed, went out to see after them, and on going into a court near the 
house, she met the child, who reeled towards her, and on her taking her in her arms 
the blood gushed from her throat, and the child appeared as if she was expiring; a 
surgeon was sent for, but his efforts were fruitless, and in about an hour it died. The 
prisoner wandered about for three or four days, and although every diligence was used 
to find him, it was unsuccessful. At length on the morning of the Tuesday following, 
at about five o'clock, he rapped at the door of the watch-house of St. Andrew, 
Holborn, and said his name was Dean, and that he was the murderer. He was of course 
detained, and taken to Giltspur-street Compter.
	Mrs. Mary Albert, the mother of the little girl, was examined in support of the 
statement. When she beheld the prisoner at the bar, she burst into an hysteric scream 
of horror, and was for a long time incapable of giving her evidence, until she was 
relieved by a flood of tears. The prisoner seemed evidently affected by the agony in 
which she appeared to be. On her cross-examination she gave a very favourable 
representation of the temper and disposition of the prisoner, and that he was extremely 
fond of children, and particularly of the unfortunate infant who had lost her life by his 
act. On the evening in question, she observed the prisoner to be very uneasy in his 
mind, on account of his want of employment, but he spoke in a rational and collected 
manner.
	Mrs. Sarah Williams, the mother of the last witness, on her cross-examination 
described the conduct of the prisoner, on the evening in question as indicative of an 
uneasy mind, arising from his distressed circumstances. She gave the prisoner the 
highest character for kindness to her grand-daughter, and said that he had always been 
on the most friendly terms with her family.
	Joseph Williams, the brother of Mrs. Albert, deposed to the circumstances 
connected with the above outline of the case. On his cross-examination, he said he 
had been fellow-apprentice with the prisoner, who had always conducted himself in 
the most friendly manner towards him and his family. Witness and the prisoner had 
lodged together for a long time; he knew the prisoner was unhappy in his mind on 
account of a young woman with whom he had kept company, but whose father had 
forbidden any further intercourse.
	Joseph Myatt, the watchhouse-keeper of the parish of St. Andrew, Holborn, 
proved, that early on the morning of the 20th of October, the prisoner surrendered 
himself to justice at the watch-house. He appeared in a state of great agitation, stating 
that he had been induced to surrender himself, in con sequence of his having heard a 
sermon at the Tabernacle, in Moorfields; that he had wandered about ever since the 
commission of the horrid deed, and was unable to hold out any longer. When the 
prisoner was afterwards taken to Giltspur-street Compter, he begged that he might be 
allowed a Bible. The witness's description of Dean's demeanour at the watch-house 
was strongly indicative of remorse, but of sound intellect.   John May, a police officer 
of Union-hall, proved that he removed the prisoner from Giltspur-street Compter, and 
by the direction of the magistrate of Union-hall, took him on the 20th of October 
before the coroner's inquest, which was then sitting on the body of the deceased child. 
When they got to the place of sitting, the prisoner requested to speak with the witness 
in private; and being left alone, witness, at the prisoner's request, took down the 
following statement in writing, as he gave it in his own words:-"On Friday evening 
last I met a young man named Joseph Williams, with whom I had long been intimate, 
at Mrs. Albert's house, in Jacques-court, Thomas-street. I had long been acquainted 
with a young woman named Sarah Longman, daughter of Mr. L. at the Grapes, 
Church-row, Aldgate; my affection for her was extremely great; I had for some time 
corresponded with her. A dispute unhappily arose; I wrote to her upon the subject, 
expressing my regret at the unfortunate rupture, described the very great regard which 
I entertained for her, implored her to consent to a reconciliation, and begged that she 
would write me an early answer. She never replied to my letter. Her father called upon 
me, and wished that the connexion might be discontinued. These circumstances had 
an indescribable effect upon my mind; I was miserably unhappy, was incapable of 
attending to any business, and gave myself entirely up to despair. I endeavoured to 
prevail upon her to renew the correspondence. I felt that I could not be happy in this 
world without her, and determined to leave it. Thoughts of a dreadful description 
entered my mind, and must have proceeded from the Devil. I felt that I should leave 
the world in a state of happiness, if I could murder her, and determined to perpetrate 
the deed. I had been from home two days, business not being very brisk, and on 
Friday evening I called to see Williams, at Mrs. Albert's and we both came out 
together and walked in company as far as the Surrey Theatre. We did not go in; I told 
Williams that I wanted to see a gentleman in the Borough, and should go that way. 
We parted, and I returned to Mrs; Albert's. After talking in a very friendly manner 
with the family, I asked for a knife, and they, supposing that I wanted to cut some 
bread, gave me a case knife. I took an opportunity of concealing it unperceived in my 
pocket. I shortly after went out with the child to buy her some apples, which having 
done, I returned to the court. A sudden thought came over my mind, that if I murdered 
the child, who was innocent, I should not commit so great a crime as in murdering 
Sarah Longman, who was older, and, as I imagined, had sins to answer for. In a 
moment I pulled the knife out of my pocket, put the child down out of my arms, held 
her head back, and cut her little throat. In an instant I imagined that I was in the midst 
of flaming fire, and the court appeared to me like the entrance of hell. I ran away, not 
knowing where I went or what I did; I wandered about in a state of distraction until I 
surrendered myself up at the watch-house."
	The prisoner, who, during the course of the evidence above-mentioned, 
appeared to be in a kind of idiotic stupor, being called upon to make his defence, 
merely said in a wild manner, that he was not guilty.
	A great many witnesses were then examined on his behalf to prove a case of 
insanity. Among others were, James Longman, the father of the young woman to 
whom the prisoner had been attached; George Cass, a watch-motion-maker; Ann 
Keys, Eliza Campbell, and Maria Tyrrell, persons with whom the prisoner had lodged; 
and the tendency of their evidence was to show that the prisoner, a few weeks 
previously to the unfortunate transaction in question, had been flighty and low-
spirited, in consequence of his want of employment, and having been forbidden the 
continuance of his addresses to the young woman, Miss Longman.
	The Jury found the prisoner, Guilty, and Mr. Justice Park pronounced sentence 
of death in an impressive and pathetic manner; but during this last awful stage of the 
proceedings, the prisoner exhibited a maniac apathy to the doom that awaited him, 
and he was removed from the bar in a state of mental abstraction.
	When the morning arrived on which the wretched culprit was doomed to pay 
the dreadful forfeit of his crime, an immense multitude was collected to witness the 
execution. The unfortunate man had been at prayer, with slight intermission, from the 
period of his apprehension. It was needless to recommend devotion to him. He had 
been visited by Lord Rocksavage and Mr. Sinclair, both of whom prayed with him, 
and expressed much gratitude at their kindness. "They came," said he, "with Christian 
feeling to visit the poor wretch in his dungeon." Mr. Mann, the chaplain, had much 
conversation with him.
	Dean regretted that as he was going to a place where there was no gnashing of 
teeth, he had it not in his power to take with him his beloved Sarah, who was now 
exposed to a wicked world. The chaplain endeavoured to induce him to speak of the 
little girl whose life he had taken away, and told him she would meet him in a better 
world. "No doubt," said he, "Christ, who is now saving my soul, is waiting for me; but 
I am sorry for poor Sarah, she is in a dangerous world." Mr. Mann rejoiced to see him 
so full of penitence, and told him with what happiness his friends would hear that not 
a wish of escape from punishment had passed his lips, nor a murmur of complaint. 
"Why should I complain," said he, "knowing as I do that the change I am going to 
make is for the better? Where is Voltaire now?–in hell: where is Tom Paine?–in hell: 
God have mercy upon them as he has upon me."
	His general appearance was that of a maniac, but on all subjects he spoke 
rationally, although often incoherently. After the sacrament had been administered to 
him, he appeared impatient to leave the world, and asked whether every thing was not 
in readiness for his journey: on being told by Mr. Mann that some time was to be 
allowed for preparation, "Preparation!" said he, "who can say I want preparation?–
never was man more ready to die." Mr. Mann having observed that the preparation of 
the body, not of the soul, was what he meant, Dean smiled–"Oh!" said he, "I shall 
then soon be going." He refused to stand up while any part of the ceremony in the 
chapel was performing, and he frequently prayed aloud, and with the greatest fervour.
	When the officers were striking off his irons, he looked wildly about, and at 
last fixing his eyes on the gallows, he bent towards it, and then gazed at the sky. The 
name of God was in his mouth, when he reached the platform. He then said, "God 
bless you all!" and prayed in so loud a tone as to be heard by the crowd around the 
prison. At nine o'clock the drop fell, and he died after a severe struggle. 


HENRY STENT  
A case of seduction, and attempted assassination

	THE history of Mr. Henry Stent's wrongs and sufferings–excited by the 
elopement of his wife with a man whom he had ever treated as his private friend–and 
of the murderous deed on which the injured husband resolved, to avenge his injuries, 
furnishes a most appalling commentary on the dreadful effects produced by the abuse 
of friendship, and the violation of the sacred duties of wedded life. The wretched 
woman who deserted her home, parents, and friends, for the guilty intercourse of a 
villain, was most comfortably situated in life, and blessed with an affectionate and 
indulgent husband. The heartless seducer was a man somewhat advanced in years, 
also married, and the father of a large family. The complicated events arising out of 
this melancholy tale, might almost be mistaken for the romantic ravings of a German 
poet, did not the notoriety of the circumstances place them beyond all shadow of 
doubt, and prove them "not only possible, but true." Well might the guilty sufferer 
exclaim -–
Oh, what a tangled web we weave, 
When first we practice to deceive!
	Mr. Stent was a respectable butcher, residing at Pimlico, and at the time of the 
seduction of his wife, was about twenty-eight years old; his wife twenty-six, and they 
had been married about seven years. They had lived in the greatest harmony and 
comfort, Stent himself being of a remarkably mild and tranquil disposition, singularly 
partial to his wife, and if guilty of any error towards her, it was in an excess of 
fondness.
	The miscreant whose diabolical machinations destroyed their peace for ever, 
was a fellow named Sweeting, who resided in the adjoining house, and was upon 
terms of family intimacy with them, frequently visiting, and receiving the visits of Mr. 
and Mrs. Stent. By what means he first acquired an influence over the mind of his 
wretched victim does not appear, but the following is a specimen of the arts which he 
used to complete his triumph over her, and to induce her entirely to desert the man 
whose confidence she had already abused.
	A short time previous to the elopement, Mrs. Stent had been afflicted with an 
indisposition which rendered country air desirable. She was in consequence sent down 
to the house of an uncle of her husband, a farmer, within three miles of Uxbridge. 
While in this situation, she was repeatedly visited by Sweeting, both publicly and 
privately, and from thence he endeavoured by every possible argument to induce her 
to elope; urging his illicit passion with unceasing violence. Still, however, the 
unhappy woman resisted his importunities. Whether he had at that time accomplished 
her seduction, does not appear, but in order to work upon her mind, and to incline her 
to place a more implicit belief in the strength of his unnatural affection, he went 
through the farce of hanging himself to a tree in the neighbourhood, as if in despair at 
her cruelty. From this perilous situation he took especial care to be providentially 
relieved; and he was still bent upon an imaginary death, and pretended to quench the 
flame by which he was devoured in the canal; but here, too, he contrived to be rescued 
from the crime of self-destruction.
	These feats were performed anonymously; he would not disclose his name, or 
the cause of his contempt of life; but he took care that Mrs. Stem should not remain in 
ignorance of the ordeal through which he had passed; and at length the poor woman 
became so alarmed by these occurrences that she returned to town. In a few days 
afterwards she fled from her husband and her fate remained involved in obscurity, 
except that it was suspected Sweeting was the partner of her flight, as he had 
disappeared from his home about the same time.   Sweeting had four children living, 
and his wife was far advanced in pregnancy with a fifth. On the evening previous to 
the morning fixed on for the elopement, Mr. and Mrs. Stent were invited to meet a 
party at Sweeting's house, who, after tea, engaged Stent in a game of cards, while his 
wife returned home, packed up all the moveables on which she could lay her hands, 
clothes, plate, and money, and removed them to another place. After she had 
accomplished this object, she returned and finished the evening in the most convivial 
manner. The next morning she eloped.
	About three weeks after, Sweeting returned to his wife in the dead of night, 
and demanded what money she had in her possession. She denied that she had any; 
but he persisted that she had, and insisted upon having it. The poor woman urged the 
proximity of her confinement, and the calls of her other children. He was, however, 
deaf to these arguments; he shut the door, and with dreadful threats forced her to strip 
herself, and from her stays ripped sixty pounds, with which he went off. His unhappy 
wife was soon afterwards seized with the pains of child-birth, and was delivered.
	The agonies of her mind on this occasion exceeded those of her body; and 
Nature gave way to the full tide of misery which had burst upon her; she became 
raving mad! Her neighbour Stent was sent for, to assist in clothing her in a straight 
waistcoat, and in an hour afterwards she died in his arms! Her death was soon 
followed by that of her helpless infant. Thus did vice triumph over the happiness of an 
innocent family! The death of the mother and infant was succeeded by the death of 
another child. Whatever property remained was soon dissipated in the necessary 
expenditures of the funerals, and the support of the surviving children, who were 
subsequently removed to the workhouse, where they remained a burthen to the parish.
	What were the sensations of the guilty father when this heart-rending tale 
reached his ears, it is impossible to say; but if a shadow of feeling remained in his 
bosom, his misery could not be less than his crime; nor could Mrs. Stent, who was the 
partner in his flight and the participator in his infamy, be less exposed to the horrors 
of remorse.
	The guilty woman, and her infamous paramour, fled to France, from whence it 
appears they returned to England very soon afterwards, and then sailed to America. 
The unnatural bonds of licentious attachment have, however, but a very weak hold, 
either of the slaves or the victims of its lawless influence, and Mrs. Stent found full 
soon that she was fated to add to the list of dupes and outcasts. In a foreign country, 
far removed from the reach of help, cut off by her own act from protector or friend, 
she fatally felt the extent of her crimes, and consequent degradation. The brute who 
had seduced her from home, from husband, and from fame, treated her as the wretch 
he had made her, while to the poignancy of her bodily sufferings were superadded the 
mental torments produced by a despairing consciousness of guilt.
	At length remorse, mingled perhaps with somewhat of real penitence, induced 
the wretched woman to think of returning home, to throw herself at the feet of her 
injured husband, and to make some atonement by her future conduct for the deep and 
irreparable injuries she had committed. Her sated seducer gladly availed himself of 
the opportunity of getting rid of the degraded being who had now become a burden to 
him, and readily agreed to her return; first extorting from her a promise that she would 
for ever conceal the circumstance of his being the partner of her flight, and fiercely 
threatening, that if she ever disclosed the fact, he would return and cut her throat.
	The ship in which she took her passage to England encountered severe storms 
and perils on the voyage, but Providence was pleased to save the miserable woman 
from a watery grave, to endure sufferings a thousand times more appalling than, in the 
ordinary course of things, surround the bed of death itself, or even haunt the culprit 
who pays the forfeit of his life to the violated laws of society.
	On her arrival at Liverpool, she took the stage to London; and being set down 
at the Saracen's Head Inn, Snow-hill, retired to a room, from whence, in the wild 
phrenzy of conscious guilt and hopeless despair, she addressed the following letter to 
her injured husband:--
	"August, 5, 1819. 
   "Henry,– 
   "You, no doubt, will be offended at my writing to you, one that I have used so ill; 
but, believe me, I have considered of my crime, and will repent, if possible. Oh, 
Henry! I have suffered more than I can tell you in crossing the seas; there was nothing 
but storms and trouble, and the ship was lost. But you, perhaps, already know that I 
have put my trust in God for safety in crossing them again, and have got safe to 
England once more, to throw myself at your feet, and implore your pity, if you cannot 
pardon me; but oh! for one moment consider before my doom is fixed. Indeed, I am 
penitent, and sorry for my sins, and hope you will hear my prayer for mercy, as well 
as that God which I have offended. But if my story was told by any other than me, 
you would see what a villain he was. If you find you cannot forgive–but oh! that 
thought makes me tremble–do not let my dear father and mother know you have heard 
of me, for that would bring their trouble afresh to their minds, (that is, if their lives are 
spared), and I hope I have not got that to answer for.
	"All I wish is, to pass the remainder of my days in obscurity, or in the 
workhouse, if you think proper, or in any other place; do not desert me, for God's 
sake, do not. I have come from America, landed on Tuesday morning, and at night left 
Liverpool; and this morning got to the Saracen's Head, where I shall await your 
answer with the greatest distress. If you please to let me have some of the clothes I 
left, as I have not a gown to wear. Oh! Henry, think well before you say what shall be 
my fate; only ask your own heart. Do not tell any body that you know of my being in 
England, but think what a journey for a lone woman to take. I do not know when you 
will get this, but, if you can, let me know to-night what is to be my lot. Indeed, I will 
be content on bread and water, if I can but obtain your forgiveness. Oh! Henry, be not 
deaf to my prayers; I know it is a crime, I have often heard you say you never would 
forgive; only write to say you will pardon me, and do what you like after; but do not 
let any of my friends know that I have wrote to you–grant me that request, if you 
cannot grant any more. Let me know, for I had only £2 5s. to bring me to London. 
	"One o'clock. 
	MARIA STENT."
	The frightful part of our tale now advances; and who shall account for the 
errors of man's imperfect nature, when all its "milk of human kindness' is "turned to 
gall," by the cold-blooded baseness of the supposed private friend; by the deliberate 
whoredom of the wife of his bosom; by the lascivious abandonment of her, who, 
having vowed to "love, to honour, and obey," has participated in the joys of his youth, 
in the anxieties of his manhood–and then, betraying the partner of her vows, and her 
loyalty to the marriage bed, coolly and deliberately throws herself into the arms of a 
villain?	Stent had felt, and deeply felt, the wound that had been inflicted on him, the 
effects of which still burned and rankled even in his very heart's core. He had felt the 
desolation of his domestic fire-side; he had known the want of the anxious attendant, 
in those moments of worldly care from which no human being is exempt; he had 
vainly sought for repose upon his "widowed bed of fire," and had felt a mockery of 
his misfortunes in the domestic mementos of his former happy days. He had 
witnessed, too, the death-bed of the wife of the seducer of his wife, and he had seen 
the helplessness of infants, deserted by their natural protector, struggling in the last 
agonies of mortal disease, or stretching out their little hands in supplication for food, 
while their unnatural parent was squandering in licentiousness that which should have 
placed them out of the reach of want. With folded arms and quivering lips, how oft 
had he paced the streets at midnight, ruminating on his injuries, and impotently 
panting for the power of vengeance. Twelve months of familiarity with wretchedness 
had at length somewhat closed, if it had not effectually sealed the wounds by which 
his soul had been pierced, when, in a moment unexpected and unannounced, the 
prime agent of all his sufferings was as it were at his feet, and full and ample means of 
vengeance within his grasp. Common feeling cannot but shudder at the dreadful 
resolve upon which, in desperation, and impelled by a full sense of all his injuries, he 
rushed; but let us rather yearn in pity over the man who is tried as he had been tried, 
than look to the culprit who avenged his wrongs as he avenged them. Christian charity 
must induce us to conclude that the intellect had given way before the rolling torrent 
of injury by which it had been assailed, and that the hand was but the involuntary 
agent of a deed on which an incompetent mind had resolved.
	In the dreadful state of mind here described, he hurried to the inn from whence 
his wretched wife had despatched the letter which had newly lighted up the 
smothering embers of his fury; was shown into the room wherein she was sitting, and 
instantly commenced a fierce and bloody attack upon the person of the profligate 
woman. Fortunately, her screams of terror and cries for mercy were heard by the 
attendants, and several individuals rushed into the room in time enough to save her 
life, although she was dreadfully cut and mangled in the bloody encounter.
	The fury of the unhappy man evaporated with the knowledge of his having 
punished the offender against the honour of his bed and his peace of mind; he calmly 
surrendered himself into the hands of justice, and was conveyed, without a struggle, to 
the Gilrspur-street Counter, from whence he immediately despatched the following 
letter to his sister.
	"Dear Eliza. -- 
	 I have been at the Saracen's-Head, and seen Maria, and from what has passed 
between us, I am now in Giltspur-street Compter. I must leave it to you to break the 
matter in the best way you can to our dear father and mother. 
	"HENRY STENT."
	On the other side was written, "I have stabbed her, but would not put that on 
the other side for fear of shocking you too suddenly. It is of no use to come to-night, 
as you cannot be admitted but shall be glad to see some of you in the morning."
	The next morning he was brought up before the sitting magistrate at Guildhall 
for examination, and the following particulars of the dreadful affair were given in 
evidence, together with the affecting details of the conduct of his suffering and 
repentant wife.
	Previously to the arrival of the Magistrate, a messenger had been despatched 
from the office to St. Bartholomew's Hospital, to learn the state of the wife, and 
whether she was able to make her deposition; to this inquiry the following note was 
returned:–
	"This is to certify, that Mrs. Stent has passed a good night, and is better this 
morning, but cannot be considered out of danger at present. As rest is a principal 
object in the treatment of her case, it would be better to defer her examination. 
	"There is no immediate danger to he apprehended. 
	"H. BENWELL, House-Surgeon. 
	"Bartholomew's-hospital. 
	"Aug. 6, 1 o'clock."
	The prisoner was then placed at the bar; he was respectably dressed in black, 
with a white waistcoat, and appeared perfectly cool and collected, but without any 
appearance of impudence or bravado.
	The first witness called was Thomas Pithouse, waiter at the Saracen's-head, 
who stated, that the woman came to the inn by their Liverpool coach, between 10 and 
11 o'clock on Thursday morning, had breakfast, and desired to be furnished with 
paper, &c. to write a letter; she wrote one, which was sent by a porter to Pimlico;–she 
remained within doors the remainder of the day; and about half-past six in the 
afternoon, after she had had her tea, the prisoner arrived, and on inquiring for Mrs. 
Stent, was shown into the room to her; there were no other persons in the room but 
themselves. Shortly after, he (the witness) being in the passage leading to the back 
yard, heard a violent shriek, and immediately a second; and before he and his fellow 
servant could get to the room door, a third; they both rushed into the room; his fellow 
servant was first, who immediately cried out, "Thomas, the man has got a knife;" the 
woman at the same time cried out, "Oh, he will kill me!"
	His companion then made a snatch to get the knife, but missed his hold; the 
man then altered the direction of the knife, and grasping it full in his hand, stabbed the 
woman with great violence in the throat. He then said, "I have accomplished my 
purpose; I wish for nothing but to suffer; I know I shall suffer." The wife replied, 
"Yes, you have, Henry, and I freely forgive you; come and kiss me." The prisoner 
then knelt down and kissed her twice, which she returned, saying, "I hope the law will 
not take hold of you; you are the best of husbands, and I am the very worst of wives, 
and I hope my fate will be a warning to all bad wives." She was then taken on a 
shutter to the hospital, and in her way thither she was continually calling on her dear 
Henry, wishing him to kiss her, and begging him to give her his hand; one of the 
persons attending took hold of her extended hand, which she then closed most 
affectionately, saying, "God bless you! I shall now die happy!" mistaking the 
stranger's hand for that of her husband.
	At this part of the evidence, which was given with much feeling on the part of 
the witness, the prisoner's fortitude seemed to be quitting him, his lip quivered, the big 
tear stood in his eye, and his whole countenance evinced that he was greatly agitated 
and affected; but after a short interval he recovered his composure.	Thomas Turner, 
the porter, said he was the first person in the room; he saw the wife on her back on the 
floor, and the man kneeling on her stomach; on his coming in, the man rose up, and 
perceiving he had a knife, he (the witness) drew back, and before he could get to the 
prisoner to seize him, he stabbed the woman in the neck, as described by Pithouse; he 
then said, "Don't be alarmed, I will not hurt any of you; I have accomplished my 
purpose:" he then let the knife drop from his hand. On the witness observing to him, 
what a rash man he was to commit such a deed, and that he had signed his own death-
warrant, the prisoner replied, he was perfectly satisfied; she had been a base woman; 
on which his wife said, "Indeed I have, I freely forgive you, and hope no harm will 
come to you." This witness also corroborated Pithouse's account of the affecting scene 
that subsequently took place between the husband and wife, and the expression of 
penitence and affection used by the latter while being conveyed to the hospital.
	Hodson, an assistant in Giltspur-street Compter, was sent for to take the 
prisoner. On his entering the room, Stent immediately said, "I am the man," and 
surrendered himself without making the smallest resistance. On searching him there 
were found only a few shillings, part of a razor-case, which he had used as a sheath 
for the knife while in his pocket, and the letter he had received from his wife in the 
morning.
	Hodson also produced the knife with which the bloody deed was committed; it 
was one of the common sticking-knives for killing calves, and it was covered with 
blood up to the hilt; the point and the edge appeared turned, as if it had struck against 
a bone; the woman having been stabbed in the side and stomach before the witness 
got into the room.
	This being the whole of the evidence at that time to be produced, the prisoner 
was asked if he wished to say any thing for himself, on which he bowed respectfully 
to the Alderman, and simply replied, "No, Sir." He was then remanded till the 
following Monday, and was conveyed back to the Compter in a coach, accompanied 
by his brother and his cousin.
	The inquirers at St. Bartholomew's-hospital the following day were informed, 
that Mrs. Stent had passed another good night, and that she was, upon the whole, 
much better. Thus it would appear, that from the first she was likely to recover the 
effects of the wounds of the body, however painful might be those of the mind. She 
was visited by her sisters and other members of her family, who felt it a duty, 
whatever had been her failings, to offer her the consolations of affection in her 
melancholy situation. She had received five stabs: one on her arm, another on her 
hand, a third on her breast, a fourth on the right side, and a fifth in her neck. That in 
the right side was considered the most dangerous.
	Mr. Stent remained resigned to his fate. He said he anticipated death; and, 
indeed, would welcome it as a relief from the misery he had felt ever since his wife's 
desertion. He was surprised on hearing that he had inflicted more than one wound, 
and said he was only conscious of having given one stab. His friends endeavoured to 
console him; but he said he needed not consolation, as his mind was perfectly easy; he 
still seemed to feel an affection for his wife, and hoped that if she was to die she 
might not linger in pain. The crime of which she had been guilty, he said, was one that 
he could not forgive; and the love he bore her rendered it the more agonizing to his 
feelings. The unhappy man seemed painfully alive to his dishonour, and to the 
ingratitude with which he had been treated.
	On the 9th of August, the day to which he had been remanded, he was brought 
before the sitting magistrate at Guildhall for a second examination, and on his being 
placed at the bar, Mr. Paine, the clerk to the magistrates, observed, that no further 
proceedings could he had against the prisoner till it was ascertained whether his wife 
was out of danger, as in that case the mode of committal would be different from what 
it would otherwise be in case of her death. He then read the following certificate of 
her present condition: --
	"Mrs. Stent continued to improve till towards yesterday morning, when she 
had an attack of inflammation of the lungs, from which, however, she is now 
recovering. She cannot be examined for the present. 
	"H. BENWELL, House-Surgeon. 
	"St. Bartholomew's Hospital, 
	"Aug. 9, 1819."
	Mr. Alderman Waithman inquired if there was any additional evidence to be 
produced.
	Mr. Paine said, it might be necessary to have the testimony of another of the 
waiters at the Saracen's Head, George King, the person who witnessed Mrs. Stent's 
arrival there, and first attended upon her; as also that of the Surgeon, to state the 
nature of the wounds she had received. Her friends, he understood, had seen her, and 
he suggested that probably they were in attendance; but upon their being called no one 
appeared.
	The Alderman then informed the prisoner, that he would be remanded to the 
ensuing Wednesday, when, if he thought proper, he might be assisted by his solicitor 
or counsel; to which Stent replied, that he believed that would not be necessary but at 
the trial. He then bowed respectfully to the magistrate, and retired from the bar.
	A few minutes after, it was notified to the Alderman, that the father of Mrs. 
Stent was in Court, and, upon being introduced to the magistrate, he expressed his 
sorrow at the shocking occurrence that had taken place: he had no wish to pursue the 
husband, but his daughter, he supposed, must be bound over. He had seen her that 
morning, and found her considerably better; she was quite calm in her mind, and 
expressed her hopes that no harm would come to her husband. He was then informed 
that Stent was remanded to Wednesday, and withdrew.
	An immense crowd was assembled in the Guildhall-yard, all eager to get a 
sight of the prisoner, but no symptoms of indignation were indicated towards him 
either at his arrival or on his return. The prisoner conducted himself with the utmost 
composure.
	On Wednesday the examination was resumed, and on Stent's being placed at 
the bar, Mr. Paine, the clerk, said, he had caused the necessary inquiry to be made at 
St. Bartholomew's-hospital, and had received a certificate of the situation of Mrs. 
Stent's health, which he read as follows:–
	"This is to certify, that Mrs. Stent is improving fast. The wounds are nearly 
healed, and I have no doubt but that in a few days I shall be able to pronounce her out 
of danger. 
	"H. BENWELL, House Surgeon. 
	"St. Bartholomew's Hospital, 
	"Aug. 11."
	Under these circumstances, he conceived it would be necessary to remand the 
prisoner until the wife was in a condition to attend at the office, and give her 
deposition; in the interim the chain of evidence might be rendered more complete, by 
the examination of the other waiter, and the porter, who carried the letter to the post, 
whom he had desired to attend.
	George King, a waiter at the Saracen's Head, was then examined. He stated, 
that he attended Mrs. Stent on her arrival at the inn, showed her into a back-room 
usually appropriated to passengers, where she ordered breakfast and a sheet of paper 
to write a letter; she did so, and desired him to send the porter to take it to the post: he 
complied with her directions, and nothing further occurred till the arrival of Mr. Stent, 
at about half an hour past six. Witness was the first person that saw him; he inquired if 
there was not a young woman there who came by the coach from Liverpool? Witness 
replied in the affirmative, and showed him into the room to her: there was no one else 
in the room but herself. On his opening the door, Mrs. Stent, who was sitting in a far 
part of the room, immediately rose from her seat, and came to meet her husband. 
Witness heard nothing that passed then, for he shut the door directly and retired. He 
then proceeded to state, that he heard the shrieks in common with his fellow servants, 
and ran to give assistance. He saw no blow struck, but observed the bloody knife lying 
on the floor. He also corroborated the other witnesses in their account of the 
expressions of self-accusation which fell from Mrs. Stent. He left the parties in care of 
his fellow-servants, and went to the Compter for an officer.
	The porter who took the letter was in attendance; King said, all that he knew 
was, that he took the letter from Mrs. Stent, who asked him if he thought it would be 
delivered that night.
	Mr. Alderman Rothwell, addressing the prisoner, said, "My poor man, I feel 
your unhappy situation exceedingly, and in order to prevent your feelings from being 
harrassed, as they must be, by being thus frequently brought up, I shall remand you to 
Saturday, by which time, probably, your wife will be well enough to attend, and make 
her deposition, and this unfortunate and distressing affair, as far as the magistrate is 
concerned, be finally closed."
	The prisoner maintained his usual composure throughout; but his brother, who 
stood near him, was greatly affected, and at the commencement of the Alderman's 
address, burst into a violent flood of tears.	Such general interest had this unhappy 
affair excited, that a considerable crowd was assembled in the Guildhall-yard before 
eleven o'clock in the morning; the justice-room was filled with persons of 
respectability, and the outer doors of the office were obliged to be kept shut during the 
examination, to prevent further inconvenience. The prisoner was conveyed from and 
to the Compter in a coach, accompanied by his brother and his cousin.
	An immense concourse of persons assembled on the Saturday, to which day 
the further examination of the melancholy affair had been adjourned, in front of the 
Justice-room, Guildhall, in expectation that Mrs. Stent would be brought up to give 
her evidence against her husband. Upon the arrival of Alderman Rothwell, however, a 
certificate was received from Mr. Benwell, House Surgeon of St. Bartholomew's 
Hospital, from whence it appeared, that although Mrs. Stent was in a state of 
convalescence, yet that, from the state of her body, the agitation which would 
naturally result from her appearing in public might be productive of injurious 
consequences. Under these circumstances it was thought advisable to delay the final 
examination a few days longer, and the prisoner was not brought up.
	Both Mrs. Stent and her father declared their intention not to prosecute. This, 
however, could make no difference as to the course of justice; for the king would 
become the prosecutor, and the evidence of Mrs. Stent might be altogether dispensed 
with. As, however, from the fact of the prisoner having been in the room with his wife 
ten minutes before an alarm was given, a doubt might arise as to the cause of the 
assault, which might operate favourably for the prisoner. The magistrate was bound to 
take cognizance of the offence, and it was indispensable that Mr. Stent should, at all 
events be committed for trial.
	Mrs. Stent being at length pronounced sufficiently recovered to be able to 
appear in public and give her evidence, the final examination took place at Guildhall, 
on Wednesday, the 18th of August.
	It being generally known that Stent was to undergo his final examination, and 
that his wife was sufficiently recovered from her wounds to be able to attend and give 
her deposition, a great concourse of people was collected together in the Guildhall 
yard, as early as ten o'clock in the morning, and before eleven all the avenues to the 
justice-room were so completely stopped up as to render it very difficult for the 
officers in attendance to open a passage for the admittance of those whose presence 
was required. The office itself was crowded to excess with persons of respectability of 
both sexes, immediately after the doors were opened. Mrs. Stent, accompanied by her 
father and sister, arrived in a coach from the hospital, about a quarter before 11 
o'clock, and were permitted to remain in the magistrate's parlour till their presence 
was required. Her appearance was by no means interesting; she was short of stature, 
had light blue eyes, small nose, and fair complexion. She looked remarkably pale, and 
was more annoyed than fatigued by the curiosity of the surrounding spectators; her 
voice and manners were remarkably mild and fascinating.
	The prisoner, Stent, was conveyed from the Compter in a coach, in custody of 
Hirdsfield the officer, accompanied by his cousin and Mr. Bryant, a friend of the 
family, and alighted at the office exactly at 12 o'clock. The sitting magistrate, 
Alderman J. J. Smith. arrived only a few minutes before him.
	Henry Benwell, Esq., the House-Surgeon at St. Bartholomew's Hospital, was 
then examined. He stated, that Maria Stent was brought to the hospital between six 
and seven o'clock on the evening of Thursday the 5th of August inst.; he saw her 
directly; she was very faint and cold, but perfectly sensible. On examining her, he 
found she had received several wounds; there were three on her neck and right breast, 
one on her right arm, one on her right side, and one on her left thumb. One wound on 
the neck had penetrated the windpipe, and that on the side had penetrated the right 
lobe of the lungs; from this last mentioned wound she bled most profusely. This 
wound, and that which had injured the windpipe, were the most serious; the others 
were small and of little consequence. He at first apprehended considerable danger; 
Mrs. Stent, however, continued getting better till the Sunday morning following, when 
he was called up at seven o'clock, in consequence of an attack of inflammation on his 
patient's lungs; from this, however, she had now recovered: the wounds were not yet 
perfectly healed. but he considered her now out of danger. He had not seen the knife 
with which the stabs were given, but from all appearances they must have been made 
by a sharp instrument.
	The depositions of Thomas Turner, the porter, George King and Thomas 
Pithouse, waiters at the Saracen's Head-inn, were severally read over, signed, and 
sworn to, and the parties bound over in recognizances of £40 each to attend and give 
evidence on the trial. Mrs. Stent was then introduced, and accommodated with a chair 
at the desk near to the Alderman. She was dressed in a blue spotted cotton gown, with 
a shawl over her shoulders, and wore a black poke bonnet, nearly concealing her face; 
from this circumstance, and her continually holding her head down, very few of the 
spectators were gratified by a view of her countenance.
	Alderman Smith addressed her with great feeling, and informed her it was 
necessary she should be sworn. She replied mildly, but firmly, "Very well, Sir." The 
oath was then administered. She then stated, in answer to the different questions put 
by the Alderman, that she was the wife of the prisoner; that she arrived in London 
from Liverpool on the day in question; that she wrote a letter to her husband, and that 
he came to her at the Saracen's Head about six o'clock in the evening. In answer to the 
question, "What happened after her husband arrived," she replied very distinctly, that 
she was so agitated on seeing her husband that she could recollect nothing after she 
saw him, till she found herself undressed in the hospital. in giving this evidence, she 
was particularly guarded in not saying too much, making no extraneous observations, 
but confining her answers strictly to the questions, and frequently giving them in a 
single word; as, when asked–how she found herself when she came to her 
recollection, she replied, "Wounded." When asked, "Where?" she said, "Principally in 
the neck." She persisted, when re-questioned, that she had no recollection of any thing 
that passed in the interview with her husband.
	Mr. Alderman Smith, addressing Mr. Beecher, Mrs. Stent's father, said, much 
as he might regret the circumstances, a serious crime had been committed; and it was 
necessary some person should he bound over to prosecute. Mrs. Stent, being a married 
woman, could not; the nearest relation was the party generally looked to; and as he 
stood in that relation, he wished to know if he was willing to be so bound over. Mr. 
Beecher replied, if it was necessary, he was very sorry for it; it was a most unfortunate 
business, and he had no wish to pursue the husband. Mrs. Stent, bursting into tears, 
laid her hand on her father's arm, and said in a most beseeching tone, "Don't you, 
father."
	Mr. Harmer, to whom the father seemed to look for advice, said, "You have 
your option." On which Mrs. Stent said still more earnestly, "Then, don't you, father." 
On which Mr. Beeeher declined to be bound over, and Hirdsfield, the officer, who 
took the prisoner into custody, was then bound over as the prosecutor.
	Mr. Beecher was then asked by the magistrate, if he would enter into 
recognizance for the appearance of his daughter; he replied, he would be answerable 
for her forthcoming.
	Mrs. Stent was permitted to withdraw into the parlour with her father and 
sister. Shortly after, Mr. Harmer brought a request from her to the Alderman, to be 
permitted to see her husband for a few minutes before he was sent back.
	Mr. Alderman Smith said, he could not refuse such a request only on account 
of the agitation it would occasion to both of them. Mrs. Stent again begged, for God's 
sake, to let her speak to him for a minute. The magistrate said, it was painful to deny 
her, but he thought it would be too much for the feelings of both of them; but she 
should have permission to visit him at the Compter, with which she appeared more 
content, and shortly afterwards returned in a coach to the Hospital.
	The Alderman addressing the prisoner told him, it was the opinion of his 
solicitor, that he should not say anything in his defence at present. The magistrate had 
every regard to his feelings in the painful situation he was placed, but he must be 
committed for trial. His wish, however, to remain in the Compter, until the sessions 
commenced, should be complied with. The prisoner then bowed respectfully, and was 
removed from the bar.
	During the whole of this painful examination, the prisoner maintained his 
usual composure, which was not in the least altered on the appearance of his wife. The 
only period at which he showed any agitation was during the reading of that part of 
Pithouse's evidence, where he described the affecting conduct of Mrs. Stent while 
being carried to the hospital. The prisoner had been much affected at the time this 
evidence was given originally. He expressed no further resentment against his wife, 
but desired never to speak to her or see her again, and wished the officer to let him 
stand down while she was present, that he might not be forced to see her.
	Although very strongly urged and recommended by her friends to delay her 
interview with her husband, until they were each recovered from the agitation of the 
long and affecting final examination, such was the anxiety of Mrs. Stent to see him, 
that she would not be persuaded to defer her visit, but would stop at the Compter on 
her return from the Justice-room to St. Bartholomew's-hospital. Mr. Teague, the 
Governor of the Compter, having no intimation of her visit, was from home at the 
time, and Mrs. Stent was obliged to wait patiently in his apartments till his return, as 
none of the officers felt themselves warranted to allow of the interview without his 
permission. On his return, at four o'clock, he readily complied with her request, but 
with the condition that the interview took place in his presence, and that her husband 
consented to the meeting. Mr. Stent was accordingly informed of his wife's desire to 
see him, and replied he had no objection, but wished that some friends he had with 
him should also be present. Mr. Teague then showed Mrs. Stent and her sister into the 
Committee-room, where her husband and his friends were also immediately 
introduced. On his entrance she seized his hand, kissed him very affectionately, and 
inquired, with great apparent eagerness, after his health, and how he had borne his 
confinement. He replied to her with kindness and affability, but seemed carefully to 
avoid any thing like the appearance of returning affection. The struggle with himself 
was evidently great, while she pressed his hand and moistened it with her tears. After 
some further conversation, in which she informed him she had been much fatigued in 
the hospital by the kindness of numerous friends, and the visits of other persons from 
curiosity, and that she meant to go home to her father's, she asked his permission to 
see him again; to which he replied he had no objection. She then again kissed him and 
took her leave.
	By nine o'clock the next morning she was at the Compter, and again saw her 
husband, in the presence of Mr. Teague; the interview was short, and at her departure 
she obtained his consent to see her again. At neither of these visits did Mrs. Stent 
venture the slightest allusion to her own misconduct, or her husband's severity; she 
seemed well aware that he still remained too much irritated against her, and wished to 
accustom him to the sight of her without resentment. Stent, agreeably to his own 
request, remained in the Giltspur-street Compter, in the interval between his 
commitment and trial, where he conducted himself with the greatest propriety; 
devoting nearly the whole of his time to reading and devotional exercises. He, 
however, occasionally engaged in imparting instruction to his less-informed 
companions in prison. Upon the whole, although his firmness never forsook him, he 
maintained a dejected spirit. He was constantly visited by his wife, who gradually 
advanced to a perfect state of convalescence; but on no occasion whatever did he 
evince the slightest desire to renew his confidence with, or unbosom his feelings to 
her; in fact, he occasionally directed that Mrs. Stent should not be admitted to him.
	There was, however, another cause, which seemed to actuate the mind of 
Stent; and he desponded under it the more, as one of those dreadful results of his 
wife's infidelity. His father, an aged but independent man, it appears, immediately 
after the lamentable transaction at the Saracen's Head, undertook the management of 
his son's affairs. In performing these duties, the old man had the misfortune to fail 
from his chaise and dislocate his hip so dangerously, that mortification was 
apprehended, and this misfortune produced a kind of agony in the mind of his son.
	As the period for his being brought to trial advanced, some benevolent 
individuals undertook to make the necessary arrangements for his defence, and on the 
17th of September, 1819, he was put to the bar at the Old Bailey.
	The court was crowded with females. A London jury having been called, the 
prisoner was arraigned upon an indictment, charging him in the usual form with 
having inflicted divers wounds upon the person of his wife, Maria, on the 5th of 
August last, with intent to kill and murder her, or to do her some grevious bodily 
harm. He pleaded, Not Guilty. The jury was then sworn. There was no counsel for the 
prosecution, and Mr. Justice Best called Maria Stent: the wife of the prisoner stood up 
in the witness-box, and was sworn. She was plainly dressed, and wore a large Leghorn 
hat, which tended much to conceal her features: she seemed to be greatly agitated.
	Mrs. Stent was now addressed by Mr. Justice Best, when the entreated that she 
might not be called on to give evidence against the best of husbands.
	Mr. Justice Best.–I am extremely sorry to give you pain; but it is my duty to 
ask you some questions, which it will be your duty to answer. Is your name Maria 
Stent?–Yes.
	Is the prisoner your husband? Look at him. (Here the witness turned towards 
the prisoner with a look of great anguish.)–Yes.
	I believe you separated from him for some time?–Yes.
	When did you leave him?–On the 29th of August, 1818.
	Where did you go to?–To France.
	When did you return to England?–I returned to London in August 1819, from 
Liverpool, and went to the Saracen's Head.
	Where did the prisoner live at that time?–At Pimlico.
	Did you send any letter or message to him?–I sent a letter.
	In the course of that day did you see your husband?–Yes.
	Where?–At the Saracen's Head.
	What time of the day?–Between seven and eight.
	As you recollect, state what passed.–I have no recollection of what passed.
	Did any thing happen?–Yes.
	What do you first recollect?–Being in bed at St. Bartholomew's-hospital.
	What was the matter with you?–I was wounded.	Where were you 
wounded?–In the neck.
	Any where else?–Yes, there were other wounds.	Have you any recollection 
of the prisoner's coming into the room to you at the Saracen's-head?–Yes.
	Who came in with him?–I do not recollect.
	Were you alone in the room?–Yes.
	Before you went into the room, had you any wound?–No.
	Cross-examined by Mr. Alley–Your feelings overpowered you when you saw 
your husband, and you have not the least recollection of what happened afterwards?–
Yes.
	You said you did not wish to give evidence against the prisoner, because he 
was the best of husbands?–Yes.
	How long were you away from him?–About twelve months.
	(Here the witness sat down, and seemed extremely anxious to hide herself 
from public observation.)
	The evidence of King, Pithouse, and Turner, to the effect already stated in the 
examinations before the magistrates, was then given, after which, Mr. Justice Best 
informed the prisoner, that if he had anything to say in his defence, the period had 
now arrived for so doing. The prisoner said he would leave his case entirely in the 
hands of his counsel.
	A vast number of witnesses were then called on behalf of the prisoner, all of 
whom appeared to be persons of great respectability. They stated, that they had known 
him for many years, and had always believed him to be a kind-hearted, humane, good-
natured man as any in existence, and a particularly affectionate and indulgent 
husband. It was impossible, in fact, to imagine testimony more favourable than was 
given by these persons, who all seemed actuated by the strongest sympathy towards 
the prisoner.
	Mr. Justice Best proceeded to sum up the evidence. He deeply regretted the 
important and painful duty which, in the present case, devolved upon himself as well 
as upon the jury; painful, however, as that duty was, he felt no doubt that they would 
discharge it in a proper manner. The learned judge then explained the law upon the 
subject. From the evidence detailed, and which he should again read over to them, no 
doubt could remain on the mind of any unprejudiced person that the crime charged 
upon the prisoner came within the provisions of that most excellent act of parliament 
introduced by the late lamented Chief Justice of the King's-bench, for the protection 
of the subject's life. Though it did not appear in evidence upon the present occasion, 
the fact, however, might be fairly assumed, that Mrs. Stent, the unhappy woman who 
appeared before them on that day, had forsaken her husband, and by proving 
unfaithful to his bed, had inflicted upon him the most poignant anguish, the most 
acute suffering, that a man devoted to a wife could possibly endure. This, however, 
could by no means be admitted as a justification of his crime. The law of the land 
upon this subject proceeded upon the same principles as the religion of the country, 
which was Christianity. If a husband detected his wife in the very fact, in flagrante 
delicto, as it were, and that at the moment he plunged some deadly weapon into her 
bosom, so as to occasion death, it would not be considered murder. The law, like the 
religion of the country, making fair allowance for the frailties of human nature, 
considered the husband, with such provocation immediately before his eyes, as no 
longer under the guidance of reason, and of course not accountable for his acts. Here, 
however, the circumstances were quite different. A considerable time had elapsed 
since the elopement of the first witness, and on her return she manifested those 
symptoms of her repentance–that appearance of returning affection–which might well 
be supposed to disarm vengeance, and prevent that ferocious purpose which the 
prisoner appeared to have deliberately contemplated. Even while her blood was 
flowing from the wounds he had inflicted, she still entreated him to kiss her, and in 
that kiss conveyed a pardon to her assailant. Under circumstances such as these, the 
law did not admit of the same excuse as when a husband detected his wife in the very 
fact. Sufficient time having been given for cool reflection on one side, and for 
repentance on the other, the law, proceeding on the same principle as the benign 
religion which it imitated, did not allow vengeance to be inflicted with impunity. 
After some further observations, which the leaned judge delivered with great talent 
and feeling, he summed up the evidence at length.
	The Jury then retired, and after consulting for about half an hour, returned with 
a verdict of guilty, but recommended the prisoner strongly to mercy, on account of his 
good character.
	Mr. Justice Best–The recommendation shall certainly be forwarded.
	A petition, most numerously and respectably signed, was presented to the 
Prince Regent, on behalf of Stent, who, in consideration of all the circumstances, was 
graciously pleased to commute the sentence of death for two years' imprisonment. 


PEI  
A captured and liberated negro, tried for the murder and cannibalism of 
Zongobia, another captured negro slave, at Charlotte-town, Sierra Leone, 
July 1819

	THE existence of anthropophagi, or man-eaters, has in many instances been 
disputed, and in some flatly denied; but, revolting as is the custom, and pitiable as are 
the people among whom the practice prevails, there are instances upon record to 
which it would be scepticism itself to refuse credence (supported as they are by the 
most respectable authorities), and we have here to present the particulars of a most 
decided instance of cannibalism, which were developed in the trial of a captured 
negro slave, in the British settlement at Sierra Leone, before the chief justice of the 
colony and a jury of residents, the foreman of which was a white man, the others 
coloured men of the settlement.
	The trial took place in July, 1819, when Pei, a captured and liberated negro, 
was indicted for the murder of Zongobia, another captured negro, at Charlotte-town, 
in the colony of Sierra Leone, on the 5th of January, by severing his head from his 
body with a sharp instrument made of a piece of iron hoop.
	Previously to the commencement of this trial, much difficulty was experienced 
in procuring adequate means of interpretation between the court and prisoner; and, at 
length, when a person was found capable of conversing with the prisoner in his 
language, a second interpreter was required to render the bad English of this first 
interpreter intelligible.
	The first object of the interpretation was, to inform the prisoner of his 
arraignment, and to instruct him how to plead; which being accomplished, an 
endeavour was made to apprise him of his right to challenge the jurors, and of the 
proper mode of exercising that right; but upon the first option of challenge being put 
to him, in swearing the foreman of the jury, an answer was returned, which threw the 
whole court into an involuntary burst of laughter, at the same time that it produced a 
strong and universal sensation of horror. When the prisoner was told to look upon that 
man, and say if he liked to be tried by him, the answer was interpreted, given in a tone 
of astonishment by the English interpreter, was–"He say, he like him too much; if he 
catch him, he eat him." After this answer, it was thought best, in tenderness to the 
prisoner, to go through the remaining forms, without any further reference to him.
	The particulars of this horrid transaction, as detailed in evidence, were as 
follows; Hyena, an inferior overseer of captured negroes, at Charlotte-town, employed 
to superintend the deceased and his countrymen, because he could speak their 
language, having missed the deceased, Zongobia, at ration time, reported his absence 
to his superior, who ordered search to be made in the bush. Shortly after, he saw a 
man coming out of the bush with a canvas bag, which he attempted to shift away, as if 
to put it out of sight. He immediately questioned the man, whom he found to be one 
Quia Pei, of Zongobia's nation, and insisted on seeing the bag and its contents. The 
man reluctantly opened the bag, which he said contained some meat: on inspection, he 
discovered pieces of human flesh. The man, Quia Pei, was immediately secured, but 
he died in prison while awaiting his trial.
	William Ashford, principal native superintendent at Charlottetown, stated, that 
on being informed by the last witness that Zongobia was missed, he had given orders 
to search for him; shortly after he was informed of the detention of Quia Pei, and 
came to the place where he saw the bag and its contents; there was part of a human 
hand, with the thumb, a piece of the shoulder, and lower part of the neck, and some of 
the intestines. Quia Pei, he understood, avowed the killing of the man Zongobia, and 
implicated the prisoner Pei as his accomplice in the act.
	John Ouseley Kearney, Esq., a magistrate, was resident at Bathurst-town. In 
the month of January last, he was sent for to inquire into the particulars of the horrid 
transaction now before the court. The bag, containing the mutilated remains already 
described, was shown to him. Quia Pei, upon whom it was found, confessed the act, 
and alleged that the prisoner Pei first suggested it to him, saying, the deceased was fat, 
and good to eat; both together seized the opportunity of surprising the deceased as he 
was stooping down in the brook searching for crabs; the prisoner caught the arms of 
the deceased behind his back, and held him while Quia Pei threw him over: he 
struggled hard. They were obliged first to cut off his hand, and afterwards they cut off 
his head: they then proceeded to the horrid process of cooking and eating the flesh, 
and in this abominable repast it was understood that others also assisted. This 
statement was given freely and voluntarily by Quia Pei, the man who had since died 
in prison: the prisoner, Pei, also confessed, but slowly and reluctantly, and not till the 
other repeatedly accused him and remonstrated with him on the inutility of his denial.
	Mr. Kearney made Quia Pei and the prisoner take him to the place where the 
dreadful deed was perpetrated, and show him the further remains of the deceased. He 
saw the place where the fire was made, and the bones that had been left, some of them 
bearing the marks of such persevering voracity, that a thigh bone had been broken for 
the purpose of extracting the marrow: the head, with the tongue and upper part of the 
neck, had been left entire and buried. He caused them to be taken up: the face was 
recognised as Zongobia's. The reason given for the distinction with respect to the head 
and its contents was, that eating any part of the head was supposed, in the country of 
these cannibals, to cause madness. They were called the Manni, or Maniani, and were 
notorious for this practice, for which they were despised by all their neighbours. On 
Mr. Kearney's asking whether there was any quarrel or any enmity towards the 
deceased, he was told there was not; and upon some expression of surprise that so 
great an atrocity should be perpetrated without any provocation, or motive, it was 
thought, sufficient to explain it by the same motives which induced Mr. Kearney to 
kill a fat sheep. Quia Pei said, the cause of his having been sold as a slave was, that he 
had killed and eaten so many men as to render him formidable to the king of his 
country and to the head men, who made a palaver for him, and had him condemned 
and sold.
	The substance of Mr. Kearney's testimony was interpreted to the prisoner, and 
he was asked whether he wished to put any questions. He did not ask any question, 
but denied having participated in the murder, that he had ever confessed it: he was 
near the place, with his knife and pot, and was called to the feast after the man had 
been killed. In reference to the charge of holding the hands of Zongobia behind his 
back, he asked whether a person of his own slight frame was capable of such an 
exertion? With reference to the charge of having pointed out Zongobia as a fat man 
and fit to be killed, he denied having given any such suggestion, or having had any 
part in such conversation or design; he knew, however, that Quia Pei, and the others 
of his country, had held such talk on board the ship in which they came, and that they 
had formed a design accordingly, for the opportunity of future execution.
	After this special denial of the charge by the prisoner in all its most material 
parts, it was thought desirable by the Court that the interpreters of the original 
examination should be called. They confirmed the defence set up by the prisoner, 
namely, that he had never made any confession of being concerned in the murder of 
the deceased, although he admitted being present at the eating of his body, having 
been accidentally passing by at the time the deceased Quia Pei and others were 
enjoying the banquet, of which they invited him to partake.
	The Chief Justice in summing up the evidence observed, that a most barbarous 
murder had been committed, accompanied with circumstances the most humiliating to 
human nature, in the undeniable proofs of a practice which was scarcely reconcilable 
to human possibility. He owned his first impression, on hearing this horrid 
transaction, in a way that compelled him to believe the fact, was, despair of effecting 
any moral improvement, or of making any progress in civilization, upon minds so lost 
and sunk in the lowest extreme of a savage debasement; but, upon more mature 
reflection, he saw in it only a more striking instance of the depravity of human nature, 
when abandoned to itself, and destitute of social culture, and of religious instruction. 
This reflection was the more impressive, because it was matter of undeniable record 
in history, that the ancestors of the most civilized nations of Europe, even of Britons 
themselves, now the foremost in every social affection as well as in all moral virtue 
and in pure religion, were in the general habit of offering human victims to their 
monstrous conceptions of the Supreme Being; instead, therefore, of deserting as 
hopeless and disgusting the design of rescuing these rude savages from the depths of 
barbarism in which they were sunk, this remembrance ought to fill us at once with 
humility and with confidence; and to incite to a perseverance in the present exertions, 
till those who are now so abject should be made in all things equal to ourselves.
	In order fairly to discharge their duty in determining according to the 
evidence, whether the prisoner at the bar was guilty or not guilty of the murder, it 
would be incumbent on the Jury to dismiss all extraneous impressions, arising 
naturally, and almost necessarily, from the common relations of the horrid transaction, 
and from the conversation respecting it. They should exclude from their minds all 
foreign matters, even to the expression uttered by the prisoner, with respect to the 
foreman of the Jury, when apprised of his right of challenge–an expression which 
filled the Court at once with an involuntary burst of laughter, succeeded immediately 
by a more appropriate sensation of horror. The prisoner, it appeared, was implicated 
in the charge of having participated in the murder by one Quia Pei, since dead, who 
had been caught with the mangled fragments of a human body upon him, concealed in 
a bag, shortly after the disappearance of the unfortunate man upon whom the murder 
had been perpetrated, named Zongobia. Quia Pei, when observed and interrogated by 
the native overseer, Hyena, at first attempted to conceal the bag, and then said simply, 
the contents were pieces of meat; it was, however, ascertained immediately by the 
thumb, and by other distinctive marks, that the whole was human flesh. This 
discovery furnished proof so nearly amounting to full conviction against Quia Pei, 
that denial could scarcely have been of any avail; he therefore, it appeared, confessed 
the act freely to the superintendent who first examined him. There might have been 
some inducement in the words of the interpreter, desiring him to confess in order to 
avoid a palaver, which he might have understood either as, "to save time and trouble," 
or as "to secure himself from mischief." Quia Pei avowed himself the principal 
perpetrator of the murder; but charged the prisoner with having suggested it to him, 
and with having pointed out the deceased, Zongobia, as a fit object for such a design; 
he also charged the prisoner with having participated with him in the perpetration of 
the murder, by holding the hands of Zongobia behind his back, while he, Quia Pei, 
threw him over, and proceeded to disable him by cutting off his hand; after which he 
cut his throat also, and severed his head from his body. Quia Pei showed the place 
where the murder was perpetrated, and where the head was buried, which was 
recognised as bearing the features of Zongobia. The reason given for sparing the head 
in the horrid voracity exercised on the body, was a belief in Quia Pei's nation that to 
eat the human head, or any part of it, caused madness. The bones of the body were 
found in a shocking condition, bare, and some of them broken. Quia Pei was the 
leading person in all those discoveries, and he alone appeared to have carried off the 
mangled fragments; for it did not appear that any had been found upon any other. 
Quia Pei was, therefore, in every respect the leading actor in this atrocious deed, and 
was proved to be so by undeniable circumstances, as well as by his own confession. 
That confession implicated the prisoner at the bar, as having suggested the design 
originally, and as having also assisted in the execution of it; but that confession was 
not evidence to convict the prisoner, unless confirmed by the assent of the prisoner 
himself, or by the testimony of other witnesses, or by concurring facts or 
circumstances of corroboration. It was understood, or rather supposed, that the 
prisoner had assented in the examinations; but this assent the prisoner denied, and 
denied also having any concern in the murder. After this derangement of the train of 
evidence which, it was understood, was to lead to the conviction of the prisoner, the 
court felt considerable embarrassment. There was not any collateral or corroborative 
evidence, nor any matter of fact, nor circumstance affecting the prisoner. If the court 
and the jury could be satisfied of the fact of previous communication and concert in 
the design on the part of the prisoner, and of his subsequent presence near the place 
where the murder was perpetrated, so as to be within call, and to have joined on being 
called, the concurrence would be sufficient to establish the prisoner's guilt. But the 
answers of the prisoner conveyed a distinct denial of his having held any 
communication respecting the murderous design, previous to its perpetration, or 
having known of it, till after it was perpetrated, when he was invited to join in the 
horrid feast made of the body. It would be for the jury to consider whether the 
circumstances of previous communication and subsequent presence near the spot at 
the time when the murder was perpetrated, and junction with the perpetrator or 
perpetrators, upon being called, had been at first freely admitted, and afterwards 
artfully retracted by the prisoner. But considering the way in which any knowledge 
that might have been had of these matters was obtained, it would probably appear too 
slight a foundation for pronouncing the prisoner guilty.
	The jury retired, and after an absence of about half an hour, returned their 
verdict–Guilty of assisting.
	The Chief Justice informed them that this verdict could not be received; the 
indictment charged the prisoner, not as assisting, but as the actual perpetrator of the 
murder. The only verdict, therefore, that the jury could regularly give, or that the court 
could receive, was, simply, one of guilty or of not guilty.
	The jury retired again, and returned in less than half an hour, giving their 
verdict–Guilty.
	The Chief Justice observed, that on receiving this verdict, it would be 
incumbent on him, in the ordinary course of his duty, forthwith to pass sentence of 
death upon the prisoner, in one of the awful forms prescribed by law; but the same 
statute which enjoined that course of proceeding, gave a power to the judge to 
postpone the judgment, if he should see sufficient cause. After the opinion that he (the 
Chief Justice) had expressed of the insufficiency of the evidence, he would act very 
inconsistently with himself if he did not avail himself of this power: he therefore 
postponed the judgment.
	A statement of the case, with the evidence, and a copy of the indictment, was 
accordingly soon after placed in the hands of the Governor for the purpose of being 
sent to England. it was accordingly transmitted by his Excellency to Earl Bathurst, his 
Majesty's principal Secretary of State for the Colonial Department. Earl Bathurst, in 
consideration of the circumstances, thought it incumbent on him to recommend Pei to 
his Royal Highness the Prince Regent, for his Majesty's most gracious pardon. The 
pardon was received, and the prisoner was, in consequence, liberated without delay. 


JOHN SCANLAN and STEPHEN SULLIVAN  
The murderers of the Colleen Bawn

	John Scanlan was born to an eminent family in Ireland, and after serving his 
king as a lieutenant, was discharged on half-pay following the defeat of the Corsican 
usurper. Sullivan had been a soldier under him, and, having been also discharged, he 
accompanied Scanlan in the capacity of a servant. He was a native of Limerick, and, 
though not more than thirty-two years of age, was much older than his master, who 
had not attained twenty-five.
	Young Scanlan, on his way to Limerick, where he proposed residing, stopped 
for some time in Dublin, where he found an opportunity of ingratiating himself into 
the favour of a thoughtless but lovely girl of fifteen years of age, the niece of a Mr 
Connery, a rope-maker.
	The gentlemanly appearance and polished address of Scanlan, when aided by 
his protestations of love and tenderness, flattered the vanity of the poor girl; but still 
she would not listen to him on any but honourable terms. She acknowledged her 
partiality and charged him, if he was sincere, to make her his wife. To this proposal he 
affected to consent, after some conditions had been agreed on: these were that she was 
to keep her marriage a secret from her uncle, lest his friends should hear of it–an event 
which he seemed to regard as pregnant with ruin to him.
	The foolish girl consented to all he chose to enjoin, and in an evil hour quitted 
the roof of her kind uncle, carrying off with her one hundred pounds in notes and 
twelve guineas in gold. He pretended to act honourably, and carried her before an 
excommunicated priest, who joined their hands in wedlock. Scanlan resorted to this 
man, thinking the ceremony, when performed by him, not obligatory; but in this he 
was mistaken, for he soon after learned that, according to the laws of Ireland, a 
marriage so celebrated is valid.
	The fugitive lovers quitted Dublin and took up their abode in the romantic 
village of Glin, situated on the banks of the river Shannon, on the Limerick side. 
Scarcely, however, had the honeymoon passed over their heads, when it appears 
Scanlan formed the dreadful resolution of getting rid of his wife. Her beauty, her love, 
her innocence, appealed to him in vain; he persisted in his resolution and too fatally 
carried it into effect.
	It appears he was prompted to the dreadful deed by avarice and ambition: his 
sister, who had been married to a nobleman in the county of Limerick, apprised him 
of a match she was forming for him with an heiress of wealth and beauty, and 
requested his acquiescence. Knowing that he could not avail himself of the proposed 
advantage while his wife (for she was legally his wife) was alive, he determined that 
she should not long remain an obstacle to his advancement to rank and opulence.
	Sullivan was his confidant throughout the whole affair, and to him was 
entrusted the execution of his atrocious plan. Scanlan had purchased a pleasure boat, 
in which they used to take excursions on the Shannon. Of this amusement his wife 
was very fond, and it was during one of these moments of recreation, while she should 
be impressed with the beauty of the scenery, that the monsters resolved to rob her of 
that life which bloomed so exquisitely on her youthful and animated cheek.
	One evening in the July of 1819, Scanlan affected to be called from home on 
business, but desired his wife to make Sullivan amuse her for an hour on the river in 
the boat. With this request she complied; and Sullivan, by his master's directions, got 
ready to execute their horrid purpose. Having provided a club to knock out her brains 
and a rope and stone to tie to the body to sink it, he proceeded down the river. This 
man was treated by his master and mistress with great familiarity, so that he was not 
obliged to keep that distance so necessary to good order, but used every freedom 
consistent with respect. When the boat had drifted to a secluded inlet, Sullivan 
prepared to execute his purpose: he raised the club in a menacing position and was 
about to strike, when the lovely creature, thinking he only intended to frighten her, 
gave him a smile of such innocent sweetness and simplicity that the assassin was 
disarmed. He dropped the instrument of destruction, conducted his mistress home and 
told his unfeeling master that he had not strength to execute his commands.
	The horrid resolution was postponed, but not abandoned. A few evenings 
after, Scanlan, accompanied by his wife and Sullivan, went out in the boat as usual; 
but the unfortunate woman was never seen alive after. Scanlan returned to his 
lodgings, and said that for misbehaving he had shipped Ellen on board some vessel, 
the captain of which had taken her under his protection. This story was disbelieved, 
and a few days discovered their guilt; the corpse of the murdered Ellen was washed 
ashore, mutilated in a most shocking manner. The legs were broken in several places, 
one arm had been knocked off entirely, and a rope was tied round her neck. Her skull 
was fractured in a thousand pieces, her eyes knocked out of her head and nearly all 
her teeth forced from her mouth.
	Horrid and deformed as was her once-lovely person, still it was instantly 
recognized, when the murderers endeavoured to fly from justice. Of their guilt there 
could be no doubt. They were seen together in the boat; Sullivan had sold the 
murdered girl's clothes, and he and his master had quarrelled about some money, in 
which quarrel Scanlan had been accused of the murder.
	Sullivan escaped for twelve months the pursuit of justice; but Scanlan was 
almost immediately apprehended, though he had resolved never to be taken alive. The 
following August, he was tried at the assizes; and, being found guilty, Baron Smith, to 
his immortal honour, ordered him for almost instant execution, lest the powerful 
interest of his family should procure a respite if he left him even the period usually 
allowed to criminals convicted of a murder. The time allotted Scanlan to live was too 
short to admit a messenger going to Dublin and back again, and consequently he was 
executed, to the satisfaction of all lovers of justice.
	Twelve months after, his guilty servant met a similar fate. Before his 
execution, he made a full confession, from which the above particulars are partly 
taken. Such was the powerful influence of Scanlan's family that, though they could 
not avert his fate, they succeeded in keeping it a secret from a large portion of the 
community, for they had influence enough to prevent an insertion of his case in all the 
Limerick newspapers; and consequently it remained unknown, except in the 
immediate neighbourhood of the transaction.
	The trial of Sullivan, however, revealed his own and his master's guilt and 
proved that, in this country, neither wealth nor power can turn aside the sword of 
justice or make the criminal less abhorrent, though he should have great and wealthy 
friends.
	The circumstances of this case, we are persuaded, furnished the author of the 
Tales of Irish Life with the idea of 'The Poor Man's Daughter'. 


MRS MARY RIDDING  
A Captain's Wife, who was sent to Prison for stealing a Child, 28th of 
August, 1819

	MRS MARY RIDDING, the wife of Captain William Ridding, was tried at the 
Old Bailey, upon an indictment for stealing Benjamin, the infant child of John 
Schrier, fourteen months old.
	The first witness was a little boy, seven years of age, named Samuel Schrier. 
He was sent out, with his three little brothers, before two o'clock, on Saturday, 28th of 
August, 1819; one of them was Benjamin. He took them to an adjoining field. A lady, 
who was the prisoner at the bar, came up to him and asked: " Is this Bancroft Place?" 
He replied: "Yes." She then asked him if there was a cakeshop near, and if the child 
(Benjamin) was his brother. He said: "Yes." She then gave him a shilling, and desired 
him to go and get threepennyworth of cakes, and took the child out of his arms to hold 
while he was away. He was gone about a quarter of an hour, and when he returned to 
the spot he found Benjamin missing, and searched all about the fields without being 
able to find him or the lady.
	Sarah Holdgate said her husband kept a greengrocer's shop at Shadwell. On 
Saturday, 28th of August, the prisoner came to their shop, about four o'clock in the 
afternoon, to buy some fruit for a child she carried in her arms. The lady seemed very 
agitated, and trembled much. She said she had lost her way, was much fatigued, and 
wanted a coach to Old Street, and did not mind what she paid for it. Witness directed 
her to the nearest coach stand, and was, at the time while she stopped–for about ten 
minutes–struck with the difference in the condition of dress of the child and the lady.
	Hester Hilder lived at the Cross Keys Inn, Gracechurch Street, and 
remembered the prisoner coming there on Saturday, the 28th of August. She had been 
there once before. This Saturday, when she came with the child, it was dark, and 
candles were lighted for her. She left the inn on the Monday following. The child, 
while at the inn, pined and fretted a good deal, as if it wanted its mother's nutrition.
	John Schrier said, when he found that Benjamin was lost he immediately went 
to make diligent search, in the course of which he arrived at Birmingham, where he 
found Martin, the officer, who had arrived there before him. He was in an apartment 
with the child and the lady at the bar.
	Martin held up the child to him, which he immediately owned to be his, and 
accordingly took it. Martin then pointed to the lady, and said it was she who stole it. 
Either the prisoner or her sister-in-law, who was present, asked witness how he knew 
it to be his child. And he pointed out marks on the child's arm and eye, when one of 
the ladies remarked that he might have seen these marks since he came into the room. 
He refuted this by producing one of his printed bills advertising the lost child, which 
contained an enumeration of the aforesaid marks.
	Joseph Martin, an officer, said he pursued the prisoner to Birmingham. He 
found her there on the Wednesday, with the child in her arms, at the door of her 
house. It was dressed very smartly, and she was nursing it. He did not speak to her 
until the Thursday morning, when the father came. He told him he thought he had 
succeeded in finding his child. He then went to the house, which was a bookseller's, 
and asked for Captain Ridding, who was out. He then asked for Mrs Ridding, who, 
with her sister-in-law, came downstairs, and he was introduced to them in a back 
parlour. Witness then said to them: "I am an officer of the police from London, and 
have a serious charge against you; it is for stealing a child." She appeared dreadfully 
agitated at this intimation, and the sister-in-law equally so. The latter said: "What does 
all this mean, my dear? Speak the truth. What is there about this child?" "I will, then", 
said the prisoner. "The Captain has been long wishing for a child, and I went to 
London, determined to take some poor person's child, and adopt it as my own." The 
officer further said that when he first saw the child on the Wednesday it was elegantly 
attired in a lace dress; on the Thursday it had a new and different dress. The lady 
appeared to treat it tenderly, and offered to send a careful person up with it to London. 
She did not seem to wish to conceal the child at all, for he saw her dancing it in her 
arms at the bookseller's door.
	The jury returned a verdict of guilty; but strongly recommended the prisoner 
to mercy. She was sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment.


SIR FRANCIS BURDETT  
Fined Two Thousand Pounds at the Leicester Assizes, 23rd of March, 1820, 
and sent to Prison for Three Months for a Seditious Libel
	THIS was an information filed by his Majesty's Attorney-General against the 
defendant, Sir Francis Burdett, for a libel. The first count charged that the defendant 
did on the 22nd of August, 1819, publish a certain libel.
	The count then set out the libel verbatim, which was in these words: 
TO THE ELECTORS OF WESTMINSTER
	GENTLEMEN,–On reading the newspaper this morning, having arrived late 
yesterday evening, I was filled with shame, grief and indignation at the account of the 
blood spilled at Manchester.
	This, then, is the answer of the borough-mongers to the petitioning people–this 
is the proof of our standing in no need of reform–these the practical blessings of our 
glorious borough-mongers' domination–this the use of a standing army in time of 
peace. It seems our fathers were not such fools as some would make us believe, in 
opposing the establishment of a standing army, and sending King William's Dutch 
Guards out of the country. Yet would to Heaven they had been Dutchmen, or 
Switzers, or Hessians, or Hanoverians, or anything rather than Englishmen, who have 
done such deeds. What! Kill men unarmed, unresisting, and, gracious God! women 
too!–disfigured, maimed, cut down and trampled on by dragoons! Is this England? 
This a Christian land? A land of freedom? Can such things be, and pass by us like a 
summer cloud, unheeded? Forbid it every drop of English blood in every vein that 
does not proclaim his owner, bastard. Will the gentlemen of England support, or wink 
at, such proceedings? They have a great stake in their country: they hold great estates, 
and they are bound in duty and in honour to consider them as retaining fees, on the 
part of their country, for holding its rights and liberties: surely they will at length 
awake, and find they have duties to perform.
	They never can stand tamely by, as lookers-on, whilst bloody Neros rip open 
their mother's womb; they must join the general voice, loudly demanding justice and 
redress; and head public meetings throughout the United Kingdom, to put a stop, in its 
commencement, to a reign of terror and of blood; to afford consolation, as far as it can 
be afforded, and legal redress to the widows and orphans–mutilated victims of this 
unparalleled and barbarous outrage.
	For this purpose I propose that a meeting should be called in Westminster, 
which the gentlemen of the committee will arrange, and whose summons I will hold 
myself in readiness to attend. Whether the penalty of our meeting will be death by 
military execution, I know not; but this I know, a man can die but once, and never 
better than in vindicating the laws and liberties of his country.
	Excuse this hasty address. I can scarcely tell what I have written; it may be a 
libel, or the Attorney-General may call it one, just as he pleases. When the Seven 
Bishops were tried for libel, the army of James II., then encamped on Hounslow 
Heath, for supporting arbitrary power, gave three cheers on hearing of their acquittal.
	The King, startled at the noise, asked "What's that?" "Nothing, sir," was the 
answer, "but the soldiers shouting at the acquittal of the Seven Bishops." "Do you call 
that nothing?" replied the misgiving tyrant; and shortly after abdicated the 
government.
	Tis true, James could not inflict the torture on his soldiers–could not tear the 
living flesh from their bones with the cat-o'-nine-tails–could not flail them alive. Be 
this as it may, our duty is to meet; an England expects every man to do his duty. I 
remain, gentlemen, most truly and faithfully, your most obedient servant,  
	FRANCIS BURDETT.
	The information contained other counts, laying the charge in a different 
manner. 
	Mr Samuel Brooks lived at No. 101 Strand, London. He knew the defendant, 
and was acquainted with his handwriting. On being shown the paper in question, he 
said he believed it to be the handwriting of the defendant–it came to him through the 
hands of Mr Bickersteth, a professional gentleman; it was in an envelope, which had 
been mislaid–he did not look on the envelope to see whether it had a postmark on it. 
The envelope contained no direction to him, but merely to Mr Bickersteth, to pass it to 
him. When he received it, he supposed that it was intended that he should publish it. 
He sent it to several papers, and afterwards saw it in The Times, but could not 
recollect when. The letter was dated the 22nd of August, and he received it, he 
believed, a day or two afterwards.
	Mr Tooke, an attorney of London, was then called, and proved the handwriting 
of Sir Francis Burdett on the envelope. W. Simpkin, the keeper of the toll-gate near 
Kirby, being called, said that he saw Sir Francis Burdett near the gate on the 22nd of 
August, 1819. The gate was about a hundred yards from the house of Sir Francis 
Burdett. He saw him again on the following day about the same place. This was in the 
county of Leicester.
	The witness retired from the box, but was recalled, and asked some questions 
by Sir Francis Burdett. He did not know that Kirby Farm was on the borders of 
several counties. He knew that it was in the county of Leicester. Mr Brooks was called 
again, and said that he had inserted the letter of Sir Francis Burdett in several papers, 
and among others The British Press. This paper was produced. When he sent the letter 
to the newspapers, its publication was left to their own discretion. They were not paid 
for it.
	Sir Francis Burdett observed that he could not conceive why it should be 
considered disaffection in him to lament that soldiers had cut people to pieces; or how 
it could excite disaffection in the military. He had addressed the letter to his 
constituents, and to the country gentlemen of England, with the very view of 
obtaining legal redress. He contended that the Manchester meeting, which was the 
subject of this letter, was not illegal; for he had been in Parliament a quarter of a 
century, and he always understood that any number of persons might legally meet to 
present petitions, and it was not until very lately that a noble and learned Lord had 
twisted out some obscure points of law to prove that a meeting when it became very 
numerous became illegal. Until that declaration was made, all public meetings were 
considered as legal. In support of this assertion he quoted the opinion that had been 
given by Lord Chief Justice Holt, who declared that any person who killed another on 
account of being in a great meeting was guilty of murder. As to reading The Riot Act, 
it ought not to be read till there was a riot, when an hour was allowed to the people to 
disperse; and there was nothing in this case to justify the sending of military among 
the rioters.
	Mr Denman offered evidence to prove the statements respecting the 
Manchester meeting.
	Mr Justice Best said that which related to the proceedings at Manchester was 
irrelevant; he would allow no evidence of what had passed there.
	Mr Serjeant Vaughan admitted the legality of the Manchester meeting at its 
first assembling, but denied that that question could affect the present case.
	Mr Justice Best said he had no hesitation in saying that it was a libel. Nothing 
occurred that could form any excuse for the most intemperate of men saying that a 
reign of terror and blood was commenced in this country. The government rested not 
on the army, but on the affections of the people. If the paper was calculated to do 
infinite mischief, that mischief must have been intended. More poisonous ingredients 
never were condensed in one paper.
	The jury conversed together in the box for about two minutes; the foreman 
then stepped into his place, and called out: "Guilty of libel."
	The defendant was sentenced to a fine of two thousand pounds and three 
months' imprisonment in the Marshalsea of the court.


ARTHUR THISTLEWOOD, JAMES INGS, JOHN 
THOMAS BRUNT, RICHARD TIDD AND WILLIAM 
DAVIDSON  
Leaders in the Cato Street Conspiracy

	ON the cessation of the war which ended in Bonaparte being exiled to St 
Helena, Great Britain found herself subject to those temporary domestic difficulties 
which always succeed a return from hostility to peace. Agriculture, trade and 
commerce became, for the instant, almost torpid, and thousands of the labouring 
classes were thrown out of employment.
	In this moment of paramount distress the evil-minded and the designing, 
taking advantage of the disposition of the people, and urged by personal 
considerations, continued those attacks upon the Ministry of the country which they 
had hitherto made without success, and the people, whose attention was now 
withdrawn from the object which had hitherto served to keep their minds occupied, 
were easily led away and persuaded that the dangers and difficulties which appeared 
to exist were the result of bad management only, and were of a nature likely to be 
permanent, and most injurious to their well-being. The existence of the evil was 
attributed to some defects which were pointed out in the representative system; and as 
this was considered to be the root of the evil, the name of Radical (from radix, the 
Latin word for a root) was given to the persons who espoused these new opinions. 
The party in itself, both as regarded reputation and numbers, was contemptible to a 
degree. Arthur Thistlewood, Dr James Watson, James Watson, jun., Thomas Preston, 
John Hooper, and a man named Hunt, who eventually became a Member of 
Parliament, were the most notorious of these agitators. Meetings were held in various 
parts of the kingdom, for the ostensible purpose of petitioning for parliamentary 
reform, and the metropolis followed the example.
	The first meeting took place, 15th of November, 1816, in the Spafields, then a 
wild unenclosed space. The circulation of some addresses proved that the object of the 
meeting was not of that peaceful nature which its promoters pretended to ascribe to it. 
On the day appointed, soon after twelve o'clock, the assemblage of the mob 
commenced, and in less than half-an-hour about five thousand persons had collected 
round a party supporting tricoloured flags. A cart was placed on this spot, and in a 
short time Dr Watson, his son, and Mr Hooper, all carrying tricoloured cockades in 
their hats, ascended this rostrum, and were hailed with loud cheers. The Doctor and 
his son then addressed the meeting in most inflammatory speeches; and the latter, 
having wound himself up to a pitch of the most ungovernable fury, called upon the 
people to follow him, and jumping from his elevated position he rushed, pistol in 
hand, at the head of the mob, towards Clerkenwell. The mob rushed the shop of Mr 
Beckwith, a gunmaker, and carried away all the arms they could find. They then 
marched under the guidance of their leader to the Tower, and then, while young 
Watson endeavoured to win the soldiers from their allegiance, by assuring them of the 
good feeling which prevailed towards them on the part of the people, and that they 
should receive a hundred guineas per man if they would join them, the mob continued 
to scour the neighbourhood in search of arms. While, however, the great body of the 
rioters had thus followed in the steps of their leader, others pursued a different 
direction, and, taking St Giles's, St Clement's and the Strand in their march, despoiled 
every shop which they approached of such articles as they deemed might be useful to 
them. The eruption was so sudden that the means of opposing the proceedings of the 
rioters could not speedily be obtained. The Lord Mayor, Sir Matthew Wood, showed 
great determination; and, notwithstanding the most violent proceedings on the part of 
these fellows, he and Sir James Shaw, the Chamberlain, succeeded in securing three 
of the insurgents, who had entered the Royal Exchange, and were armed with guns.
	The military at length appeared, and many of the rioters were secured, while 
the others, having thrown away their arms, quickly disappeared. Young Watson, 
however, was nowhere to be found; and it appears that immediately after he quitted 
the Tower, being alarmed at his position, he hastily returned to his lodgings, and 
possessing himself of some papers and other articles went to a public-house in Fetter 
Lane, where he found his father and Thistlewood. The trio considered themselves as 
being likely to be taken into custody, and they in consequence quitted London for 
Northampton immediately. On their arriving at Highgate, however, they were seized, 
on suspicion of being footpads, but a scuffle taking place, the elder Watson alone 
remained in the hands of their assailants, while his companions effected their escape.
	The Government had received information of a formidable and dangerous 
conspiracy, in which Dr Watson and others were stated to be deeply implicated, and 
the parties were in consequence apprehended, and with the Doctor were committed to 
the Tower.
	A bill being found by the grand jury, Watson, Thistlewood, Preston and 
Hooper were brought up from the Tower to the Court of King's Bench, on the 17th of 
May, 1817. They severally pleaded not guilty, and were then taken back to the Tower, 
from which they were again brought up on the 9th of June. 
	Dr Watson was first arraigned, and John Castles was the witness called to 
prove the most material facts against him. He said that he became acquainted with the 
prisoner about a month before the Spafields meeting, and saw him at the Cock, in 
Grafton Street, where he went to meet a society called the Spenceans. On the 
following night he met Watson and Preston by appointment at the Mulberry Arms, 
Moorfields, at a society of the same description; and he there saw present young 
Watson, Hooper, Thistlewood, the two Evanses, father and son, and one John 
Harrison. After the meeting broke up he walked away with the elder Watson, who 
observed that it was a very easy matter to upset Government, provided a few good 
fellows would act together. He then said that he had drawn out a plan that would 
debar the cavalry from acting, by interrupting the horses, and that he had got several 
people who had solicited at different houses, and that they had formed a committee, 
which was sitting, to devise the best modes and plans. He inquired where the witness 
lived, and promised to call the next morning, and show him the plan.
	In pursuance of this appointment he called at the lodging of Castles on the 
following Sunday morning, and produced several papers, one of which was a plan of 
the Tower, and another a plan of the machine, which he had described on the 
Thursday before, for obstructing the cavalry. It was to run upon four wheels, with 
sharp knives, which were to be on each side, and spikes in the middle. The knives 
were to be something like scythes, and placed horizontally. There were also several 
other drawings of the Tower Bridge, and different places and entrances about the 
Tower. "He then," continued Castles, "asked me how many men I could bring; and 
how many I knew. I told him I knew a great many, but I did not know whether they 
would act when put to the test; he begged I would exert myself as much as I could. I 
told him that I was a smith, and that I had nothing but my little business to live on; but 
he said never to mind that; they would find something better for me than that; they 
had plenty of money for everything. We then made another appointment, and I met 
him at one Newton's. Similar conversation took place there, and he said they had got a 
committee consisting of five–namely, Harrison, Preston, Thistlewood and his son, and 
himself–and that I should be made one of the generals, and head a party of pikemen 
and other men, and that I should hear further in a few days, and might consider myself 
as one of the committee from that time; that I should make the sixth, and they would 
not have any more.
	"Shortly afterwards I met the elder Watson, and we went to King Street 
barracks, and across the Park to a small magazine in Hyde Park, where the powder is 
kept, to examine the whole of the avenues, and determine which was the best place for 
setting fire to the barracks. There was also one Skinner with us, but he left us in the 
Park, and Watson said he had thought that Skinner was a cleverer man than he really 
was; that he had intended to have made an officer of him, but he found him not at all 
as he had calculated, as he had not any cultivated idea whatever.
	"About this time I was introduced to Thistlewood, by one John Harrison. 
Thistlewood asked me how much money it would take to make a few hundred pikes, 
and how long it would take me. I told him it would depend entirely on their size, and 
the steel or iron they should be made of. He said they should be about nine or ten 
inches long; and I told him that they would come to about fourpence or fourpence-
halfpenny a pound. He wished me to make one for a pattern; and I told him I would, 
but that I had no place to make them in. Harrison replied that he knew a person who 
would lend me the use of his forge. Hooper and Harrison went with me to a little shop 
in a cellar, kept by a man of the name of Bentley, in Hart Street. I asked him to allow 
me to make use of his forge to make a pike, to put round a rabbit-warren or fishpond. 
He told me that if I would look out a piece of iron he would make it himself. When it 
was done it was given to me, and I took it away. I afterwards carried it to one 
Randall's, where I met the two Watsons, and Thistlewood, Harrison and Hooper; and 
Watson said that it was a famous instrument. Watson then wrote down the name of 
the house where the committee sat, No. 9 Greystoke Place, on a paper for me.
	"A day or two afterwards the committee met in Greystoke Place, to deliberate 
upon the best plan to set fire to the barracks, and to get all the men we could together. 
When we met, Thistlewood produced a map of London. It was marked out with which 
were the best roads to take; and we arranged the number of men who were to be 
collected together at the different barracks and places to be attacked. The whole of the 
committee were to act as generals; to have their several stations, and were to attack 
the separate barracks at one given time and moment. Watson proposed Thistlewood as 
the head general. Thistlewood and young Watson were to take the guns and two field-
pieces that were in the artillery ground in Gray's Inn Lane; Preston was to attack the 
Tower; Harrison the artillery barracks near Regent's Park; and I was to set fire to the 
King Street barracks, and either to take the men prisoners or kill those that might 
attempt to escape; the elder Watson was to set fire to the Portland Street barracks. We 
were to attack the whole of those places at a given hour, and set them on fire at one in 
the morning; we were to take any person we met and make them join us–such as 
gentlemen's servants; and coachmen were to be taken from their carriages, and those 
who could ride were to have the horses, which were to form a cavalry, and the 
coaches and carriages were to be used to barricade the entrances. After I had set fire to 
the King Street barracks, and after we had seen that all were in flames, and that none 
had made their escape, I was to meet the elder Watson at the top of Oxford Street. 
Harrison was to join us with the artillery, which he was to bring from the barracks by 
Regent's Park, and as soon as that was done there was to be a volley fired, to let the 
remainder know we had got possession of the artillery. Piccadilly Gate was to be 
fastened and chained, and a party stationed there to fire upon the horse if they 
attempted to come from the barracks, and then others were to proceed towards 
Charing Cross and Westminster Bridge, and barricade there all the avenues upon that 
side, to prevent them coming round by Chelsea and that way, and then young Watson 
and Thistlewood, after getting possession of the guns, were to break open all the oil-
shops and gunsmiths' shops, in which they could find either combustibles or arms. 
They were then to blockade Chancery Lane and Gray's Inn Lane to St Giles's, where 
Thistlewood was to make his grand stand. One gun was to be pointed up Tottenham 
Court Road and the other up Oxford Street.
	"Preston, if he had not succeeded in taking the Tower, was to barricade 
London Bridge, to prevent the artillery coming from Woolwich. He was then to 
barricade Whitechapel, to prevent any troops coming from the country that way; and 
then, when he had a body sufficient, the main body was to have met at the Bank."
	Witness proceeded to give many more details of the plot, and described how, 
when an attempt was made to carry it into effect, the mob threw down their arms at 
the approach of the military, while the ringleaders escaped into the country.
	On his cross-examination it appeared that the witness was a Government spy, 
and that his morals admirably fitted him for such an employment. There were few 
crimes, short of murder, with which he was not made to charge himself. On the sixth 
day of the trial Mr Hunt and several other witnesses were called, whose testimony 
went to impeach the credit of Castles and others for the prosecution, after which 
counsel was heard for the prisoner, and the Attorney-General spoke in reply.
	Watson having declined to make any defence after the ability displayed by his 
counsel, Lord Ellenborough proceeded to charge the jury, who returned a verdict of 
acquittal, founded apparently upon the incredibility of the testimony of the witness 
Castles.
	It was not until the 24th of February, 1820, that the public were made aware of 
another plot to which Dr Watson was a party and which had for its object the 
assassination of the whole of his Majesty's Ministers. On the morning of that date a 
proclamation was plentifully distributed throughout the metropolis, offering a reward 
of a thousand pounds for the apprehension of the notorious Arthur Thistlewood, on a 
charge of high treason and murder, and pronouncing the heaviest penalties against all 
who should harbour or conceal him from justice.
	It would appear that it had been long known to the Members of the 
Government that a plan was in meditation by which they would all be murdered, and 
that Thistlewood was one of the originators of and prime movers in the horrid design; 
but in accordance with the system which then existed–of waiting until the crime 
should be all but matured, in order to secure a conviction of the offenders–they 
determined to make no effort to crush the scheme until a period should have arrived 
when their own safety rendered it necessary. The conspirators, meanwhile, having 
weighed various plans and projects for the accomplishment of their object, eventually 
determined to select the evening of Wednesday, the 23rd of February, as that on 
which they would carry out their plot, and it was deemed advisable that this night 
should be fixed upon because it became known to them, by an announcement in the 
newspapers, that a Cabinet dinner would then be held at the house of Lord Harrowby, 
in Grosvenor Square. Contemptible as the means possessed by the conspirators were 
to carry their design fully into execution, it is certain, from the confession of one of 
them, that the first part of their project was planned with so much circumstantial 
exactness that the assassination of all the Ministers would have been secured. It would 
appear that it was arranged that one of the party should proceed to Lord Harrowby's 
house with a parcel addressed to his lordship, and that when the door was opened his 
companions should rush in, bind or, in case of resistance, kill the servants, and occupy 
all the avenues of the house, while a select band proceeded to the chamber where the 
Ministers were at dinner, and massacred the whole of them indiscriminately. To 
increase the confusion, hand-grenades were prepared, which it was intended should be 
thrown lighted into the several rooms, and one of the party engaged to bring away the 
heads of Lords Castlereagh and Sidmouth in a bag, which he had provided for that 
purpose.
	Thus far the conspirators might probably have carried their plans into effect, 
but of the scheme for a general revolution which these men–whose number never 
exceeded thirty–appear to have considered themselves capable of accomplishing we 
cannot seriously speak. Among other arrangements, the Mansion House–selected, we 
suppose, for its proximity to the Bank–was fixed upon for the "palace of the 
provisional government."
	The place chosen for the final organisation of their proceedings, and for 
collecting their force previous to immediate action, was a half-dilapidated tenement in 
an obscure street called Cato Street, near the Edgware Road. The premises were 
composed of a stable, with a loft above, and had been for some time unoccupied.
	The information upon which Ministers proceeded in frustrating the schemes of 
the conspirators was derived from a man named Edwards, who pretended to enter into 
their views, for the purpose of betraying them.
	Thus accurately informed of the intentions of the gang, measures were taken 
for their apprehension. A strong body of constables and police officers, supported by a 
detachment of the Guards, was ordered to proceed to Cato Street, under the direction 
of Mr (afterwards Sir Richard) Birnie, the magistrate. On arriving at the spot they 
found that the conspirators had taken the precaution to place a sentinel below, and that 
the only approach to the loft was by passing up a ladder, and through a trap-door so 
narrow as not to admit more than one at a time. Ruthven led the way, followed by 
Ellis, Smithers and others of the Bow Street patrol, and on the door being opened they 
discovered the whole gang, in number between twenty and thirty, hastily arming 
themselves. There was a carpenter's bench in the room, on which lay a number of 
cutlasses, bayonets, pistols and sword-belts, and a considerable quantity of 
ammunition. Ruthven, upon bursting into the loft, announced himself as a peace 
officer, and called upon them to lay down their arms. Thistlewood stood near the door 
with a drawn sword, and Smithers advanced upon him, when the former made a 
lunge, and the unfortunate officer received the blade in his breast, and almost 
immediately expired.
	About this time the Guards, who had been delayed in consequence of their 
having entered the street at the wrong end, arrived, under the command of Captain 
(Lord Adolphus) Fitzclarence, and mounted the ladder; but, as the conspirators had 
extinguished the lights, fourteen or fifteen of them succeeded in making their escape, 
and Thistlewood, the chief of the gang, was among the number. A desperate conflict 
now took place, and at length nine persons were made prisoners–namely, Ings, 
Wilson, Bradburn, Gilchrist, Cooper, Tidd, Monument, Shaw and Davidson. They 
were all immediately conveyed to Bow Street, together with a large quantity of arms, 
consisting of pistols, guns, swords and pikes, and a large sackful of hand-grenades, 
besides other ammunition, which had been found in the loft. The same means by 
which the conspiracy had been discovered was now adopted in order to procure the 
discovery of the hiding-place of Thistlewood, and it was found that, instead of his 
returning to his own lodgings in Stanhope Street, Clare Market, on the apprehension 
of his fellows, he had gone to an obscure house, No. 8 White Street, Moorfields. On 
the morning of the 24th of February, at nine o'clock, Lavender and others of the Bow 
Street patrol were dispatched to secure his apprehension; and after planting a guard 
round the house, so as to prevent the possibility of his escaping, they entered a room 
on the ground floor, where they found the object of their inquiry in bed, with his 
stockings and breeches on. In his pockets were found some ball cartridges and flints, a 
black girdle or belt, which he was seen to wear at Cato Street, and a military sash.
	He was first conveyed to Bow Street, and there shortly examined by Sir R. 
Birnie, by whom he was subsequently conducted to Whitehall, where he was 
introduced to the presence of the Privy Council. He was still handcuffed, but he 
mounted the stairs leading to the council chamber with great alacrity. On his being 
informed of the nature of the charges made against him by the Lord Chancellor, he 
declined saying anything, and was remanded to prison. In the course of the week 
several other persons were apprehended as being accessories to the plot; and, on the 
3rd of March, Thistlewood, Monument, Brunt, Ings, Wilson, Harrison, Tidd and 
Davidson were committed to the Tower as state prisoners, the rest of the persons 
charged being sent back to Coldbath Fields Prison, where they had been previously 
confined.
	The case of the parties to this most diabolical conspiracy immediately received 
the attention of the law officers of the Crown; and on the 15th of April, 1820, a 
special commission being issued, the prisoners were arraigned at the bar of the Old 
Bailey on the charge of high treason, and also of murder, in having caused the death 
of the unfortunate Smithers. There were eleven prisoners–Arthur Thistlewood, 
William Davidson (a man of colour), James Ings, John Thomas Brunt, Richard Tidd, 
James Wilson, John Harrison, Richard Bradburn, John Shaw Strange, James Gilchrist 
and Charles Cooper–and they all pleaded not guilty to the charges preferred against 
them.
	Counsel having been assigned to the prisoners, and the necessary forms having 
been gone through, Thistlewood received an intimation that his case would be taken 
on Monday morning, the 17th of the same month, and the prisoners were remanded to 
that day.
	At the appointed time, accordingly, Arthur Thistlewood was placed at the bar. 
He looked pale, but evinced his usual firmness. The jury having been sworn, and the 
indictment read, the Attorney-General stated the case at great length, and twenty-five 
witnesses were examined in support of the prosecution, among whom were several 
accomplices, whose testimony was satisfactorily corroborated. Some of those who 
appeared to give evidence had been apprehended on the fatal night in Cato Street, but 
were now admitted witnesses for the Crown. After a trial which occupied the Court 
four days, Thistlewood was found guilty of high treason. He heard the verdict with his 
wonted composure, seeming to have anticipated it; for when it was pronounced he 
appeared quite indifferent to what so fatally concerned him.
	The evidence against Tidd, Ings, Davidson and Brunt, whose trials came on 
next in succession, differed little from that upon which Thistlewood was convicted, 
and they were also found guilty. Their trials, being separate, occupied the Court six 
days. On the evening of the tenth day the six remaining prisoners, at the suggestion of 
their counsel, pleaded guilty–having been permitted to withdraw their former plea–by 
which they eventually escaped capital punishment.
	On Friday, the 28th of April, the eleven prisoners were brought up to receive 
sentence. After a most admirable and affecting speech, the Lord Chief Justice passed 
sentence in the usual form upon them, directing that, after they should have been 
hanged, their heads should be severed from their bodies, and their bodies divided into 
four quarters, which should be at the disposal of his Majesty.
	The execution of Thistlewood, Ings, Brunt, Davidson and Tidd took place on 
the following Monday, at Newgate. Davidson was the only prisoner who did not reject 
religious consolation; and Thistlewood, when on the scaffold, turned away from the 
ordinary with an expression of indifference and contempt. 


PHILIP HAINES AND MARY CLARKE  
Executed at Leicester for the murder of Mr. John Clarke, March 1821

	PERHAPS a more appalling instance of human depravity, involving the 
dreadful fact of a wife procuring the murder of her husband, after a long course of 
adultery with his assassin, is scarcely to be found upon record than is developed in the 
following tale. -–
	At the Lent Assizes for the county of Northampton, on the 8th of March, 1821, 
Philip Haynes was indicted for the murder of Mr. John Clarke, of Charwell-house, 
Charwelton, Northamptonshire; and Mary Clarke, widow of the deceased, was also 
put to the bar, charged in the indictment with being an accessory to the said murder 
before the fact.
	Mr. Clarke, (King's Counsel) opened the case for the prosecution, which he 
briefly stated to the Court and Jury to the following effect:
	The indictment charged the prisoner, Philip Haynes, with the murder of Mr. 
John Clarke, who was an opulent farmer, residing at Charwell-house, near 
Charwelton, in this county, on the 10th of February last, and Mary Clarke, the widow, 
with being an accessory before the fact in the said murder, she having excited the 
other prisoner, Haynes, to commit such murder. The prisoner, Haynes, for more than a 
year, had been in the service of Mr. Clarke;–having, however, left him, he went to 
Byfield, which was about two miles from Mr. Clarke's where he resided till the 
murder was committed. On the 10th of February last, about four o'clock in the 
afternoon, Mr. Clarke was upon a hay-stack, cutting hay; whilst he was there, and in 
the act of cutting, he was shot at from the barn, which was distant from the hay-stack 
seven or eight feet, and struck on the left arm. A labourer at work in the barn, on 
hearing the discharge of the gun, immediately ran out and met his master walking 
towards the house, and bleeding; this person observed the smoke to meet him, and to 
be between the barn and the hay-stack, he therefore was confident that the gun must 
have been fired from the barn. Surgical aid was immediately procured, Mr. 
Wildegoose, a surgeon, attended, and amputated the arm, in the hope of saving Mr. 
C.'s life; before this operation was performed, Mr. Clarke made his will, and in two 
days afterwards he died. There could be no doubt of the wound, and that the person, 
whoever it was that committed it, was guilty of murder. Mr. Clarke had strong 
suspicions of the prisoner Haynes.–His life had been attempted once or twice before; 
at one time a rope had been put across the highway, at another time he received a 
blow against his??gate, from which, however, he escaped. In consquence of the 
suspicions which fell upon Haynes, endeavours were made to apprehend him, but he 
could not be found; he had not been at his lodgings for a fortnight before; the barn 
was searched, and in a hole in the straw, capable of containing more than one person, 
a gun, a wallet, a wooden bottle, a glass bottle, bread and bacon, a powder flask, a 
small fustian bag, with lead and shots in it, were found. Search was also made to 
discover from whence the gun was fired; the rafters of the barn were observed to be 
dirtied and scorched with the flash, and that spot commanded the hay stack, from 
which it was distant only about seven feet. By direction of Mr. Canning, the executor 
of the deceased, a guard was placed round the barn on Sunday. On Monday, Mr. 
Canning desired a more particular examination of it to be made, and after some time, 
the prisoner was discovered, covered over with barley straw; he was of course taken 
and searched, and upon him were found a pocket-book, containing a letter from Mrs. 
Clarke, neither dated nor signed; and on searching his lodgings, a fustian coat was 
found belonging to the prisoner, a piece from which had been cut out, and comparing 
that with the bag found in the barn, it appeared to correspond. Also a quantity of lead 
recently melted, a clasp knife, and a great number of letters in the hand-writing of 
Mrs. Clarke. An active magistrate attended the deceased, and took his deposition; and 
the prisoner Haynes, being asked to give an account where he was at the time the gun 
was fired, refused to give any account of himself. Having disappeared for a fortnight 
before, seems to have been done so with a view of shewing that he was not in the 
way.
	With respect to the other prisoner, Mary Clarke, there were a great number of 
letters to produce, to shew that she was the instigator;–that she was tired of her 
husband–that he was old–that the general outline of the letters was, that she wanted to 
get rid of him, to enable her to form a connexion with the prisoner Haynes, after the 
death of her husband. In one of these letters it would be found, that she desired 
Haynes to procure a quantity of laudanum and to send it to her. The constant theme of 
the letters would be found to be "do him, if you can." Having heard the evidence, the 
Jury would have to consider, first, whether the prisoner, Haynes, committed the 
murder; and next, whether the prisoner, Mary Clarke, incited him to do so.
	Witnesses were then called in support of the prosecution.
	Anthony Marriott.–I am a labourer, living at Hellidon, near Charwell-house, 
and worked as labourer with Mr. Clarke, at his decease. I saw him on Saturday, the 
10th of February, against the cow-house door; he was then in good health, and not far 
from the hay-rick. I went into the barn to thrash, and was about to pull my clothes off 
to begin, when I heard the report of a gun, which appeared to me to come from 
without. I opened the door and ran out. I met smoke coming towards me from the 
west, between the barn and the hay-rick. I perceived my poor master with his left hand 
supported by his right. He was groaning, and the blood running very much. I laid hold 
of him and led him to the barn door, in the road to the house. When we got to the barn 
door, I requested him to stop, and then ran to look over the wall, but could not see any 
one. I returned to my master, who was bleeding very much, and was very faint, and 
took him to the house. Mrs. Clarke, the prisoner, met me in the yard with my master, 
and said, it was no more than she expected, times and often, on account of stopping up 
the road. [Here it appeared that Mr. Clarke had stopped up a footway through the 
homestead.] I got him into the house, and pulled his coat off. Mrs. Clarke assisted in 
tying up his arm. She then ordered me to go for Mr. Yeomans, the surgeon of Badby, 
distant about three miles, and the nearest surgeon. I saw my master two or three times 
before his death, which happened on the following Tuesday morning, about four 
o'clock. The shot was fired about half past three in the afternoon of Saturday. When I 
went into the barn, I found things were not as I had left them. I found some loose 
barley scattered. I had swept it up the night before. I searched the barn on Monday 
morning about nine o'clock, and turned some loose barley back, and after getting 
down a good bit, I perceived something stir. I trod on his feet, and having stirred the 
part with my fork, some one said, "Be civil, and I will get up." It was the prisoner. I 
pushed the fork at him, and said, "You rascal, I have a good mind to stab you–you did 
not mind killing my master." We then tied his hands, and secured him. I asked my 
mistress, on Saturday, whether I should stop all night. She said, "No, there was 
plenty".
	Robert Wildegoose, Esq., of Daventry, formerly a surgeon in the army. I am 
conversant with gun-shot wounds. I was sent for to attend the late Mr. Clarke; saw 
him about six o'clock on the Saturday evening, found him on the bed, exhausted from 
loss of blood; examined him, and found the principal wound was in the under part of 
the elbow joint; there was another wound higher up; the first wound was so large that 
I could put my fingers in; it had then stopped bleeding; I found the bone so much 
injured that I advised amputation; we waited until Mr. Clarke had settled his affairs; 
he made his will, and the arm was amputated between the elbow and shoulder; we 
then examined the limb taken off more particularly, and found two loose pieces of 
bone, and some shots which had been opposed against the bone; we also found the 
principal artery had been divided, which necessarily occasioned great loss of blood; I 
saw him the next morning, and again on Monday; he was very weak, but perfectly 
sensible; I thought him then in a dangerous state; I remained with him for some hours; 
in my judgment, the wound was the cause of his death.
	The evidence of T. Waterfield, Esq., another surgeon, was to the same effect.
	John Plomer Clarke, Esq.–I am a magistrate for this county, and went to the 
house of the deceased about ten o'clock in the morning of the 12th of February last; he 
was then very weak, but perfectly collected and sensible, and expressed his 
apprehensions that he should not recover. I took his deposition in his bed-chamber; 
his words were faintly spoken; I thought it better that he should not know that Haynes 
was in custody, until he had signed the deposition–when signed, I told him Haynes 
had been taken; and on expressing his wish to see him, I ordered Haynes into the bed-
chamber. Haynes came to the foot of the bed, and asked deceased with great 
unconcern how he did; the deceased looked at him, and with his remaining hand 
pointing towards him, said, "You bloody-minded fellow, how could you do me this 
unkind office?" Haynes replied, he had done nothing, and knew nothing about it. I 
then ordered Haynes out of the room, as the old man was much agitated. I afterwards 
went downstairs; I stated to Haynes what Mr. Clarke had said, and commented on his 
unfeeling manner, in the course of which I mentioned to him something about his 
conscience–he said he had no conscience. I asked him how he came to be in the barn; 
he replied, he came there on his own private business, and should not tell me or any 
other man then, but probably he might tell me before he died.
	The deposition of the deceased was then read, in which it was stated, that on 
Saturday evening he was cutting hay from the rick near the barn; that a gun was fired 
at him from the barn, which so severely wounded him in the arm, that it was obliged 
to be amputated–that on Sunday, Mr. Canning brought in a wooden bottle, which 
deceased knew belonged to him; also, some bread and cheese, which deceased 
believed to be of the same kind as they were then consuming in the house; and that the 
bit of linen also brought in by Mr. Canning, was part of a frock, worn by his 
(deceased's) little girl.
	Mr. Robt. Canning.–I went with Cockerill, Tubb, and others, to search the 
barn; I got, by means of a ladder, to the top of the barley-mow, and found a large hole, 
about seven feet deep and two yards wide, in the barley, by the side of the wall, next 
the rick-yard, and on the side next the hay-rick; I called Tubb, and told him to go 
down into the hole and search it; I then called up Lomas, and went down to the hay-
rick; they produced, in a short time, a gun, a wallet, a wooden bottle, and a glass 
bottle; the gun appeared black in the pan, as if it had been used; I took them from 
Lomas to the bed-side of Mr. Clarke; after I had shewn them to him, I took them 
home, locked them up, and went to the magistrate. In the wallet were two pieces of 
bread, one piece of cheese, and a piece of bacon; also a canvas bag or purse, in which 
was a tin powder flask, with some powder in it, several large slugs, and a quantity of 
large and small shot. On Sunday evening I set four men to watch the barn and 
premises, sent four or five men to the lodgings of the prisoner, and remained on the 
premises till nearly twelve on Sunday night. The next morning, I ordered Noon, 
Marriott, and Samuel Tubb, to go on the mow and turn the barley over; they shortly 
after called to me; when I came I looked on the mow and found they had got the 
prisoner Haynes; I went up the ladder, tied a cord round his arms, and sent him to the 
house. I observed the eaves of the barn from the hay-stack, where I had placed myself, 
and directed a gun to be pointed out at me: there is a space at the top of the mow in 
the barn, under the rafter, at which a gun might be put out. I knelt down on the rick, as 
if cutting, in a part where the hay had been recently cut, there was blood near it; the 
gun commanded me. On the Monday after the deceased was shot, on going into the 
house I met Mrs. Clarke, and asked her how she did; she made me no answer; I said, 
how is poor Clarke; she said, "I don't know, I have not seen him."
	Mr. John Upton.–I live at??Badby, I searched Haynes on Monday, and found 
the pocket-book with the papers in it now produced, they have been in my custody 
ever since; the five pound forged note was also in it; I also found a paper with some 
marks of gunpowder about it, a canvass purse, with keys in it and pocket knives.
	Mr. Richard Cole.–I am one of the constables of Daventry; I went to the 
prisoner's lodgings, and found there a quantity of letters in a box; found also the bottle 
of laudanum now produced, in a box–we found on the shelf in the kitchen, a quantity 
of lead, and in the same room the old coat or frock now produced. I observed that part 
of one of the pockets had been cut away. I compared the pocket that had been cut out, 
with the bag produced; it is my opinion, that it is part of the pocket, as it fits.
	Robert Smith, I am a labourer, and worked with Mr. Clarke. I went for the 
doctor; whilst saddling the horse, Mrs. Clarke came to me about a quarter of an hour 
after the accident; she said, when I was mounting, "Don't kill the horse,"–when I came 
back, I was in the room assisting the surgeon. Mrs. Clarke, was in the kitchen, I called 
for some cloths, for Mr. Clarke was vomiting; she said, "there were cloths enough, 
and we might take them." There were none in the room, and she did not come up 
stairs, we therefore took a sheet off the other bed.
	Several other witnesses were examined, whose testimony tended to 
substantiate in the most complete manner the evidence here given in detail. On the 
letters from the wretched woman to her brutal paramour being put in, a feeble attempt 
was made by the counsel for the defence to question their admissibility, on the ground 
that the hand-writing of the prisoner had not been sufficiently proved;–to these 
objections the counsel for the prosecution were about to reply, when they were 
stopped by the Judge, who instantly decided that the letters were perfectly admissible. 
These letters were numbered, 1, 2, 8, 9, 11, 17, 24, 28, 29, 36, 40, 42, 44, 45, 46, 47, 
and the following extracts from them prove too well the nature of the guilty compact 
existing between the prisoners.
	No. 1. "I have caught a cold in getting out of bed to do his shoulder. He has an 
inflammation, and I hope God Almighty will take him before it be long."
	No. 2. "You must have another plan, for when he goes out again he means to 
bring some one with him–he has no thoughts of you–when the night grows dark you 
may lit on him, and get another pistol which will carry–he says the man that gave him 
the blow had a red striped waistcoat, and a short man–I pray, day and night, it may be 
done between now and Christmas.–I hope you will send word if you mean to watch 
again–I am sure it may be done."
	No. 8. "I hope it will not be long–I hope you will watch all you can–I shall not 
see you till you have done it–I hope you will do it as soon as you can–do it safe,"
	No. 11. "I could be happy if the Old–was dead."
	No. 17. "I hope you will watch him all you can, and do him, if you can."
	No. 24. "The £10 you change at Bonham's keep £1 yourself, and send me the 
rest."
	No. 28. "Our shepherd is gone soldiering, and the Old – shepherds himself, 
now is your time to do him and settle him, if you intend to do it."
	No. 29. "I cannot tell when he will go out anywhere–and I dare not let you 
come when he is here–when it is done,–."
	No. 36. "I wish you would contrive to do it, for it may as well be done first as 
last–and now he goes himself, you may do it better."
	No. 40. "When they are a-field you must hide yourself, and do it–On Sunday 
he is in all day–I wish the–would fetch him–I shall not come down to Byfield till you 
have done it, and settle the Old --. I dreamt that you and I were talking against the 
meadow-gate, and the old man came to us, and you ran after him and fired at him, and 
missed him–but when you do, you mind that and yourself–you must watch for him all 
day when you can, and do it–and mind yourself."
	42. "I tell you the Old–has seen Elkington; but he did not say he see you and I 
together–mind yourself."
	No. 44. "I hope you will try all you can to get rid of the Old–now I must tell 
you, you don't mean to do it–so tell me from your heart, whether you mean to do it or 
not–for I will make away with myself if you don't do it."
	No. 45. "If it is not done in a short time, I cannot see what will be the end of 
it–I with you would do it as soon as you possibly can–It seems strange to me that it 
should be so long about–I must say I think you can't watch for him so much as you 
say–I am sure he has no will made no more than what I told you of."
	No. 46. "I wish you would send me some laudum [laudanum] and I will see 
what I can do for him–I will do it if I can–send me that or something else."
	No. 47. "I pray you to do all you can to get shut of him, for there is nobody 
knows what I go through, but God and myself.–I have thirteen calves and lambs to 
serve, and thirteen dozen of butter, but d-- him, do him if you can."
	The above letters are generally addressed to the prisoner, Haynes, in the terms 
of "my dear friend."
	The prisoner, Haynes, being called upon for his defence, said he was innocent, 
and never had a gun, or any thing of the kind.
	The prisoner, Mary Clarke, said she left her defence to her counsel.
	The Judge then recapitulated the whole of the evidence to the Jury, and 
observed, that in order to find the prisoners guilty of the offence charged, they must 
be satisfied, first, that Mr. Clarke died in consequence of the wound he received, and 
that Haynes fired at and gave him that wound; and secondly, they must be satisfied 
that the prisoner Mary Clarke, instigated him to commit the crime.
	After a short consultation, the Jury returned a verdict of Guilty, against both 
the prisoners. His Lordship then proceeded to pass sentence: he stated, that the 
prisoners had been convicted upon the most clear and satisfactory evidence, of the 
foul and tremendous crime of murder, which in this particular case was aggravated by 
every consideration, it having been committed by the wife and servant, after a long 
and libidinous intercouse; that the law permitted them but a short time to live; that it 
would be in vain for either of them to expect mercy in this world; that in a very few 
days, and indeed in a very few hours, the follies and vanities of this life would be 
closed upon them for ever–a short time only was open for repentance, but there were 
hopes that by a sincere and true repentance, even at the last, the Divine wrath might 
be averted; that Philip Haynes, who said he had no conscience, must have an inward 
monitor who told him that he had transgressed, and that Mary Clarke, although her 
affections were alienated from her husband, owed still a duty to herself; that he hoped 
both would sincerely repent, and prepare for what was to come–that it was his 
Lordship's painful duty to denounce against them that sentence which the law had 
awarded to their crime; that sentence was–"That you, Philip Haynes, and you, Mary 
Clarke, be taken from hence to the prison from whence you came, and taken from 
thence on Saturday next, the 10th day of March instant, to the place of execution, and 
there be hanged by the necks until you are severally dead, and that your bodies when 
dead, be taken down and dissected and anatomized; and may the Lord have mercy on 
your souls!"
	Previous to their execution, these wretched culprits made confession of the 
crime for which they were to suffer, and narrated in detail the particulars of their 
proceedings for the accomplishment of their diabolical purpose. They acknowledged 
that a criminal intercourse had subsisted between them for nearly two years, and also 
that many schemes had been planned for the purpose of effecting the destruction of 
their victim; and the female prisoner acknowledged to having made repeated overtures 
to her guilty paramour for the destruction of her husband, long before the dreadful 
deed was effected. 


JOHN SMITH  
A Greenwich Pensioner, eighty years of age, executed 23rd of December, 
1822, for the murder of a woman with whom he had cohabited

	AT the Kent Assizes, for December, 1822, John Smith, a pensioner of 
Greenwich Hospital, was indicted for the wilful murder of Catherine Smith, a woman 
with whom he had for some time previously cohabited.
	The prisoner, a fine robust old man, nearly six feet high, entered the court with 
a firm and steady step, although nearly eighty years of age. The following is a 
digested abstract of the evidence for the prosecution:
	On the morning of the 4th of October, about half-past five o'clock, he went to 
a public-house called "The Cricketers," sat down near the bar, and called for a pot of 
porter. Immediately afterwards, addressing himself to the landlord, he said "Hawkins, 
have you seen my woman this morning?" He replied in the negative; upon which the 
prisoner said, "If you see her go past, call her in." About ten minutes before six, the 
deceased came into the public-house in company with another Greenwich pensioner. 
The deceased called for two glasses of gin. The landlord drew a glass of gin, and set it 
before her on the bar; when she said, "You know I take it with peppermint." The 
landlord was turning round to get the peppermint bottle, when in an instant the 
prisoner, who was sitting close to the deceased, rose up and stabbed her with a knife 
in the right breast. Before this not a word had passed between the prisoner and the 
deceased. The deceased immediately exclaimed, "you have killed me! you have killed 
me!"
	The unfortunate woman was urged by the landlord to run to the infirmary 
immediately. She went out, but before she got the distance of forty paces she dropped 
down dead. The prisoner was immediately seized by the landlord, who said to him, 
"You wicked old man, how could you do so rash an act?" He replied, "She has been 
with that fellow all night."
	The prisoner was afterwards searched, and the knife was found upon him, 
stained with blood; and being asked whether that was the instrument with which he 
committed the murder, he said it was, and owned that he did it. The point of the 
instrument, which was a common pocket knife, upon being examined, appeared as if 
it had been recently sharpened.
	The prisoner, in his defence, entered into a long statement of quarrels between 
him and the deceased, which, he said, had irritated and made him unhappy. She had 
come from London to live with him, and take care of him, he being old and infirm; 
they had lived together for about fifteen months; but a short time before this 
transaction, she was greatly altered in her behaviour towards him. He had, through 
friends of his own, procured her a situation as helper in one of the wards of the 
hospital; she became cold and unkind to him, and at last be discovered that she kept 
company with Levett, another Greenwich pensioner. On the morning of the 4th of 
October he went to "The Cricketers" public-house to get some beer; while he was 
there, he was cutting a piece of stick-liquorice with his knife, when the deceased and 
her lubber came into the house and stood close to him; he had been drinking the night 
before; the appearance of the deceased with her paramour affected him very much, 
and the deceased having trod upon his corns, he in a moment of rage committed the 
fatal act; but without knowing what he did, and certainly not intending to kill the 
unfortunate woman. Under such circumstances he hoped a merciful view of his case 
would be taken.
	The Judge having summed up the evidence, left it to the Jury, who 
immediately returned a verdict of Guilty, and the prisoner was ordered for execution 
on the following Monday. He retired from the bar with the same firm step and 
demeanour with which he had entered the Court.
	At twelve o'clock on Monday the 23rd of December, the dreadful sentence of 
the law was carried into effect on Penenden Heath. He appeared to be very penitent 
and resigned, and partook of the sacrament a short time before he left the gaol. At the 
place of execution he addressed the people, who were assembled in great crowds, and 
said, "that women were the cause of his downfall." He prayed aloud and very 
fervently, until the drop fell, frequently ejaculating, with a clear and audible voice, 
"Lord have mercy upon me! Christ have mercy upon me!" and with these words upon 
his lips was launched into eternity.
	After hanging the usual time, the body was taken to Greenwich College, where 
it laid one day for public view, and was afterwards dissected and anatomized in the 
Hospital.
	Previous to his execution, this man exhibited one of the most remarkable 
instances of mental abstraction, that perhaps has ever been manifested under the awful 
circumstances of deliberate murder. He sent for a gentleman of Maidstone, who, 
attending the summons, received from the prisoner a vehement injunction to make 
public what he called a history of his life. The surprise of the gentleman may be 
conceived, when, on examining the paper, he discovered it to be a concise narrative of 
the place of the prisoner's birth–his propensities–and, finally, his motives for 
committing the murder, described in doggerel verse. Although the production of an 
illiterate man, it is truly astonishing that the mind of a man nearly fourscore years old 
could, by any possibility, under circumstances so peculiarly awful, for a moment be 
so abstracted from his situation as to admit of so extraordinary a production. The 
levity of the concluding lines is not the least striking part of this extraordinary 
effusion. The original has been followed literatim et verbatim.
In the County of Wicklow I was born'd 
but now in Maidstone die in scorn 
I once was counted a roving blade 
but to my misfortune had no trade 
women was always my downfall 
but still I liked and loved them all 
a hundred I have had in my time 
when I was young and in my prime 
women was always my delight 
but when I got old they did me slight 
a woman from London to me came 
she said with You I would fain remain 
if you will be constant I'll be true 
I never want no Man but You -- 
and on her own Bible a Oath did take 
that she never would Me forsake 
and during the time that I had Life 
she would always prove a loving Wife 
and by that Means we did agree 
to live together she and Me -- 
but soon her vows and Oath did break 
and to another Man did take 
Which she fetch'd home with her to lay 
and that proved her own destiny 
So as Jack Smith lay on his bed 
this notion strongly run in his Head 
then he got up with that intent 
to find her out was fully bent 
swearing if he found out her Oath she'd broke 
he stick a knife into her throat 
then to the Cricketers he did go 
to see if he could find it out or no 
not long been there before she Come in 
with this same fellow to fetch some Gin 
then with a Knife himself brought in 
immediately stab'd her under the Chin 
and in five minutes she was no more 
but there laid in her purple gore 
Now to conclude and end my song 
they are both dead dead and gone 
they are both gone I do declare 
gone they are but God knows where --


DANIEL DOODY, JOHN CUSSEN, alias WALSH, JAMES 
LEAHY, MAURICE LEAHY, WILLIAM DOODY, DAVID 
LEAHY, DANIEL RIEDY, WILLIAM COSTELLO, AND 
WALTER FITZMAURICE, alias CAPTAIN ROCK  
Convicted of Abduction, 1822/1823

	IT was the opinion of Dr. Johnson that many of the romantic tales of the 
middle ages had their origin in truth, and that the absolute distress of females might, 
in all probability, have called for the institution of "knight errantry." To protect the 
defenceless is a natural impulse, which has its foundation in the sympathies of our 
nature; but when a female, young, beautiful, and innocent, is the victim of oppression, 
there is no man with common feelings, who would not risk his life to snatch her from 
despair and misery. In this happy country there are few instances of abduction; but in 
Ireland this unmanly crime is too prevalent. The distracted state of certain parts of the 
country gives aid to the schemes of unprincipled ruffians, acting on the presumption 
that injured females, when degraded and dishonoured, would of necessity save the 
violators of their innocence from ignominy by a marriage–the only means, they 
suppose, left them to escape from unmerited shame. The persons thus forcibly carried 
away are generally the daughters of opulent farmers–a fact which clearly shows the 
mercenary views of those who commit so base and cowardly an outrage on the most 
defenceless part of the creation.
	Among the many outrages of this nature was one on the person of Miss 
Honora Goold, a young lady remarkable for her personal beauty. She lived in the 
house of her mother, at Glangurt, in the county of Cork, and had two sisters older than 
herself, she being scarcely sixteen, and a brother. On the 4th of March, 1822, about 
twelve o'clock at night, their dwelling was attacked by an armed banditti, who, on 
threatening to burn the house, were admitted. One of the ferocious ruffians burst into 
Miss Honora's apartment, and asked if she was the eldest Miss Goold. She replied in 
the negative, and said that her sister was on a visit in Cork. The inquirer then 
withdrew, and, having searched several other apartments, returned, followed by five 
or six others, and repeated his interrogation, which he, however, answered himself in 
the affirmative; and then desired her to arise and dress herself. At the suggestion of 
one of the party they withdrew outside the door, to allow a compliance with their 
orders.
	The young lady had no hesitation in obeying their mandate; for she very 
naturally preferred being up and dressed in the presence of such ruffians. She had 
scarcely put on her clothes, however, when one of them re-entered, seized the 
screaming girl in his arms, and bore her out of the house, where a horseman was 
waiting to receive her. Before this stranger she was placed, in spite of all her cries for 
mercy; and the party, having obtained their prize, set off at full speed, bending their 
course towards the Galties, a range of mountains between the counties of Cork and 
Limerick. At the distance of several miles they halted and procured a pillion, and then 
compelled her to ride behind the leader of this atrocious band. In her eagerness to 
escape she fell several times during their progress; and having continued her screams 
all the time, one of the ruffians threatened to murder her unless she desisted.
	By daylight they had entered the recesses of the Galties, and several of the 
party having occasionally dropped off, she was conducted by the few that remained to 
the house of David Leahy, a substantial farmer.
	The leader of this outrage was a young man named Brown, of a respectable 
family, and who had received an education which should have rendered him incapable 
of such base and unmanly conduct. The elder Miss Goold was entitled, on her 
marriage, to a large fortune; and Brown, hoping to possess himself of it, resolved to 
carry off the young lady. Being disappointed by the precipitancy and mistake of his 
assistants, he determined to make sure of the lovely victim who had fallen into his 
power, knowing that the opulence of her family could make him independent, 
provided he could insure the consent of the astonished girl he had forcibly carried off. 
With virtuous indignation she repulsed his fulsome advances, and begged the 
protection of Mrs Leahy, in whose parlour she now was; but, strange to say, this 
mother of children connived at the ruin of her unprotected guest.
	Foiled in his direct attack, Brown had recourse to an expedient, which, for the 
honour of human nature, we would wish never to record, did not impartial justice 
demand an honest discharge of our duty as faithful narrators of criminal occurrences. 
It was proposed, and immediately after breakfast, that Miss Goold should take some 
rest. A bed was in the parlour, and she was directed to repose upon it. This, indeed, 
after the fatigue of the night, was most desirable; but to her utter astonishment, the 
family, in which there were two females, left the room, at the same time locking the 
door upon herself and Brown. The monster, in spite of her entreaties and screams, 
proceeded to undress her, and insisted on sleeping beside her. The reader need not be 
told the rest–the purity of female innocence was grossly violated in the person of this 
young and lovely creature; and her destroyer arose from his bed of lust the polluter of 
one whose peace of mind neither the world's sympathy nor the world's wealth could 
restore.
	The friends of Miss Goold, who comprised the wealth and respectability of 
Cork county, set instantly about recovering the injured lady. The pursuit was 
continued from day to day for three weeks, and the vigilance of her friends was only 
evaded by removing the poor afflicted creature from cabin to cabin, and from the 
house of one farmer to that of another. One day she was kept on the bleak mountain, 
and had the anguish to see her friends at a distance, while she was prevented from 
flying to them by a ruffian who stood sentinel over her with a loaded pistol.
	Abused, insulted, and almost exhausted with fatigue, this delicate female 
absolutely refused to sanction the presumption of her destroyer; and at the conclusion 
of three weeks she was placed, by her ferocious guards, in a poor cabin by the road 
side, where her friends might find her. When discovered, she was in a deplorable 
condition, being literally unable to walk, stand, or sit. It took seventeen hours to 
remove her thirteen miles, the distance from her mother's house; but, when once 
restored to home and its enjoyments, her recovery was rapid, and in a short time her 
health was established as well as it was possible to be, under all the circumstances of 
her affecting case.
	From the description of the banditti received from Miss Goold, several of the 
party were apprehended. Brown, the guilty contriver of the whole, escaped out of the 
country; and Walter Fitzmaurice, alias Captain Rock, evaded the pursuit of justice for 
a considerable time, but at length surrendered himself to a magistrate. The men whose 
names are mentioned above, with the exception of Costello and Fitzmaurice, were 
brought to trial at Limerick, on the 29th of July, 1822. Miss Goold appeared to give 
evidence, dressed in deep mourning, and her narrative which she delivered with 
modest dignity, procured her the willing sympathy of a crowded court. The prisoners 
were found guilty–Death; but the three Leahys and Cussen were subsequently 
discharged, on a point of law operating in their favour.
	On the 23rd of August following, Walter Fitzmaurice, better known at the time 
as Captain Rock, pleaded Guilty at the Cork assizes, and, along with Costello, who 
was found Guilty on the solitary evidence of Miss Goold's brother, who swore to 
having seen him on the night of the abduction, received sentence of Death.
	On the ensuing Saturday, Costello underwent the awful sentence of the law, 
but Fitzmaurice was respited, something having arisen in his favour, principally on 
the ground of his pleading guilty in consequence of the judge refusing to put off his 
trial in the absence of a material witness. Costello, to the last, declared his innocence, 
not only of the crime for which he was convicted, but of any connexion whatever with 
the White-Boys.
	The history he gave of his misfortune to persons who conversed with him in 
the gaol, previous to going out to execution, was this:-- He was a relative of Brown's, 
and was workman to him for five years, up to September, 1821; when he left him for 
the purpose of assisting his brother, whose wife then died, leaving him a large family. 
He continued in the practice of habits of industry, and, as he declared on the scaffold, 
knew nothing of Miss Goold's abduction till the morning after. He slept, he asserted, 
on that night, and it was endeavoured to be established on the trial, with his brother; 
and Fitzmaurice, who pleaded guilty, was frequently afterwards heard to declare the 
innocence of this unfortunate man. Before going out to execution, he observed to a 
person in the gaol–"Are not these queer laws that make a man's life depend on the 
oath of one witness?" He also asked this person whether he thought there was much 
pain in the punishment he had to undergo, but being assured that there was not, and 
that it was only instantaneous, it afforded him great consolation. The only thing that 
he seemed to apprehend was the first sight of the hangman, and the tying up of his 
arms; but being reasoned with on these points, he acquiesced in their propriety, and 
assumed his usual firmness; and when the executioner came to tie his arms, he put 
them so far back that the tightness became extremely painful to him in his progress to 
the gallows. His manner of going to and at the place of execution was such as to 
awaken the sympathy and to excite the astonishment of all, even of those who guarded 
him, some of whom were observed to shed tears. He was firm to the last; and in him 
was observable that unpresuming confidence which could arise from no other source 
but the innocence of his heart, and his conscious freedom from the crime for which he 
suffered. His attention to the clansmen who accompanied him showed him to be 
impressed with the blessings of true piety: he died blessing his prosecutors, and 
begging the prayers of the people. He was a well-looking man, with rather a soft and 
open countenance, and had nothing daring or determined in his appearance. 


PHILIP STOFFEL AND CHARLES KEPPEL  
Guilt of Murder disclosed by a Prisoner's Ignorance of Spelling, 1823

	ON Tuesday night, the 8th of April, 1823, Mrs Elizabeth Richards, a widow of 
seventy-five years of age, was murdered at Clapham. The unfortunate lady had 
resided for thirty years in the same house. She kept no servant, and had no inmate but 
an elderly lady, named Bell. The latter was in the habit of going out in the evening to 
attend a place of religious worship. A little after eight o'clock on the evening in 
question a neighbour woman called to see Mrs Richards, and found her dead; she was 
lying on her back in the parlour, with an apron stuffed into her mouth. The pockets of 
the deceased had been violently torn from her side, and her watch and some money 
taken, as well as several articles of wearing apparel. The villains, however, had 
missed the principal object of their attack, for a large sum of money which was 
concealed in an upper room had escaped their search. A paper parcel was found in the 
hall, on which was written, "Mrs Bell, hat Mrs Richards, Clapham."
	The sensation produced by this unprovoked murder was so great that a public 
meeting was called a day or two after at Clapham, and a reward of two hundred 
guineas offered for the discovery of the murderers. The active officers of Union Hall 
police office in the course of a week apprehended a suspicious character, Philip 
Stoffel, nephew to Mrs Richards, a ruffianly-looking fellow of about twenty years of 
age. When brought to the police office he denied all knowledge of the crime with 
which he was accused; but on being requested to write "Mrs Bell, at Mrs Richards," 
he wrote the word "hat" for "at", in a hand precisely similar to that in which the 
superscription on the parcel found after the murder was written. Seeing himself 
detected, he exclaimed: "It is of no use–I was at the murder!" He then, unsolicited, 
gave a full account of the whole transaction, and acknowledged who were with him at 
the time. Previously, however, to this confession, another of the gang, named Thomas 
Scott, a rat-catcher, was in custody, and had been admitted King's evidence. In his 
confession, which gave a minute account of the whole transaction, he stated that the 
robbery was planned by Stoffel, who called in the aid of himself, Keppel and one 
Pritchard, but that the murder was the act of Keppel alone, Stoffel particularly 
desiring that they would not hurt his aunt.
	In consequence of the information obtained by Scott's confession, the officers 
went in pursuit of Keppel and Pritchard. After having travelled from Gravesend to 
Portsmouth, they succeeded in apprehending Keppel, who was disguised in a smock-
frock, etc. Pritchard escaped the pursuit of justice, as he was never apprehended. 
Keppel denied all knowledge of the murder, and behaved in the most hardened 
manner. Stoffel had every expectation of being admitted King's evidence, but he was 
not so fortunate, and he was arraigned along with Keppel at the Croydon Assizes, on 
the 25th of July, for the murder of Mrs Richards.
	Having been declared guilty by the jury, the learned judge (Mr Serjeant 
Onslow) put on the black cap, and passed the awful sentence of the law upon the 
prisoners. Keppel, whose conduct throughout the whole transaction had been most 
thoughtless and hardened, then directly addressed the Court in the most abominable 
language. He told the judge that he was a–old rogue, and damned him and his laws 
together; and was prevented from continuing his abuse only by being forcibly 
removed from the dock.
	The unhappy wretches continued, up to the day of their execution, which took 
place at Horsemonger Lane jail on the 28th of July, 1823, to exhibit the utmost levity 
of demeanour; but were at length brought to a just sense of their condition on the 
morning of their death, and were turned off, professedly lamenting their past misspent 
life. 


HENRY FAUNTLEROY  
A Partner in a Leading Banking-House, who forged Securities of the Value 
of One Hundred and Seventy Thousand Pounds, and was executed at 
Newgate on 30th of November, 1824

	THE station in society which was occupied by this unfortunate gentleman, 
together with the long-established respectability of the banking-house in which he was 
a most active partner, and the vast extent of the heartless forgeries which he 
committed, gave to his case an intensity of interest which has rarely been exceeded.
	The apprehension of Mr Fauntleroy took place on the 10th of September, 
1824, when he was taken into custody on a warrant, issued in consequence of 
information being lodged, at Marlborough Street police office, that it had been 
discovered that in the month of September, 1820, stock in the three per cents. to the 
extent of ten thousand pounds, which stood in the name of himself, J. D. Hulme and 
John Goodchild, as trustees for Francis William Bellis, had been sold out under a 
power of attorney, to which the names of Mr Fauntleroy's co-trustees and of one of 
the subscribing witnesses had been forged.
	The name of the firm with which Mr Fauntleroy was connected was Marsh, 
Stracey, Fauntleroy & Graham, and their banking-house was situated in Berners 
Street, where they enjoyed no inconsiderable portion of public patronage. The 
apprehension of Mr Fauntleroy, on one charge, no sooner became generally known, 
than, on inquiries being made, it was found that he had, under similar circumstances, 
sold out stock to the enormous amount of one hundred and seventy thousand pounds 
since the year 1814, the whole of which he had converted to his own use. The most 
extraordinary degree of interest was in consequence exhibited, and the public, 
apprehensive of the degree of mischief which might be revealed, became so alarmed 
that a run on the banking-house took place, which was checked by a suspension of 
payments, and eventually by a commission of bankruptcy.
	His trial took place at the Old Bailey on the 30th of October, 1824, when he 
was indicted for forging a power of attorney for the transfer of stock in the three-per-
cent. Consols. to the amount of five thousand pounds, with intent to defraud Frances 
Young. The Attorney-General was employed to conduct the case for the prosecution, 
and in his opening address to the jury he described the prisoner as the acting partner in 
the house of Messrs Marsh & Co. Mr Fauntleroy, the father of the prisoner, had 
become a partner in that firm at the period of its establishment, and had continued so 
up to the time of his death, which took place in the year 1807. The prisoner was then 
admitted into the concern, and became a most active member in carrying on its 
extensive transactions. In the year 1815 Frances Young, of Chichester, a customer of 
the house, lodged in their hands a power of attorney to receive the dividends on five 
thousand, four hundred and fifty pounds of stock, invested in her name in the three-
per-cent. Consols. The dividends were regularly handed over by the banking-house; 
but it was found that, soon after the period mentioned, another power of attorney, 
authorising the prisoner to sell the stock, was presented to the bank, and the sale was 
effected by him. To this power the prisoner had forged the names of Frances Young 
and of two witnesses to it. But the most extraordinary part of the case was that among 
the prisoner's private papers, contained in a tin box, there had been found one in 
which he acknowledged his guilt, and adduced a reason for his conduct. The 
Attorney-General then read the paper, which presented the following items:–De la 
Place, eleven thousand, one hundred and fifty pounds three-per-cent. Consols.; E. W. 
Young, five thousand pounds Consols.; General Young, six thousand pounds 
Consols.; Frances Young, five thousand pounds Consols.; H. Kelly, six thousand 
pounds Consols.; Lady Nelson, eleven thousand, nine hundred and ninety-five pounds 
Consols.; Earl of Ossory, seven thousand pounds four per cents.; W. Bowen, nine 
thousand, four hundred pounds four per cents.;–Parkins, four thousand pounds 
Consols. Sums were also placed to the names of Mrs Pelham, Lady Aboyne, W. R. 
and H. Fauntleroy and Elizabeth Fauntleroy; and the learned gentleman observed that 
all the sums were added together, and the sum total, one hundred and seventy 
thousand pounds, appeared at the foot of this list in the prisoner's handwriting. The 
statement was followed by this declaration:
	"In order to keep up the credit of our house, I have forged powers of attorney 
for the above sums and parties, and sold out to the amount here stated, and without the 
knowledge of my partners. I kept up the payment of the dividends, but made no 
entries of such payments in our books. The bank began first to refuse to discount our 
acceptances, and to destroy the credit of our house: the bank shall smart for it."
	The Attorney-General then called his witnesses, who confirmed in every point 
his statement of the case.
	Then the prisoner, after having completed the reading of a long document in 
his defence, sat down, and wept with much agitation. Seventeen gentlemen of the 
highest respectability were then called, and they all attested their opinion of his 
honour, integrity and goodness of disposition, and that he was a person whom, of all 
others, they would have supposed incapable of a dishonourable action. During their 
examination the prisoner buried his face in his handkerchief, apparently anxious to 
conceal his features from their view.
	In summing up, the judge told the jury that, as the evidence did not show the 
forgery to have been committed within their jurisdiction, they, being a London jury, 
would have to decide on the count for uttering; and after twenty minutes' 
consideration they returned a verdict of guilty of uttering. Sentence of death was then 
passed.
	Every exertion was used by Mr Fauntleroy's counsel–his case being twice 
argued before the judges, upon points of law; but both decisions were against him; 
and on the 30th of November, 1824, his execution took place at Newgate. The number 
of persons assembled on the fatal day was estimated at nearly one hundred thousand. 
Every window and roof which could command a view of the dreadful ceremony was 
occupied, and places from which it was impossible to catch a glimpse of the scaffold 
were blocked up by those who were prevented by the dense crowd before them from 
advancing farther.


CORNELIUS WOOD  
Executed at the Old Bailey for the Violation and Robbery of Mary Ayres

	THE following case, of the forcible violation of the person of a female, has 
never, perhaps, been equalled in brutal atrocity, since that of the unfortunate MARY 
ASHFORD, recorded in the fourth volume of this work.
	On the 8th of December, 1824, two respectable young women, one named 
Mary Ayres, and the other Jane Green, the latter a married woman, of very slender 
frame, and far advanced in a state of pregnancy, proceeded from the house in which 
they lodged in Cleveland-street, Fitzroy-square, to the village of Finchley, to inquire 
after a situation in service there for Mary Ayres, which they heard was vacant;–they 
remained at Finchley until five o'clock in the afternoon, and at that hour called at the 
White Lion public-house, from whence stages start for town, to inquire if they were 
likely soon to meet with one. Mr. Paris, the landlord, told them that be feared not for a 
considerable time; but seeing a one-horse light cart near his door, with a man in it, 
about to proceed to London, Mr. Paris asked him if he would take the two young 
women to town, which he agreed to do, and they accordingly got into the cart, and 
soon after a young man got into the cart also, and all four set off for town.
	The driver proceeded at a brisk rate, keeping the young women in familiar 
conversation along the road, but the other man scarcely speaking to them at all, so that 
they noticed him very little until they arrived at Highgate, when suddenly the driver 
turned aside out of the public road, and directed his course towards what is called 
Holloway-road, assigning as a reason for doing so, that it was to avoid the turnpike, 
which satisfied the young women for the time. After proceeding some distance along 
this road, the cart stopped at a public-house called the Cock, opposite a by-lane which 
leads towards a very intricate part of the country, with which the young women were 
wholly unacquainted. At this public-house, the driver and the other man, in a very 
presuming tone, demanded of the young women to treat them with something to 
drink; and although they neither liked the manner of the demand, nor the delay it was 
likely to occasion, they consented, more through fear than anything else, and gave the 
men a shilling to purchase some gin, which they did, and drank; and immediately after 
which, to the dismay and astonishment of the young women, the driver said, that they 
must now get out of the cart, as he could take them no farther, and they must make the 
best of their way along the opposite lane, which the men told them would lead directly 
towards town. Compelled thus to quit the cart, they proceeded some distance along 
the lane, as directed, leaving the two men behind; one, the driver's companion, 
wrapped up as he had been the whole way, in a large rough coat. The young women 
had not got above half-way down the lane, it being quite dark, when they were 
overtaken by a man in the dress of a groom, who accosted them, and said that he had 
heard the conversation that had passed between them and the two men in the cart, at 
the top of the lane, and that seeing the man had directed them in a wrong course 
towards town, he had followed to put them in a correct line. The young women 
thanked him, and he then pointed out some lamps at a distance, which he said were 
the lamps in Tottenham-court-road, and that if they would proceed with him across 
two or three fields, they would, by that short cut, be within five hundred yards of 
home. The young women, delighted at this intelligence, tired and frightened as they 
were, consented to accompany him, and he led them across two fields, and into a 
third, where every thing was still as death. It now occurred to Mary Ayres that they 
were not proceeding in the direction to town at all, and she intimated as much to the 
man; and at that instant, looking in his face, she discovered at once, even dark as it 
was, that he was the same man who had accompanied them from Finchley in the cart, 
and whom they had left behind with the driver. She instantly exclaimed to the other 
young woman that this was the case, but she had no sooner done so than the ruffian 
knocked her down with a desperate blow, and then threw himself upon her; being, 
however, a young woman of some strength, she disengaged herself from him, and got 
up, when he knocked her down again, and struck her a third blow. The other young 
woman, in her state, terrified beyond all description, made an effort to escape up the 
side of a hedge about four feet in height, but she had no sooner got half-way up, then, 
through fright and exhaustion, she fell back into a ditch, and probably was only saved 
from suffocation and death by coming upon her feet again; but she sunk in the mud up 
to her knees, and was as completely held fast there as if she had been screwed in a 
vice. The villanous assailant of Mary Ayres had by this time completely destroyed all 
power of resistance in her, and she now lay bleeding and resistless, the victim of the 
most merciless violence, until her brutal assailant had accomplished that act which for 
ever destroyed her peace, and cost him his life, within a few yards, and in sight of her 
unhappy companion, who was unable to extricate herself from the mire in which she 
was held fast, and lend, as she endeavoured to do, perhaps at the hazard of her life, all 
the aid her feeble frame could permit of to her distressed and fallen friend; but the 
only aid she could give was that of her voice, and her piteous cry for help was all that 
disturbed the gloomy and horrid silence that reigned around. Having effected his 
brutal object, the ruffian was determined to add the crime of robbery to that of rape; 
and after the completion of his first offence, he rose from the ground, and seized the 
shawl from his victim's shoulders, and a hand-basket which lay by her side, 
containing, among other things, a half-sovereign and six shillings in silver, with which 
he made off. Poor Mary Ayres made some resistance to the dragging of the shawl 
from her shoulders, and she got upon her legs with the effort; after which the fellow 
deliberately took the money out of her basket, which latter he flung at her head, and 
again knocked her down with the force of it, and there left her to her fate.
	After recovering in some degree from her barbarous treatment, her first 
endeavour was to extricate her miserable friend, now more dead than alive, from her 
deplorable situation; and so completely exhausted were both, that it took near an hour 
before she was got clear out of the ditch. The unhappy creatures then endeavoured to 
crawl back towards the lane from which they had been seduced, and proceeding on to 
its extremity, they were suddenly overjoyed to hear the barking of a dog, which, 
although they could see no trace of a human habitation, gave them hope that someone 
was at hand. Proceeding on a little farther, they suddenly fell against what they 
supposed at first to be a hedge, but which happily turned out to be a miserable mud-
cabin, inhabited by a poor old man and his dog; and the barking of the latter having 
awoke its master, who had some time retired to bed, it being now past ten o'clock, the 
old man got out of his cabin, naked as he was, to see from whence proceeded the 
lamentations and cries for pity that just then struck upon his ear. He soon discovered 
the two unhappy young women, and led them into his poor habitation, where having 
heard their melancholy tale, he pressed them to remain that night in his cabin, and 
share what hospitality he could afford them. This, however, they declined doing, as 
they required surgical and other aid, and besought the old man to put them on the right 
road towards their home. The old man instantly dressed, and arming himself with a 
bludgeon, and accompanied by his dog, he proceeded with the young women towards 
their home, declaring that with his life he would defend them from further 
molestation. After be had got them clear of all intricacy, he met with an acquaintance, 
whom he knew to be a constable, and into his charge he delivered the young women, 
and this latter person conveyed them in safety to their house in Cleveland-street.
	Fortunately for the ends of justice, Schofield, an active officer of the police, 
happened to be on business at Finchley on the very day that the young women were 
there, and was standing near the White-Lion public-house at the very time that they 
set off with the two men in the cart; and as he himself wanted a conveyance to town, 
he observed to Mr. Paris, the landlord, when the other man got in with the driver, that 
he wished he had been a little sooner, and he would have had that seat. This 
circumstance induced him to notice particularly the driver, the other man, and the 
colour of the cart and horse; and the moment he was employed on the business, he 
recollected the whole transaction at Finchley; and although the young women could 
give him no clue to the offenders, he did not doubt but that he should soon have them 
in custody. For several days he was actively engaged in tracing them, and from his 
exertions discovered that the principal offender was in the habit of frequenting a 
public-house in that neighbourhood, called the Plough; and in a room in this house he 
placed the young woman, Mary Ayres, at an hour that he had information the man 
would enter, and in a few minutes after, Cornelius Wood, a farmer's servant, came in, 
and the moment the girl saw him she made a violent hysterical exclamation, and 
fainted away. Schofield instantly secured him, and in the course of the same day 
apprehended Francis Day, the driver of the cart.
	Day at once acknowledged that he had driven the cart, and that Wood got out 
of it soon after the young women, and followed them, but declared that he knew 
nothing whatever of the intentions of Wood or had any connivance with him in the 
affair. Wood at first denied that he knew anything whatever of the transaction alluded 
to, or that he had been in the cart at all; but when he found that Day had recognised 
him as the person who was in the cart, he no longer denied it. The young woman, 
Mary Ayres, fully and clearly proved the commission of the two offences by Wood. 
The dress worn on the night in question by Mary Ayres was produced before the 
magistrate, and never was there exhibited a stronger proof of the violence she had 
suffered, and the resistance she must have made. A strong bombasin gown was torn to 
pieces in every part, and covered with mire and blood, as was also her cloak; and her 
under-dresses were in a state that we cannot attempt to describe. She bore on every 
part of her person marks of the most brutal violence. The scene of the outrage on 
being examined by the officer, and a number of persons who went to inspect it, was 
found to be torn up for several yards of the field, as if some furious animal had been 
prancing on it. The depth of the ditch where the other young woman got fixed was 
measured by the officer, and it was found that her legs were sunk to the depth of a 
foot and a half.
	On his trial Wood made a feeble attempt to prove that he was not the person 
who committed the violence, but the testimony of the unfortunate victim of his 
atrocity, as well as that of her companion, was so clear and decisive, and the whole 
chain of collateral evidence so conclusive and complete, that he was immediately 
found guilty by the jury, and forthwith admonished to prepare for the dreadful fate 
that must necessarily follow crimes like his.
	As the period approached for carrying into effect the awful sentence of the 
law, considerable efforts were made by his friends to save him from his impending 
fate, and a petition to obtain a pardon was drawn up, and application made to the 
prosecutrix for her signature. This, however, with a painful recollection of the 
violence and indignity to which she had been subjected, she very properly refused to 
grant.
	Up to the time of his execution he continued to deny his guilt, and it is 
melancholy to reflect that this desperate and abandoned young man went out of the 
world uttering a falsehood almost with his dying breath. The whole tenor of his life 
had been wicked in the extreme. Not twelve months before his disgraceful end, he had 
appeared as a witness against a man for horse-stealing, and before he had concluded 
his evidence, the jury were so completely convinced that his testimony was false and 
perjured, that they acquitted the prisoner; and subsequent circumstances transpired 
which implicated Wood in the commission of the very crime for which be attempted 
to swear away the life of an innocent man. 


EDWARD HARRIS, alias KIDDY HARRIS  
One of a desperate Gang of Thieves and Ruffians, executed for a brutal 
Assault (with intent to Murder), committed on Sarah Drew, in Hackney 
Fields

	THE following case is no less remarkable for the ferocity of the assault, 
having for its object the murder of an individual who was expected to become a 
witness against a member of a well-known gang of burglars, than for the pertinacity 
with which an alibi was falsely sworn to, and attempted to be maintained. The trial 
took place at the Old Bailey, in October, 1824, and the particulars are detailed in the 
testimony of the following witnesses.
	Sarah Drew, a servant in the family of Mr. W. Hale, a silk manufacturer in 
Wood-street, Spitalfields: 'His house was robbed on Monday, the 27th of September. 
Previously to the commission of the robbery, I saw a person about the premises; and 
after the robbery, I told the police-officers that I should know that person again if I 
happened to see him. In consequence of my saying so, I received instructions from the 
officers, if I ever saw him again, to follow him wherever he went. On Wednesday, the 
29th, two days after the robbery was committed, I accompanied Handley and Hatfield, 
two officers belonging to the police-office in Worship-street, to a piece of ground, 
where I saw a great many men gambling, and tossing up halfpence. Whilst I was with 
them in that place, I saw one of the officers go up to the prisoner, place his hand upon 
his shoulder, and say something to him, which I did not hear. I told them that he was 
not the person whom I had seen in my master's house. On the Sunday following, I 
went to Shoreditch church to hear a charity Sermon, at half-past two, and left the 
church soon after five o'clock. I had in my pocket a five-shilling piece, two half-
crowns, eight shillings, and one sixpence. I gave away a shilling in the church to the 
charity for which they were begging. I had also an umbrella and a shawl. As I came 
out of church, I saw the man who came into my master's house on the day that it was 
robbed, leaning on the outside of the church-rails. In consequence of what I had been 
desired to do by the officers, I followed him; he went down the Hackney-road; then 
up a turning, then over a field, then over the canal, then up a turning, then again over 
the canal, up another turning, which took me into Hackney-fields. At this time it was 
daylight, and I had never lost sight of the man I was following. When I got into 
Hackney-fields, the prisoner came behind me, took me by the arm, and asked me if I 
knew him. I looked at him, and said, "I do not know you, Sir." I knew him all the 
time, but from fear I said that I did not. He was the man with whom I had seen the 
officers conversing on the Wednesday. The prisoner made a beckon, and another man 
immediately came up.'
	Here the witness was much agitated, and burst into tears. Mr. Justice Park 
desired her to be composed, as nobody would harm her in that court.
	'That man seized me by my other arm. The prisoner told that man to put his 
hand on my mouth, to prevent my hallooing. The man did so. During the time that this 
was doing, the man whom I had been following continued to walk onwards. The 
prisoner, after he had compelled me to walk a yard or two further with him, crammed 
some hay into my mouth, and said to the other man, "Now, hold your hand over this." 
The man did so. Then the man whom I had been following, when he saw that the 
other two had hold of my arms, crossed over to them and said "Oh d--n her, make her 
take off her pattens, that she may go on the faster." I accordingly put them off with 
my feet, and left them. They then walked me along to the end of the field as fast as 
they could, keeping hold of me all the time. During that time the prisoner said 
nothing. We then went down a lane with a hedge on each side. That lane leads to a 
pond. The prisoner still said nothing; but the man whom I had first followed said, "Oh 
d--n her, drag her down faster." When we came to the pond, the prisoner took off my 
shawl and forced my umbrella from me. He then pulled out of his pocket a rope, 
nearly a yard and a half long. He then said, "I'll hang her; she cannot swear against us 
then." The other man, who had hold of my arm, then said, "Search her, and see what 
she has got." He did search me, and he took out of my pocket my purse, with the 
money it contained. He then put it into his left-hand waistcoat-pocket. I saw him do it. 
At the same time he said, "D--n the b--rs, they cannot swear to money." The man 
whom I had followed then gave me a blow on the left breast over the heart, and I fell 
with my back against a rail, on one side of the pond. The prisoner then took hold of 
me by the shoulders, and the man who had held my other arm took hold of me by the 
feet, raised me up, and flung me over the rail with great force. I fell upon a bank first, 
and then rolled into the pond.
	'There was a good deal of water in the pond. All my body was in it, but my 
head was out. The man whom I had first followed said, "D--n her, poke her under the 
water." The prisoner replied; "Oh no! she will never rise any more." Whilst I was in 
the water I heard some of the parties speak. I heard one of them, I can't say which, 
asking whether my shawl was all silk.'
	The poor girl was again overcome by the recollection of the danger which she 
had undergone, burst into tears, and could not proceed for some minutes. On 
recovering herself, she continued.
	'Another of them said it was made of hard silk. One of them afterwards said, 
but I cannot tell which, "We won't have any thing belonging to her–there may be 
marks on it." After that, the prisoner came to the rail, and after saying "Here goes," 
flung the umbrella and shawl into the pond. I then heard one of them ask the other 
how much money he had. He said, "I have got 17s. 6d., and now she is gone, we will 
go to the White Horse, at Hackney, and regale ourselves." They then went away. I 
remained in the pond sometime after I had ceased to hear their voices, lest they should 
come back and poke me in again. I then crept out of it. Shortly afterwards I heard two 
men talking. I put up my head to see who they were. Seeing that they were not those 
who had so ill-treated me, I asked for help, and they assisted me over the rail. I was 
wet and muddy up to my neck. I asked them to take me home to my father's: they 
said, "No, I had better go to the alehouse at the end of the field." The landlord got me 
a coach, and I went in it to the police-office is Worship-street.'
	John Bradshaw, a labourer in the service of the East India Company, sworn. 
'About 10 minutes after six o'clock on the evening of the 3rd of October, I was going 
across Hackney fields with Mr. Jamieson Field. At that time it was just getting dark. 
When we came opposite the pond, I heard a person calling out, as if in distress. The 
voice was that of a female. She said "For God's sake, give me assistance, for I have 
been robbed by two men, and thrown into a pond." Mr. Jamieson Field, who was with 
me, jumped over the rail, and assisted her up. It was Mrs. Drew, the prosecutrix. She 
was in a dreadful state, covered with mud, and wet up to the neck. We took her to the 
Cat and Shoulder of Mutton public-house."
	Mr Jamieson Field deposed to the same effect as it preceding witness.
	Charles Rogers. "I keep the Cat and Shoulder of Mutton in Hackney-fields. 
On Sunday, the 3rd of October, the prosecutrix was brought to my house between 10 
and 25 minutes past six o'clock, by Field and Bradshaw. She complained of having 
been robbed, and flung into a pond. I procured a coach, and ordered it by her desire to 
drive to the police-office in Worship-street."
	William Hatfield: "I am a police-officer belonging to the office in Worship-
street. On the 29th of September last, I and my brother officer, Handley, accompanied 
the prosecutrix to a waste piece of ground belonging to a public-house at the back of 
Wentworth-street, called "Black Hell." I took the prosecutrix there to see whether she 
could identify any person as the man whom she had seen on her master's premises at 
the time of their being robbed. There were about thirty or forty persons when I took 
her there. The prisoner was among them. I went up to him, put my hand upon his 
shoulder and said–"Ah, Kiddy, what brings you here?" I am sure that she observed me 
do so. The prosecutrix did not recognise any man there as the person whom she had 
seen in her master's entry. We went from that place to the City of Norwich public-
house, in Wentworth-street, for the same purpose as we had been to the Black Hell. In 
consequence of something we learned there, we went back to the Black Hell. The 
second time we went, we stayed some time, as I went round the place to look all the 
men in the face. The prosecutrix did not fix on any man there. This was on the 
Wednesday after the robbery. I saw the prosecutrix again, on Sunday night, about 
half-past seven o'clock, at the house of Mr. Garton, the Chief Constable of Worship-
street office. She told me she had been robbed by three persons, and gave me 
information which led us to apprehend the prisoner at the bar."
	Handley, another officer at Worship-street, corroborated the statement of the 
last witness in all its material points, and proved that the prosecutrix must have seen 
the prisoner both the times he took her to the Black Hell.
	Vann, another police-officer, produced a rope, which he had received from a 
person of the name of Stretton.
	John Stretton: "I am a gardener in the neighbourhood of Hackney-fields. On 
the 20th October last, I had occasion to prune some black-currant trees in my garden, 
which is only eight yards from the pathway through Hackney-fields, and not more 
than sixty or seventy yards from the pond. In pruning these trees, I found a rope. 
About three weeks or a month before, I had cut down these same trees, and at that 
time there was no rope among them. I carried it to the office in Worship-street, and 
gave it up to the officer."
	Thomas Ganon. "I am chief constable in Worship-street office. I received a 
rope from John Stretton. I took that rope with me to the prosecutrix. I asked her to 
describe the rope with which the prisoner at the bar had threatened to hang her before 
I produced it. She did so. The rope agreed with her description in every point except 
that she said she thought it was only unplatted at one end, and it was in fact unplatted 
at both."
	Edward Wood: "I am a cow-keeper at Dalston. On Sunday night, October the 
3rd, about 25 minutes past six o'clock, I was in Hackney-fields. I picked up a pair of 
pattens, beside the footpath leading from the Dalston end of it to the Cat and Shoulder 
of Mutton. They were close together, about 240 yards from the pond; I delivered them 
to the officers, one to each."
	The prisoner being called upon for his defence, said that he should leave it 
entirely to his counsel. On the day when this woman said she was robbed, he was ill at 
home in bed.
	Mr. Andrews called the following witnesses on the part of the defence:--
	Elizabeth Harris: "The man at the bar is my father. He lived in October last in 
George-street, near Hanbury's brewhouse. I have a mother, a brother, and a sister. My 
sister and I do not live at home, but with a Mrs. Walker. I heard of my father being 
taken up on a Monday morning. On the Sunday before I had gone to Mr. Marshall's, 
in George-street, a few minutes before 6 o'clock, to buy some apples. Mr. Marshall 
lives on the opposite side of the way to my father, three or four doors lower down the 
street. I saw my father in his shirt-sleeves, leaning out of the window, with his hand 
on the rails before it."
	Cross-examined: "I had been walking out by myself on that Sunday, from 
half-past two o'clock to five minutes before six. I went to Spitalfields church, stayed 
there an hour and a half, then walked round Shoredith, up Bethnal-green-road, and 
down Whitechapel. I did not go home then, but walked past my father's windows. I 
did not call on my father, though I had not seen him for two or three days. The church 
was done about half-past four o'clock. The prayers were over at the time I entered; 
they were preaching all the time I was there."
	Re-examined: "The clergyman who preached was dressed in white. I cannot 
write. I do not know figures, but I can tell what o'clock it is. [The learned Judge here 
asked her to tell him the hour by the clock in court–the witness did so.] I cannot tell 
what the sermon was on that day. In general my father goes to bed on a Sunday 
afternoon. He was not in bad health on that Sunday to my knowledge."
	Richard Marshall proved that Elizabeth Harris had bought some apples of him 
on the Sunday afternoon in question, about 6 o'clock. He did not see her father at the 
window.
	Edward Harris, a boy of eleven years of age, and a son of the prisoner was 
then put into the witness-box. Before he was sworn, he was examined by the Judge as 
to his knowledge of the nature of an oath. The Judge having allowed him to be sworn, 
he deposed as follows: "I remember my father being taken away by the officers on a 
Monday morning. On the Sunday before, my father was very bad in health. He laid 
down after dinner. My mother bade me go to chapel. I went by myself to the chapel at 
the cornet of Wood-street. The service was then begun. The parson had on a black 
gown. I returned from the chapel between 5 and 6 o'clock. My father was then at 
home, and at tea. After tea my father sat by the fire till eight o'clock, when I went to 
bed. I knew the hour from hearing Hanbury's clock strike. From the time I came from 
chapel to the hour I went to bed, my father was never out of the room. He was in his 
shirt-sleeves all the time."
	Examined by Mr. JUSTICE PARR.-"My father generally gets up at ten o'clock 
of a Sunday, then dresses, gets his dinner, goes out, comes back, and then takes his 
tea, and goes to bed. I never knew my father to go to bed on a Sunday afternoon 
before."
	Anne Harris, daughter of the prisoner, in the service of Mrs. Walker, was at 
home on the Sunday in question, at three o'clock in the afternoon. She left her father 
there with his coat off, lying asleep on the bed; took a long walk, and returned 
between nine and ten o'clock, and found him still at home. He was often ill, and 
always lay down of a Sunday afternoon.
	Thomas Yardly lives opposite the house where Harris resided; did not know 
him; had never drank with him; had heard of him as a noted character–as a boxing 
man. Witness had seen a man standing at Harris's window at about half-past six 
o'clock on the evening of the Sunday in question; had called his wife and his 
apprentice Norwood to observe Harris, who was the man at the window, as witness 
believed, but he would not swear to it. The man was in his waistcoat, and looked as if 
he had just come off the bed. Heard that Harris was taken up, and went to Newgate to 
see if it was the same.
	Mrs. Yardly recollected her husband calling her to the window to observe 
"Kiddy Harris," with whom his brother had had a fight. [In this she was confirmed by 
Norwood, the apprentice, but neither of them would swear that Harris was the man 
whom they saw at the window, though each of them believed so.]
	Three witnesses who were in the room under Harris's, deposed that they had 
seen him at half-past five o'clock. The door opened into the passage, but it was shut, 
so that if Harris had gone out they might not have heard him, and would not have seen 
him.–This was the defence.
	Mr. JUSTICE PARK expounded the evidence, showing the agreements and 
contradictions with great particularity.
	The Jury returned a verdict of–Guilty.
	The prisoner said, with perfect composure, "My Lord, I'm quite satisfied with 
my trial; but I'm an innocent man, upon my word I am."
	Although the prisoner had totally failed in his attempt to prove an alibi, yet he 
persisted in asserting his innocence, and strong representations were made in his 
behalf to the Secretary of State; few cases have perhaps undergone more investigation 
and scrutiny than that of this systematic depredator. The Magistrates of Worship-
street Office were directed to pay most particular attention to the circumstances of the 
case. One of them, Mr. Osborne, went to the pond in Hackney-fields, into which the 
young woman was thrown, accompanied by an intelligent gentleman of that district, 
who had for a long time been actively useful in suppressing crime. They both 
minutely noticed every circumstance of time and place alluded to on the trial. The 
Recorder of London also, much to his credit, took the trouble of going in company 
with the gentlemen alluded to, to Spitalfields, for the purpose of viewing the relative 
situation of Harris's house, and that of the witness who appeared on his behalf, and 
also to make inquiries connected with the affair; but the impression produced in the 
minds of these gentlemen, after all they saw and heard, was decidedly unfavourable to 
the prisoner; and after having been respited from time to time for several months 
during the inquiry, he was at length ordered for execution on the 22nd of February, 
1825.
	His conduct on this awful occasion was a strange mixture of the coward, the 
ruffian, and the flash-man, and affords another awful instance of the innate depravity 
of mankind, hardened in crime by a total absence of religion and Christian feeling.
	On the arrival of the Sheriffs, about a quarter before eight o'clock, Harris was 
asked if he was prepared to go to the press room? He said, "You may take me there, 
and you may drag me to the gallows, but I shall be murdered."
	Soon after the Sheriffs and Under Sheriffs proceeded to the room into which 
culprits are usually brought to be pinioned. Two other culprits, who underwent the 
awful sentence of the law at the same time as Harris, had already been pinioned, and 
the latter being ordered to be brought forth was heard at some distance in the dark 
passage adjoining the press-room, talking loudly in a tone of remonstrance to the 
gaolers, and the moment he entered the room, and saw the Sheriffs, &c., he 
exclaimed–"Oh the villains, the villains, to hang an innocent man! I know nothing 
about it; if I did I'd tell–Murder, murder!–Indeed, Mr. Sheriff, you are going to hang a 
man that is entirely innocent–what bad laws are ours to hang an innocent man! by G-
d, I'm innocent of the charge!"
	Mr. Sheriff Brown attempted to soothe the irritated feelings of the culprit, by 
reminding him that he (the Sheriff) could not do any thing for him more than he had 
done, except direct his attention to that state upon which he was about to enter. This, 
however, had no effect. Harris continued talking very fast, and appealed in a coarse 
and confident manner to every one around him. "Gentlemen, is not this too bad? I am 
innocent–I know nothing of it at all–is not this a disgrace to the country? D--n their 
eyes, what do they hang me for?" The Sheriff, in vain, begged him to think of his 
situation, and, for the few moments he had to live, to look to Jesus Christ for help. 
During this time his hands were tied. When the officer came up to him for that 
purpose, he said, "You will do as you like with me–I suppose you will do it!" When 
the officer was in the act of tying the cord round his wrists, he said, "You need not 
hurt me more than is necessary." Then turning his face towards the persons present 
connected with the press, and looking most steadfastly at two or three that were 
nearest to him, he said, "Oh Gentlemen, tell them (meaning the public) that I die 
innocent; I am murdered; I am, so help me God! as I am a dying man. I know I have 
been a wicked man, and a fighting man, and all that, but of this I am innocent. Is not 
this a shame, to keep a man five months in gaol, and then to bring him out and hang 
him!" He then dropped on his knees before Mr. Sheriff Brown and others, who were 
around him, and lifting up his hands, and looking upwards, once more said, "Of this I 
am innocent, and may I endure everlasting torments, if what I am saying is not true!" 
again appealing to the Almighty. All being ready, he was lifted up, and turning 
sharply round, in a natural quick tone said, "But where are my fellow-sufferers?" The 
Sheriffs removed from their position, which had prevented him from seeing them 
sitting on the opposite side of the room, and he said, "Oh! here they are–God bless 
you! I am wonder fully supported–it is nothing but downright murder! Oh! may God 
forgive you;–I suppose somebody did it. So help me Heaven, I don't know who did 
it!"
	The three criminals were placed in order, to walk towards the scaffold. 
Approaching the door of the room Harris turned round again, and said, "Where's the 
boatswain (an officer of the ward, wherein he had been confined)–Oh! here he is;–
come, old boy, let's shake hands (they did so)–God bless you!"
	All being thus arranged, with slow pace they moved forwards. The moment 
Harris set his foot in the first passage, he cried out "Murder, murder, murder, 
murder!" until the recesses of the dismal abode re-echoed. The voice of the Reverend 
Divine could not for some time be heard while reading the burial service. When the 
bell first tolled he was a little more calm.
	During the time the executioner was performing his duty, Harris continued 
talking to those around, and protesting his innocence, declared it was a plant, because 
he had been before transported, and that it was the doing of some wicked wretch, and 
spoke of the woman who was the witness against him.
	Just before he was led up the stairs of the scaffold, he said, "I suppose they 
will not let me speak to the crowd, but I will, if possible. I will shout loud enough, 
that I am murdered–murdered." On being informed that all was prepared, he ascended 
the scaffold. He was very ill prepared to meet the awful transition. The moment he 
went out on the drop be recommenced his exclamations of "Murder! murder! I am 
murdered! I am murdered!" until the cap was drawn over his eyes; and in a few 
seconds the drop fell, and closed this world for ever on him.


GEORGE ALEXANDER WOOD AND ALEXANDER 
WELLESLEY LEITH  
Eton College Boys, indicted for Manslaughter, 9th of March, 1825, as the 
Result of a Two-Hours' Fierce Fight

	THE scene of this melancholy event, by which one youth, a member of a 
noble family, was hurried into an untimely grave, and two others were brought to the 
bar of a public court of justice upon a charge of manslaughter, was at Eton College, 
and it occurred on Monday, the 28th of February, 1825.
	On the 9th of March, 1825, George Alexander Wood, son of Colonel Wood 
and nephew of the Marquis of Londonderry, and Alexander Wellesley Leith, were 
placed at the bar at the Aylesbury Assizes, charged with killing and slaying the Hon. 
F. Ashley Cooper, son of the Earl of Shaftesbury. The circumstances will be best 
explained as they appeared in evidence before the coroner.
	On Sunday, the 27th of February, about two o'clock, two young gentlemen, 
scholars at Eton, the Hon. F. A. Cooper and Mr Wood, were in the playground, when 
some words arose between them. From words they proceeded to blows: they had 
fought for several minutes when the captain came up and separated them. It was 
subsequently determined that they should meet on the following afternoon and 
terminate their differences by a pugilistic contest. Many of the scholars were present 
to witness the battle. The combatants stripped at four o'clock on Monday afternoon 
and commenced fighting. Mr Cooper was under fifteen years, and his opponent, who 
was half-a-head taller, was nearly seventeen. Mr Wood had the advantage in point of 
strength; but the quickness and precision of Mr Cooper were remarkable for one so 
young, and he declared that he would never give in. In the eighth, ninth and tenth 
rounds he became weak and exhausted, and it was then evident that he was not a 
match for Mr Wood. Some of the "backers" had brought a quantity of brandy in 
bottles into the field; and the second of Mr Cooper having, in the eleventh round, 
poured a portion of it down Mr C.'s throat, he recovered his wind and strength. The 
young men continued to fight from four till nearly six o'clock; and when they were in 
a state of exhaustion they were plied between the rounds with brandy. They fought 
about sixty rounds, and at the end of the last round Mr Cooper fell very heavily upon 
his head, and never spoke afterwards. He was carried off the ground to his lodgings, at 
the house of the Reverend Mr Knapp, by his brothers, who were present at the fight. 
He was put to bed; but no medical assistance was sent for till four hours had elapsed. 
Shortly afterwards he expired. Upon the arraignment of the defendants they pleaded 
not guilty, and the witnesses for the prosecution did not answer. Mr Justice Gaselee 
having ordered their recognisances to be estreated, a verdict of not guilty was 
returned, and the defendants left the bar attended by Lord Nugent, Colonel Brown, Sir 
John Dashwood King and other persons of distinction. 


EDWARD GIBBON WAKEFIELD, WILLIAM 
WAKEFIELD AND FRANCES WAKEFIELD  
Romance of a Wealthy Heiress who was abducted, and married at Gretna 
Green

	THE extraordinary abduction of Miss Turner, a wealthy heiress, the daughter 
of Mr Turner, a gentleman of the highest respectability, living at Shrigley, in the 
county of Cheshire, by Mr Edward Gibbon Wakefield, excited an unusual degree of 
interest. The notoriety of the case renders it unnecessary for us to do more than give a 
general history of the circumstances attending the abduction, and the final termination 
of the proceedings against the defendants, Mr E. G. Wakefield, a barrister, and his 
brother William, and Mrs Frances Wakefield.
	It would appear that Miss Turner, at the time of this affair, had just entered her 
fifteenth year. Her father was a man of large property, and was High Sheriff of 
Cheshire; and with a view to the proper education of his daughter, who was a young 
lady of lively disposition, of quick perception, and also of great personal beauty, he 
placed her at the school of a Mrs Daulby, at Liverpool. She had been there for a 
considerable time when, in the month of February, 1827, Mr E. G. Wakefield and his 
brother William went to Macclesfield on a visit, where they learned the situation, the 
wealth and the beauty of Miss Turner. They soon formed a design, by means of which 
they proposed to secure possession of the person of Miss Turner. With this view they 
quitted Macclesfield on the evening of the 5th of March, with the professed object of 
proceeding to the metropolis on their route to Paris; but, instead of taking the road to 
London, at seven o'clock on the morning of the 6th of the same month they presented 
themselves at the Albion Hotel, Manchester, in a Wilmslow post-chaise. Having 
purchased a carriage in this place, they sent it to Liverpool; and at eight o'clock on the 
morning of Tuesday, the 7th of March, the newly bought carriage was driven up to the 
house of Mrs Daulby, and a servant alighted from it and presented a letter, which was 
in the following terms, and which he professed to have brought with him from 
Shrigley. It was addressed to Miss Daulby, and was as follows:–-
	SHRIGLEY, Monday night, half-past Twelve. 
	MADAM,–I write to you by the desire of Mrs Turner, of Shrigley, who has 
been seized with a sudden and dangerous attack of paralysis. Mr Turner is, 
unfortunately, from home, but has been sent for, and Mrs Turner wishes to see her 
daughter immediately. A steady servant will take this letter and my carriage to you to 
fetch Miss Turner; and I beg that no time may be lost in her departure, as, though I do 
not think Mrs Turner in immediate danger, it is possible she may soon become 
incapable of recognising anyone. Mrs Turner particularly wishes that her daughter 
may not be informed of the extent of her danger, as, without this precaution, Miss 
Turner might be very anxious on the journey; and this house is so crowded, and in 
such confusion and alarm, that Mrs Turner does not wish anyone to accompany her 
daughter. The servant is instructed not to let the boys drive too fast, as Miss T. is 
rather fearful in a carriage.
	 The best thing to say to Miss T. is, that Mrs T. wishes to have her daughter 
home rather sooner, for the approaching removal to the new house; and the servant is 
instructed to give no other reason in case Miss Turner should ask any questions. Mrs 
Turner is very anxious that her daughter should not be frightened, and trusts to your 
judgment to prevent it; she also desires me to add that her sister, or niece, or myself, 
should they continue unable, will not fail to write to you by post. 
	I am, madam, your obedient servant, 
	JOHN AINSWORTH, M.D.
	The allusion to the indisposition of the young lady to ride quickly gave the 
letter an air of authenticity, and its contents were immediately communicated to Miss 
Turner. On her seeing the servant, however, she expressed her surprise at his being 
strange to her; but the fellow, whose name was Thevenot, and who was in the service 
of Wakefield, answered with great readiness that, in consequence of Mr Turner's 
having taken a new mansion, he had made some alteration in his establishment, and 
had engaged him as butler, in lieu of the person who had before filled that situation. 
He added that the carriage would return by way of Manchester, where it would take 
up Dr Hull, who, it was known, had previously attended Mrs Turner, and that then it 
would immediately proceed to Shrigley. The extreme plausibility of the man's manner 
and story left no room for suspicion, and the young lady was in a few minutes handed 
into the carriage and driven off.
	The vehicle reached Manchester in due course; but instead of going to Dr 
Hull's residence it stopped at the door of the Albion Hotel, and there the young lady 
was directed to alight. She was shown into a private room, but she had been there 
scarcely five minutes when Mr E. C. Wakefield presented himself. Miss Turner was at 
this time completely unacquainted with him, and she made to leave the room; but on 
his stating to her that he came from her papa, she remained. She proceeded 
immediately to make inquiries of him as to the state of her mother's health; but the 
necessity of some reason being given why she was not taken to Shrigley having 
arisen, Mr Wakefield told her that the fact was that the real cause of her removal from 
the school was the state of her father's affairs, and that the only reason why this was 
not at once communicated to her was a desire on the part of her parents to keep the 
circumstance secret from her schoolmistress and companions. He then introduced his 
brother William to her, and telling her that they were directed to conduct her 
immediately to Mr Turner, they ordered post-horses to be instantly got ready.
	They then proceeded on the road to Huddersfield, and Miss Turner, buoyed up 
with the assurance of seeing her father at almost every stage, travelled all night until 
they arrived at Kendal, where she was assured that her parent would be waiting for 
them. Here, however, a fresh disappointment awaited the unhappy young lady. 
Wakefield, perceiving that she began to exhibit great anxiety, now found it necessary 
to become "more explicit" upon the subject of the state of her father's affairs, and he 
stated to her that the bank of Messrs Daintry & Kyle at Macclesfield had failed, and 
that an uncle of his, who was a banker at Kendal, had lent her father sixty thousand 
pounds; that this had partially relieved him, but that the Blackburn bank had also 
failed, and everything was now worse and worse; that her father was completely 
ruined, but that he (Wakefield) was his greatest friend; that his uncle could turn Mr 
Turner out of doors, but that Mr Grimsditch, the legal adviser of the latter, had hit 
upon a plan which, if it were followed out, would make all right; that some 
settlements were to be drawn up and made, and some property transferred to her, so 
that her estate would belong to her husband, whoever he might be; that Mr Grimsditch 
had proposed that he (Mr Wakefield) should marry her, but as he had never seen her 
he had laughed at the proposition; that his uncle, the Kendal banker, had insisted upon 
his seeing her, and it now remained for her to determine whether she would accede to 
this proposition, or that her father should be turned out of doors. He added that she 
might come to a determination when she saw her father, who was then on his way to 
Scotland, pursued by sheriff officers. Imposed upon by these representations, Miss 
Turner permitted herself to be carried to Carlisle, on the way to Gretna Green; and on 
their arrival in that city the younger Wakefield quitted the party for a short time. On 
his return he said he had seen Mr Turner and Mr Grimsditch at an inn close by, but 
that in consequence of their dread of sheriff officers the former was afraid to show 
himself; that Mr Grimsditch, in his fear, had thrust him from the house, declaring his 
anxious desire that the marriage should take place immediately, for that as soon as the 
certificate arrived at Carlisle, Mr Turner would be released. He also added that Mr 
Turner had desired him to inform his daughter that he entreated her not to hesitate; for 
if she did, there would be an execution at Shrigley, and they would all be ruined.
	With such an injunction Miss Turner, with a degree of filial solicitude which 
did her honour, hesitated no longer, but at once proceeded to Gretna with Mr 
Wakefield, where the ceremony of marriage was performed by the far-famed 
blacksmith in the customary manner. This done, she returned with Mr Wakefield to 
Carlisle, and there expressed her anxious solicitude with regard to her father's 
situation, and desired at once to see him, in order that she might be assured of his 
safety. A new subterfuge was adopted, however, and she was informed that her father, 
having now secured his liberty, and intelligence of her marriage having already 
reached him, had gone on to Shrigley whither they were to follow him. Leeds was the 
point to which they next proceeded; and, on their arrival there, Wakefield recollected 
that he had an appointment at Paris, which he must keep in the ensuing week. He 
declared it impossible therefore that they could then go to Shrigley, and pretended to 
dispatch his brother to Cheshire with directions to conduct Mr Turner to London, 
where they would all meet. Wakefield and Miss Turner arrived at Blake's Hotel, in 
Prince's Street, Hanover Square, at half-past eleven o'clock, on the night of Friday, the 
19th of March; but there a person who was in waiting declared that Mr Turner and Mr 
W. Wakefield had proceeded to France, so a chaise was directly ordered, and they 
started for Dover, and from thence by the first packet to Calais.
	For several days the circumstances of the abduction remained totally unknown 
to the friends of the young lady; then the fact of her not having arrived at Shrigley 
having been discovered by Mrs Daulby, some members of the family were dispatched 
in pursuit of her, and she was traced to Manchester, and thence to Huddersfield; but 
there all trace of her and her companion was lost. The dreadful anxiety entertained by 
the unhappy parents of the young lady was soon still further excited by the receipt of a 
letter from Mr Wakefield, headed Carlisle, begging that Mr and Mrs Turner would 
render themselves quite easy, for that the writer had married their daughter. In a state 
of mind bordering on distraction Mr Turner instantly proceeded to London, for the 
purpose of procuring such aid as could be afforded by the police of the metropolis. 
His inquiries revealed to him that Mr Wakefield had carried his daughter to the 
Continent, and thither he dispatched the paternal uncle of the young lady, 
accompanied by his solicitor and Ellis, an active and prudent officer attached to Bow 
Street, and armed with a letter from Mr Canning to the British ambassador in France. 
In the meantime a letter was received by Mrs Turner from Mr Wakefield, headed 
Calais, in which the writer repeated the declaration that he had married Miss Turner, 
and taking all the blame of the transaction on himself as far as " over-persuasion " 
went. He added: " Miss Turner is fondly attached to me, and I do assure you, my dear 
madam, that it shall be the anxious endeavour of my life to promote her happiness by 
every means in my power."
	Upon the landing of Mr Turner and his companions at Calais the first persons 
they saw were the young lady whom they sought and Mr Wakefield, who were 
walking on the pier. The exclamation of Miss Turner afforded a convincing proof that 
she had remained with Mr Wakefield unwillingly; for, crying out, " Good God! here's 
my uncle," she rushed from her companion, and was soon locked in the embrace of 
her relation, declaring how rejoiced she was that he had come to convey her home. Mr 
Wakefield, on finding matters take this turn, declared that the young lady could not be 
taken from him by force, and appealed to the. civil authorities of the town as to 
whether any person could be hurried from the country against their will. The mayor 
immediately interfered; but when he applied to the young lady to ascertain her 
feelings upon the subject she clung to the protecting arm of her uncle, and exclaimed 
that she would " freely go with him, to avoid the sight of that man " (Mr Wakefield). 
Mr Wakefield still urged his right to the possession of the young lady, as she was his 
wife; but Miss Turner cried out: " No, no, I am not his wife! He carried me away by 
fraud and stratagem. He forced me to accompany him to Gretna Green; and there, in 
the presence of a third person, I was compelled to acknowledge him as my husband, 
and to be called his wife. By the same forcible means I was compelled to quit England 
and trust myself to the protection of this person, whom I never saw until I was taken 
from Liverpool, and now never wish to see again." Wakefield, finding his plans 
completely frustrated, said to the uncle: "Then, sir, you may dispose of your niece as 
you think proper, but you receive her at my hands as a pure and spotless virgin." Mr 
Wakefield also drew up an acknowledgment declaring that no familiarities whatever 
had passed between him and the young lady, and, having signed it, put it into the 
hands of Mr Turner.
	Mr Turner and his niece then forthwith returned to England, while Mr 
Wakefield proceeded to his hotel, packed up his luggage, and started directly for 
Paris.
	A question now arose as to the proper mode of proceeding in the courts of law 
against the offending parties in this extraordinary transaction. Warrants were, 
however, issued against the Wakefields, upon one of which Mr William Wakefield 
was apprehended at Dover within a few days after his brother's flight to Paris. He was 
instantly conveyed before the magistrates of Cheshire, where an examination of great 
length took place. After a long argument upon the nature of the offence he was 
committed to Lancaster Castle to await his trial, the magistrates refusing to take bail 
for his appearance at the assizes. Under a writ of habeas corpus Mr Wakefield was 
brought before the Court of King's Bench on the first day of the followin Easter Term; 
and the depositions in the case being produced on the succeeding day, Mr Wakefield 
was admitted to bail, in a personal recognisancc of two thousand pounds, and with 
two sureties to the amount of one thousand pounds each.
	At the following assizes for the county of Lancashire, indictments were 
preferred against Mr E. G. Wakefield and W. Wakefield for " having at Liverpool 
feloniously carried away one Ellen Turner, spinster, then a maid and heirapparent 
unto her father, William Turner, Esq., for the sake of the lucre of her substance; and 
for having afterwards unlawfully and against her will married the said Ellen Turner." 
An indictment was also preferred against the same parties, together with Edward 
Thevenot, their servant, and Frances Wakefield, their stepmother, who was alleged to 
have been concerned in the transaction, for a conspiracy; and the grand jury returned 
true bills in both cases, in the former, however, reducing the offence to a 
misdemeanour only. All the parties, with the exception of Thevenot, who was in 
France, appeared, and pleaded not guilty to the indictments; and Mr Justice Park, 
upon an application by the defendants, refused to postpone the trial. Mr E. C. 
Wakefield then claimed a right to traverse, and after some argument it was allowed 
him. Upon the 21st of August public curiosity was excited to the highest degree, in 
consequence of its being anticipated that the trial of Mr William Wakefield would 
then come on. The court was crowded to excess, and the ladies formed, as usual on 
such occasions, the principal part of the audience; but when Mr Wakefield was called 
it was found that he was not in attendance. Great disappointment was felt by the 
public in consequence, and an order was made by the learned judge that the 
recognisances of the bail and of the defendant should be estreated. The interest which 
the public took in this case from its commencement was now doomed to be suspended 
for a considerable time; for it was not until Friday, the 23rd of March, 1827, that the 
general curiosity which was entertained with regard to the termination of the case was 
satisfied. The three defendants were then put upon their trial at Lancaster, Mr 
Brougham appearing with others for the prosecution, and Mr Scarlett for the defence. 
After a trial which occupied the whole day, and in the course of which the 
circumstances we have already detailed were proved in evidence, the jury returned a 
verdict of guilty against all three defendants.
	The most remarkable part of the case was the examination of David Laing, the 
blacksmith at Gretna. His evidence simply amounted to proof that the Messrs 
Wakefield and Miss Turner had come to Gretna, being apparently agreeable to the 
match, and that he joined their hands and heard their acknowledgment in the usual 
form. The young lady, he said, presented him with a twenty-shilling note, and 
afterwards "embraced her husband very agreeably." The fellow, in his examination, 
declared that he had formerly been a merchant (that is, a Scotch pedlar), and that he 
had been forty-five years employed in joining hands at Gretna Green. He got thirty or 
forty pounds for this job. In appearance the old man had been made to assume an air 
of respectability. Someone had dressed him in a black coat, and a velvet waistcoat and 
breeches of the same colour, the shape of his hat being that commonly known as the 
"clerical cock." He seemed a vulgar fellow, though not without shrewdness, and had 
that air of familiarity which he might be supposed to have acquired by the freedom 
necessarily permitted by persons of a superior rank in life to one who was conscious 
that he had the power of performing for them clandestinely a most important 
ceremony. When he entered the witness-box he leaned forward towards the counsel 
with a ludicrous expression of gravity on his face, accompanying every answer with a 
knitting of his wrinkled brow and a significant nodding of his head, which gave 
peculiar force to the quaintness of phraseology which he assumed, and occasionally 
convulsed the Court with laughter.
	On the following day Messrs E. G. and W. Wakefield submitted to a verdict of 
guilty on the second indictment; and upon the two findings the male defendants were 
committed to Lancaster Castle, there to remain until the ensuing term, when they were 
to be brought up for judgment in the Court of King's Bench.
	On Monday, the 14th of May, Messrs E. G. and W. Wakefield were carried to 
the Court of King's Bench at Westminster to receive judgment, when affidavits were 
put in on their behalf, declaring that the latter had acted entirely under the guidance 
and direction of his elder brother. Mr E. G. Wakefield also swore that the expenses of 
his trial to him had exceeded three thousand pounds. The counsel on behalf of the 
prosecution having addressed the Court on aggravation, pressing for the severest 
penalty allowed by the law, Mr Justice Bayley addressed the prisoners. He dwelt in 
impressive terms upon the falsehood and art used by them to entrap the young lady 
into the marriage, and the gross delusions resorted to for the purpose of lulling her 
suspicions, and inducing her to yield to the design in carrying her off. He then referred 
separately to the conduct of the defendants, after which the learned judge passed 
sentence, which was that Edward Gibbon Wakefield should be imprisoned in 
Newgate for the space of three years, and that W. Wakefield should be imprisoned in 
Lancaster Castle for the like term of three years. Mrs Frances Wakefield, against 
whom a verdict of guilty had also been returned, was not brought up for judgment; the 
generous feelings of Mr Turner, much injured as his family had been, preventing him 
from proceeding with harshness against a female.
	The next day a motion was made in the House of Lords by Lord Redesdale for 
leave to bring in a Bill to annul the marriage between Miss Turner and Mr Wakefield, 
when, after some discussion, the Bill was granted in the usual way. 


WILLIAM CORDER 
Executed 11th of August, 1828, for the Murder of Maria Marten, in the Red 
Barn, the Crime being revealed to the Victim's Mother in Three Dreams

  
The Murder in the Red Barn

	THE murder for which this most diabolical criminal merited and justly 
underwent condign punishment was as foul and dark a crime as ever stained the 
annals of public justice. Maria Marten, the victim of his offence, was born in July, 
1801, and was brought up by her father, who was a mole-catcher, at Polstead, in 
Suffolk, where she received an education far superior to her situation in life. 
Possessed of more than ordinary personal advantages–a pretty face and a fine form 
and figure–it is little to be wondered at that she was beset by admirers, and that, 
artless and inexperienced as she was, she should have imprudently fixed her affections 
upon an unworthy object. An unfortunate step ruined the character of the young 
woman, and a second mishap with a gentleman of fortune, residing in the 
neighbourhood of her father's house, left her with a child–which at the time of her 
death was three and a half years old. About the year 1826 she formed a third liaison, 
with the man who became her deliberate murderer, William Corder.
	William Corder was the son of an opulent farmer at Polstead. Having become 
acquainted with the girl Marten, the consequence of an illicit intercourse which took 
place between them was a child. From that time he became much attached to her, and 
was a frequent visitor at her father's house. The child died within a short period of its 
birth, and from the circumstance of its having died suddenly, and of Corder having 
taken it away at night and disposed of its body in a manner which he would never 
explain, an idea was entertained that it had come unfairly by its death. However 
strongly this notion may have taken possession of the public mind, after the 
apprehension of Corder, it does not appear that any real evidence was ever produced 
publicly to support the impression which had got abroad; but certain it is that the 
unhappy girl made use of the circumstance as a means of endeavouring to procure the 
father of the child to fulfil a promise which he had made that he would make her his 
wife. On the 18th of May, 1827, Corder called at the house of old Marten, and 
expressed his willingness that the ceremony should be performed; and he said that, in 
order that no time should be lost, and that the marriage might be as private as 
possible, he had made up his mind to have it celebrated by licence instead of by 
banns. The next day was appointed for the wedding, and he persuaded the unhappy 
girl to dress herself in a suit of his clothes, so as to secure the greatest secrecy, and to 
accompany him to a part of his premises called the Red Barn, where she could 
exchange them for her own, and from whence he would convey her in a gig, which he 
had in readiness, to a church at Ipswich. The girl consented to this singular 
proposition, and Corder immediately quitted the house, and was soon after followed 
by his unhappy victim, who carried with her such part of her own clothes as would be 
necessary to appear with in church. In the course of a conversation which took place 
between Corder and the mother of the girl, before their going away, the former 
repeatedly declared his intention to make the girl his lawful wife, and he urged, as a 
reason why she should go with him immediately, that he knew a warrant had been 
issued against her for her bastard children.
	Within a few minutes after Corder had quitted the house he was seen by the 
brother of the girl to walk in the direction of the Red Barn, with a pickaxe over his 
shoulder; but from that time nothing was ever heard of the unfortunate girl, except 
through the fictitious communications received from Corder, who still remained at his 
mother's house at Polstead. The return of Maria Marten had been expected to take 
place within a day or two after the time of her quitting her father's house; but as she 
had before occasionally exhibited considerable irregularity in the duration of her visits 
to Corder, and as also there was an understanding that the latter should procure her a 
temporary lodging, little anxiety or alarm was at first felt at her prolonged absence. A 
fortnight elapsed, however, and then her mother proceeded to question Corder upon 
the subject, when he declared that she was quite safe and well, and that he had placed 
her at some distance, lest his friends might discover the fact of his marriage, and 
exhibit displeasure at the circumstance. Thus from time to time he put off the inquiries 
which were made of him; but in the month of September he declared he was in ill-
health, and quitted Suffolk with the avowed object of proceeding to the Continent; 
and it is not a little remarkable that before he left Polstead he expressed great anxiety 
that the Red Barn should be well filled with stock–a desire which he personally saw 
fulfilled. He took with him about four hundred pounds in money; and several letters 
were subsequently received by his mother, who was a widow, and also by the 
Martens, in which he stated that he was living at the Isle of Wight with Maria. It was 
remarked that, although he represented his residence to be in the Isle of Wight, his 
letters always bore the London postmark. At length strange surmises and suspicions 
began to be entertained, in consequence of no personal communication having yet 
been received from his supposed wife. The parents of the unhappy girl became more 
and more disturbed and dissatisfied; and the circumstances which eventually led to the 
discovery of this most atrocious crime are of so extraordinary and romantic a nature 
as almost to manifest an especial interposition of Providence in marking out the 
offender.
	In the course of the month of March, 1828, Mrs Marten dreamed on three 
successive nights that her daughter had been murdered and buried in the Red Barn. 
Terrified at the repetition of the vision, an undefined suspicion, which she had always 
entertained, that her daughter had been unfairly dealt with, appeared fully confirmed 
in her own mind; and so lively were her feelings, and so convinced was she of the 
truth of the augury, that on Saturday, the 19th of April, she persuaded her husband to 
apply for permission to examine the Red Barn, with the professed object of looking 
for their daughter's clothes. The grain which had been deposited in the barn had by 
this time been removed, and, permission having been obtained, the wretched father 
proceeded to the accomplishment of the object he had in view. He applied himself to 
the spot pointed out to his wife in her dream as the place in which her daughter's 
remains were deposited; and there, upon digging, he turned up a piece of the shawl 
which he knew his daughter had worn at the time of her quitting her home. Alarmed at 
the discovery, he prosecuted his search still further, and when he had dug to the depth 
of eighteen inches, with his rake he dragged out a part of a human body. Horror-struck 
he staggered from the spot; but subsequent examination proved that his suspicions 
were well founded, and that it was indeed his murdered daughter, the place of deposit 
of whose remains had been so remarkably pointed out. The body, as may be supposed, 
was in an advanced state of decomposition; but the dress, which was perfect, and 
certain marks in the teeth of the deceased, afforded sufficient proofs of her identity.
	As may be imagined, the whole neighbourhood was in an uproar of confusion 
at this most extraordinary circumstance, and information was immediately conveyed 
to the coroner, in order that an inquest might be held. By the time a coroner's jury had 
assembled, a surgical examination of the body had taken place; and Mr John Lawden, 
a surgeon, proved that there were appearances yet remaining sufficient to indicate that 
the deceased had come to her death by violent means. He said that there was a visible 
appearance of blood on the face and on the clothes of the deceased, and also on a 
handkerchief which was round the neck; that the handkerchief appeared to have been 
tied extremely tight, and beneath the folds a wound was visible in the throat, which 
had evidently been inflicted by some sharp instrument. There was also a wound in the 
orbit of the right eye; and it seemed as if something had been thrust in which had 
fractured the small bones and penetrated the brain. When the body was found it was 
partly enveloped in a sack, and was clothed only in a shift, flannel petticoat, stays, 
stockings and shoes.
	No sooner had the body been discovered than all eyes turned to Corder as the 
murderer. Information having been dispatched to London, Lea, an officer of Lambeth 
Street, was forthwith sent in pursuit of the supposed offender. With a loose clue only, 
he traced him from place to place, until at length he found him residing at Grove 
House, Ealing Lane, near Brentford, where, in conjunction with his wife, whom he 
had married only about five months before, and to whom, it was said, he had 
introduced himself through the medium of a matrimonial advertisement, he was 
carrying on a school for young ladies. It was necessary to employ a degree of 
stratagem to obtain admission to the house; but at length Lea represented that he had a 
daughter whom he wished to put to school, and he was shown into a parlour, where he 
found the object of his search sitting at breakfast with four ladies. He was in his 
dressing-gown, and had his watch before him, with which he was minuting the boiling 
of some eggs. The officer called him on one side, and informed him that he had a 
serious charge against him; he also inquired whether he was not acquainted with a 
person named Maria Marten, at Polstead, but he denied that he had any knowledge of 
such a person even by name. He was then secured. Upon his house being searched, a 
brace of pistols, a powder-flask and some balls were found in a velvet bag, which, on 
its being subsequently seen by Mrs Marten, was immediately identified by her as 
having been in the possession of her daughter at the time of her quitting her house for 
the last time. A sharp-pointed dagger was also found, and this was identified by a 
person named Offord, a cutler, as being one which he had ground for the prisoner a 
few days before the murder was committed. The prisoner, immediately on his 
apprehension, was conducted to Polstead, in order that he might undergo an 
examination before the coroner; and the most lively interest was exhibited by the vast 
crowds of people who had assembled to catch a glimpse of him on his being brought 
into the town. On his appearance before the coroner he was dreadfully agitated; and 
the circumstances which we have described having been deposed to by various 
witnesses, a verdict of wilful murder was returned against William Corder.
	Thursday, 7th of August, in the same year, was appointed for the trial of this 
malefactor, and the anxiety to witness the proceedings in court, or to obtain early 
information in reference to the case, which almost universally prevailed, was strongly 
manifested by the assemblage of hundreds of well-dressed persons of both sexes 
round the front and back entrances to the shire hall, Bury St Edmunds, as early as five 
o'clock in the morning of that day. The rain fell in torrents, but many persons braved 
the weather and remained without shelter until nine o'clock, when the Lord Chief 
Baron (Alexander) arrived, to try the prisoner. At the moment his Lordship gained 
admission to the court the scene which presented itself beggars description. The 
barristers who attended the circuit, amongst whom were to be observed the counsel 
for the prosecution and the defence, in vain struggled against the pressure of the 
opposing crowd, and many of them, at the moment they had almost attained their 
object, were carried back in an exhausted state to the extremest verge of the 
assembled multitude. When his Lordship had taken his seat on the bench the names of 
the jury who had been summoned to try the prisoner were called over; but the crowd 
was so great, and the sheriff's force so ineffective, that it was almost impossible to 
make way for them into the court. They were, after the lapse of nearly an hour, 
brought over the heads of the crowd into the passage leading into the hall, some with 
their coats torn, their shoes off, and nearly fainting.
	Nor was the curiosity of the public confined to the courthouse. Hundreds had 
early assembled at the door of the jail and along the road leading thence to the shire 
hall, anxious to catch a glimpse of the accused. He left the jail at a quarter before nine 
o'clock, having previously attired himself with much care in a new suit of black, and 
combed his hair over his forehead, which he had previously worn brushed up in front. 
On account of the number of challenges made by the prisoner, it was some time 
before a jury was empanelled. At length, however, the prisoner was arraigned upon 
the indictment preferred against him. He pleaded not guilty. The evidence adduced 
differed but slightly in effect from the circumstances which we have detailed. Proof 
was given that at the time of the discovery of the body of the deceased marks were 
distinctly visible, which showed that she had received a pistol-shot or gun-shot 
wound; and it was also proved, by the brother of the deceased girl, that the prisoner, at 
the time of his quitting the house of old Marten on the day of the murder, carried a 
loaded gun.
	He declared that he deeply deplored the death of the unfortunate female in 
question; and he urged the jury to dismiss from their minds all that prejudice which 
must necessarily have been excited against him, by the foul imputations which had 
been cast upon him by the public press. He admitted that the evidence which had been 
adduced, was sufficient to create some suspicion against him; but he trusted that the 
explanation which he should give of the circumstances, would at once explain, to their 
satisfaction, the real bearings of the case. He then proceeded to say, "No man regrets 
more sincerely than I do the death of the unfortunate Maria, the circumstances 
attending which I am now about to state; and much have I to regret, that I for a 
moment concealed them, but I did so because I was stupefied and horror-struck at the 
time, and knew not how to act. You have heard of the nature of my connection with 
the unfortunate Maria; that connection was contrary to the will of my mother, and to 
conceal her situation, I took lodgings for her at Sudbury, where she was confined. In 
the usual time she returned to her father's house; in a fortnight after which the infant 
died–not, as has been intimated, by violence, but a natural death. Being anxious to 
conceal the circumstance from my friends and neighbours, it was agreed between her 
father, and mother, and myself, that Maria and I should bury the child in the fields, 
and we took it away for that purpose. After this Maria returned to my house at 
Polstead; and by means of a private staircase I took her to my own room, where she 
remained concealed for two days. The pistols which have been spoken of were 
hanging up in the room loaded. I had before that shown her the use of them, and on 
returning to her father's, she, by some means unknown to me, contrived to get the 
pistols into her possession. It is well known that at that period Maria was much 
depressed in spirits, and was anxious that I should marry her, although I had reason to 
suspect that she was at the time in correspondence with a gentleman in London by 
whom she had had a child. My friends objected to the match, and I declined it at the 
time. But although poor Maria's conduct was not altogether free from blame, I was 
much attached to her, and at length agreed to her wishes; and it was arranged that we 
should go to Ipswich and obtain a licence for that purpose. Whether I did or did not 
say anything about a warrant having been issued by the parish officers for her 
apprehension, I cannot now pretend to say; but if I did, it must have been because 
such a report was abroad at the time, It was agreed that Maria should go in male attire 
to the Red Barn so often mentioned in the course of the trial. You have heard from the 
mother of the unfortunate Maria, that she and I had had words, As we proceeded to 
the Barn she was in tears. To that Barn we had often repaired before, and frequently 
passed the night there. When we reached the Barn, words arose, and Maria flew into a 
passion. I told her that if we were to be married, and to live together, she must not go 
on so. Much conversation ensued, and on changing her dress, she at length told me, 
that if we were married we should never be happy together–that I was too proud to 
marry her and take her to my mother's, and that she did not regard me. I was highly 
irritated, and asked her, if she was to go on this way before marriage, what was I to 
expect after? She again upbraided me, and being in a passion, I told her I would not 
marry her, and turned from the Barn, but I had scarcely reached the gate when a report 
of a pistol reached my ear. I returned to the Barn, and with horror beheld the 
unfortunate girl extended on the floor, apparently dead: I was for a short time 
stupefied with horror, and knew not what to do. It struck me to run for a surgeon; and 
well would it have been for me had I done so. But I raised the unfortunate girl, in 
order, if possible, to afford her some assistance; but I found her altogether lifeless; 
and, to my horror, I discovered that the dreadful act had been committed by one of my 
own pistols, and that I was the only person in existence who could tell how the fatal 
act took place The sudden alarm which seized me suspended my faculties, and I was 
some time before I could perceive the awful situation in which I was placed, and the 
suspicions which must naturally arise from my having delayed to make the 
circumstance instantly known. I, at length, found that concealment was the only 
means by. which I could rescue myself from the horrid imputation; and I resolved to 
bury the body as well as I was able. Having done so, I subsequently accounted for her 
absence in the manner described by the witnesses, saying sometimes one thing to one 
person, and at other times other things to another. 1 may be asked why, if innocent of 
the crime imputed to me, I felt it necessary to give those answers? To which I answer, 
that some persons are driven to do acts from fear which others do from guilt, which is 
precisely the case with me in this instance. It may be asked, too, why I have not called 
evidence to prove the facts I have stated; but, gentlemen, I put it to you whether things 
do not sometimes take place which are only known to the parties between whom they 
happen; and what direct proof can I give when the only person who knew of these 
facts is no more? I can for the same reason give no direct proof of the unhappy 
woman's having got possession of my pistols. I say pistols, because I found the other 
loaded pistol in the unfortunate Maria's reticule. As to the stabs and other wounds 
described by the witnesses, I can only say that no stab or cut was given by Maria or 
my self; and I firmly believe that the surgeons would never have sworn to them, were 
it not for the circumstance, of a sword having been found in the room in which I was 
arrested. If any stab did appear on the body, it must have been done with the 
instrument used in disinterring it."
	Having concluded his address by a strong appeal to the jury upon the 
probabilities of the case, a number of witnesses were called, who spoke to the 
prisoner's good character. The Lord Chief Baron summed up, and a verdict of 
"Guilty" was re turned. At this point the prisoner was first observed to raise his 
handkerchief to his eyes; and during the subsequent passing of the sentence of death, 
he seemed to be dreadfully affected. On his return to the jail, he seemed to recover his 
spirits; but the only desire which he expressed was, that he should he permitted to see 
his wife. To this request an immediate assent was given, and at two o'clock on the 
Saturday afternoon, she was admitted to the prisoner. The meeting between her and 
her wretched husband was of a most affecting character, and it did not terminate until 
near an hour had elapsed. During that evening, the prisoner was constantly attended 
by the reverend chaplain of the jail; but notwithstanding the religious exhortations 
which he received, he exhibited no inclination to make any confession of his crime. 
On the following day the prisoner attended chapel in the customary manner, and 
during the performance of the service he appeared deeply affected. On his return to 
his cell, he threw himself upon his bed and wept bitterly for a considerable time. In 
the course of the afternoon, it was hinted to him that his defence could scarcely be 
believed; but in answer he said that, "Confession to God was all that was necessary, 
and that confession to man was what he called popedom or popery, and he never 
would do it." It was subsequently suggested to him that he must have had great nerve 
to dig the grave while the body lay in his sight, when his reply was, " Nobody knows 
that the body lay in the barn and in sight, whilst I dug the bole;" but then, suddenly 
checking himself, he exclaimed, "O God! nobody will dig my grave." In the course of 
the afternoon, he had a second and last interview with his wife, and the scene was 
truly heartrending. He expressed the most anxious fears with regard to the manner in 
which she would be in future treated by the world; and implored her, should she ever 
marry again, to be cautious how she accepted a proposition reaching her through the 
equivocal medium of a public advertisement. The parting scene was most dreadful, 
and the wretched woman was carried away from the cell in a state of stupor. After 
Mrs Corder had retired, Mr Orridge, the worthy governor of the jail, made the 
strongest efforts to induce the unhappy prisoner to confess, pointing out to him how 
greatly be would add to his crime, should he quit the world still denying his guilt. 
Corder then exclaimed, "O sir, I wish I had made a confidant of you before, I often 
wished to have done it, but you know, sir, it was of no use to employ a legal adviser 
and then not follow his advice." Mr Orridge said that there was no doubt that was very 
proper, up to the time at which he was convicted, but that now all earthly 
considerations must cease. The wretched prisoner then exclaimed, "I am a guilty 
man," and immediately afterwards made the following confession:--
	"Bury Jail, August 10, 1828–Condemned Cell, 
	Sunday Evening, Half-past Eleven." 
	"I acknowledge being guilty of the death of poor Maria Marten, by shooting 
her with a pistol. The particulars are as follows:-- When we left her father's house we 
began quarrelling about the burial of the child, she apprehending that the place 
wherein it was deposited would be found out. The quarrel continued for about three-
quarters of an hour upon this and about other subjects. A scuffle ensued, and during 
the scuffle, and at the time I think that she had hold of me, I took the pistol from the 
side-pocket of my velveteen jacket and fired. She fell, and died in an instant. I never 
saw even a struggle. I was overwhelmed with agitation and dismay–the body fell near 
the front doors on the floor of the barn. A vast quantity of blood issued from the 
wound, and ran on to the floor and through the crevices. Having determined to bury 
the body in the barn (about two hours after she was dead), I went and borrowed the 
spade of Mrs Stowe; but before I went there, I dragged the body from the barn into the 
chaff-house, and locked up the barn. I returned again to the barn, and began to dig the 
hole; but the spade being a bad one, and the earth firm and hard, I was obliged to go 
home for a pick-axe and a better spade, with which I dug the hole, and then buried the 
body. I think I dragged the body by the handkerchief that was tied round her neck. It 
was dark when I finished covering up the body. I went the next day and washed the 
blood from off the barn floor. I declare to Almighty God I had no sharp instrument 
about me, and that no other wound but the one made by the pistol was inflicted by me. 
I have been guilty of great idleness, and at times led a dissolute life, but I hope 
through the mercy of God to be forgiven. 
	"W. CORDER." 
	Witness to the signing by the said William Corder, 
	"John ORRIDGE."
	On the next morning the confession was read over to the prisoner, and he 
declared that it was quite true; and he further said, in answer to a question put to him 
by the under-sheriff, that he thought the ball entered the right eye.
	He subsequently appeared much easier in his mind, and attended service in the 
chapel immediately before his being carried out for execution. He still wore the 
clothes in which he was dressed at the time of his trial. As allusions were made to his 
unhappy situation in the prayers which were read, he appeared convulsed with agony; 
and when the service was over, although he appeared calm, his limbs gave up their 
office, and he was obliged to he carried to his cell.
	At a few minutes before twelve o'clock he was removed from the dungeon in 
which he had been confined, and conveyed to the press-room, where he was pinioned 
by the hangman, who had been carried down from London for the purpose of 
superintending the execution. He was resigned, but was so weak as to be unable to 
stand without support. On his cravat being removed he groaned heavily, and appeared 
to be labouring under great mental agony. When his wrists and arms were made fast, 
he was led round towards the scaffold; and as he passed the different yards in which 
the prisoners were confined, he shook hands with them, and speaking to two of them 
by name, he said, "Good bye, God bless you!" They were considerably affected at the 
wretched appearance which he made; and "God bless you!" "May God receive your 
soul!" were frequently uttered as he passed along. The chaplain preceded the prisoner, 
reading the usual Burial Service, and the governor and officers walked immediately 
after him. The prisoner was supported up the steps which led to the scaffold; he 
looked somewhat wildly around, and a constable was obliged to support him while the 
hangman was adjusting the fatal cord. A few moments before the drop fell he groaned 
heavily, and would have fallen, had not a second constable caught hold of him. 
Everything having been made ready, the signal was given, the fatal drop fell, and the 
unfortunate man was launched into eternity. He did not struggle; but he raised his 
hands once or twice, as if in prayer; the hangman pulled his legs, and he was in a 
moment motionless. In about nine minutes, however, his shoulders appeared to rise in 
a convulsive movement; but life, it seemed, had left him without any great pain. Just 
before he was turned off, he said, in a feeble tone, "I am justly sentenced, and may 
God forgive me."
	Mr Orridge then informed the crowd that the prisoner acknowledged the 
justice of his sentence, and died in peace with all men. Thus did this unhappy man 
terminate, by an ignominious death, a life which, judging from his age and healthy 
appearance, might have been prolonged to an advanced period in comfort and 
independence.
	The mob collected on this occasion was computed to amount to upwards of 
seven thousand persons, and occupied every spot of ground from which a glimpse of 
the final scene of the wretched man's life could be obtained. A considerable portion of 
the persons collected were women and as soon as the execution was over, they 
dispersed from before the drop, and proceeded to the Shire Hall, where a large 
number of persons had assembled in order to obtain a view of the body.
	At two o'clock the body was exposed on the table in the centre of the Shire 
Hall; it was naked from the navel upwards. The crucial operation had been performed 
and the skin of the breast and stomach turned back on each side. The body measured, 
as it lay, five feet five inches in length, and presented a very muscular appearance. 
The face and throat were somewhat swollen and discoloured, the right eye was open, 
and the left partially so; the mouth was also open sufficiently to show the teeth. The 
body was taken to the hospital the next day to be dissected, in pursuance of the 
sentence.
	After the execution a spirited bidding took place for the rope which was used 
by the hangman; and as much as a guinea an inch was obtained for it. Large sums 
were offered for the pistols and dagger which were used in the murder, but they 
became the property oil the sheriff of the county, who very properly refused to put 
them up to public com petition. A. piece of the skin of the wretched malefactor, which 
had been tanned, was exhibited for a long time afterwards at the shop of a leather-
seller in Oxford-street.
	We regret to say that little credit is to be attached to the confession which was 
made by the unhappy man on the night before his execution; for, taking the case in all 
its bearings, there can be little doubt that the murder was the result of premeditation.
	The pistols which the wretched malefactor carried with him had, according to 
the testimony of witnesses who were called for the defence, long been in his 
possession; but we are at a loss to know with what object he should have carried them 
in his pocket, loaded as they were, on the day of the murder, unless with a 
preconceived intention of taking away the life of his unhappy paramour. Upon 
consideration of the main features of the case, we fear that, revolting as such a 
conclusion must be to all persons possessing the common feelings of humanity, it 
must be supposed that the unhappy Maria Marten was enticed by her bloodthirsty 
assassin to the Red Barn, for the sole purpose of being there murdered. Corder's 
possession of the gun and the pistols, as well as the circumstance of his having been 
seen carrying the pick-axe to the barn, all tend to confirm this belief; and if a motive 
be looked for sufficient to induce the commission of this most heinous offence, a 
second murder, namely that of the infant child of the malefactor and his victim, and a 
desire to conceal a secret which he knew to be in the possession of the latter, and 
which might have been employed by her to the detriment of her seducer, may be at 
once assigned. There can be little hesitation in imputing so fearful an addition to his 
offence as that to which we have alluded to a man, whose cold-blooded villainy shines 
though every passage of his connection with his miserable victim, and of his 
subsequent life. His conduct in buoying up the anxious and inquiring hopes of the 
girl's mother after the murder, in so long residing on the very spot where his crime 
had been committed, probably in the daily habit of visiting the very barn, which was 
at once the scene of the death, and the grave of the wretched girl, exhibit him to have 
possessed a heart callous to the feelings of a man. Frightful, however, as was his 
crime against society, awful as was the expedient to which he resorted to get rid of 
what he deemed an annoyance and an obstruction to his wishes and comfort, he 
committed a no less dreadful offence against the welfare and happiness of the woman 
whom be made his wife, in permitting her to enter into the bonds of matrimony with 
him–a wretch, for whom even the punishment which be received at the hands of 
justice was scarcely retributive; knowing, as he did, that accident, one false step of his 
own; a persevering inquiry as to the place of abode of the girl Marten, would at once 
and for ever blast the hopes which she might have formed of future peace and 
domestic felicity. The mode in which he proceeded in this new insult to humanity, at 
once exhibited a heart upon which the recollection of past guilt could produce no 
effect.
	The advertisement which he caused to be inserted in the paper was in the 
following form:
	"A private gentleman, aged twenty-four, entirely independent, whose 
disposition is not to be exceeded, has lately lost the chief of his family by the hand of 
Providence, which has occasioned amongst the remainder circumstances the most 
disagreeable to relate. To any female of respectability, who would study for domestic 
comfort, and who is willing to confide her future happiness to one in every way 
qualified to render the marriage state desirable, as the Advertiser is in affluence; many 
happy marriages have taken place through means similar to this now resorted to. It is 
hoped none will answer through impertinent curiosity; but should this meet the eye of 
any agreeable Lady who feels desirous of meeting with a sociable, tender, kind; and 
sympathising companion, she will find this advertisement worthy of notice. Honour 
and secrecy may be depended upon. As some little security against idle application, it 
is requested that letters may be addressed (postpaid) A.Z., care of Mr Foster, stationer, 
68, Leadenhall street, with real name and address, which will meet with most 
respectful attention,"
	The following curious conversation in reference to his marriage is related to 
have taken place after his conviction.
	Attendant: Pray, Mr Corder, may I ask whether it is true that it was by 
advertisement that you were first introduced to Mrs Corder?–Corder: It is perfectly 
true.
	Did you receive any answers to it?–I received no less than forty-five answers, 
and some of them from ladies in their carriages.
	Really! well, that surprises me.–It may well surprise you, as it did myself, but 
I missed of a good–
	Pray how was that?–I will tell you. In one of the answers which I received, it 
was requested that I should attend a particular church on an appointed day, dressed in 
a particular way, and I should there meet a lady wearing a certain dress, and both 
understanding what we came about, no further introduction would be necessary.
	But how could you know the particular lady, as there might be another lady 
dressed in the same way?–Oh, to guard against any mistake, the lady desired that I 
should wear a black handkerchief, and have my left arm in a sling; and in case I 
should not observe her, she would discover me and introduce herself.
	And did you meet her?–I did not; I went to the church, but not in time, as the 
service was over when I got there.
	Then as you did not meet her, how could you tell that she was a respectable 
woman?–Because the pew-opener told me that such a lady was inquiring for a 
gentleman of my description, and that she had come in an elegant carriage, and was a 
young woman of fortune. [Here the prisoner sighed heavily.]
	Then you never saw her afterwards?–No, never; but I found out where she 
lived, and who she was; and would have had an interview with her, were it not that I 
was introduced to Mrs Corder, and we never parted until we were married.
	Pray, sir, was that long?–About a week
	We have reason to believe that this last assertion, like many of those made by 
the wretched man, was totally untrue; and that in reality he had been introduced to 
Mrs Corder at a sea-port town, in the course of the summer before the marriage. They 
afterwards met at the shop of a pastry-cook in Fleet-street, and subsequently, 
singularly enough, the young lady having answered the advertisement, her next 
meeting with her future husband took place at the same shop. Mrs Corder, whose 
maiden name was Moore, previously to her marriage kept a school in the 
neighbourhood of Gray's-inn-lane, and was very respectably connected.


JOSEPH HUNTON 
A Wealthy Quaker, who committed a Series of Forgeries in the City of 
London, and was executed 8th of December, 1828

	THE case of this criminal excited considerable attention from the 
circumstance of his having been long known in the City of London as being a person 
of good repute, and also from the fact of his being a Quaker.
	It appeared that a considerable number of forged bills of exchange had been 
put in circulation, and the result of the inquiries which were made by the Committee 
of Bankers for the Prevention of Frauds and Forgeries clearly fixed the offence upon 
Hunton. The bills were for the most part accepted in the name of Mr Edward Wilkins, 
of Abingdon, and purported to be drawn by the firm of Dickson & Co., of Ironmonger 
Lane, warehousemen, in which Hunton was a partner. It so happened, however, that 
intelligence was received in town, before several of them became due, that Mr 
Wilkins was dead; and upon inquiry it turned out that the whole of the acceptances in 
the name of that person were forgeries. Hunton received speedy information of the 
discovery of the frauds of which he had been guilty, and when inquiry was made for 
him he was found to have absconded. Officers were immediately dispatched in all 
directions to secure his person, and he was at length traced by Forrester, the city 
constable, to the neighbourhood of Plymouth. He directly started in pursuit with some 
others who were employed on the same errand, and, upon inquiry there, they learned 
that the object of their search was upon the point of sailing for New York in the Leeds 
packet, on board which he passed under the assumed name of Wilkinson. The officers 
immediately proceeded to board that vessel, and, under pretence of having a letter to 
deliver, they were introduced to the forger. When they informed him of the nature of 
their mission he was not able to utter a word, but rose and followed them, and was 
immediately conveyed to the shore. It is rather extraordinary that the first paper taken 
from his pocket was a letter directed to the editor of The Times, stating that the 
amount of the forgeries ascribed to him in a paragraph in that journal was 
considerably exaggerated, and requesting that an acknowledgment to that effect 
should be inserted in justice to the party accused, who would return as soon as 
possible and pay off all his pecuniary obligations. There was also found in his pockets 
the copy of a letter directed to the house of Curtis & Co., informing them that, as it 
was not convenient for the firm to discount any more bills for him, he should absent 
himself for a short time from London. These were both directed from Deal, and were 
no doubt intended to mislead, as the writer never went near Deal in his route. He had 
entered the packet in his Quaker dress; but in the course of a few hours he had put on 
a light green frock, a pair of light grey pantaloons, a black stock and a foraging cap. It 
was ascertained that he had previously entered a French steamboat on the river, with 
the intention of proceeding to Boulogne, and that he had been actually in that boat at 
the time of its being searched by some officers who were endeavouring to procure his 
apprehension.
	Upon his arrival in town he underwent an examination before the Lord Mayor, 
upon the charges which were preferred against him; and several cases having been 
substantiated he was fully committed for trial.
	At the Old Bailey sessions, on the 28th of October, 1828, the prisoner was put 
upon his trial, and he was found guilty upon a charge of forging a bill for one hundred 
and sixty-two pounds, nine shillings, with intent to defraud Sir William Curtis & Co. 
On the following Tuesday, the 4th of November, he was again indicted for a similar 
offence, for forging a bill for ninety-four pounds, thirteen shillings, when a similar 
verdict was returned; and at the conclusion of the sessions, notwithstanding the 
recommendation of the jury to mercy, he received sentence of death.
	A considerable time elapsed before the case of this unfortunate prisoner was 
reported to the Crown, in accordance with the custom which then prevailed; and it 
was not until the 8th of December that his sentence was carried into effect. Before we 
describe the circumstances which attended the execution we must allude to a most 
extraordinary delay which took place in the report of the Recorder of London of the 
cases of no less than forty-nine prisoners confined in Newgate on various capital 
charges. It appeared that, his Majesty being at Windsor, the recorder proceeded to the 
Castle on Monday, the 24th of November, for the purpose of making his report, when 
three wretched prisoners were ordered for execution. In accordance with the usual 
practice it would have been the duty of the recorder to proceed forthwith to London to 
communicate the result of the deliberation of the Privy Council at Newgate, in order 
that the unhappy criminals, whose cases had been under consideration, might be at 
once relieved from the dreadful suspense in which, situated as they were, they would 
necessarily be placed. Monday night passed, however, and no intelligence was 
received of the learned gentleman, or of the decision which had been arrived at; and 
the greater part of Tuesday was permitted also to elapse before their dreadful anxiety 
was relieved. At five o'clock on that afternoon the clerk of the learned gentleman 
reached Newgate with the death warrant; and then only was it that the fate of the 
prisoners could be disclosed to them. The subject was brought under the consideration 
of the court of aldermen at the earliest possible period, with a view to the recorder 
giving some explanation of the very singular conduct of which he had been guilty; 
and he then stated that, the Council not having terminated until after eight o'clock on 
the evening of Monday, he was at that time too fatigued to return to town on the same 
night, and that though he started from Windsor on the following morning he was so 
long delayed on the road that he did not arrive in town until half-past three o'clock. 
This excuse, however plausibly it may have been put by the learned gentleman, was at 
least a lame one, and the remarks which were made upon his conduct at the time by 
the public, and by the Press, were confined to no very measured terms.
	Although so many prisoners had been reported on this occasion, it was found 
that Hunton was not among the number–a circumstance which gave him undue hopes 
and expectations that he would be spared an ignominious death. A second report, 
however, was made on Monday, the 1st of December, when the wretched criminal, 
with three others, was ordered for execution on the 8th of the same month.
	Hunton bore the intelligence that he "was certainly to die" with apparent 
fortitude. He was lying on his pallet when the ordinary entered his cell at a little after 
eleven on Monday night. Upon hearing the cell door open at so extraordinary an hour 
he turned round slowly and said 
	"Well, I suppose I know the news thou bringest?" "Yes," replied the ordinary, 
"Mr Hunton: you are, I hope, prepared for that which you have expected–you are to 
be executed." Hunton said: "Indeed I have been expecting that intelligence: it is no 
surprise, and yet my case has many palliatives which should operate with grace at the 
seat of mercy. Pray tell me who are doomed to die with me." The ordinary mentioned 
the other names enumerated in the report, and Hunton observed that he should submit 
with calmness to his fate. "But," said he, "if wilt thou do me the great favour, friend 
Cotton, to permit my wife to come and stay with me alone before the time arriveth for 
the change?" The ordinary replied that he had not the power to grant any favour, but 
the request should be communicated to the proper authority, and no doubt every 
indulgence of a reasonable kind would be granted. During this conversation Hunton 
seemed to be perfectly resigned to his fate. It is singular that he never asked on what 
day he was to be executed. After the ordinary had assured him that he should be 
treated with kindness he turned about, and said, "Goodnight, friend," and appeared to 
resign himself to sleep. In the morning he rose, evidently in a state of the most 
wretched dejection: his eyes were filled with tears, and he deplored the inhumanity of 
the laws, by which a man who had committed an act which did not deserve the name 
of fraud was to suffer death. The spirits by which he had been supported ever since his 
committal to Newgate altogether abandoned him: he wrung his hands in agony, and 
complained of the bitter aggravation of delay. When he first entered Newgate he said: 
"I wish, after this day, to have communication with nobody; let me take leave of my 
wife and family and friends. I have already suffered an execution; my heart has 
undergone that horrible penalty." A few days afterwards a person called upon him to 
request that he would explain some document relating to certain bills not yet due. In 
an instant he gave the required explanation, fully to the satisfaction of the person 
interested; and when asked by the same individual what opinion he entertained of his 
own case–"Why," said he, "my case resembles the condition of this paper" (holding 
the letter upon his finger): "a breeze of wind will turn it either way. Caprice may save 
or destroy me; but I rather think I shall live longer." On the Tuesday he was visited by 
his wife and several of the Society of Friends, and he told them he knew that to hope 
would be to court deception. He was, during the whole day, a most painful object to 
those who went to console him. He groaned as if his heart were bursting within him, 
and seemed to consider this life all that a human being could wish for.
	The execution of a man who was known to have moved in so respectable a 
sphere of life as the unfortunate Hunton failed not to attract an immense crowd of 
persons to the vicinity of the jail of Newgate on the morning upon which it was 
determined that his life should be forfeited. From the extraordinary efforts which had 
been made to save this unfortunate culprit, a very general belief was entertained that a 
respite would most certainly arrive for him even so late as on the morning fixed for 
his death. His safety was considered almost certain, and many were scarcely 
persuaded that he would really suffer even at the moment when the fatal cord 
encompassed his neck. The unfortunate man had, however, calmly composed his 
mind to meet his fate, and seemed to contemplate its approach without dread. He was 
on Sunday visited by several ladies and gentlemen of the Society of Friends, who 
were accommodated with an apartment, in which they remained in their peculiar 
devotions for several hours. Afterwards the unhappy man was attended by two 
gentlemen, elders of the congregation, who sat up with him in the press-room all 
night, during which time Hunton composed a very long prayer, appropriate to his 
situation and approaching death. He committed his thoughts to paper, and after he had 
completed the prayer he copied it, and directed it to his "dearly beloved wife." At 
halfpast seven the two elders left the miserable man, after they had "kissed," and their 
absence was supplied by the attendance of Mr Sparks Moline, of Leadenhall Street.
	Fifteen minutes before the awful hour of eight the under-sheriffs arrived at the 
prison, preceded by their tipstaffs, and were conducted by Mr Wontner to the press-
room. At the end of this gloomy apartment was observed, sitting at a long table which 
was strewn with pieces of paper and books, the ill-fated Hunton; immediately 
opposite sat his "friend," Mr S. Moline. Hunton, on turning his head and observing the 
group of officers as they entered the room, said: "I pray thee stop a minute; I'll not be 
long." He then concluded reading, in a distinct voice, the prayer he had composed in 
the night; it was couched in the most impressive and devout language that could be 
imagined. In it he expressed his dependence on the merits of Jesus Christ, and a hope 
that when the spirit was separated from the body it would join the angelic host above 
in singing praises to the Son of God, and to the Almighty. Hunton had a very peculiar 
kind of voice, somewhat shrill and effeminate; he, however, spoke with firmness. 
There was nothing in his manner to condemn, but it showed a perfect self-possession. 
Mr Moline, when the unhappy man had finished reading, bowed his head, and 
responded: "Amen!" Hunton then rose and, folding up the paper in a hurried manner, 
said: "I am quite ready now." Mr Wontner approached him, and said he might remain 
seated for a short time longer; he thanked the worthy governor and resumed his seat at 
the table, and occupied his time by perusing some religious work before him. During 
this time John James, aged nineteen, who was condemned for a burglary in the house 
of Mr Witham, the barrister, in Boswell Court, and two others were brought into the 
room, attended by the reverend ordinary.
	The wretched Hunton, during the pinioning of his fellow-convicts, conducted 
himself with the greatest calmness and devotion. He repeatedly addressed those who 
were to suffer with him, urging them to repentance.
	All having at last been properly secured, it only remained for the unfortunate 
Hunton to undergo the same ordeal as his fellow-sufferers. The unhappy man was 
indulging in a sort of reverie when Mr Wontner tapped him upon the shoulder. He 
instantly stood up, and deliberately took a white stock from his neck and approached 
the officers. He stood firmly, and when the man was in the act of tying his wrists he 
said: "Oh dear, is there any necessity to tie the cord so fast?" The officer made no 
reply; upon which Hunton said: "Well, well, thou knowest best." He again complained 
of the cord being too tight about his arms, which was slackened a little, and the 
unhappy man said: "Thank thee, thank thee." After he had been thus secured he said: 
"Wilt thou allow me to wear my gloves?" "Yes, certainly, sir," was the reply, and with 
some difficulty he put them on, and still kept the prayer addressed to his wife in his 
hand, All being now in readiness, the mournful procession moved towards the 
scaffold.
	Before Hunton left the room he said to Mr Moline: "Thou will not leave me, 
friend?" "No," said Mr Moline, "I will see thee to the scaffold." Mr Moline then 
supported the unhappy man along the passage to the lobby at the foot of the scaffold, 
where he sat down by the side of his friend, still holding the prayer to his breast.
	Hunton was the last to be summoned by the officers. When his name was 
pronounced he turned round and delivered the prayer to Mr Moline, when each shook 
the other's hand and kissed lips, the unhappy man observing: "You may say I am quite 
happy and comfortable–fare thee well." He then quickly ascended the steps with the 
same unshaken firmness and deliberation which had marked his conduct throughout 
the trying period. He took his station under the fatal beam, and requested that a blue 
handkerchief, to which he seemed fondly attached, might be fastened over his eyes, 
which was accordingly done.
	When the preparations of the hangman for the deaths of these unhappy men 
were completed, the Rev. Mr Cotton commenced reading a portion of the burial 
service, and at a given signal the drop fell, and the four unfortunate beings were 
suspended. A loud shriek from some persons in the crowd followed the close of the 
melancholy scene.
	The sufferings of the unhappy men were but brief. The rope by which Hunton 
suffered was longer than the rest, on account of his remarkably low stature; it soon 
reached its full tension, and he appeared to die instantly.
	After the bodies had remained suspended for an hour they were cut down and 
removed into the interior of the jail, preparatory to their interment.
	The unfortunate Hunton, it appeared, commenced business at Yarmouth as a 
slop-seller, and, having been exceedingly prosperous, he opened a concern of some 
magnitude at Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, He also engaged in business as a sugar-baker 
in the metropolis. He had previously married a lady, a member of the Society of 
Friends, to which sect it will be perceived that he also belonged, and was supposed to 
be possessed of property to the amount of thirty thousand pounds. He then 
relinquished these concerns and entered into partnership with Messrs Dickson & Co., 
of Ironmonger Lane, who soon discovered that he was engaged to no small extent in 
speculations on the Stock Exchange, in which, as it turned out, he was particularly 
unsuccessful. A dissolution of partnership was the consequence, and then the unhappy 
man, driven to want and despair, committed those frauds which cost him his life. Up 
to the time of his absenting himself from London he had a large establishment at 
Leytonstone, in Essex, where he was always looked upon as an eccentric but highly 
honourable and respectable person. The appearance and demeanour of the unhappy 
man at the time of his apprehension were such as to excite the greatest commiseration 
amongst those who saw him. Although it would appear that the forgeries of which he 
had been guilty were of no trifling extent, at that period one hundred sovereigns only 
were found in his possession.


ESTHER HIBNER THE ELDER, ESTHER HIBNER THE 
YOUNGER, AND ANN ROBINSON  
Tried for the Murder of a Parish Apprentice, who died as the Result of 
Inhuman Treatment, 10th of April, 1829

	THESE unnatural women were indicted at the Old Bailey, on the 10th of 
April, 1829, for the wilful murder of Frances Colpitt, aged ten years, the parish 
apprentice of the elder Hibner.
	Mr Bolland (with whom was Mr Alley) stated the case. He observed that the 
facts he had to lay before the jury would excite the greatest horror in the minds of 
those who heard the dreadful narration, but he thanked God that such a case as the 
present was of unfrequent occurrence in this country. The deceased, who was only ten 
years of age, was a pauper, and was apprenticed to the prisoner, Esther Hibner the 
elder, who resided at Platt Terrace, Pancras Road, by the overseers of St Martin's 
parish, to learn the business of fabricating tambour-work. She was apprenticed on the 
7th of April, 1828, and in the month of October following a system of the most cruel 
and unnatural treatment was commenced by the prisoners towards the unfortunate 
deceased, and the other children who were placed under their care by St Martin's and 
other parishes. They were not allowed sufficient sustenance, were compelled to rise to 
begin work at three and four in the morning, and were kept at work till eleven at night, 
sometimes two in the morning, and sometimes all night. They had scarcely any bed to 
lie on; and frequently during the most inclement season their resting-place was the 
floor, and their only covering an old rug. The prisoners had good bedding and clothes, 
and every comfort that they desired. The children were not permitted to go out to 
obtain necessary air and exercise, and thus the cruel treatment they had experienced 
had terminated fatally with three of them. The child which was the subject of the 
present indictment had been reduced to such a deplorable condition that her feet had 
mortified; and this, combined with the bursting of an abscess on the lungs, brought on 
by the ill-treatment the child had experienced, had occasioned her death. The 
breakfast which the children were allowed was a slice of bread and a cup of milk; if 
they were indulged with this luxury, they had no more food all day. Sometimes the 
elder Hibner said the deceased and the other children had not earned their breakfast, 
and then a few potatoes were given them in the middle of the day, and nothing more 
till the following morning. Nine pounds of potatoes were divided amongst the whole 
family, which consisted of twelve persons; they were allowed meat only once a 
fortnight. On Sundays they were locked in the kitchen, the windows of which were 
closed.
	It was proved that the younger prisoner, Hibner, had taken the deceased from 
the frame, and knocked her down on the floor; she had then taken the deceased up, 
and knocked her down again. When the elder prisoner was informed that the deceased 
was lying ill in the room, instead of affording her that protection which she was bound 
to do, she replied: "Let her lie there." The deceased, when in a state that she could 
scarcely crawl about the house, was told by the younger Hibner to clean the stairs. She 
attempted to do it, but fell exhausted, and was unable to accomplish the task. The 
younger Hibner then took the deceased upstairs and flogged her with a cane and a rod, 
and afterwards sent her down to finish the stairs. The children often cried for food, 
and, to satisfy the cravings of nature, had eaten the meat that was brought in for the 
dog, and also some pieces of meat which they picked out of the wash that was 
obtained for feeding the pig. It was also proved that all the prisoners had beaten the 
deceased, sometimes with a cane, sometimes with a rod, and sometimes with a shoe. 
The medical gentlemen who attended the deceased before death, and examined her 
body afterwards, proved that they found large sores on the feet of the deceased, and 
her toes were mortifying and falling off. After death they examined the body, and 
found it in a most dreadful state, produced by the ill-treatment she had experienced 
from the prisoners, and from the want of proper food and nourishment. The case 
demanded the most serious attention of the jury, and he felt satisfied that they would 
give the circumstances the most serious consideration before they arrived at their 
decision.
	Evidence of the apprenticeship by the parish officers, and of the dreadful state 
in which the deceased was found, was then given, and followed up by the testimony 
of three of the apprentices, who fully confirmed the narrative given by Mr Bolland.
	The elder prisoner, Hibner, said she would leave her defence in the hands of 
her daughter.
	The daughter said that the children had sworn falsely. They had been treated 
with the greatest kindness by her and her mother since they had been in their house, 
and there was not the slightest ground for the accusation which had been preferred 
against them.
	Robinson declared that what had been alleged against her was false. She was 
engaged by the Hibners only to assist them in their business, and went home every 
night at eight o'clock.
	The jury, after some, deliberation, found the elder Hibner guilty, but acquitted 
the other women.
	The sentence of death was at once passed upon Mrs Hibner, and she was 
ordered for execution on the following Monday; while the other women were directed 
to be detained, to be tried for the assault upon the deceased.
	During the trial Mrs Hibner did not exhibit the slightest feeling of remorse for 
her crimes, or fear for the consequences of them; and when she was arraigned upon a 
second indictment, which charged her with the diabolical murder of another of her 
apprentices, she pleaded not guilty with all the firmness of conscious innocence, 
although, as the poor child's death had been the result of the same dreadful course of 
treatment adopted towards Colpitt, there could be no doubt of her legal and moral 
responsibility for the crime which had hurried the wretched being from the world. As 
a capital conviction had already been obtained against the prisoner, it was thought 
unnecessary to obtain the verdict of the jury upon this second indictment, and the 
horrid wretch was conducted from the court to the condemned cell in the jail. Here her 
conduct became violent in the extreme. She swore to Mr Wontner, the governor of the 
jail, that she would not be hanged, and became perfectly outrageous because she was 
not allowed to have a mutton chop for her dinner. On Sunday she had a last interview 
with her daughter; but it produced no effect upon her hardened mind, and she parted 
from her without a tear. She subsequently went into the yard, and as it appeared to the 
turnkey that there was something suspicious in her behaviour he sent a person after 
her, who found her bleeding from a wound she had inflicted in the front part of her 
neck with a knife, which, by some means, she had obtained, unknown to the 
attendants. From this time her behaviour was so violent that it was found absolutely 
necessary to apply the strait-waistcoat to prevent her from tearing the bandages off the 
wound. She confessed, soon after her attempt at suicide, to Mr Wontner that it was not 
her intention to kill herself, but merely to wound herself severely, thinking thereby 
that she would be allowed to live a few days longer.
	When this was ascertained, Mr Cotton offered his spiritual advice and 
assistance to the wretched woman; but she refused them, saying that she knew enough 
of the Bible herself, and wanted no interpreter. Mr Cotton persevered until a late hour, 
but all his efforts proved useless. She listened to him with the most imperturbable 
patience, and never gave expression to either assent or dissent.
	A little before eight o'clock on Monday morning, the 13th of April, the 
wretched malefactor was led from the condemned cell to the press-room. She 
exhibited a dreadful appearance. Her dress, a black gown, over which was a white 
bed-gown, and the white cap on her head, contributed, together with the sallowness of 
her complexion, to give her a most unearthly aspect. The sad procession then set 
forward, the miserable woman being carried by two men, as she absolutely refused to 
walk. On her arrival at the scaffold she was assailed with a loud volley of yells from 
the people, particularly from the females, of which the crowd was in a great measure 
composed. She did not make a single struggle, and appeared to die almost 
instantaneously.
	Her body was cut down, after hanging the usual time, and delivered to the 
surgeons for dissection.
	On the same day that this wretched being expiated her crimes upon the 
scaffold her daughter and her assistant, Robinson, were tried for the minor offence of 
assaulting the miserable children entrusted to their care as apprentices. Having been 
found guilty, they were sentenced respectively to twelve and four months' 
imprisonment in the house of correction.


WILLIAM BANKS 
Executed at Horsemonger Lane Jail, 11th of January, 1830, for an Armed 
Burglary

  
Banks and his Gang robbing the Warringtons

	THE Reverend William Warrington was a gentleman of large property, who 
resided at Grove Cottage, West Moulsey, in the vicinity of that well-known spot, 
Moulsey Hurst, Surrey. On the night of Wednesday, the 19th of November, 1828, his 
house was entered by four burglars, and a great quantity of valuable property carried 
off. Mr Warrington's house adjoined that of Mr Jeffs, a magistrate of the county, and a 
ladder, which had been accidentally left in the garden of the latter gentleman, was 
employed by the thieves in effecting an entrance to the house which they had 
determined to rob. The circumstances which attended the burglary were as follows.
	Between one and two o'clock on Wednesday morning Mrs Warrington was in 
her bedchamber, engaged in writing, and Mr Warrington was in the same room in bed 
asleep, when the former was terrified by hearing some persons at the back part of the 
house attempting to force a window on the first floor, which opened on to a staircase 
and to a passage which led to the bedroom. Before she had time to alarm her husband, 
the fastenings of the window were wrenched off, without breaking the glass, and as 
she opened her bedroom door she beheld four men, who had entered by the window 
by means of the ladder before mentioned, in the act of ascending the stairs and 
approaching her chamber. Her fears were so excessive that she was struck speechless 
for a few seconds. When she recovered she shrieked, and exclaimed: "Good God, we 
shall be murdered; there are thieves in the house!"
	Her husband was awakened instantly by her cries, and he had just time to leap 
from his bed and proceed in his shirt to the mantelpiece, on which he constantly kept a 
loaded pistol, before the four villains entered the chamber. He seized the pistol, 
levelled it at one of the thieves, and fired; but without effect. The first man who 
entered the room, however, a dark, ferocious-looking fellow, in turn drew from under 
his coat a pistol, and presented it at Mr Warrington. The villain pulled the trigger, but 
the powder did not ignite. He recocked it, and pulled it a second time but it flashed in 
the pan. Mrs Warrington fell upon her knees, and in the most earnest and affecting 
manner implored the villains not to murder her husband, but to take all the property 
without interruption. The thieves then produced some cords (which they had stolen 
from Mr Jeffs's garden), and tied Mr and Mrs Warrington's hands and feet. Their 
hands they tied fast behind their backs, and cautioned them to be silent as they valued 
their lives. They left Mr and Mrs Warrington in their bedroom for a few minutes, and 
proceeded upstairs to the servants' sleeping apartments, and there they bound two 
female servants (the only persons in the house beside Mr and Mrs W.) with cords, in 
the same manner as they had previously bound the others. After they had bound them 
the four robbers carried them downstairs to a vault which was under the house, and 
fastened them in that cold place, with scarcely any covering. The villains then 
returned to Mr Warrington's bedroom, searched his clothes, and broke open his desks 
and drawers, and, in truth, ransacked the house completely. They took cash to the 
amount of about thirty pounds, and jewels and plate of considerable value, with which 
they decamped. The servants had been confined for several hours in the vault when 
one of them, after much exertion, released one of her hands from the cord and forced 
her way through the door of the vault. After ascending some steps she found another 
door fastened, and she had to break through that before she could assist her master 
and mistress, whom she found in a most deplorable state of agitation. She unloosed 
the cords which secured them and, having released her fellow-servant also, they 
alarmed Mr Jeffs's family and the other neighbours. Mr Warrington found that not 
only all his portable property of value had been carried off, but that the villains had 
stolen a horse, valued at eighty guineas, from the stable, and had taken his phaeton 
from his chaisehouse, and by these means had carried off their booty. Mr Warrington 
sent information of the robbery to Mr Cooke, constable of Kingston, who set off in 
pursuit of the robbers. He was able to trace the phaeton and horse and two of the 
robbers from the house of Mr Warrington, by a very circuitous route, to Walton 
Bridge, and from thence through several by-roads to Knightsbridge.
	On the same day Mr Warrington also gave information of the robbery at Bow 
Street, and Ellis, Ruthven and Bishop were directed to institute an investigation, with 
a view to apprehending the thieves. Upon the arrival of the officers at the house of Mr 
Warrington various minute circumstances transpired which induced a strong belief in 
their minds that the robbery had not been committed by experienced thieves, but that 
it had been "put up," or sanctioned by some person in the house. The clumsy manner 
in which the boxes and drawers had been opened seemed to point to the first 
impression, and the undoubted circumstance of six buck-shot having been withdrawn 
from Mr Warrington's pistol, which had been lying on the mantelpiece for several 
days, led to the latter conclusion. Suspicion seemed to attach to one of the female 
servants, who had been familiarly accosted by her name, "Fanny," by one of the 
robbers, and who had been the first to secure her escape from the cords by which she 
had been confined, and she was taken into custody. After a few days' imprisonment, 
however, the officers declared themselves unable to produce any positive evidence 
against her, and she was discharged.
	From this time the most anxious exertions were made by the police officers to 
secure the robbers. Every means in their power was tried; but although they succeeded 
in tracing them by witnesses to London, where Mr Warrington's phaeton and horse 
were found, they were unable to discover who were the persons by whom the burglary 
had been perpetrated.
	In the month of July, 1829, however, the long-pending mystery was solved. A 
man named Barnett, a Jew, had been convicted of a burglary in the house of Mr 
Colebatch, in Thames Street, for which he had been sentenced to transportation for 
life; but, anxious to save himself from the infliction of this punishment, he tendered 
information as to the parties who had composed "The Moulsey Gang," as they were 
now called, upon condition of his liberty being restored to him. The proposition was 
at once accepted, and he immediately impeached Banks and four other men, named 
John Smith, William Johnson, James Taylor and William Potts–alias Emery. The 
officers instantly set about endeavouring to procure the apprehension of these persons, 
and Cragg, a resolute officer of Bow Street, was directed to proceed in search of 
Banks. This fellow was a notorious thief, and was suspected to have been concerned 
in many robberies which had recently been committed. Cragg had heard that he had 
frequently declared his resolution not to be taken alive. Determined to succeed in his 
object, however, Cragg attired himself in the garb of a butcher and proceeded in 
search of him. Many days elapsed before he could find him; but at length he met with 
him and, rushing at him, presented a pistol at his head, and called upon him to 
surrender himself a prisoner, Banks appeared astounded at this salutation, and made 
no resistance, but exclaimed "I am a dead man." When his person was searched, a 
loaded pistol was found in his pocket, and on his back was a coat which was a part of 
the produce of a robbery in which he had been recently concerned, in the house of Mr 
Campion, at Waltham Cross.
	The other prisoners were apprehended about the same time; and Potts was 
proved to have pawned a pair of shoes which also had been stolen from Mr 
Campion's. Upon their examination before the magistrates at Bow Street, Banks's 
participation in both burglaries was clearly proved, and he was committed for trial. 
Both Mr and Mrs Warrington identified him as one of the persons who had entered 
their house, but pointed him out as having acted with some degree of humanity and 
strongly protested against the exercise of any cruelty by his companions.
	Banks alone was committed for trial upon the charge of burglary at Mr 
Warrington's, the evidence against the other prisoners not being sufficiently 
conclusive to warrant their being indicted, and he was found guilty, and sentenced to 
death at the succeeding Surrey Assizes.
	After his conviction he professed himself to be perfectly willing to meet his 
fate, as he knew nothing of a state hereafter; he declared that all he cared about being 
hanged was for the pain it would cause him. He refused to receive any consolation 
from the chaplain, and was perfectly unmoved up to the time of his being pinioned.
	He was hanged at Horsemonger Lane jail on the 11th of January, 1830. 


WILLIAM BURKE 
Who, with his accomplice Hare, murdered persons to sell their bodies to the 
anatomists. Executed 28th of January 1830

  
Mrs M'Dougal Pursued by the Mob

	THE unparalleled atrocities of which this diabolical murderer was guilty, with 
his associates, can scarcely ever be obliterated from the recollection of man. Devoid 
of all sense of humanity–a butcher of the human race–he was guilty of almost 
innumerable murders, for which his only reward was the miserable amount to be paid 
him for the bodies of his victims, in order that they might be submitted to the knife of 
the anatomist.
	The scene of these horrible occurrences was Edinburgh; but notwithstanding 
the publication of the details of the circumstances attending them which appeared at 
the investigations which took place before the sheriff, few could be found who had 
formed such an idea of the baseness of human nature, as to believe the possibility of 
the truth of the dreadful disclosures which were made.
	The metropolis of Scotland had been long and frequently excited by 
statements being made of the disappearance of persons in the lower orders of life, who 
were suddenly missed, and of whom no subsequent traces could be discovered. 
Tramps entering the city with their friends were suddenly lost; Irish haymakers, on 
their road to the agricultural districts of the Lowlands, in the same manner seemed to 
vanish from among their companions; and in one instance an idiot, who in Scotland is 
always looked upon as a harmless playmate for the children, as a welcome guest at 
every table and as an object of universal pity, was on a sudden lost from the favourite 
haunts of his imbecile wanderings.
	The occurrence which immediately led to the disclosure of these diabolical 
crimes was the unaccountable disappearance of a mendicant named Mary Campbell, 
an Irishwoman, who, after having been seen frequenting the same vicinity for a 
considerable time, towards the end of October 1829, was suddenly missed. The poor 
woman happened to have friends, who were not disposed to treat her loss lightly, and 
a rigid inquiry by the police was the result. An idea was suggested that her body might 
be found at some of the medical schools in Edinburgh, so justly celebrated for the 
excellence of the anatomical instruction which they afforded to the pupils, and one 
day's search testified the truth of the fears which had been excited of her death, Her 
remains were discovered at the dissecting-room of Dr Knox, a distinguished 
anatomist, bearing marks perfectly conclusive of their identity. The poor woman had 
received a wound upon her ankle from the kick of a drunken man, the aspect of which 
was sufficiently well known to enable her former companions to speak with certainty 
as to the body. The cause of death was now the subject of investigation, and here the 
deficiency of caution in the purchase of subjects, the necessity of a change in the law 
with regard to the provision of bodies for dissection, and finally, the certainty of the 
murder of the deceased, were exemplified. The medical men, by whom the body was 
examined, gave their firm and decided opinion that suffocation had been the means by 
which the deceased had been deprived of life–a means which it was exceedingly 
unlikely any natural circumstances would have produced. It was evident, therefore, 
that murder had been resorted to, it was believed, with a view to secure the body of 
the wretched woman, in order that it might be sold for dissection.
	The next inquiry which followed, was that as to the individual from whom the 
subject had been purchased. The law at that time contained no enactment with regard 
to the mode by which surgeons were to be provided with those subjects which the 
study of anatomy, so important to the human race, positively required that they should 
possess. The occasional execution of a criminal, whose remains were ordered by the 
terms of his sentence to be given over to the surgeons for dissection, afforded no 
sufficient supply to meet the constant demand which existed; and the stealing of dead 
bodies was a practice openly encouraged by the professors of anatomy.
	So long as the war continued, the period of time required for the completion of 
the education of medical students, so as to fit them in some measure for the Army or 
Navy, was very short, and the study of anatomy was consequently much neglected. At 
that time the dissecting-rooms were generally supplied by 'resurrection-men' who 
exhumed the bodies, and, as the suspicion of the public was not excited, this was 
attended with no great difficulty. The highest price ever obtained by these men was 
four guineas for each subject; but as the number of medical men increased, and many 
gentlemen, who had been engaged in the Army and Navy, returned to complete their 
education, the demand became greater, and consequently the risk of procuring 
subjects by the usual means was proportionately augmented. The men were frequently 
detected in their attempts, and punished severely: they therefore demanded an 
advance in their remuneration, and in consequence of no legal provision being made 
for supplying the schools, it was found necessary to accede to their demands. The 
price then became eight guineas, and it subsequently varied from that to sixteen 
guineas, according to circumstances.
	On account of the greatly increased amount obtained for subjects, numbers of 
persons now engaged in the traffic, and the consequence was more frequent detection. 
Every means which ingenuity could suggest was used to obtain bodies which had not 
been buried, and for this purpose, the men, when they heard of the body of a person 
being found (drowned for instance) and which was lying to be owned, trumped up a 
story of an unfortunate brother or sister, humbugged a coroner's jury (who, by the 
way, were more than once so well imposed on as to make a subscription, to enable the 
supposed brother to bury his relative) and thus obtained possession of the body. In 
this sort of trickery the wives of the men were often employed, as their application 
was attended with less suspicion, and it was never difficult to impose on the parochial 
officers, who were always anxious to avoid the expense of burying the deceased. 
Subjects were thus occasionally procured, but they were much more frequently 
obtained by pretending relationship to persons dying without friends in hospitals and 
workhouses. As the bodies thus obtained were much fresher than those which had 
been buried, they produced generally (independent of the teeth) as much as twelve 
guineas each.
	But the poor and friendless were not the only sufferers from this system; 
persons moving in a higher sphere of society have often suffered the loss of their 
friends, when they were confident in security. What will the wealthy not feel, when 
they are told that the very men employed to solder down the leaden coffin of a child 
have abstracted the body, and carried it off without exciting the slightest suspicion, in 
the baskets with their tools?
	The surgeons from their anxiety to obtain subjects, and from the 
acknowledged illegality of the proceedings, were frequently not over-nice or minute 
in their inquiries as to the cause of death, or the means by which the body offered to 
them was obtained. The impossibility of obtaining any answer the truth of which 
could be relied on, and the independence of the 'resurrection-men', who were always 
sure of a market, may be reckoned as almost sufficient excuses for this lax mode of 
proceeding. It is just to believe, however, that no suspicion can ever have entered the 
imagination of the anatomists that unfair means had been resorted to, to take away the 
life of the subjects offered to them, merely with a view to their bodies being submitted 
to dissection. To such causes may be ascribed the non-discovery of the suspicious 
cause of death of the numerous miserable victims whom investigation proves to have 
been murdered.
	In this case, happily, the frequency of the visits of the supposed resurrectionist 
or body-stealer to the same dissecting-room enabled the police to discover his haunts, 
together with the circumstances attending the disappearance of the deceased, which 
were sufficient to afford convincing proof of her murder at his hands. Paterson, the 
porter to Dr Knox, was well acquainted with the persons of Burke and a man named 
Hare, by whom this subject had been sold, and he related the circumstances attending 
its purchase to the police serjeant by whom the investigation was carried on, in such a 
manner as at once secured their apprehension. He said that on the 31st of October, 
Burke and Hare called at the dissecting-rooms, and said that they had got something 
for the doctor, at the house occupied by the former. Paterson had before visited this 
place on similar occasions and was well acquainted with its position, and on the next 
morning he went to the house in Tanner's Close, where he was told the body lay. He 
found there Mrs M'Dougal, who passed as the wife of Burke, and Mrs Margaret Laird, 
who stood in the same relation with regard to Hare. Upon his entrance, Burke pointed 
to a heap of straw under the table, signifying that the body was there, and the witness 
gave them 5L. to be divided between the two men, 3L. more being agreed to be paid, 
if the subject should turn out to be such as was desired. The men divided the money, 
and promised to carry the body on the same night to the dissecting-room. It arrived, 
packed in a tea-chest, and at the time of the visit of the police, which was on the 
following day (the 2nd of November), it had not yet been looked at. Upon the chest 
being opened, appearances presented themselves which induced Paterson to believe 
that the body had never been buried; the face was livid, and blood was running from 
the nostrils and mouth. As we have already said, subsequent examination proved that 
death had been caused by suffocation.
	Coincident with the discovery of this evidence, the voluntary testimony of two 
other witnesses was obtained, which afforded conclusive proof of the violent means 
resorted to by Burke and Hare, to procure the death of the deceased. Mr and Mrs 
Gray, poor persons who were travelling through Edinburgh, informed the police, on 
the same day, of occurrences which they had witnessed on the night of the 31st 
October, which induced the most dreadful suspicions in their minds. They stated that 
they had taken up their lodgings in the house occupied by Burke in the course of that 
day, and towards the evening they had seen Mrs Campbell go in with that person. 
They retired to rest without holding any communication with her, as she appeared to 
be intoxicated, but in the morning, they were surprised to find that she was gone. 
They inquired of Mrs Burke what had become of her, and she said that they had 
turned her out because she was impudent. But an undefinable apprehension lurked in 
their minds of some wrong having been done, and seizing an opportunity they peered 
into Burke's room, and there, under the table, they saw marks of blood, and upon 
further investigation, the body of the murdered woman concealed beneath some straw. 
Terror-struck with the discovery, they immediately gathered up their bundles and 
proceeded to quit the house, but were dissuaded from their intention by Mrs Burke, 
who had ascertained the fact of their having made so important a discovery, and urged 
them to stop, 'as it might be 10L. a week to them'. They, however, rushed from the 
place as soon as they could escape, and on the following day conveyed intelligence to 
the police of what they had seen.
	Upon the arrival of the authorities at the Tanner's Close, they found it to be a 
scene well fitted for the performance of such tragedies as had been recently enacted 
within its limits. The close itself was narrow and dark, and contained only one house, 
which was situated at the bottom. Here, almost shut out from the light of heaven, lived 
this detestable murderer, letting out lodgings either by the night or otherwise, to such 
poor wretches as would put up with the accommodation which he could offer. The 
house consisted of two rooms only, one of which was occupied by Burke and his wife, 
while the other was devoted to his lodgers. The former contained nothing but a 
miserable bed, a table, and some straw, still reeking with the blood of the murdered 
woman, while the latter was totally devoid of furniture. Fortunately for their purpose, 
the whole party, four in number, was assembled; and they were all immediately 
secured and conveyed to prison. Burke, it appeared, had carried on a pretended trade 
of shoemaking, and in one corner of his room was found a pile of old boots and shoes, 
consisting of nearly forty pairs; but the discovery also of a great number of suits of 
clothes, of various sizes, and bearing distinct marks of blood, afforded sufficient 
proof, that the murder of Mrs Campbell was not the only one which had been 
perpetrated within the apartment.
	The examinations of the prisoners before the magistrates of Edinburgh served 
only to bring to light fresh atrocities and to excite fresh horror; and eventually the 
whole of the prisoners were committed for trial, the evidence being clear and 
conclusive as to the implication of the men, although that which affected the women 
left great doubts as to the possibility of their conviction being secured.
	During the period which elapsed subsequently to their committal, and 
preparatory to their trial, Hare, with a degree of villainy excelling that of his fellow in 
guilt, offered to make disclosures upon the subject of the system which had been 
carried on, upon condition of his own indemnification from punishment, and that of 
his wife. Mrs Laird, it had been discovered, was the least guilty of the whole party, 
and so far as her discharge was concerned little difficulty was experienced, but upon 
the question of the other terms desired by Hare considerable doubt was entertained. 
Long and frequent consultations were held by the magistrates upon the subject, in 
which the probabilities of the conviction of these associates in villainy were most 
anxiously weighed, and it was at length determined that, for the sake of that justice 
which imperatively demanded the most satisfactory and complete evidence of the 
guilt of one at least of the gang, the offer should be accepted. The prisoner then made 
a statement to the officers of the jail, which was reduced to writing.
	On the 23rd December in the same year, the two prisoners, William Burke and 
Helen M'Dougal, were put upon their trial before the High Court of Justiciary at 
Edinburgh. The indictment charged against them several murders, founded upon the 
communications made by Hare, but after much discussion on the part of the counsel 
for the Crown and on behalf of the prisoners, it was determined that that part only of 
the indictment which alleged them to have murdered Mary Campbell should be 
proceeded with, inasmuch as that the disclosure of any of the particulars of one 
murder in the course of a trial for another would materially prejudice the minds of the 
jury against the persons charged. The murder of Mrs Campbell was alleged to have 
been committed by suffocation.
	The preliminary witnesses produced a plan of the house of the prisoners in 
Tanner's Close, and proved the identity of the remains found at the house of Dr Knox.
	William Noble, the shopman to Mr Rayner, a grocer at Portsburgh, near 
Tanner's Close, was then examined, and proved that on the night of the 31st October 
Burke, who had been in the habit of dealing at his employer's house, called there in 
order to purchase some trifling articles of grocery. While he was standing at the 
counter, Mrs Campbell entered the shop, and begged for charity. She said that she had 
come to Edinburgh to search for her son, a boy of eleven years old, but that she had 
been unable to find him and that she was now quite destitute. Burke inquired her 
name, and on her mentioning the name of Campbell he at once claimed acquaintance 
and relationship with her, and finally took her away with him, saying that he would 
provide her with lodging for the night. The woman at this time was sober. The witness 
added that on the following day, Burke called again and purchased an old tea-chest, 
and Mrs Hare, whom he knew, as well as her husband and Mrs M'Dougal, carried it 
away about half-an-hour afterwards.
	Mrs Ann Black and Hugh Alison gave evidence tracing Mrs Campbell to 
Burke's house, and as to the occurrences of the dreadful night of her death. The 
former said that she was a lodger of Burke's, and upon going home on the night of the 
31st of October, she saw Mrs Campbell sitting in Burke's room by the fire. She was 
ill-clad, and was eating porridge, and in answer to a question which the witness put, 
Mrs M'Dougal said that she was a Highland woman, a friend of her husband's, and 
that she had been assisting them in washing. The witness then quitted the room, but 
subsequently in passing through it after dark, she saw that Mrs Campbell was much 
intoxicated. Hare and his wife were then there, and had brought in some spirits with 
them, and they were all merry, and laughing and singing together. The witness 
afterwards heard dancing, and on looking into the room, she saw that it was Mrs 
M'Dougal, Hare, and Mrs Campbell. Between ten and eleven o'clock she heard a 
disturbance, as if Burke and Hare were fighting, and a woman screaming, but she took 
no notice of it, as such occurrences were frequent with her landlord's friends. In the 
morning she inquired of Mrs M'Dougal where Mrs Cambell was, and was told that 
she and her husband (Burke) had got too friendly, and that she had kicked her out of 
the house. Alison, the witness, corroborated the evidence of Mrs Black, as to the 
disturbance which occurred in the house of Burke at about the hour mentioned, and 
which he had heard in his residence at one of the upper flats of a house nearly 
adjoining, but he had distinguished screams of agony and cries for help, succeeded by 
a noise as if some person had been strangling or suffocating. He afterwards heard the 
voices of two men in conversation in the close, whom he had taken to be Burke and 
Hare.
	Mr and Mrs Gray, whose names we have already mentioned, were also 
examined upon the same point, and having proved the presence of Mrs Campbell in 
Burke's house at the time of their arrival, they stated that Mrs M'Dougal had told them 
in the morning, that she had turned out the deceased because she was impudent. They, 
however, watched their opportunity, and slipping into the room unseen, discovered 
her body concealed among the straw under the table.
	Other confirmatory evidence was also given upon the same subject, and David 
Paterson, the porter at Dr Knox's, detailed his account of the transaction of the 
purchase of the body in the manner which we have already described, and of its 
arrival in a tea-chest. Other witnesses having proved that they saw the prisoner 
(Burke) and Hare carrying a tea-chest in the direction of Dr Knox's, but in such a line 
of street as clearly showed their object to be to escape observation, William Hare, the 
approver, was called.
	Lord Meadowbank, a learned and very distinguished judge, presided upon this 
occasion, and with the most humane feelings earnestly cautioned this witness to give 
his evidence with truth. The fellow, whose appearance in the witness-box excited 
great interest and indignation, sullenly answered, that he intended to do so, but that he 
only came there as a witness in the case of the 'old woman', as he emphatically 
described the deceased Mrs Campbell, as distinguished, doubtless, from other 
miserable victims; his examination then proceeded. Having been sworn in the 
common form, he said he was a native of Ireland, and had resided in Scotland ten 
years. He had been acquainted with Burke about twelve months. M'Dougal lived with 
Burke as his wife; witness lived in the West Port, not far from Burke. He was in a 
public-house in the West Port on the forenoon of the 31st of October, when Burke 
came in, and they had a gill; he asked witness to go down to his house, to see the shot 
he had got to take to the doctor's; he said he had taken an old woman off the street, 
and wished witness to go down and see her, and see what they were doing. He 
understood by the word 'shot', that he was going to murder the woman. He went to 
Burke's house, and found there was a strange man and woman (their name was Gray), 
the old woman, and Helen M'Dougal; the old woman was washing her short-gown; it 
was white and red striped. [Identified the bedgown.] Witness remained in the house 
about five minutes, and then went home. Between eight and nine on the same night he 
was at the house of a man named Connaway with his wife, and Burke, Mrs M'Dougal, 
the old woman Campbell, and a lad named Broggan, Mrs M'Dougal's nephew, came 
in. Liquor was introduced, and after a while Burke and Broggan went away. Witness 
remained some time longer, but then he also quitted the house, and went to Tanner's 
Close. There had been some dancing at Connaway's, and at this time he had no idea 
that any harm was to be done to the old woman on that night. Soon after he arrived at 
Tanners Close, Burke, M'Dougal and Mrs Campbell also came in, the latter being so 
much the worse for liquor as scarcely to be able to keep her feet. A quarrel arose 
between him and Burke (which was evidently got up for the purpose of murdering the 
old woman in the confusion which would be the result of it), upon the subject of his 
being in the house, Burke declaring that he had no business there, while he asserted 
that he had been invited by Mrs M'Dougal. They began to fight, and Mrs Campbell 
appeared alarmed, and called police and murder. She ran into the passage twice, but 
was brought back each time by Mrs M'Dougal, and upon her re-entering the room the 
second time, witness intentionally pushed her over a stool upon the floor. She got up 
so as to rest upon her elbow, but was so drunk as not to be able to regain her feet; she 
called on Burke to quit fighting, and he did so, but then having stood for some 
minutes on the floor, Burke stood stride-legs over her, and laid himself down above 
her–his breast being on her head. She gave a cry, and then moaned a little; he put one 
hand on her nose and mouth, and the other under her chin, and stopped her breathing; 
this was continued for ten or fifteen minutes; he never spoke while this was going on; 
after he had risen from above her he put his arm upon her mouth for some minutes; 
she appeared quite dead; witness was sitting all the while on a chair. When he saw the 
woman was dead, he stripped the body of the clothes, put it into a corner, doubling it 
up and covering it with straw. Witness's wife and M'Dougal, when they heard the first 
screech of the old woman, ran into the passage, and did not come in again until the 
body was covered with straw; before this they were lying in the bed, and witness sat at 
the head of the bed; did not observe blood on the floor, or on the woman's face at the 
time; did not observe the woman in the passage cry–but nobody came to the door 
during the time. Burke had not been above the woman more than a minute or two, 
when the women started out of bed and ran to the door; he saw none of them 
attempting to save or assist the old woman, and such could not have happened without 
his seeing it. When it was all over the women came in again, and then Burke went out; 
the women asked no questions, nor did they make any remark, but they went to bed 
again without a word being exchanged. When Burke returned, he brought with him 
the man from Dr Knox's (Paterson), and he looked at the body; he said it would do 
well enough, and they were to get a box and put it in, in order to carry it to his 
master's house. At this time the women were in bed, but he could not tell whether they 
were awake or not, and he soon afterwards fell asleep himself, he was rather the worse 
of liquor, but he knew well enough what he was about.
	He awoke about seven o'clock in the morning; he found himself on a chair, 
with his head on the bed; the women were in the bed, and John Broggan was lying 
beyond his aunt; Burke was at the fireside. He and his wife got up and went home. In 
the course of the day, Burke called on him, and asked him to assist in procuring a box. 
They went first to Surgeon's Square, where Dr Knox's school was situated, but failed 
in obtaining one there, and then Burke went and purchased a tea-chest at the grocer's. 
M'Culloch, a porter, took the box home, and witness arrived there with him before 
Burke came in. They were standing at the door when he came, and he asked whether 
they had put up the body. He answered that they had not, and Burke then remarked 
that they were worth little if they had not done that. They, however, directly went in, 
and witness and M'Culloch assisted in placing the body in the chest, the latter forcing 
it down in its place. M'Culloch also, on seeing some of the woman's hair hanging out, 
pushed it into the box, remarking that it would be 'a fine thing to have that seen!' The 
chest was corded, and M'Culloch was instructed to carry it to Surgeon's Square, 
witness and Burke accompanying him. On their way they met Mrs M'Dougal and his 
(witness's) wife, in the High School Yard, and they all went together. Having 
delivered the chest to Paterson, it was placed in a cellar, and the latter then went with 
them to Dr Knox at Newington, where he and Burke were paid 2L 7s 6d. each, 5s 
being given to the porter.
	The witness was cross-examined by Mr Cockburn on behalf of the prisoners, 
when he admitted that he had followed many businesses, both in Ireland and in 
Scotland. He had been frequently concerned in supplying medical schools with 
subjects, but had never assisted in raising any bodies from churchyards. He had often 
seen bodies carried to the houses of medical lecturers, but declined to say how often; 
he also declined to say whether he had been concerned in the murder of any other 
person but the old woman, or whether he had been present at any other murder in the 
course of the same month of October.
	Mrs Laird, the wife of this witness, gave evidence very similar to that of her 
husband, corroborating his statements to as many of the transactions as had fallen 
within her knowledge and observation.
	This completed the case for the prosecution, and a most humane and able 
address having been delivered to the jury by Lord Meadowbank, at half-past eight 
o'clock in the evening, they retired to consider their verdict. During the period of their 
absence, which extended to fifty minutes, the most breathless anxiety was exhibited as 
to the result of the trial, and upon their re-entering the court, an eager silence 
prevailed amongst the persons assembled. The verdict consigned Burke to an 
ignominious fate by a declaration of his guilt; but the jury, contrary to all expectation, 
declared, that as to Mrs M'Dougal, the offence alleged was 'not proven', a finding 
which relieved her from all immediate consequences upon the indictment.
	Lord Meadowbank immediately passed the sentence of death upon Burke, and 
ordered him to be hanged on the 28th January, 1830, and his body to be delivered 
over to the surgeons for dissection.
	He and his fellow prisoner, M'Dougal, were then immediately conveyed to the 
lock-up house attached to the court, where they met Hare and his wife, who, although 
they had been examined as witnesses, were detained to answer any charge which 
might be preferred against them.
	On the succeeding Friday, Mrs M'Dougal, who had been allowed to remain so 
long in custody from motives of humanity only, fears being entertained that if she 
were to go at large, her life would be sacrificed to the vengeance of the mob, was 
discharged, and forthwith proceeded to her old abode, the scene of so many horrible 
transactions. On the next day she ventured out to a neighbouring liquor-shop to 
purchase whisky, but she was instantly recognized, the spirit was refused her, and the 
mob gaining intelligence as to who she was, she was compelled to fly for her life. 
Fortunately for her, the police interfered, and conducted her again to the prison, 
thereby saving her from violence; but there can be little doubt that, but for this 
fortunate intervention in her behalf, she would have fallen a victim to the vengeance 
of the justly indignant populace.
	In the meantime Burke had become scarcely less communicative than Hare 
had previously been. He made no denial of the truth of the statements which had been 
made by that wretch, declaring that he had sold as many as thirty or forty subjects to 
the surgeons, although he subsequently admitted, like his companion, that he had 
never once been concerned as a resurrectionist, so that it could only be inferred that he 
had been a party to as many murders as he had sold dead bodies.
	The conclusion to which these circumstances lead is as obvious as it is 
appalling; and to strengthen it we shall here introduce a statement which was 
published at the time, and which may be relied on. About six months previously to 
these transactions, the body of a female was offered for sale by some miscreants, 
probably of Burke's gang, to the assist ant of a most respectable teacher of anatomy in 
Edinburgh. The ruffians offering it were not known to him, and were not resurrection-
men; but as a subject was required, be said he would take it if it suited him when he 
examined it, and asked when they could bring the body. They replied that they had it 
now, and that they would bring it to the dissecting-room in the evening, between nine 
and ten o'clock: At the appointed hour, accordingly, they made their appearance, 
accompanied by a porter, with the body in a sack. It was taken in, of course, and 
turned out of the sack, when it proved to be the body of a female, as had been stated 
by the ruffians–a woman of the town in her clothes, and with her shoes and stockings 
on. The assistant was startled, and proceeded at once to examine the body, when he 
found an enormous fracture in the back part of the head, and a large portion of the 
skull driven in, as if by a blow from the blunt part of a hatchet, or some such weapon. 
On making this discovery, he instantly exclaimed, "You villains, where and how did 
you get this body?" To which one replied, with great apparent sang-froid, that it was 
the body of a woman who had been "popped in a row (murdered in a brawl) in 
Halkerston's Wynd," and that if he did not choose to take it another would. The 
assistant then suggested that they should wait till he sent for his principal, his 
intention being to have them detained; but not relishing this proposal, the ruffians 
(three in number, besides the porter) immediately withdrew with their horrid cargo, 
and, doubtless, soon found a less scrupulous purchaser. Statements of a similar 
character were subsequently made in many of the Scotch journals, and there appears 
to be too good reason to suppose that they were perfectly true.
	When we consider this most singular and atrocious conspiracy, and the 
characters of the different actors in it, as we understand them to be, it should seem as 
if each of them had his allotted part in the bloody drama. Hare was a rude ruffian, 
with all the outward appearances of his nature–drunken, ferocious, and profligate; and 
far likelier to repel than to ensnare any one by a specious show, which he was quite 
incapable of putting on. He appears, however, to have over-reached his associate, 
Burke, whom he succeeded in always thrusting forward, with a view, we have no 
doubt, of turning short upon him, as he did at the last, and consigning him to the 
gallows, when this should be necessary, in order to save himself. Burke was, indeed, 
the only one of the two qualified to manage the out-door business of the co-partnery; 
and he it was, accordingly, who always went out to prowl for victims, and to decoy 
them to their destruction. In his out ward manners he was entirely the reverse of Hare. 
He was, as we learn from good authority, quiet in his demeanour: he was never 
riotous; was never heard cursing and swearing; and even when he was the worse for 
drink, he walked so quietly into his own house, that his foot was never heard along the 
passage. He was of a fawning address, and was so well liked by the children in the 
neighbourhood. that each was more ready than another to do his errands. The riots 
which often occurred in the house, and in which Hare always bore a conspicuous part, 
were, there is no doubt, got up on purpose, either when they were in the act of 
committing murder, or that the neighbours might not be alarmed at the noise which 
inevitably accompanied the mortal struggle between them and the unhappy inmates 
whom they had enticed into their dwelling.
	We have already mentioned the full statements made by Hare, as to the horrid 
traffic in which he had been engaged, which were not published in the form in which 
they fell from the lips of this diabolical ruffian. Some portions of them, however, 
escaped, and found their way into the public papers; and regretting our inability to lay 
before our readers the whole of the history of this terrible case, we shall present to 
them so much of his story as we have been able to learn: --
	The first murder which he charged against Burke, although it is surmised that 
several had been committed before that time, was that of a girl named Paterson, who 
was about eighteen or twenty years of age. It appears, that this girl, with one of her 
associates, Janet Brown, had been lodged in the Canongate police-office, on Tuesday 
night, the 8th of April. They were kept till six o'clock the next morning, when they 
went to the house of one Swanstoun, to procure spirits. Here they were met by Burke, 
who asked them to drink. He afterwards prevailed on them to go with him to 
breakfast, and gave them two bottles of spirits to carry along with them. They 
accompanied him to his brother Constantine Burke's house, in the Canongate. This 
man was a scavenger, and went out at his usual hour to work After they had been in 
the house for some time Burke and his wife began to quarrel and to fight, which 
seems to have been the usual preliminary to mischief. In the midst of this uproar, 
Hare, who had been sent for, and who was a principal agent in this scene of villainy, 
entered, and in the meantime Janet Brown, agitated seemingly, and alarmed by the 
appearance of violence, wished to leave the house, and to take her companion along 
with her, By this time it was about ten o'clock, and Paterson was asleep in one of the 
beds, totally unconscious of her approaching fate, The other girl went out, and was 
absent about twenty minutes. When she returned she asked for Paterson, and was told 
that she had left the house. She came back in the afternoon in search of her, and 
received the same answer. By this time she was murdered. Burke had availed himself 
of the short interval of twenty minutes, during which her companion, Janet Brown, 
was absent, to execute his horrid purpose, when she was asleep, by stopping her 
breath; and that very afternoon, between five and six o'clock, her body was taken to 
the dissecting-room and disposed of for eight pounds. The appearance of this body, 
which was quite fresh–which had not even begun to grow stiff–of which the face was 
settled and pleasant, without any expression of pain–awakened suspicions; and Burke 
was closely questioned as to where he procured it. He easily framed some plausible 
excuse that he had purchased it from the house where she died; which silenced all 
further suspicion.
	We have already alluded to the murder of an idiot His name was James 
Wilson; but he was more commonly known by the appellation of "Daft Jamie." The 
circumstances attending his assassination were even, if possible, more revolting than 
those of the women Campbell and Paterson, The appearance of this creature showed 
at once the imbecility of his mind, and was such that be was universally regarded with 
a feeling of tenderness and sympathy. He was quite harmless and kind hearted; and 
was on this account generally liked, and well treated; and there were certain houses 
where he was admitted as a familiar guest, and kindly entertained. It is probable that 
he had been for some time watched by this gang of murderers, and marked out as one 
that might be easily taken off without exciting suspicion. Accident unfortunately 
threw him in their way. He was met by Burke at nine o'clock one morning, in the 
beginning of October, 1828, wandering about in his usual manner in the Grass-
market. He instantly accosted him in his fawning manner, and inquired of him 
whether he was in search of any one; he told him he was seeking his mother, to 
whom, as he was a creature of kindly dispositions, be was warmly attached. The 
wretch at once saw that be now had him within his grasp, and instantly commenced 
his schemes for drawing him away to some convenient place where be might be 
murdered. He contrived to persuade him that be knew where his mother had gone, and 
would take him to the place; and by coaxing and flattery he at length decoyed him 
into Hare's house. Here those monsters of iniquity, exulting over their deluded victim, 
began to pretend the greatest affection for him, and having procured liquor, they 
pressed it upon him. He at first decidedly refused, but they so far wrought upon his 
good nature by their assumed kindness, that they induced him to join them in their 
cups, and they plied him so effectually, that he was soon over powered, and lying 
down on the floor, fell asleep. Burke, who was anxiously watching his opportunity, 
then said to Hare, "Shall I do it now?" to which Hare replied, "He is too strong for you 
yet; you had better let him alone for a while." Both the ruffians seem to have been 
afraid of the physical strength which they knew the poor creature possessed, and of 
the use he would make of it, if pre maturely roused. Burke accordingly waited a little, 
but impatient at the delay, and anxious to accomplish his object, he suddenly threw 
himself upon Jamie, and attempted to strangle him. Oppressed as he was with the 
influence of liquor, he was roused at once by this assault to a full sense of his danger: 
and, by a dreadful effort, be threw off Burke, and sprung to his feet, when the mortal 
struggle began. Jamie fought with all the fury of despair, and would have been an 
overmatch for either one of the ruffian assailants. Burke had actually the worst of the 
struggle, and was about to be overpowered, when be called out furiously to Hare to 
assist him. Hare rushing forward, turned the balance of the unequal conflict by 
tripping up Jamie's heels, and afterwards dragging him along the floor, with Burke 
lying above him. In the course of this contest, the unhappy object of this dreadful 
violence contrived to lay hold of Burke with his teeth, and to inflict on him a wound 
which occasioned a cancer, that would in all probability have shortened his days, even 
if he had escaped the vengeance of the law. None were present at this murder, which 
was completed before mid-day, except the two ruffians themselves; but the body was 
recognised in the dissecting-room by one of the students.
	We have stated that the confessions of Hare were fully corroborated by the 
statements made by Burke subsequent to his conviction. The following conversation, 
which took place between him and one of the officers of the jail, sufficiently indicates 
the state of his mind at this time, and the respective degrees of guilt attributable to him 
and to Hare:--
	Before a question was put to him concerning the crimes be had been engaged 
in, he was solemnly reminded of the duty incumbent upon him, situated as he was, to 
banish from his mind every feeling of animosity towards Hare, on account of the 
evidence which the latter gave at the trial: he was told, that, as a dying man, covered 
with guilt, and without hope, except in the infinite mercy of Almighty God, he, who 
stood so much in need of forgiveness, must prepare himself to seek it by forgiving 
from his heart all who had done him wrong; and he was most emphatically adjured to 
speak the truth, and nothing but the truth, without any attempt either to palliate his 
own iniquities, or to implicate Hare more deeply than the facts warranted. Thus 
admonished, and thus waned, he answered the several interrogatories in the terms 
below stated; declaring at the same time, upon the word of a dying man, that 
everything he should say would be true, and that he would in no respect exaggerate or 
extenuate anything, either from a desire to inculpate Hare, or to spare any one else.
	After some conversation of a religious nature–in the course of which he stated, 
that while in Ireland his mind was under the influence of religious impressions, and 
that he was accustomed to read his Catechism and his Prayer Book, and to attend to 
his duties–he was asked, "How comes it, then, that you, who, by your own account, 
were once under the influence of religious impressions, ever formed the idea of such 
dreadful atrocities, of such cold-blooded, systematic murders, as you admit you have 
been engaged in–how came such a conception to enter your mind? " To this Burke 
replied, that he did not exactly know; but that, becoming addicted to drink, living in 
open adultery, and associating continually with the most abandoned characters, he 
gradually became hardened and desperate, gave up attending chapel or any place of 
religious worship, shunned the face of a priest, and being constantly familiar with 
every species of wickedness, he at length grew indifferent as to what he did, and was 
ready to commit any crime.
	He was first asked how long he had been engaged in this murderous traffic? 
To which he answered, 'From Christmas 1827, till the murder of the woman 
Campbell, in October last.' 'How many persons have you murdered, or been 
concerned in murdering, during that time? Were they thirty in all?'–'Not so many; not 
so many, I assure you.' 'How many?' He answered the question; but the answer was, 
for a reason perfectly satisfactory, reserved.
	'Had you any accomplices?'–'None but Hare. We always took care, when we 
were going to commit murder, that no one else should be present–that no one could 
swear he saw the deed done. The women might suspect what we were about, but we 
always put them out of the way when we were going to do it. They never saw us 
commit any of the murders. One of the murders was done in Broggan's house, while 
he was out; but before he returned, the thing was finished and the body put into a box. 
Broggan evidently suspected something, for he appeared much agitated and entreated 
us "to take away that box", which we accordingly did; but he was not in any way 
concerned in it.'
	'You have already told me that you were engaged in these atrocities from 
Christmas 1827 till the end of October 1828: were you associated with Hare during all 
that time?'–'Yes: we began with selling to Dr–the body of a woman who had died a 
natural death in Hare's house. We got 10L. for it. After this we began the murders, and 
all the rest of the bodies we sold to him were murdered.'
	'In what place were these murders generally committed?'–'They were mostly 
committed in Hare's house, which was very convenient for the purpose, as it consisted 
of a room and a kitchen.'
	'By what means were these fearful atrocities perpetrated?'–'By suffocation. We 
made the persons drunk, and then suffocated them by holding the nostrils and mouth, 
and getting on the body. Sometimes I held the mouth and nose, while Hare knelt upon 
the body, and sometimes Hare held the mouth and nose, while I placed myself upon 
the body. Hare has perjured himself by what he said at the trial about the murder of 
Campbell; he did not sit by while I did it, as he says; he was on the body assisting me 
with all his might, while I held the nostrils and mouth with one hand, and choked her 
under the throat with the other. We sometimes used a pillow, but did not in this case.'
	'Now, Burke, answer me this question: were you tutored or instructed, or did 
you receive hints from anyone, as to the mode of committing murder?'–'No, except 
from Hare. We often spoke about it, and we agreed that suffocation was the best way. 
Hare said so, and I agreed with him. We generally did it by suffocation.'
	'Did you receive any encouragement to commit or persevere in committing 
these atrocities?'–'Yes; we were frequently told by Paterson that he would take as 
many bodies as we could get for him. When we got one, he always told us to get 
more. There was commonly another person with him of the name of Falconer. They 
generally pressed us to get more bodies.'
	'To whom were the bodies so murdered sold?'–'To Dr --. We took the bodies to 
his rooms in --, and then went to his house to receive the money for them. Sometimes 
he paid us himself; sometimes we were paid by his assistants. No questions were ever 
asked as to the mode in which we had come by the bodies. We had nothing to do but 
to leave a body at the rooms, and to go and get the money.'
	'Did you ever, upon any occasion, sell a body or bodies to any other lecturer in 
this place?' 'Never. We knew no other.'
	'You have been a resurrectionist (as it is called), I understand?' 'No, neither 
Hare nor myself ever got a body from a churchyard. All we sold were murdered, save 
the first one, which was that of the woman who died a natural death in Hare's house. 
We began with that: our crimes then commenced. The victims we selected were 
generally elderly persons. They could be more easily disposed of than persons in the 
vigour of youth.'
	Such were the horrible disclosures made by this man–disclosures of the truth 
of which there cannot be the smallest doubt. The general impression raised by Burke's 
declaration was, that he had been originally the dupe of Hare, and that the latter 
having been before engaged in a similar traffic had driven him on, after having once 
enlisted him in the service, to commit atrocities of which he would not otherwise have 
been guilty.
	With such a belief almost universally pervading society, it may well be 
imagined that a notification which was given that no prosecution would take place 
against Hare was received with no small degree of surprise. A cry that he, like Burke, 
should be subjected to the punishment due to his crimes, was raised, but was met by a 
positive refusal on the part of the public prosecutor to per mit any proceedings to be 
taken against him of a criminal nature. Great excitement was created by this 
determination being made known, but its propriety must be now, as indeed it was then 
upon mature consideration, admitted. No one, we believe, will deny that immense 
advantages would have been derived by society from the visitation of condign 
punishment upon every one of the wretches, male and female, who had disgraced the 
human form, by aiding and abetting the perpetration of these unheard-of atrocities; but 
it was felt that care must be taken that in the anxiety which existed to visit the guilty 
with the reward of their criminal acts, the great landmarks of conservative law were 
not overthrown. Whatever the terms were upon which the evidence of Hare was 
obtained, it behoved the public authorities of the country to act upon them to their 
fullest extent; and although probably, according to the strict rule, he would have been 
liable to be brought to trial upon any one of those murders in which be had been 
engaged, except that of Mrs Campbell, the expediency of such a proceeding may well 
be doubted. His arraignment for any offence, without the certainty of his conviction, 
might have been to place the authorities in a position, in which they would have been 
triumphed over by this ruffian. Who, we ask, could have been produced as a witness 
to fix any crime upon him? His own confession was taken for another purpose, and 
was a privileged communication which could not be produced in evidence against 
him;–that of Burke would be equally useless, for before any trial could take place, he 
would be a "hanged man," and his statement being ex parte, could not legally be laid 
before the jury. Mrs M'Dougal, burning with vengeance for the loss of her paramour, 
would be so prejudiced as to render her testimony impossible to be believed, and Mrs 
Hare could not be examined as a witness against her own husband. The other 
witnesses on the trial had deposed to facts and circumstances which were in 
themselves vague and uncertain when stripped of the admissions, positive and 
negative, of Hare and Burke, which alone served to flash upon them the light of truth 
in a horrid and appalling glare, but which, as we have already said, could not be used 
in any new inquiry. If a new investigation had commenced in which Hare was the 
person charged, the peace of the community might have been disturbed. Great 
excitement would undoubtedly have been created, and it was deemed impolitic for the 
sake of the character of the nation, when a conviction was uncertain, to expose a 
wretch like this prisoner to popular outrage. Edinburgh had already had her share of 
those commotions, in which the people had snatched victims from the protection of 
the law, and wanted no other sacrifice; and however all men would have rejoiced, if in 
due course of law the whole of this band of wretches could have been punished by the 
gibbet, all right-minded persons must have shrunk, even for such a purpose, from 
straining the law to sharp interpretations. Hare, therefore, it was felt, must be 
protected from the penal consequences of his crimes, and permitted to live a little 
longer. Such a wretch, however, could not have escaped with impunity. To a mind 
capable of reflection death would have been comfort, compared with such a state of 
existence as that towhich he was doomed. With whom, now that Burke was gone, 
could he associate? Where could he hide it head? The brand of "murderer" was on his 
brow,–the finger of the Almighty was upon him, as one for whom the chance of 
mercy was small and uncertain.
Notwithstanding these considerations, however. frequent reports were circulated that 
the friends of Daft Jamie were determined to commence a prosecution against his 
murderer; and a petition was actually presented to the High Court of Justiciary in the 
name of his mother and sister, for a warrant to detain the prisoner in jail to answer the 
charge; but the court declined to interfere, as such a step would be unnecessary, the 
right of prosecution lying in the hands of the Lord Advocate, who was bound to take 
such steps as were proper and requisite.
	In the meantime Mrs M'Dougal having been again suffered to quit the jail, 
succeeded in making her escape from Edinburgh unperceived. Upon the night on 
which she was taken to the prison for security by the police, she affected to be 
sensible of her condition, but assured the officers that she was herself nearly falling a 
victim to the horrible system in which Burke had been engaged. She then related a 
plausible tale of her having. overheard Burke and Hare come to a determination to 
murder her in case of their wanting a subject. She stated, that one night Burke and 
Hare were carousing in one of the apartments of Hare's humble shambles on the profit 
of a recent murder. In the midst of their unhallowed orgies, Hare raised his hand, and 
in a fit of fiendish exultation, stated that they could never want money; for when they 
were at a loss for a "shot "–a body for dissection–they would murder and sell, first one 
and then the other of their own wives. Being in the adjoining apartment, the females 
overheard, and were petrified by this horrible resolution, as they had every reason to 
believe that the monsters would certainly carry it into effect. A discussion of sonic 
length ensued. and Hare finally succeeded in persuading Burke to consent, that when 
the dreadful emergency did arrive, Mrs M'Dougal should be the first victim, Upon her 
leaving the prison she was seen to go in a direction as if she intended to quit the city 
of Edinburgh, and unsought, and unasked for, she was never again seen within the 
limits of the place which she had polluted by her presence.
	On Wednesday the 28th of January, pursuant to his sentence, Burke underwent 
the last penalty of the law. During the latter portion of his confinement, he declared 
that his confession had tended materially to relieve his mind; and he professed great 
contrition for his crimes. On the day of his execution he was removed from the jail to 
the lock-up, at the Court-house, where the scaffold had been erected, under a strong 
escort of police. The crowd which had assembled to witness his final exit from the 
scene of life was tremendous, and seats commanding a view of the gallows were let at 
a large price. Upon his coming forth on to the platform, he was assailed by the 
hideous yells of public execration. The concluding moments of his existence must 
have caused him the most acute suffering, for, stung to madness by the horrible 
shrieks with which he was greeted, he appeared anxious to hurry the executioner in 
the performance of his duty, as if desirous to escape from that life which he had spent 
so ill. Very soon after eight o'clock, he was tied up to the gallows in the usual way; 
and he immediately gave the signal for the falling of the drop, by throwing down his 
handkerchief. A short, but apparently a severe struggle succeeded; amid in less than 
two minutes he ceased to move. His body hung suspended for half an hour, when it 
was cut down and placed in a shell, which had been brought to the scaffold for its 
reception. A struggle took place among the officials present for scraps of the rope 
with which he had been hanged, shavings of his coffin, and other relics of a similar 
character, but by nine o'clock, the crowd had dispersed.
	The case of Hare was argued before the Scotch judges on the 5th of February, 
and by a majority of four to two, they determined that the public faith had been 
pledged to him, when his evidence was received against Burke, and he was ordered to 
be discharged. It was found, however, that by an ancient form of law he might be 
detained for the costs of the suit, and his final deliberation was therefore delayed until 
Thursday, the 12th of the same month, when he and his wife were set at liberty. They 
appear upon their discharge to have parted company, for Mrs Hare was nearly 
sacrificed to the fury of the mob at Glasgow, to which place she wended her way, 
while her husband proceeded by mail to Dumfries, where he was near meeting a 
similar fate. The mail, it appears, landed him at about seven o'clock in the morning, 
and although there was no intimation of his arrival, he was recognized by the mob, 
who immediately assailed him with the bitterest execrations, and with stones and 
other missiles. He succeeded in effecting his escape from them into the King's Arms 
Inn, where he obtained a refuge, but a crowd of persons surrounded the house, and 
demanded that he should be given up to their fury. For a considerable time 
consequences of a dangerous nature were apprehended, but night having arrived, the 
people dispersed; and when all was quiet, Hare quitted the house, and made a 
precipitate retreat from the town–whither, it was not known. The subsequent history 
of this atrocious ruffian, and of his wife and Mrs M'Dougal, must, we believe, for ever 
remain a mystery. 
	Their crimes and their notoriety would be sufficient to prevent their 
acknowledging their names, or the fact of their being the participators in these 
horrible transactions; and it is to be hoped, that when they quitted the scene of their 
dreadful offences, they did so with sincere thankfulness to the Almighty for the 
escape which they bad had from a sudden and ignominious death, and with a firm 
determination to make use of that period which was granted them to live, to atone, by 
their repentance, for their sins.
	We cannot quit this subject without remarking upon the effects which were 
produced by these revolting murders. It was on the 28th of January. that Burke 
expiated his crimes upon the scaffold, and Parliament met on the 5th of the ensuing 
month of February. On the 12th of the same month, Mr Warburton gave notice of his 
intention of bringing the whole subject before the House of Commons, Rumours had 
by this time become general through the metropolis that the same system which had 
been carried on in Edinburgh had been discovered to exist in London; and the public, 
whose fears were easily alarmed by such a statement, immediately concluded that 
every report of a missing person confirmed that which now became a pretty general 
belief. The daily papers were filled with accounts of persons who had suddenly 
disappeared, and who were supposed to have been "burked," the term now universally 
employed in the description of the murders committed by the atrocious gang, whose 
villainies had just been brought to light; and the universal alarm which prevailed was 
rendered greater by the absurd practice of idle or drunken fellows who stopped 
persons whom they met in lonely situations, pretending to clap a plaister over their 
noses and mouths, with an intention to suffocate them. Complaints were made to the 
police of the system of creating alarm which was carried on, and their utmost 
vigilance was called for to protect the public from absolute danger, as well as from the 
terror which was everywhere excited. Accounts were sometimes received of dead 
bodies having been discovered packed in brine tubs, on their way to Edinburgh from 
London, and every case of this description was distorted into proof of the existence of 
a scheme of murder in the latter place, even more dreadful than that which had been 
discovered in Scotland..
	Owing to the long and most important discussions, which at this period were 
carried on in both Houses of Parliament, upon the subject of the claims of the 
Catholics for relief, it was not until Thursday, the 12th of March, that this subject 
could be brought under the attention of the legislature. Mr Warburton then moved in 
the House of Commons for leave to bring in a bill to legalise and regulate the supply 
of dead bodies for dissection. The honourable gentleman in stating to the House the 
general grounds upon which he made his motion, said that his first object would be, to 
confer a species of legality on the practice of anatomy; and with this view he should 
propose–first, an enactment to render anatomy lawful, both in its practice and as a 
mode of instruction in all cities or towns corporate wherein there were schools which 
conferred degrees in anatomy, or wherein there were hospitals which were capable of 
receiving fifty patients at a time. The next difficulty to surmount would be the 
obtaining a sufficient number of subjects for the purposes of science and instruction. 
His project had for its basis the practice of the French Government in the City of 
Paris. He, therefore, should propose that the overseers of the poor, in certain cases, 
and the governors of hospitals, should be empowered by the bill to give up to surgical 
examination the bodies of such persons as fell victims to disease whilst in the hospital, 
and were not claimed within a certain time after their decease. Here he begged that he 
should not be understood to treat the feelings of the lower orders with the slightest 
degree of disrespect by the present enactment. He begged them to take this into their 
consideration, and also to reflect, that in the case of the late disclosures of the horrid 
atrocities committed in order to obtain a supply of subjects for dissection in 
Edinburgh, the lower classes had in all cases been the victims. The motion of the hon. 
member was fully approved of by the House, and a bill was on the same night 
introduced, embodying the general principles which he had detailed. The bill passed 
the House of Commons in the course of the same session, but upon its reaching the 
House of Lords, so many noble individuals were found who objected to its principle, 
by which, it was said. the poor were subjected to what might be considered an evil, in 
which the rich did not participate, that it was withdrawn.
	It was not until the recurrence of events in the metropolis of London, similar in 
character to those which we have just described,-- the murders committed by Bishop 
and Williams,-- that the subject again received the attention of Parliament. In the 
session of 1831, Mr Warburton once more moved for leave to introduce a bill, the 
provisions of which, although they were mainly the same as those of his former 
measure, differed from it in some important respects. By the new bill, the consent of 
the party whose body was to be submitted to dissection was required to be obtained 
before his death, as a condition precedent to its being handed over to the surgeons, 
and the whole system was to be placed under the superintending direction of 
inspectors and commissioners appointed for that purpose. This bill was introduced on 
Thursday, December 15, and after undergoing considerable discussion, it at length 
passed into a law in the same session.
	The act after being in operation during a period of upwards of eight years, was 
found to have been attended with the most advantageous results, and the exertions of 
Dr Southwood Smith, who held a responsible situation under its provisions, tended in 
no small degree to secure this admirable effect. The offence of body-snatching ceased 
from that time to be heard of; for the object of the crime having been removed, the 
crime itself ceased to be committed.
	Happy would it have been for the interests of the community, if, before these 
dreadful scenes were witnessed and brought to light, some similar plan had met the 
approbation of the legislature.


CAPTAIN WILLIAM MOIR  
Executed on 2nd August, 1830, for murdering a Fisherman who had 
trespassed on his Farm at Barking, Essex

	THIS unhappy gentleman was a native of Forfarshire, in Scotland, where he 
was born, of a family of the highest respectability, in the year 1794. At the age of 
nineteen he entered the British Army, and during a period of seventeen years served 
with great credit in the 14th, 37th and 40th Regiments of Foot, in France, Spain and 
America. In the course of his sojourn in the latter country (in the year 1816) he was 
united to a young lady of exceedingly amiable disposition, who at that time had 
reached only her fourteenth year; and upon his return to England he resided with his 
wife in the vicinity of London. Here he became acquainted with many families of high 
standing in society; but, tired of an idle life, he determined to devote his time to the 
occupation of farming, and at Michaelmas 1829 he entered on the possession of 
Shellhaven Farm, which consisted of about four hundred acres of land, and was 
situated near Stanfordle-Hope, in the vicinity of Barking, in Essex. At this time he had 
three children, whose ages were respectively twelve, ten and seven years; and there 
appeared every prospect of a continuance of that happiness which he had so long 
enjoyed with his family when, by an act attributable rather to passion or insanity than 
to preconceived deliberation, he subjected himself to the infliction of the severest 
penalty of the law.
	Captain Moir was in the habit of pursuing a strict line of discipline with regard 
to trespassers upon his farm, and was considerably annoyed by the constant 
appearance of fishermen upon his lands, who resorted thither for the purpose of 
dragging a portion of the river which passed through them, and which was supposed 
to contain an abundance of fish of a superior quality and size.
	On Wednesday, the 24th of March, 1830, a poor man, named Malcolm, who 
resided at Hammersmith, quitted home, in a boat, accompanied by his apprentice and 
a brother fisherman, named Duke, for the purpose of fishing. They proceeded to 
Shellhaven Creek, where Malcolm threw out his nets. Shortly after Captain Moir 
made his appearance, armed with a knife, and accompanied by a servant named 
Raven, and ordered the nets to be removed. Malcolm offered some observations of 
abuse towards him and reluctantly retired; he was proceeding to cross Captain Moir's 
meadows, to go to the house of a man named Baker, when he was called back, and 
ordered to go round by the sea-wall. He directed some further abuse towards the 
Captain and took off his jacket, as if to fight him, but at length went away. Captain 
Moir then returned to his house, and Malcolm and his assistants went to Baker's 
cottage. They had not been there more than an hour and a half when they went back to 
the creek, where Malcolm's boat was lying. At this time Malcolm had a boat-hook 
over his shoulder, to which was suspended a basket of potatoes, which he had 
obtained from Baker, and the party was again crossing Captain Moir's meadows, 
Malcolm being about seven yards in advance, when the Captain and his servant were 
seen riding furiously towards them. The former exclaimed that he thought he had 
ordered them not to trespass upon his lands; when Malcolm answered that he would 
go, or that he might go and be d--d; the precise observation was not distinctly heard. 
Captain Moir then suddenly presented a pistol and discharged it at him. Malcolm 
exclaimed that his arm was broken, and dropped his boat-hook; and the Captain 
threatened to serve his companions in the same manner if they did not instantly retire.
	Malcolm was soon afterwards carried back to Baker's cottage, where he was 
attended by Mr Dodd, a surgeon, at the direction of Captain Moir, and was found to 
be in a position of such great danger as to render his immediate removal necessary. 
The poor man was subsequently attacked with lockjaw, and died after the lapse of two 
or three days. A conversation took place between Captain Moir and Mr Dodd upon 
the subject on the day of the occurrence, when the former justified his conduct, 
declaring that his land was his castle, and that he would do the same again the next 
day, under similar circumstances.
	A coroner's inquest was held upon the body of the deceased fisherman, and a 
verdict of wilful murder was returned, and Captain Moir was committed to 
Chelmsford jail, to take his trial at the ensuing assizes.
	The case came on for investigation at Chelmsford before Lord Tenterden, on 
Friday, the 30th of July, when every effort was used on behalf of the accused, but to 
no purpose, and a verdict of guilty was returned upon the capital charge. The prisoner 
urged the absence of all malice on his part towards the deceased, and alleged that he 
had been compelled to retain loaded pistols constantly in his house, in consequence of 
the desperate characters by which his neighbourhood was surrounded. All, however, 
was of no avail, and sentence of death was passed in the usual terms.
	After his conviction a strong and urgent appeal was made on his behalf to the 
Government, founded upon the suggestion that there was little doubt that the act on 
the part of the unhappy man had been dictated by insanity. It was declared, however, 
that it was too late to hope for mercy upon any such grounds, which ought to have 
been made the subject of inquiry at the trial, where, had they proved well founded, 
they would have relieved the prisoner from all criminal responsibility.
	In the meantime the wretched prisoner, unconscious of the measures which 
were being taken by his friends with a view to secure his safety, diligently applied 
himself to the only duty remaining for him to perform on earth–that of making his 
peace with the Almighty. He attended divine service in the chapel of the jail on 
Sunday, and was afterwards visited by his wife, then only twenty-eight years of age, 
his mother, his sister, and some friends, of whom he took a most affectionate farewell. 
At about seven o'clock on Monday morning he received the Sacrament, and expressed 
himself perfectly resigned to his fate, declaring at the same moment that he had not 
the smallest degree of animosity against the ill-fated man whose death he had caused, 
and whom he had had no intention to kill. Throughout the dreadful concluding scene 
of his life he conducted himself in the calmest manner. He ascended the scaffold 
declaring that he was at peace with all mankind, and repeatedly denied that he had had 
any feeling of unkindness towards Malcolm. At nine o'clock the fatal bolt was drawn, 
and the ill-fated gentleman died instantaneously.
	Captain Moir at the time of his execution, which took place on the 2nd of 
August, 1830, was only thirty-six years of age. He was a remarkably fine man, and 
stood upwards of six feet in height. He was brother-in-law to Sir James G. Baird (a 
near relative to the gallant Sir David Baird), and was first cousin to Sir William Rae, 
at the time of his execution the Lord Advocate for Scotland. He was descended, on his 
grandmother's side, from the heroic Bruce, and was also connected with the 
distinguished families of Blair of Blair, the Stewart and the Butes. 


JOHN SMITH, alias WILLIAM SAPWELL  
Executed for the Murder of a Policeman

  
Sapwell Murdering the Policeman

	THE cold-blooded and atrocious murder of which this man was convicted, 
showed him to merit most fully the awful punishment which befell him.
	The object of the dreadful crime of which he was guilty, was a constable of the 
G division of the Metropolitan Police Force, then only recently established in London 
and its vicinity. In laying before our readers the circumstances of the case, it will not 
perhaps be considered out of place if we shortly recite the manner in which that most 
admirable body was first called into existence and operation.
	The necessity of some improvement in the police of the metropolis had long 
been felt, and the utter inadequacy of the few Bow Street patrols hitherto employed to 
guard the streets of London by day, and of the watchmen, upon whom the same duty 
devolved by night, had for a considerable time attracted the attention of the public and 
of parliament. Committees of the House of Commons sat for the purpose of receiving 
evidence upon the subject, and a vast number of suggestions were thrown out upon 
the proper measures which should be taken with a view to obviate the existing 
difficulty. Statements were published in many of the newspapers, in which the faults 
of the system were pointed out and partial remedies suggested, but it was universally 
felt that no amendment of the plan then in operation could be sufficient to secure the 
object in view, and that a general and complete alteration and reorganization of the 
whole police of the metropolis was requisite. A plan of this description was long and 
ably advocated in a weekly journal of large sale (Bell's Life in London), the Editor of 
which had turned a great portion of his attention to a subject so nearly connected with 
the most minute interests of the community. A series of articles appeared in that 
newspaper, upon which there can be no doubt that the new police system, now so 
deservedly popular for its competency and for its admirable effects in securing our 
common safety, was founded. In the session of parliament of the year 1829 Mr Peel, 
at that time Secretary of State for the Home Department, introduced a bill to the 
House of Commons, founded upon principles directly in consonance with those 
supported in the journal in question–principles which were eventually adopted with 
the almost unanimous consent of the legislature. The general scheme which was put 
forth as being most desirable, was that of making a police throughout England, the 
centre and focus of which was to be fixed in London. The great towns throughout the 
kingdom would act as corresponding agents for the diffusion of that intelligence, the 
rapid and regular transmission of which was properly looked upon as so important to 
the success of any system of this description. In London, again, a smaller focus was to 
be formed under a board of commissioners, who would have daily communication 
with every division of the metropolis in which the police should be established, as 
well as with those country districts to which we have already alluded.
	The minor details of the measure were to be carried out by the marking out of 
divisions, to be governed by superintendents, inspectors, serjeants, and privates in 
their various grades, constant communication being kept up throughout the 
metropolis, by day as well as by night, between each division. The advantages to be 
derived from a scheme so comprehensive in its details, and so complete in its 
organization, must be at once obvious to the mind of every person, and it is needless 
to point out to our readers the vast variety of instances in which its effects would be 
attended with the very best results. It was felt, however, by Mr Peel, that so large and 
general a measure could not be carried into operation with immediate success, and 
that much delay must take place before a universal scheme of rural police could 
effectually be established. He was yet convinced of the great utility which would be 
produced even from its partial adoption, and he lost no time in proposing a bill in 
parliament, which should have for its object the immediate appointment of a body of 
men capable of performing all the police duties of the metropolis. The proposition 
was at once assented to by both houses of the legislature, and on Tuesday the 29th 
September 1829, the 'new policemen' first entered upon their duties. Their dress, their 
supposed military character, and the extreme jealousy with which all classes of 
Englishmen view anything which may be supposed to derogate from their rights and 
privileges, long conspired to make this most useful force in the highest degree 
unpopular. Epithets of the most odious character were heaped upon them, attacks both 
abusive and violent were levelled at them from all quarters, and a few instances of 
irregularity amongst their numbers were eagerly seized hold of, as arguments to be 
employed against the general body. But at length, the increased safety obtained for the 
community, the quiet and orderly manner of the men themselves, as well as the 
improvement in the general conduct of the lower classes, obtained for them a 
reputation of the very highest description. The system which, first, was confined to 
the limits of the metropolis, has been joyfully extended to all large towns and to 
manufacturing neighbourhoods, and so anxious have even the most remote rural 
districts become for this new safeguard for their property and their lives, that almost 
every month sees the adoption of the plan in some new quarter. The improvement of 
the morals of the lower orders is no less than that which has taken place in their 
manners, and many of the crimes by which society was formerly so frequently 
disgraced, have now happily disappeared from the dreadful catalogue which the life of 
degraded man presents.
	There can be no doubt that the offence of which we are about to enter into a 
description was in some degree attributable to that feeling of hatred for the police 
which was so peculiarly exemplified among the lower orders of the people. Long, the 
unfortunate object of the attack of this determined murderer, was a police-constable, 
No 43 of the G division, and occupied a beat in Gray's Inn Lane. On the night of 
Monday the 16th of August 1830, he was engaged in the performance of his duty 
when, at about half-past twelve o'clock, he observed three men of suspicious 
appearance lurking about the vicinity. Entertaining an apprehension of their intention 
to commit a burglary, he communicated his opinions to a brother constable on the 
adjoining beat, and it was determined that the men should be watched. They remained 
within Long's district of duty, and he followed them as far as the burial-ground of St 
Andrew's parish, which is situated at the back of Mecklenburgh Square. Here they 
stopped and remained in conversation for some time, and Long, believing this to be a 
favourable opportunity for convincing them of his intention to prevent the success of 
any marauding schemes which they might have in view, warned them to retire. The 
words had scarcely escaped the lips of the unfortunate man, ere he was violently 
seized by the arm by two of the party, while the third stabbed him to the heart. So 
desperate was the wound, that the murderer was unable to withdraw the weapon with 
which it was inflicted; but in his effort to do so, he pulled away the handle, and then 
all three ran off. This diabolical act was witnessed by more than one person, and 
several individuals instantly rushed to the spot. Long had fallen to the ground, with an 
exclamation that he was 'a dead man', and upon his head being raised upon the knee of 
one of the witnesses, he immediately expired. In the meantime, Newton, the constable 
to whom the unfortunate man had communicated his suspicions, had followed the 
assassins, and Smith was secured by him, having run a considerable distance and 
being in a state of the greatest agitation and alarm. Two other persons were also taken 
into custody, but it turned out that they were unconnected with the dreadful 
occurrence, and they were set at liberty. The truth of the suspicions of the constable 
was amply exhibited by the discovery of a number of housebreaking implements near 
the spot, which it was evident the thieves had intended to employ, but had thrown 
away in their flight. The handle of the knife was also discovered lying in the road at 
about one hundred yards from the spot where the murder was committed.
	Several examinations of the prisoner subsequently took place before the 
magistrates at Hatton Garden, and witnesses were called who swore positively that his 
was the hand by which the wound was given which had caused the death of the 
deceased. During his imprisonment, he continued firm in his denial of participation in 
the murder, and maintained a sullen silence as to his occupation in life as well as his 
connexions. He appeared to associate with none of his fellow-prisoners.
	His trial took place at the Old Bailey sessions, on Friday the 17th of 
September, when it turned out that his name was Sapwell and that he was a baker by 
trade. He still protested his innocence, but the evidence of the witnesses being of the 
most conclusive description, a verdict of guilty was returned, and he was sentenced to 
be executed on the following Monday.
	On the day after his conviction he was visited by his wife and his six children, 
to whom, as well as to the officers of the jail, he continued loud in his declarations of 
his having been wrongfully convicted. He asserted that he had been to the Bedford 
Tea Gardens at Camden Town on the night of the murder, and that on his way home 
he heard a cry of 'Stop thief', and had joined in the pursuit of four men whom he saw 
running away, when he was himself taken into custody. He was exhorted by the Rev 
Mr Cotton, the ordinary of the prison, to whose humane advice he paid some 
attention; but he declined to receive the sacrament. In the course of the following day 
(Sunday) he also received a visit from the Sheriff (Ward), to whom he made no secret 
of his having intended to commit suicide if an opportunity had occurred, and with 
whom he argued against the sinfulness of such a mode of terminating his life, he 
instanced the cases of Sir Samuel Romilly, Mr Whitbread, and other distinguished 
individuals, who he said were perfectly justified in depriving themselves of existence 
when it became irksome to them.
	On the morning of his execution (the 20th of September 1830), he entered 
freely into conversation with Sheriff Ward, and with new asseverations that he was 
not guilty of the crime for which he was about to suffer, declared, in an imaginary 
dialogue with the Almighty, that on his arrival at the gates of heaven, he should be 
unable to account for his standing there, and that the Almighty would give him 
admission; protesting, however, that he ought not to have been sent there so soon. He 
appeared sensible of his situation, and requested that the proceedings on the scaffold 
might occupy as little time as possible. He was turned off at the usual hour, and his 
remains were given to the directors of St George's Hospital for dissection.
	The wretched man occupied the greater part of Saturday and Sunday, previous 
to his death, in drawing up statements of the manner in which he was by mistake 
drawn into the situation in which he stood, which amounted simply to a repetition of 
the story he had related to his family. He appears to have been very illiterate, his 
letters being both ill-spelt and ill-written, and he expressed none of those fears usually 
exhibited by persons in his situation.
	Long, the constable, appears to have been a man of excellent character, having 
for a considerable time occupied a situation as watchman before he entered the police. 
He left a wife and several children, for whom a liberal public subscription was 
afterwards raised. 


JOHN ST JOHN LONG  
A Quack Doctor of Harley Street, who was convicted for the Manslaughter 
of a Woman Patient. When he died a Monument was erected to him by 
Grateful Patients

	THE extraordinary investigation touching the offence of which Mr Long was 
guilty attracted to him more than ordinary public attention. The manslaughter of 
which he was convicted was the effect of a system of treatment which he adopted 
towards a young lady named Cashin, who had been placed under his medical care by 
her mother.
	It appears that about the month of August, 1830, a lady named Cashin, of great 
respectability and considerable fortune, with her two daughters, came to London from 
Dublin, where they resided, for the purpose of procuring medical assistance for one of 
the young ladies, who was suffering from consumption. The ladies took up their 
abode in the house of Mrs Roddis, in Mornington Place, Hampstead Road; and Mrs 
Cashin, having heard much of the wonderful cures effected by Mr St John Long, 
determined to seek his advice and aid for her daughter. Mr Long, it seems, had not 
been regularly educated as a surgeon, but he had acquired considerable celebrity for a 
line of practice which he had adopted, and occupied a house in Harley Street, 
Cavendish Square. Thither Mrs Cashin repaired; and a short attendance upon the 
young lady, who was only sixteen years of age, was sufficient to confirm the 
melancholy fears of her mother that all human exertions on her behalf would be of no 
avail. The insidious nature of the disease by which she was affected was known and 
acknowledged by Mrs Cashin, and a desponding apprehension seized upon her mind 
that her elder daughter might also be attacked with this dreadful disorder. A new 
application on her behalf was therefore decided upon to Mr St John Long, who was 
requested to devise some means by which the impending mischief might be 
prevented. Mr Long participated in the fears of the young lady's mother, and 
acknowledged the prudence of the course which she had adopted; and, bidding them 
at once give up their fears, he assured them of his perfect ability to attain the object 
which they so anxiously had in view. Miss Cashin at this time was twenty-four years 
of age and in the full enjoyment of health; but, notwithstanding the absence of any 
necessity to take active steps in her case, Mr Long determined to employ his line of 
treatment upon her. The general nature of his treatment was simply this: in cases of 
internal disease he proposed, by creating an external wound and a discharge, to carry 
off the malady. In a few days the external wound was produced in the case of Miss 
Cashin–by what means did not appear, as the general mode of treatment was kept 
secret by the quack–and the effect was of the most dreadful description. The wound 
daily increased, and appearances soon presented themselves which so alarmed Mrs 
Roddis, the landlady, that she felt herself called upon to adopt measures on behalf of 
the young lady.
	She wrote to Mr Long, and in a day or so he called. Mrs Roddis humanely 
urged that danger might arise from symptoms which appeared so violent; but the 
doctor laughed at her apprehensions, declaring that the wound was going on 
remarkably well, and that he would give a hundred guineas if he could produce 
similar favourable signs in some other of his patients. It was represented to him that 
the wound had wrought a disease of another description upon the young lady–she was 
unable to retain anything upon her stomach. For this he said he had a remedy with 
him, if he chose to apply it. He was an enemy, however, to physic; the sickness was a 
favourable symptom, and the young lady would find relief from its disagreeable 
effects by taking mulled port wine. This, however, like everything else, was ejected 
from the stomach. Mr Long called again. In vain were certain angry appearances 
about the wound pointed out to him; he remained positive in his declared opinion, and 
refused to take any new measures for the young lady's immediate relief.
	Every day brought new symptoms, which were looked upon by Mrs Cashin as 
unfavourable and dangerous; and at length Mr Brodie, of Savile Row, was called in. 
This eminent surgeon took every step possible for Miss Cashin, but all his efforts 
were useless; and the very morning after his assistance had been obtained the young 
lady expired. When Mr Long was acquainted with the circumstance of new aid having 
been procured he assured Mrs Cashin that this was quite unnecessary, and he never 
afterwards called.
	A coroner's inquest was summoned.
	Mr Brodie's evidence was conclusive as to the cause of the death of the 
deceased. He had no knowledge of the manner in which the wound had been 
produced, but there was no doubt that it was that which had caused the sickness 
complained of, and which had also been the cause of death. He was at a loss to 
imagine how the production of such a wound could be supposed to have any effect in 
curing a patient of consumption, or in preventing such a disease.
	Sir Francis Burdett spoke of the mode of treatment adopted by Mr Long with 
some of his patients, which he did not think dangerous. By his recommendation two 
persons had put themselves under Mr Long's care. He did not know the nature of the 
application used by Mr Long; he had used it on his hand for gout, but it did neither 
good nor harm. He had waited on him, having heard he could cure tic douloureux, as 
he wished to have some information on the subject, with the view of apprising his 
friend, the Marquess of Anglesey, who was affected occasionally with that disease. 
	Dr Alexander Thompson, who had examined the body of the deceased, Mr 
Thomas King, surgeon, Mr Wildgoose, surgeon, Dr John Hogg, Dr Thomas Goodeve, 
Dr James Johnson, Mr John Maclean and Mr Thomas Evans, who had all been present 
at the post-mortem examination, were examined. They all concurred that it was a 
perfectly healthful subject, beautiful in form, and free from all disease, save that 
occasioned by the wound in the back. Few people would have recovered after such a 
local injury, which appeared to them perfectly unjustifiable. A notion was entertained 
by some that it was advisable to produce an external illness for the purpose of drawing 
off an internal disease.
	Witnesses who had been patients of Mr Long, for different diseases, and to 
whom the same mode of treatment had been applied, spoke of the advantageous 
effects which had accrued. Among other witnesses examined were the Countess of 
Buckinghamshire, Mr Prendergast, M.P., and Mr Higgs, the brewer, all of whom 
spoke in high terms of Mr Long's treatment, and of the virtues of his lotion for curing 
various complaints.
	At five o'clock the jury retired to consider their decision upon the case; and at 
eight o'clock returned, and announced their verdict of manslaughter against Mr St 
John Long.
	Mr Long subsequently surrendered to the warrant, and was admitted to bail to 
answer the charge; but when the case was called for trial at the ensuing Old Bailey 
sessions, on the 18th of September, it was postponed, owing to the absence of some 
material witnesses for the prosecution.
	On the 30th of October Mr Long was placed upon his trial, when the same 
facts which we have detailed were stated in evidence. After an ample investigation a 
verdict of manslaughter was again returned. Mr Long was then committed to Newgate 
to await his sentence; but on the following Monday he was again placed at the bar. 
The Court then passed sentence upon him, condemning him to pay a fine of two 
hundred and fifty pounds to the King. The money was immediately paid, and the 
defendant was discharged out of custody. 
	The case had created a great degree of interest in society, from the vast 
number of persons whom Mr Long had attended, and many honourable and right 
honourable persons were present at his trial; but the public excitement was still further 
aroused when a subsequent charge of a similar nature was brought against him.
	On Wednesday morning, the 10th of November, 1830, at eleven o'clock, J. H. 
Gell, Esq., and a highly respectable jury assembled at the Wilton Arms, Kinnerton 
Street, Knightsbridge, to inquire into the death of Mrs Colin Campbell Lloyd, aged 
forty-eight, the wife of Captain Edward Lloyd, of the Royal Navy, whose death was 
alleged to have been occasioned by the treatment she had experienced under the hands 
of Mr St John Long.
	The jury retired for about half-an-hour, and then returned the following 
verdict: "The jury, having attentively and deliberately considered their verdict, can 
come to no other than manslaughter against John St John Long."
	The coroner inquired on what grounds they found their verdict.
	The foreman said: "On the ground of gross ignorance, and on other 
considerations."
	Upon this second charge Mr Long was tried at the Old Bailey on the 19th of 
February, 1831. The jury, however, returned a verdict of not guilty.
	Several ladies, elegantly dressed, remained with the prisoner in the dock 
throughout the day, to whom this verdict appeared to give great satisfaction.
	Mr Long died in the year 1834, and his body was consigned to a tomb in the 
Harrow Road Cemetery, where a monument was erected to his memory at the cost of 
his former patients, who, in an inscription, paid a handsome tribute to his talents. 


JOHN TAYLOR AND THOMAS MARTIN  
A Body-Snatcher's Humorous Story of his Adventure, as told at the London 
Sessions, 21st of April, 1831

	THESE men were indicted at the London Sessions on Thursday, the 21st of 
April, 1831, for having stolen the body of an old man, named Gardiner, from St 
Bartholomew's Hospital. Taylor was recognised as a notorious " body-snatcher," or 
resurrectionist, and Martin was an undertaker.
	Taylor had taken the old man, who had a spinal disease, to the hospital. In a 
very short time the patient died, and Taylor contrived to get possession of the body by 
a manoeuvre, and assured the daughter of the deceased that her father had been 
ordered to be buried quickly, on account of the mortification which had taken place. 
Martin accompanied Taylor when he made application for the body at the hospital, 
and gave a wrong name and address. It was soon discovered by the daughter that the 
body of her father had been removed, and the two prisoners were taken into custody.
	Taylor defended himself in the (literally) following manner: "You see, please 
you, my Lord, I sees the poor old gentleman walking in Fleet Lane, wery bad; and so, 
says he, Jack, I feels queerish, and I don't suppose as how I'll get over this here caper.' 
So, you see, I takes him into a public-house and gives him half-a-pint of beer quite 
warm, and a pipe of backy, and so he stays there till six or seven o'clock; and then, 
says he, ' Jack, you must get me a place for to lay upon '; but they wouldn't have him 
in no house whatsomdever; for, please you my Lord, he warn't without warmint. 
(Laughter.) Well, then, my Lord, you see he gets worse, and he axed me to take him 
to the hospital; and didn't I take him?"
	ALDERMAN WINCHESTER: Yes, and you took him away from it too. 
(Laughter.)
	TAYLOR: Well, my Lord, you see, when I sees him snug and comfortable in 
the bed, I goes off to his daughter, and I told she, and she warn't by no means 
bevaricated at it; but she said she was obligated to me for my civility and my 
humanity, you see, for taking care of the poor old creatur wot was so wery bad. And 
so the old gentleman wanted a shirt wery bad, and I goes to his daughter, and I gets 
one with a frill to it, and I puts it on him; and so his daughter suddenly turns against 
me, and she gives me in charge, though I was so kind, for stealing the shirt; and I'm 
blest if they didn't try me for it at the Old Bailey. (A laugh.)
	SERJEANT ARABIN: I know they did, for I tried you for the robbery. (Loud 
laughter). 
	TAYLOR: Please you, my Lord, I think you was my judge. Well, you see, my 
Lord, they couldn't do nothing with me.
	SERJEANT ARABIN: Come to the point. 
	TAYLOR: Well, my Lord, I'll come soon enough. (Loud laughter.) So you 
see, she says to me, "Jack," says she, "I'll go to see the old gentleman the next day 
morning to the hospital, for I believe he's poorly"; and please you, my Lord, when she 
goes there she couldn't find nobody at all, for the body warn't there, because as how 
somebody tuck it away. (Roars of laughter.)
	SERJEANT ARABIN: No doubt of it; you took it away, and can you prove 
where 'tis buried?
	TAYLOR: Why you see, my Lord, I suppose it's in the ground, for what else 
would you do with it? Ven the breath goes avay from us, there's no use in going 
further, for then there's an end of the caper. (Excessive laughter, in which the Court 
joined.) Vell, my Lord, I never seed the body arterwards; and then they comes up to 
me, and they charges me with robbing it. But please you, my Lord, what could I do 
with it if I had it? It ain't like the body of a cow, or a sheep; and you don't think I'm 
sich a feller as would do what the black beggars does with the people wot they kills. 
(Loud laughter.)
	The jury told Serjeant Arabin that it was unnecessary to sum up, and found the 
prisoners guilty.
	Taylor was sentenced to imprisonment for nine months, and Martin for three 
months. 


JOSEPH PLANT STEVENS  
A Trickster, who was transported for robbing a Guileless Farmer, 25th of 
May, 1831

	THIS fellow was one of the class called "magsmen." The robbery of which he 
was convicted sufficiently explains the name, and affords a good specimen of the arts 
of London sharpers. The trick to which he resorted has now become very stale and is 
sufficiently notorious; but flats are still to be found who foolishly submit to be robbed 
with their eyes open in the same manner.
	At the Surrey Sessions, on the 25th of May, 1831, Joseph Plant Stevens was 
indicted for stealing thirty pounds from the person of Thomas Young, a farmer and 
hop-grower of Sevenoaks, Kent.
	The prosecutor, who was an elderly man, stated that he was proceeding along 
Bishopsgate Street, when he was accosted by a well-dressed young man of diminutive 
stature, who asked him if he was not a hop-grower from Kent. The reply being in the 
affirmative, the stranger and he then entered into conversation, which turned to 
politics. After discussing the then all-absorbing Reform question, they proposed to 
call at the Three Tuns, in the Borough, near to which tavern they had now arrived, to 
have some gin-and-water. While they were drinking it the young man spoke of the 
respectability of his own family; he said he was a native of Brighton, and that he had 
come up to London to make some inquiries respecting a rich relative, from whom he 
had expectations. While sitting in the room conversing on the subjects alluded to the 
prisoner walked in and, seating himself at the same table with them, called for a glass 
of brandy-and-water. He affected to be a stranger. After sipping a little of his liquor he 
began to talk on the question of Reform. After he had passed a high eulogium on the 
King and his Ministers he began to talk about himself, and commenced by saying that 
he was a very lucky fellow, a Chancery suit having just been decided in his favour; he 
added that he had eight hundred pounds then in his possession, and that he had fallen 
heir to eight hundred pounds per annum by the decision of the Court.
	The farmer, perceiving him take a roll of what appeared to be bank-notes out 
of his pocket, advised him strongly to put up the money again, telling him at the same 
time that London was infested with sharpers, and that if he did not take great care he 
would assuredly be "choused" out of it by some of the knowing ones, who lurked 
about in all quarters in search of their prey. The prisoner spoke in a broad country 
dialect. After the farmer had given him the advice just mentioned, the short young 
man, who no doubt was in league with the prisoner, said to the latter: "This is a nice 
steady old gentleman, and I think the least you can do is to present him with a gown-
piece for his wife, as some acknowledgment for his good advice." The prisoner at 
once assented to the proposition, and, taking a guinea out of his fob, said that he 
thought it better to give the farmer a guinea for his wife, and she could then please 
herself as to the pattern. The prisoner desired the farmer to give him his purse, in 
order that he might place the guinea with the rest of the money. The farmer very 
foolishly did as he was required, and the result was that the prisoner, by a dexterous 
movement, slipped some tissue-paper into the purse in lieu of six five-pound notes 
which had been previously there. So skilfully was the trick managed that the farmer 
did not discover he had been robbed until some time after, when, visiting Mr Stevens, 
a hop-factor, in Union Street, and recounting to that gentleman the kind treatment he 
had experienced at the Three Tuns, the discovery was made of the tissue-paper being 
substituted for his Bank of England notes.
	The jury found the prisoner guilty. After the verdict was delivered it was 
stated to the Court that a poor man from Oxfordshire, who was then in court, had been 
robbed by him in the previous November under similar circumstances.
	The chairman said there was no doubt that the prisoner was one of a gang of 
thieves who had committed many robberies of this description; and, as it was 
necessary to make an example in this instance, the sentence of the Court was that he 
should be transported for life. 


LEWIS LEWIS, RICHARD LEWIS, DAVID HUGHES, 
THOMAS VAUGHAN, DAVID THOMAS, AND OTHERS  
The Merthyr Tydfil rioters, June 1831

  
The Merthyr Tydfil Riots

	THESE riots, as alarming in their nature as they were distressing and 
mischievous in their consequences, occurred at Merthyr Tydfil in South Wales, on the 
3rd of June 1831. The district surrounding Merthyr Tydfil was at that time, as it is 
now, densely populated by persons engaged in the iron manufactories with which that 
district abounds, and the alleged insufficiency of the wages was the immediate cause 
of the desperate riot which took place.
	The preliminary to this distressing occurrence, it appears, was a turnout, or 
strike among the workmen; and the alarming manner in which these men assembled, 
and the threats which they held out, produced a well-grounded apprehension that 
violence might be done both to the persons and the property of the iron-masters. In 
order to meet any attack which might be made, the magistrates assembled at the 
Castle Inn, Merthyr Tydfil, for the purpose of devising means to meet and repel the 
rioters, and the result was that an application for military assistance was determined 
on.
	In consequence a detachment of the Ninety-third Regiment, under the 
command of Major Folkes, proceeded into the town, and on the 3rd of June took up 
their quarters at the Castle Inn, the chief inn in the town, where the magistrates still 
remained assembled in consultation.
	By this time, the mob had already exhibited its riotous and unlawful 
determination by an attack upon the Court of Requests. This court, it would appear, 
had become hateful to them, from its being also the place where offences affecting the 
relations of master and servant were usually adjudicated upon, and they demanded 
that the books should be given up to them. This was, of course, refused, as indeed 
they had been already removed to a secure place, upon which the mob commenced a 
most violent and determined assault upon the building. The residence of Mr Coffin, 
the officer of the court, was also an object of their angry demonstrations, and the two 
places having been stripped of their books and furniture, a fire was immediately made 
of them in the street and they were burned.
	This done, the rioters proceeded at once to the Castle Inn, there to give fresh 
proofs of their power and determination. At this time they exceeded a thousand in 
number, and they were loud in their demands that justice should be done them. A 
deputation was called in to explain their wants, who respectfully but firmly demanded 
an increase of wages, but the magistrates, having earnestly desired them to return to 
their work, pointing out to them that it was impossible that they could suffer 
themselves to be dictated to by a lawless mob, desired them to retire. Upon their 
return to their partisans they communicated what had taken place, and symptoms were 
soon observable in the countenances of all, which denoted their determination to 
proceed to measures even more violent than any they had hitherto adopted.
	They were addressed by several of the iron-masters present at the inn, both in 
English and Welsh, but without effect, for they persisted in their demands for further 
wages, and declared their intention to persevere until their desires were acceded to.
	At this time there was a guard of soldiers stationed at the door of the inn, the 
smallness of whose numbers was remarkably contrasted with the vast assemblage of 
the workmen. The weakness of the position of the military, in case of an attack, was at 
once seen, and steps were immediately taken to secure the safety of the post at which 
they had fixed themselves. For this purpose three men were ordered to each window 
in front of the building, to be ready with their muskets in case of necessity. Renewed 
efforts to procure the dispersion of the crowd were then made by Mr Crawshay and 
Mr Guest, and a long parley took place. No amicable decision was, however, arrived 
at, and at length, when it was least expected, a spontaneous rush was made by the 
people upon the soldiery occupying the door way and its vicinity, whose arms 
appeared to be the object of the attack. The force in the street was absolutely as 
nothing against the numbers by whom they were assailed, and orders were given to 
the soldiers above to fire.
	At this period a scene of dreadful conflict was witnessed. The men in the 
windows advanced one by one to the front to fire, and each man, before he discharged 
his piece, took deliberate aim at one of the most violent of the mob, whom lie seldom 
failed to bring down. As each man fired, he fell back and re-loaded, so that there was 
a constant succession of discharges upon the heads of the misguided people in the 
street. The personal conflict below was no less dreadful. The first person whom the 
mob had attempted to seize, was a soldier whose back was turned to them, and his 
assailant was a brawny fellow of upwards of six feet in height. The musket was seized 
from behind, but the soldier, no less active than his antagonist, immediately turned 
round, still maintaining his hold of his piece. By a dexterous twist he pushed his 
opponent from him, and received him, on his return, on the point of his bayonet, so 
that he fell dead at his feet. The soldier was at once felled to the ground by a blow 
from a bludgeon, and his gun was secured by another of the rioters. At the same 
moment a scene almost precisely similar occurred within two yards of the same spot. 
A fellow seized hold of a drummer's sword, but immediately had a bayonet run 
though his body. The muskets, meanwhile, were cracking from every window, and the 
street was raked from one end to the other. Many of the rioters penetrated to the 
interior of the house, where they committed acts of violence upon the officers of the 
regiment and upon the magistrates, many of whom, in their efforts to secure these 
assailants, received severe contusions. The rioters exhibited a degree of determination 
which was truly surprising, and the position of those who were in the inn was at one 
time highly critical. The superior discipline of the soldiery, however, prevailed against 
their numbers, and at length the neighbourhood was cleared.
	Upon a search being now made, it was found that thirteen of the rioters lay 
dead upon the ground, and the mob were seen carrying off many others, who were 
believed to be dead or severely wounded. The soldiers themselves did not escape 
injury: nearly twenty of them were wounded, exclusive of Major Folkes, who had 
received a serious contusion on the back of the head from a bludgeon. One of the men 
had had his bayonet taken from him and was stabbed in his side, while others were 
bleeding profusely from places where they had received blows or wounds from the 
people. The bodies which had been found in the street were conveyed to the stables of 
the inn–many of them only now parting with the last quivering remains of existence–
there to wait a coroner's inquest, while those persons who had been secured and who 
were wounded, received immediate surgical assistance.
	The danger to the town, however, had not yet altogether ceased. The rioters 
having succeeded in escaping from its precincts, ascended the neighbouring heights, 
from whence they continued to fire upon the immediate vicinity of the Castle Inn with 
much precision. Many of them had procured fowling-pieces, while others employed 
the muskets which they had taken from the soldiery.
	It may readily be supposed that an occurrence like this produced a very great 
degree of alarm in the vicinity of Merthyr Tydfil; and the assertion that men were 
hourly swelling the ranks of the insurgents, tended to increase the apprehensions 
which already existed. The magistrates, with great promptitude, summoned additional 
military force to their aid, and by night a body of cavalry, infantry and militia, 
amounting in number to near five hundred men, was at their disposal. During the 
whole of the day exaggerated and alarming accounts of the proceedings of the rioters 
were brought into the town, and the number of rioters assembled in the evening was 
stated to be nearly eight thousand men, all of whom appeared to be endeavouring to 
station themselves at Coedycymer. A large body of troops, both cavalry and infantry, 
was in consequence dispatched to Penydarran House, to keep them in awe and prevent 
any further acts of mischief in that quarter.
	This state of things continued during the whole of that night, but on the 
ensuing day a circumstance occurred which is worthy of notice, as exhibiting the 
ferocious intentions of these misguided men. Their headquarters at this time were at 
Hirwain, and there two red flags were hoisted, as typical of their bloody 
determinations. This, however, was not significant enough in their opinion, and they 
actually procured a basin of calf's blood, in which the flags were soaked, and with 
which the standard bearer's hands and arms were smeared on his appearing at their 
head. They were approaching Merthyr Tydfil with this emblem, when, however, they 
perceived the increased strength of the military, and prudently retired until they 
should procure fresh numbers.
	On Sunday the rioters remained perfectly inactive; but on Monday it had been 
determined that a general meeting of the working classes should be held on the Wain 
Hill, near Dowlais, which was to include all the men engaged, not only in the local 
districts, but in the counties of Brecon and Monmouth, and nearly twenty thousand 
persons were expected to assemble.
	At an early hour men were seen drawing towards that spot in every direction, 
and at ten o'clock it was announced that there were thousands in the road coming 
down to Penydarran, armed with bludgeons. The troops, now consisting of one 
hundred and ten Highlanders, fifty of the Glamorganshire Militia, and three hundred 
Yeomanry Cavalry under the command of Colonel Morgan, accompanied by the 
magistrates, proceeded to meet them, and at Dowlais the road was found filled with 
the dense masses. Mr Guest ably addressed them, but to no purpose, and the Riot Act 
was read. Still no disposition to disperse was manifested, but a determined resistance 
was shown and maintained. The Highlanders were at length ordered to level their 
muskets; but the coolness and forbearance of all parties allowed the words of 
command to be given so slowly, that the consideration of the consequences intervened 
between them, and the last word Fire!' became unnecessary, to the great satisfaction 
of all the gentle men present. The rioters now gave way, and many returned home. 
Some parted on one side, others on another, but the greater part crossed the hill to the 
ravine in the Brecon road, where, by regular concert, all the arms were collected under 
the most determined and hardened of the villains; and they were observed from the 
tower of Cyfarthfa Castle exercising in line with the sabres and pistols taken from the 
cavalry, and with the muskets of the Highlanders and their own fowling-pieces. This 
exercising was observed to continue during the whole morning, and repeated shots 
were heard fired. About twelve o'clock a scout who had been sent out brought 
intelligence that two black flags were flying in the Brecon road–a symbol of the 
determination of the men who fought under the banner to conquer or die. Soon after 
this, a movement was observed among the rioters, as if they would assume an 
offensive position, and every preparation was made to give them such a reception as 
would effectually disperse them. Their march was observed, however, to be hesitating 
and wavering, numbers flung away their arms and returned home, and at length the 
main body became so disheartened that they fairly took to their heels and disappeared.
	During the whole of the remainder of that evening and the next morning, the 
magistrates and military were exceedingly active in apprehending such men as were 
suspected or were known to have taken part in these disgraceful proceedings, and 
fourteen of the worst among them were taken in their beds. On Wednesday night, 
Richard Lewis, who had led the attack upon the Castle Inn, was secured. He was 
found skulking in a wood by two men, who secured him in a low public-house until 
they had obtained the aid of the military, and the prisoner was escorted into the town 
by a body of cavalry. His appearance and demeanour were ferocious in the extreme–
in which he differed materially from the other prisoners, of whom there were now 
near forty, all of whom admitted their fault, and ascribed the lamentable bloodshed 
which had taken place to their own unjustifiable attack on the military. This 
expression of feeling on their part was also sufficiently accorded to by the conduct of 
their fellows at liberty, who, without saying one word against the course which had 
been taken, buried their dead companions as quickly and as quietly as possible–a sure 
proof that their own consciences convicted them of lawless violence. Those who had 
been wounded, exhibited an equal consciousness of guilt, by abstaining from seeking 
medical aid, until pain or inflammation rendered such a step absolutely necessary to 
save their lives.
	In the course of the week, the greater proportion of these misguided men who 
were still at liberty returned to their work, while the cases of those who were in 
custody were disposed of by the magistrates. Several who appeared to have acted as 
ringleaders in this dreadful affair were committed for trial, but the larger number were 
dealt with summnarily, by the infliction of the penalties of fine or imprisonment, or by 
their being held to bail, to be of good behaviour. Many of the muskets and sabres 
which had been carried off were restored, and all exhibited the greatest terror at the 
guilt in which they had involved themselves, and apprehension lest they should be 
placed in the same position of difficulty in which their less fortunate companions were 
thrown.
	At inquests held on the bodies of the rioters who had been killed by the 
soldiery, the juries returned the invariable verdict of 'Justifiable Homicide'–a 
sufficient assurance to the country that the steps taken by the magistracy had been 
neither uncalled for nor too violent.
	The trials of the prisoners who had been committed for various offences of 
which they were alleged to have been guilty during these disturbances came on at the 
Cardiff summer assizes, held in the month of July.
	The following sentences were passed upon those who were convicted:
	Lewis Lewis and Richard Lewis–Death, without a gleam of hope of mercy.
	David Hughes, Thomas Vaughan and David Thomnas–Death recorded: the 
judge intimating that the sentence would be commuted to transportation for life.
	Eight were sentenced to imprisonment for different periods and hard labour.
	Several other persons, committed to Cardiff jail for having participated in the 
riots, were acquitted.
	The charge upon which Richard Lewis was convicted, was that of having, 
during the scuffle with the military before die Castle Inn, wounded Donald Black, a 
private in the Ninety-third Regiment of Highlanders, with a bayonet: the wound in 
this case was never considered dangerous.
	The soldier gave his evidence upon the trial in a very manly and creditable 
manner, but could not identify the prisoner as the party who had used the bayonet. 
The only evidence of identity was that of a person who, till the riots, was 
unacquainted with the prisoner.
	The prisoner persisted in a denial of his guilt, and declared that he would do so 
with his dying breath.
	Lewis Lewis (called Lewis the Huntsman, from his having been a huntsman to 
a gentleman of the name of Llewellen, about eleven years before) was indicted jointly 
with Hughes, Vaughan and Thomas, together with three other persons. He was 
charged with having, on the 2nd of June (the day preceding the affray near the Castle 
Inn), stood upon a chest in the street, opposite the house of a man named Thomas 
Lewis, and addressed the mob to the following effect: 'I understand that the mob has 
taken a chest of drawers from a widow woman, who had purchased it for two guineas 
from the bailiffs of the Court of Requests, and restored it to another poor widow, from 
whom it had been taken in execution. Now I don't think that is fair, unless she has her 
two guineas back, and if you are of my mind, we will go to Thomas Lewis and get it 
back. All you that are of my mind, raise up your hands.' Upon this, the mob all raised 
their hands, and several of them went into Thomas Lewis's house, and compelled him 
to deliver up the two guineas which he had received (being the plaintiff in the 
execution) to one David Williams, the widow's son. They also compelled Thomas 
Lewis to give up several other articles. During the whole of this time Lewis Lewis 
remained in the street. Upon this evidence the jury found Lewis Lewis, Hughes, 
Vaughan and Thomas Guilty, and acquitted the other prisoners.
	It appears that the two guineas thus extorted were restored to the prosecutor, 
Thomas Lewis, about a month before the assizes.
	Looking at this offence with all its bearings, there seems a much less degree of 
moral turpitude in the crime, than that of an ordinary robbery, committed for the sake 
of plunder. Here the offender sought no plunder, but, from a mistaken sense of right 
and wrong, did that which he thought justice, by restoring to the widow the money she 
had paid for the chest of drawers.
	At the conclusion of the trials, John Thomas of Merthyr Tydfil, who was 
employed during the riots as a peace-officer, and who apprehended the prisoner when 
he was committed to jail, was called by the prisoner's counsel, and was ready to 
prove, upon oath, that whilst the mob were assembled before the house of Mr Coffin 
at Merthyr Tydfil, some of them attacked him (J. Thomas) and violently beat him. 
And but for the timely aid of the prisoner, who actually fought in his defence, and in 
which he was himself severely beaten, he would, in all probability, have been killed.
	This evidence, however, was declared inadmissible at the trial, although it was 
subsequently made the ground of an application for mercy on behalf of the prisoner.
	The circumstances attending the conviction of these unhappy men procured 
for them almost universal commiseration, and petitions, signed by many thousands of 
persons unconnected with them in any way, were presented to the Crown, with a view 
to obtain for them a mitigation of punishment.
	In the cases of Hughes, Vaughan and Thomas, in obedience to the suggestion 
of the learned judge, an immediate reprieve was granted, together with a commutation 
of punishment. In that of Lewis Lewis, the huntsmnan, a respite for a week was at the 
same time allowed. The same favour was almost immediately afterwards accorded to 
Richard Lewis, but the most painful doubts were entertained as to his ultimate fate.
	On Friday, the 5th of August, Lewis Lewis received a reprieve, together with a 
notification that his punishment was commuted to transportation for fourteen years 
(an arrangement which was also at the same time made in the cases of Hughes, 
Vaughan and Thomas) and on the same day a respite for Richard Lewis for a fortnight 
was transmitted to the sheriff.
	This postponement of the fatal day was looked upon by most persons as 
preparatory only to a commutation of punishment, but this favourable anticipation 
was contradicted by its being eventually determined that the case of the prisoner did 
not entitle him to any further consideration.
	On the night before the execution, the unhappy convict was urged to make a 
confession of his guilt, but he positively denied that he had been in any way 
connected with the transaction in which he was alleged to have been an actor. He 
continued firm in this declaration up to the time of his death, and Lewis Lewis, who 
so narrowly escaped the same fate and who was his brother, subsequently confirmed 
the assertion which he had made, and stated that he could have given satisfactory 
evidence of his brother having been altogether absent from the affray.
	The execution took place at Cardiff, on Saturday the 20th of August 1831. 


JOHN AMY BIRD BELL  
A Fourteen-year-old Criminal, who murdered another Boy for the sake of 
Nine Shillings, and was executed on 1st August, 1831

	THIS malefactor, at the time of his execution, was only fourteen years of age. 
He was indicted at the Maidstone Assizes on Friday, the 29th of July, 1831, for the 
wilful murder of Richard F. Taylor, a boy aged only thirteen years, in a wood in the 
parish of Chatham.
	From the evidence it appeared that Taylor was the son of a poor man, a tallow-
chandler, who lived at Stroud. On Friday, the 4th of March, the little fellow, who was 
described as having been possessed of peculiar intelligence and an amiable 
disposition, was dispatched to Aylesford to receive a sum of nine shillings, the 
amount of a weekly parish allowance to his father. He was dressed at the time in a 
"southwester," with a belcher handkerchief round his neck, blue jacket and waistcoat, 
brown trousers, and shoes and stockings; and his father, at his request, lent him a 
knife, with which he expressed his intention to cut a bow and arrow on his way home. 
The boy arrived safely at Aylesford, when Mr Cutbath, the relieving officer of the 
parish, gave him the usual amount of nine shillings. The boy had previously been 
instructed by his father as to the mode of carrying the money, and the little fellow had 
shown him how completely and how securely he could conceal it, by putting it into a 
little bag, which he could carry in the palm of his hand inside a mitten which he wore; 
and on this occasion he was observed to place the silver in the customary manner in 
his hand. He usually reached home at about three o'clock, but this afternoon he did not 
return. As night advanced his father became alarmed at his absence; and the next 
morning he determined to go himself to Aylesford, for the purpose of making 
inquiries for him. The fact of his having received the money was ascertained; but all 
search for him proved unavailing, and his parents were left in a most painful state of 
doubt as to the cause of his sudden disappearance.
	It was not until the 11th of May that the real facts of the murder of the 
unhappy boy were discovered. On that day a man named Izzard was passing through a 
bypath in a wood situated at a distance of about two miles from Rochester, and about 
thirty rods from the highroad, when he found the body of the boy lying in a ditch. The 
mitten was cut from his left hand, and his clothes were disarranged, as if there had 
been a scuffle. Although the body was so much decomposed as to prevent his being 
able to discover by what means death had been produced, the remains of blood upon 
the shirt, coat and neckerchief left no doubt of the dreadful death which the boy had 
suffered. He had died of a wound which had been inflicted in his throat with a sharp-
pointed instrument, the mark of which was still visible, and which could not have 
been inflicted by the deceased himself.
	A diligent search was immediately instituted, for the purpose of endeavouring 
to find the instrument with which this terrible murder had been committed, and in a 
short time a common white horn-handled knife was found, corroded with rust, which 
had every appearance of being the weapon that had been used by the murderer. The 
discovery of this weapon afforded some clue to the parties implicated in the 
transaction, and a man named Bell, and his two sons, John Amy Bird Bell and James 
Bell, respectively of the ages of fourteen and eleven years, were taken into custody. 
These persons lived in the poorhouse adjoining the spot where the murder was 
committed; and the information obtained by the constable, by which the knife which 
had been found was discovered to have belonged to the boy John Bell, afforded 
conclusive testimony of one at least of them having been concerned in the foul deed. 
	An investigation into the circumstances of the murder took place before the 
magistrates at Rochester, the result of which was that convincing proof was obtained 
of the implication of the two boys. During this inquiry it became necessary that the 
body of the deceased should be exhumed–-it had been buried immediately after it had 
been discovered and the coroner's jury had sat–in order that the person of the boy 
might be searched–an operation which had been previously most unaccountably 
omitted. When this examination was made, the two younger prisoners were taken to 
the graveyard for the purpose of observing the effect of the proceeding upon them. 
The elder boy, John, maintained throughout a sullen silence; but his brother James, on 
being desired to enter the grave and search the pockets of the clothes of the deceased, 
which had been buried on his person, cheerfully complied, and brought forth the knife 
which the father of the unhappy lad had lent him on his setting out for Aylesford. This 
was the only article found upon him, and robbery, therefore, it was at once seen, had 
been the object of his murderer.
	The prisoners after this underwent another examination before the magistrates; 
and upon their being again remanded, the younger boy confessed that he and his 
brother had committed the murder–that his brother had waylaid the deceased in the 
wood, while he had remained at its outskirts to keep watch. Upon this the evidence of 
the younger boy was accepted. The father having been discharged from custody, 
although strong suspicion had been felt of his having been an accessory after the 
commission of the crime the prisoner, John Amy Bird Bell, was committed for trial 
The statement of the younger boy exhibited a remarkable degree of depravity in the 
conduct of his brother and himself. He said that they had long contemplated the 
murder of their wretched victim, as they had learned from him the errand upon which 
he so frequently travelled from Stroud to Aylesford and back; but various 
circumstances had prevented the completion of their design until the 4th of March, 
when it was carried out by John, who afterwards gave him one shilling and sixpence 
as his share of the proceeds of the transaction.
	On the way to Maidstone the prisoner acknowledged the truth of his brother's 
statement, and pointed out a pond where he had washed the blood of his victim off his 
hands on his way home after the murder. He also pointed to the opening which led to 
the spot where the murder was committed, and said to the officer: "That's where I 
killed the poor boy." Then he added: "He is better off than I am now: do not you think 
he is, sir?"–an observation to which the constable assented.
	At the trial the prisoner exhibited the utmost indifference to his fate, and 
appeared to entertain no fear for the consequences of his guilt. He maintained his 
firmness throughout a most feeling address of the learned judge, in which he was 
sentenced to death, but exhibited some emotion when he was informed that a part of 
the sentence was that his body should be given over to the surgeons to be dissected.
	At half-past eleven o'clock on Monday morning the wretched malefactor 
ceased to exist, and his body was given to the surgeons of Rochester for dissection.


JOHN BISHOP AND THOMAS WILLIAMS  
Notorious Body-Snatchers, who murdered People and sold their Bodies to 
Hospitals, and were executed at Newgate, 5th of December, 1831

	IT was on Saturday, the 5th of November, 1831, that these two men were 
apprehended for the crime of which they were subsequently found guilty, and for 
which they were executed. They were immediately conveyed to the station-house of 
the F division of police, in Covent Garden, and on the same night were taken into 
custody before Mr Minshull, the sitting magistrate at Bow Street police office. Bishop 
and Williams, however, were not the only persons then charged: James May and 
James Shields were also taken into custody, an allegation of suspicion of murder 
having been made against them all generally. At this period little more than a mere 
declaration that they were suspected to have been concerned in the murder of a boy 
about fourteen years of age, whose body they had offered for sale at King's College, 
was made, and the prisoners were remanded to await the result of the inquest, which 
was directed to be held upon the body of the deceased.
	On Tuesday, the 8th of November, a coroner's jury sat upon the remains of the 
unfortunate boy, the prisoners being in attendance to hear the evidence adduced.
	The first witness called was William Hill, the porter at the dissecting-room of 
King's College. He stated that at about a quarter before twelve on the previous 
Saturday, the 5th of November, the bell of the dissecting-room having been rung, he 
went to the door, and found the prisoners Bishop and May there. He had known them 
both before, from their having supplied the College with subjects for dissection. May 
asked him whether he "wanted anything," which, in the language of such persons, was 
intended to convey an inquiry as to whether he wanted to buy a subject. He answered 
that he did not want anything particularly, but inquired what they had. The reply was: 
"A male subject." He asked of what size he was; and the prisoner said he was a boy, 
about fourteen years old, and he wanted twelve guineas. He told them he was sure that 
that price would not be given, for the school did not want a subject; but he added that 
if they would wait he would acquaint Mr Partridge, the anatomical demonstrator, with 
their business. He accordingly informed Mr Partridge that the prisoners were there, 
and that gentleman said he would see them; he, in consequence, directed them to 
proceed to a particular part of the building, which was appropriated to the use of such 
persons. He met them there, and they were soon joined by Mr Partridge, who refused 
to give them the price they demanded. May then said that he should have the body for 
ten guineas; but this was still declared to be too much, and Mr Partridge went away. 
The prisoners again pressed the witness to purchase the subject; and he, at their 
request, went after Mr Partridge to ascertain the greatest amount he would pay. Nine 
guineas was the sum fixed, and he returned and acquainted the prisoners with the 
determination which had been expressed to give no more than that amount. May said 
that he would be d--d if it should come in at less than ten guineas; but, as he was 
going out at the door, Bishop took witness aside and said: " Never mind May, he is 
drunk; it shall come in at nine guineas in the course of half-an-hour."
	They then went away; but at about a quarter past two in the afternoon they 
returned with Williams and Shields, the latter carrying a hamper. May and Bishop 
carried the hamper into an inner room. When it was opened a sack was found inside, 
which contained the body. May, who was even more tipsy than he had been before, 
now took out the sack, turned it up and threw the body carelessly on the ground. He 
remarked that it was "a good one"; to which witness assented; but he observed that the 
body was particularly fresh, and, in consequence of some other appearances which 
presented themselves, he went to Mr Partridge. Before he went he asked the prisoners 
what the boy had died of; May answered that that was no business of theirs, or his 
either. He directed them to wait in the adjoining room until his return. He acquainted 
Mr Partridge with his suspicions, and that gentleman, in consequence, accompanied 
him to the room to look at the body. He thought that the body was more rigid than was 
usual, and it appeared to him as if it had not been buried. The left hand was turned 
towards the head, and the fingers were firmly clenched; there was also a cut on the 
forehead, from which blood appeared to have issued upon the chest. Mr Partridge 
concurred with him in thinking that there were some suspicious appearances about the 
body, and went away. Other gentlemen, students at the college, came, soon after, and 
were of the same opinion. Witness inquired of the prisoners how the cut came in the 
forehead of the deceased; and Bishop answered that May had done it, when he had 
thrown the body on the ground. When Mr Partridge returned he showed the prisoners 
a fifty-pound note, which he said he would have to get changed before he could pay 
them. Bishop suggested that he should give them what money he had, and they would 
call again on the following Monday for the remainder of the price; but this was 
objected to, and Mr Partridge again went away. In about a quarter of an hour Mr 
Mayo, the professor of anatomy at the college, came into the room with Mr Rogers, 
the inspector of police, and some constables, and the prisoners were immediately 
given into custody. The body was then delivered to the police, together with the 
hamper and sack; and they, with the prisoners, were taken to the station-house.
	Mr Richard Partridge was called, and he stated that he was demonstrator of 
anatomy at King's College. It was his opinion that the marks of internal violence 
which he had found were sufficient to produce death. He believed that the 
appearances of internal violence to the spinal marrow had been caused by a blow, or 
some other species of violence inflicted on the back of the neck.
	Mr George Beaman, the surgeon to the parish of St Paul, Covent Garden, had 
also examined the body, and his opinion corresponded with that expressed by Mr 
Partridge. His belief was that the deceased had died within thirty-six hours of the time 
when he first saw it on the Saturday; and he was also of opinion that the deceased had 
not died a natural death.
	Other evidence having been given, the jury returned a verdict of "Wilful 
murder against some person or persons unknown"; but expressed their strong belief 
that the prisoners, Bishop, Williams and May, had been concerned in the transaction.
	It was impossible that an inquiry which had hitherto terminated so 
unsatisfactorily should cease here, and Mr Minshull, with that determination by which 
his conduct as a magistrate was always characterised, immediately took upon himself 
the arduous task of conducting the investigation to its close. The prisoners were then 
remanded, and on Friday, the 18th of the month, they were again brought up.
	Witnesses were then examined whose testimony traced the prisoners Bishop, 
Williams and May to a noted house-of-call for body-snatchers–the Fortune of War 
public-house, in Smithfield–on the 4th of November, where they appeared to be in 
earnest conversation. They went in and out repeatedly all that day; and at night May 
was seen with a number of human teeth in a handkerchief, to which some portion of 
the flesh of the gum still adhered, upon which he poured water, in order to clean them. 
The next morning Shields joined them, and Bishop was heard endeavouring to induce 
him to go to St Bartholomew's Hospital for a hamper, which he refused to do, in 
consequence of which Bishop went and fetched it himself. They then went away, and 
were not again seen.
	Upon the delivery of this evidence the examination concluded, and the 
prisoners were again remanded.
	On the following day the police proceeded to Nova Scotia Gardens, and a new 
and more searching investigation of the prisoners' house and premises took place. 
There, after a minute investigation, they made discoveries which filled them with 
horror, and confirmed, by the most positive evidence, the suspicions which had been 
excited of the murderous traffic which had been carried on. About five yards from 
Bishop's back door they found a blue jacket, black trousers and little shirt. About a 
yard farther on they found a blue short coat, a pair of grey trousers with braces on and 
a piece of a comb in the pocket, a striped waistcoat, the back of the collar of which 
was blood-stained, and a shirt torn down the centre.
	Afterwards articles of a woman's clothing were found buried in the garden, 
which were eventually proved to have belonged to a woman named Frances Pigburn, 
another victim to the designs of these atrocious conspirators.
	Mr Minshull said no doubt could exist that the clothes were the same which 
had been worn by Frances Pigburn, and he feared there was little doubt that the poor 
woman had been murdered. It was inferred that the body had been sold for the 
purposes of dissection, and the clothes buried to avoid detection. In all probability the 
poor creature had been searching for lodgings, was met by some of the infernal gang, 
and was lured into their den and there destroyed. To what extent these horrors had 
been committed it was impossible to imagine.
	A further warrant for the detention of Bishop, May and Williams upon this 
fresh charge was then made out, and Mr Thomas, police superintendent, was 
requested to make every possible inquiry among the hospitals and dissecting-rooms in 
the metropolis, to ascertain, if possible, whether anybody answering the description of 
Mrs Pigburn had been offered for sale by any of the prisoners within the last six 
weeks.
	On Friday, the 2nd of December, 1831, the prisoners Bishop, May and 
Williams were placed at the bar of the Old Bailey to take their trial upon the charge of 
murder preferred against them. At ten o'clock Chief Justice Tindal, Mr Justice 
Littledale and Mr Baron Vaughan took their seats upon the bench, the remaining 
portion of which was instantly occupied by members of the nobility and persons of 
distinction, amongst whom was his Royal Highness the Duke of Sussex.
	Evidence having been given, the Chief justice summed up, and the jury 
returned as their verdict that John Bishop, Thomas Williams and James May were 
severally guilty of murder.
	The verdict was received in court with becoming silence; but the moment it 
was conveyed to the immense multitude assembled outside they evinced their 
satisfaction at the result by loud and long-continued cheering and clapping of hands. 
To such an extent was this expression of the popular feeling carried that the windows 
of the court were obliged to be closed, in order that the voice of the recorder might be 
heard passing sentence of death.
	On Sunday the usual sermon was preached in the jail chapel, and after that the 
prisoners Bishop and Williams were placed in the same cell, where they were visited 
by the ordinary and under-sheriffs, to whom they made the following confessions:--
	"NEWGATE, December 4, 1831. 
	"I, John Bishop, do hereby declare and confess that the boy supposed to be the 
Italian boy was a Lincolnshire boy. I and Williams took him to my house about half-
past ten o'clock on Thursday night, the 3rd of November, from the Bell, in Smithfield. 
We lighted a candle, and gave the boy some bread and cheese; and after he had eaten, 
we gave him a cup full of rum, with about half a small phial of laudanum in it. I had 
bought the rum the same evening in Smithfield, and the laudanum also in small 
quantities at different shops. There was no water or other liquid put into the cup with 
the rum and laudanum. The boy drank the contents of the cup directly, in two 
draughts, and afterwards a little beer. In about ten minutes he fell asleep in the chair 
on which he sat, and I removed him from the chair to the floor and laid him on his 
side. We then went out and left him there. We had a quarter of gin and a pint of beer 
at the Feathers, near Shoreditch church, and then went home again, having been away 
from the boy about twenty minutes. We found him asleep as we had left him. We took 
him directly, asleep and insensible, into the garden, and tied a cord to his feet, to 
enable us to pull him up by; and I then took him in my arms and let him slide from 
them headlong into the well in the garden; whilst Williams held the cord to prevent 
the boy going altogether too low in the well. He was nearly wholly in the water, his 
feet being just above the surface. Williams fastened the other end of the cord round 
the paling, to prevent the body getting beyond our reach. The boy struggled a little 
with his arms and legs in the water, and the water bubbled a minute. We waited till 
these symptoms were passed, and then went indoors, and afterwards I think we went 
out and walked down Shoreditch to occupy the time; and in three-quarters of an hour 
we returned, and took him out of the well, by pulling him by the cord attached to his 
feet. We undressed him in the paved yard, rolled his clothes up, and buried them 
where they were found by the witness who produced them. We carried the boy into 
the washhouse, laid him on the floor, and covered him over with a bag."
	 The statement then detailed their subsequent movements and the attempts 
they made to sell the body for dissecting purposes. May, however, knew nothing of 
the murder.
	In another confession Bishop wrote:
	"I also confess that I and Williams were concerned in the murder of a female, 
whom I believe to have been since discovered to be Frances Pigburn, on or about the 
9th of October last. I and Williams saw her sitting about eleven or twelve o'clock at 
night on the step of a door in Shoreditch, near the church. She had a child, four or five 
years old, with her on her lap. I asked why she was sitting there. She said she had no 
home to go to, for her landlord had turned her out into the street. I told her she might 
go home with us and sit by the fire all night. She said she would go with us, and 
walked with us to my house, in Nova Scotia Gardens, carrying her child with her. 
When we got there we found the family in bed, and we took the woman in, and 
lighted a fire, by which we all sat down together. I went out for beer, and we all 
partook of beer and rum (I had brought the rum from Smithfield in my pocket). The 
woman and her child lay down on some dirty linen on the floor, and I and Williams 
went to bed. About six o'clock next morning I and Williams told her to go away, and 
to meet us at the London Apprentice, in Old Street Road, at one o'clock; this was 
before our families were up. She met us again at one o'clock at the London Apprentice 
without her child; we gave her some halfpence and beer, and desired her to meet us 
again at ten o'clock at night at the same place. After this we bought rum and laudanum 
at different places, and at ten o'clock we met the woman again at the London 
Apprentice; she had no child with her. We drank three pints of beer between us, and 
stayed there about an hour. We then walked to Nova Scotia Gardens, and Williams 
and I led her into No. 2, an empty house, adjoining my house. We had no light. 
Williams stepped out into the garden with the rum and laudanum, which I had handed 
to him; he there mixed them together in a half-pint bottle, and came into the house to 
me and the woman, and we gave her the bottle to drink. She drank the whole in two or 
three draughts. There was a quarter of rum and about half a phial of laudanum. She sat 
down on the step between the two rooms in the house, and went off to sleep in about 
ten minutes. She was falling back, when I caught her to save her fall, and laid her 
back on the floor. Then Williams and I went to a public-house, got something to 
drink, and in about half-an-hour came back to the woman. We took off her cloak, tied 
a cord to her feet, carried her to the well in the garden, and thrust her into it headlong. 
She struggled very little afterwards, and the water bubbled a little at the top. We 
fastened the cord to the palings, to prevent her going down beyond our reach, and left 
her, and took a walk to Shoreditch and back in about half-an-hour. We left the woman 
in the well this length of time that the rum and laudanum might run out of the body at 
the mouth. On our return we took her out of the well, cut off her clothes, carried the 
body into the wash-house of my own house, where we doubled it up and put it into a 
hair-box, which we corded, and left it there. Later we took it to St Thomas's Hospital, 
where I saw Mr South's footman, and sent him upstairs to Mr South to ask if he 
wanted a subject. The servant brought me word that his master wanted one, but could 
not give an answer until the next day, as he had not time to look at it. I then went to 
Mr Appleton, at Mr Grainger's, and agreed to sell it to him for eight guineas; and 
afterwards I fetched it from St Thomas's Hospital and took it to Mr Appleton, who 
paid me five pounds then, and the rest on the following Monday.
	"I also confess the murder of a boy, who told us his name was Cunningham. It 
was a fortnight after the murder of the woman. I and Williams found him sleeping, 
about eleven or twelve o'clock at night, on Friday, the 21st of October, as I think, 
under some rubbish in the pig-market at Smithfield. Williams woke him and asked 
him to come along with him (Williams) and the boy walked with Williams and me to 
my house in Nova Scotia Gardens. We took him into my house and gave him some 
warm beer sweetened with sugar, with rum and laudanum in it. He drank two or three 
cups full, and then fell asleep in a little chair belonging to one of my children. We laid 
him on the floor and then went out for a little while and got something to drink, and 
then returned, carried the boy to the well, and threw him into it in the same way as we 
had served the other boy and the woman. He died instantly in the well, and we left 
him there a little while to give time for the mixture we had given him to run out of his 
body. We then took the body from the well, tore off the clothes in the garden, and 
buried them there. The body we carried into the washhouse and put it into the same 
box, and left it there till the next evening, when we got a porter to carry it with us to 
St Bartholomew's Hospital, where I sold it to Mr Smith for eight guineas. This boy 
was about ten or eleven years old; he said his mother lived in Kent Street, and that he 
had not been home for a twelvemonth and better. I solemnly declare that these are all 
the murders in which I have been engaged, or that I know anything of; that I and 
Williams were alone concerned in these, and that no other person whatever knew 
anything about either of them; and that I do not know whether there are others who 
practise the same mode of getting bodies for sale. I know nothing of any Italian boy, 
and was never concerned in or knew of the murder of such a boy. I have followed the 
course of obtaining a livelihood as a body-snatcher for twelve years, and have 
obtained and sold, I think, from five hundred to a thousand bodies; but I declare 
before God that they were all obtained after death, and that, with the above 
exceptions, I am ignorant of any murder for that or any other purpose."
	It was not until subsequent to the delivery of these statements that May was 
acquainted with the fact that the execution of his sentence had been respited during 
his Majesty's pleasure.
	Bishop and Williams were executed outside Newgate in the presence of thirty 
thousand spectators, who set up a shout of exultation that was prolonged for several 
minutes. The bodies were removed the same night, Bishop to the King's College, and 
Williams to the Theatre of Anatomy, in Windmill Street, Haymarket, to be dissected. 
They were publicly exhibited on Tuesday and Wednesday, at both places, when 
immense crowds of persons were admitted to see their remains.


JOHN HOLLOWAY  
Executed on 16th of December, 1831, for the Murder of his Wife, whose 
Dismembered Body was discovered amid Rustic Surroundings

	THIS horrible murder, almost unparalleled in atrocity, was discovered on 
Saturday, the 13th of August, 1831. On Friday, the 12th of the month, two men, 
named Maskell and Gillam, farm labourers, were passing through Rottingdean, near 
Preston, Brighton, when, on their arrival at a nook called the Hole-in-the-Wall, they 
fancied they perceived that the earth had been disturbed. They pushed away some of 
the mould with a stick and observed a piece of red printed cotton protruding, but at the 
time they took no particular notice of the occurrence. On their return home, however, 
to their respective families, they mentioned what they had seen, and Gillam's wife 
remarked that it was possible a child might be buried there. So Elphick, the officer of 
the village of Preston, was summoned to their assistance. On his arrival, Gillam 
procured a spade, for the purpose of digging round the suspected spot, and at length, 
at a distance of about eighteen inches only from the surface, a human thigh was 
found; immediately afterwards another thigh was dug up, and then a large bundle, 
wrapped in a dress made of the same description of cotton as that first seen, was 
produced. This bundle contained the trunk of a human body, but the head and arms 
were wanting. The body was still clothed in the stays, chemise and petticoats; and the 
gown, which had first attracted attention, appeared to have been loosely wrapped over 
it, and an effort made to tie it round with a cord, which presented the appearance of a 
petticoat string.
	Crowds of persons thronged to the spot, and amongst them was a Mrs Bishop, 
the wife of a labourer at Brighton, who declared that the body was that of her sister.
	An investigation was now immediately set on foot, which resulted in a 
conviction that the husband of the deceased, John Holloway, a labourer employed on 
the Chain Pier at Brighton, had murdered her, and had thus disposed of her remains, 
in order to conceal the circumstance of her death. During the six years which 
intervened between the marriage and the death of the unfortunate woman she and her 
husband had scarcely lived together for two consecutive months; and at length 
Holloway, who had quitted the Preventive Service in the year 1829, obtained 
employment on the Chain Pier, which was then in the course of construction, and took 
a woman, named Ann Kennard, to live with him as his wife. Mrs Holloway was then 
residing with her friends. Five weeks before the discovery of the murder, at which 
time Mrs Holloway was living with a Mrs Symonds, at No. 4 Cavendish Place, North 
Brighton, Holloway commenced his diabolical scheme for her murder. He called upon 
her, and expressed a wish that their former animosities should be forgotten, and that 
they should again live together as they had done when they were first married. The 
woman, who had throughout expressed the fondest affection for him, listened to his 
proposals, and it was arranged that he should fetch her on a certain day, to conduct her 
to lodgings which he had taken for her, the locality of which, however, he did not 
describe. On Thursday, the 14th of July, Holloway called for his wife at Mrs 
Symonds's; but he first took away her boxes, in which she had previously packed her 
own clothes and her baby-linen. Mrs Holloway expressed some apprehension that he 
would not come back; but he kept his promise, and returned for her in about an hour, 
and took her away, attired in a gown similar in pattern to that in which her body was 
subsequently found wrapped. From that time she was never again seen alive. Steps 
were at once taken to secure her husband and his paramour, Mrs Kennard. The latter 
was found first. She was residing at a house in Brighton, and was immediately taken 
into custody. On the same evening Holloway learned that inquiries had been made for 
him, and surrendered himself into custody.
	The coroner's jury returned a verdict of "wilful murder against John 
Holloway," and he was committed to Horsham jail to await his trial.
	A further search of the neighbourhood of Rottingdean resulted in the discovery 
of the missing head and legs, and on the following Saturday all doubts which might 
have been entertained of the guilt of Holloway were set at rest by his confession of his 
having committed the murder.
	At his trial, which took place at Lewes, on Wednesday, the 14th of December, 
1831, he was remarkable for the brutality of his demeanour. When he was arraigned 
his manner was such as to be fully in accordance with the atrocious nature of his 
crime. The court was excessively crowded, and when the name of the prisoner was 
called by the Clerk of the Arraigns a thrill of horror ran through the assembled crowd, 
which was audibly expressed in a murmur which gave much solemnity to the scene.
	After hearing the evidence, the jury immediately returned a verdict of guilty, 
and the learned judge sentenced the prisoner to be executed on the following Friday, 
and directed his body to be given up to be anatomised. He mounted the scaffold on 
Friday, 16th of December, 1831, with a firm step. There was a strong expression of 
disgust among the spectators. He fell on his knees and prayed for a short time, after 
which the rope was placed round his neck and the cap drawn over his eyes. He then 
advanced to the front of the scaffold, and in a firm voice spoke as follows:--
	"Now, my dear friends, I need not tell you that sin has brought me to this 
untimely end. As sin has brought me to this untimely end, I would entreat you to be 
aware that there is not one among you who, if he follows a life of sin and folly, may 
not be brought to the same condition; for when you trifle with sin, you know not 
where it will end. I know I suffer justly: I have spilt innocent blood; but, however 
deep my guilt, I hope in the mercy of that God who has said to the penitent, 'All your 
sins and blasphemies shall be forgiven you.' Therefore turn from your sins, and the 
Lord will forgive you."
	After he had finished his speech he retired back on the platform, and the drop 
fell. The struggles of the culprit continued for some minutes.


HENRY MACNAMARA  
Hotel Jewel Thief, who was transported for committing several Robberies, 
21st of May, 1832

	HENRY MACNAMARA was taken into custody on the morning of Sunday, 
the 29th of April, 1832, at the New Hummums Hotel, Covent Garden, on a charge of 
robbery, committed under somewhat remarkable circumstances; and on the following 
day he underwent an examination at Bow Street, before the sitting magistrate.
	The prisoner had gone to the New Hummums on the previous Saturday night, 
and had requested to be accommodated with a bed. His appearance was such as to 
lead to a supposition that he was a person of respectability, and there was no 
hesitation in complying with his desire. His luggage, which consisted only of a carpet-
bag, was conveyed to the apartment assigned to his use, and when he had partaken of 
a handsome supper he retired to rest. The New Hummums was a hotel much resorted 
to by single gentlemen, or casual visitors to the metropolis; and on the night in 
question its accommodation was as much in request as usual. Major Hampton Lewis 
occupied a sleeping apartment on the floor beneath that in which the prisoner's room 
was situated; and in the same corridor were other four bedchambers, all of which were 
also in use. In the middle of the night Major Lewis was suddenly awakened by 
hearing some person in his apartment, and on looking up he saw a man, attired only in 
his shirt and trousers, making his way towards the door, carrying off his gold watch, 
chain and seals, and also his purse. He jumped up and pursued the intruder, but did 
not succeed in catching him until he had reached the passage, when he seized him by 
the shirt and braces. The fellow struggled hard and succeeded in extricating himself, 
and ran off upstairs; but the noise had by this time alarmed the other inmates of the 
house, and instant search was made for the thief. Every room was examined; and at 
last the constables, who by this time had been called in, arrived at that to which the 
prisoner had been conducted. They found him in bed; but when they called him up 
they perceived that he still had his trousers on, and that his braces and shirt were torn. 
The detached remnants of these articles were found, on examination, outside the door 
of Major Lewis's room, having evidently been torn off in the scuffle; and the watch 
and purse of that gentleman were also discovered on the stairs leading to the corridor 
in which the prisoner's apartment was situated. This was a chain of circumstances so 
conclusive, as denoting the guilt of the prisoner, that he was carried off in custody to 
the station-house. Afterwards other four gentlemen, who slept in the apartments 
adjoining that of Major Lewis, discovered that they too had been robbed. One 
gentleman missed a shirt-pin; another some English and French money, amounting to 
about three pounds, fifteen shillings; a third a loaded pistol, which he carried for his 
protection, and his purse, containing a considerable sum in gold and notes; while the 
rings and purse of the fourth had been purloined from his dressing-table. In a room 
opposite to that which the prisoner had occupied the whole of these articles were 
found strewn indiscriminately about the floor under the bed; and with them was also 
discovered a key, which, on examination, proved to fit the lock of the prisoner's 
carpet-bag.
	Many other cases were, at subsequent examinations, brought against the 
prisoner, who was recognised as having been guilty of almost innumerable offences 
within a very short period; and he was also identified by one of the keepers of 
Maidstone Jail as having made his escape from that prison, where he had been 
sentenced to be confined for three months as a pickpocket.
	On Monday, the 21st of May, the prisoner was tried at the Old Bailey upon the 
charges preferred against him, and verdicts of guilty were returned. The crimes which 
he had committed rendered him liable to capital punishment; but the ends of justice, it 
was felt, would be amply satisfied by the permanent removal of this offender from the 
scenes of his former exploits, and from the opportunities of renewing his 
depredations, and consequently he was sentenced to transportation. 


DENNIS COLLINS  
Convicted of High Treason, in throwing a Stone at King William IV. at 
Ascot Races, 19th of June, 1832

	THIS extraordinary attack on the person of his Majesty took place at Ascot 
Races. The assault originated in nothing more than an insane desire on the part of the 
person who was guilty of it to vent his anger on the King for a supposed injury 
inflicted on him in the forfeiture of a pension which had been granted to him for past 
services in the navy.
	It was on Thursday, the 19th of June, 1832, that this attack was made. His 
Majesty, accompanied by his consort, had just reached the grand stand on the race-
course, and had advanced to the front window to acknowledge the respectful greetings 
of his people, when two stones, thrown in quick succession after each other, were seen 
to fly in the direction of the window at which the Royal party was stationed. The first 
stone rebounded from the building to the ground below, but the second entered the 
open window and struck his Majesty a somewhat severe blow on the front of the head. 
An instant alarm was raised, and a thousand arms were extended to seize the 
individual by whom the attack was made, whose act was attributed to an intention far 
more dangerous than it eventually appeared the unfortunate man had had. His Majesty 
was much agitated, and retired to the inner part of the room, apparently in alarm lest 
any further violence should be attempted, and was observed to express considerable 
fear lest her Majesty, or any of the ladies of the suite, might receive injury; but in a 
few moments he regained his self-possession and presented himself at the window, to 
assure the public of his safety. His Majesty had received only a slight injury, owing to 
the stone having fallen upon his hat; and the Royal party appeared perfectly reassured 
long before the alarm created in the minds of those present had subsided, and they had 
become convinced that the attack was not the subject of some deep-laid and villainous 
plot.
	The wretched author of the mischief had been immediately secured, and he 
was now carried before Sir F. A. Roe, the chief magistrate of Westminster, who was 
always in attendance upon his Majesty upon such occasions, and who held a species 
of court in a room under the grand stand. Gardiner, the Bow Street officer, had the 
prisoner in charge, and conducted him to the presence of the magistrate. In a few 
moments the room where the examination was held was crowded with persons in 
attendance on his Majesty, or attached to the Royal suite, who were anxious to learn 
the particulars of this extraordinary act, as well as to ascertain the station and 
occupation of the assailant of the King.
	The prisoner was found to be old and decrepit; he had a wooden leg, and was 
wearing the tattered garb of a sailor. He gave his name as Dennis Collins, and 
surveyed the assembled throng with a calm composure, while, however, there 
appeared to be considerable incoherence in the expressions which he occasionally let 
fall, produced apparently by the confusion in which he was involved, consequential 
upon the somewhat rough treatment which he had received from the mob before he 
had reached the custody of the police officers. The circumstances which have been 
already detailed were now proved in evidence; and witnesses were examined who had 
seen the prisoner on the race-course during the morning and had remarked his 
demeanour. The old man was considerably below middle height, and the general 
aspect which he presented was the reverse of pleasing, on account of the want of 
cleanliness of his person. His countenance was by no means ill-favoured, and a bright 
sparkling eye appeared to lend to it an expression of considerable intelligence. He 
made no statement before the magistrates, and was eventually committed to Reading 
jail for re-examination on the following Wednesday.
	On that day the necessary witnesses to his crime were called, and their 
depositions formally taken, and the prisoner was then called upon for his defence. His 
address to the magistrates was highly characteristic of the old sailor, a station to which 
it appeared the prisoner was entitled. He said: "I own myself in a great fault for 
throwing these stones at his Majesty. I was in Greenwich Hospital on the 16th of 
December last, as an in-pensioner. I had been there eighteen months. The ward-keeper 
was sweeping the place, and I told him he had no business to sweep it more than once 
a day; the boatswain's mate abused me, and I returned it. A complaint was then made 
to Sir Richard Keats (the governor), and I was expelled for life. I petitioned to the 
Lords of the Admiralty to have the pension which I had before I went into the hospital 
restored to me. I am entitled to that pension by an Act passed in the reign of George 
IV. which entitles a pensioner to have the same pension which he had before he 
became an in-pensioner, unless he struck an officer, or committed felony, or did 
anything of the kind, which I did no such thing. On the 19th of last April I petitioned 
the King to have my pension restored. He answered by sending the petition to the 
Lords of the Admiralty, and Mr Barrow, the secretary, sent a letter to me at a public-
house, the Admiral Duncan, with the same answer the King gave. The answer was 
that his Majesty could do nothing for me. This was partly in writing and partly in 
print. I had neither workhouse nor overseer to apply to, and had not broke my fast for 
three days; mere distress drove me to it. His Majesty never did me an injury, and I am 
exceedingly sorry I threw a stone or anything else at his Majesty. On the 17th of the 
present month I went to Admiral Rowley's; he swore at me and kicked me. I can only 
say I am very sorry for what I have done, and must suffer the law. They had no right 
to take my pension from me, to which I was entitled by Act of Parliament."
	This was all the wretched man said, and he was then fully committed for trial 
in the customary form, upon the charge of high treason.
	His trial took place at Abingdon, on Wednesday, the 22nd of August, when he 
was arraigned upon an indictment which charged him with assaulting his Majesty, 
with intent to kill and murder him, with intent to maim and disable him, and with 
intent to do him some grievous bodily harm. A verdict of guilty upon the last count 
was returned.
	The sentence awarded by the law to the offence of high treason was 
immediately passed, and the prisoner was ordered to be drawn and quartered, in 
obedience to the ancient and long-existing practice.
	It was directly known that a sentence so severe would not be carried into full 
effect upon a man whose only crime appeared to have been insanity, although there 
was no distinct evidence by which this supposition could be proved; and on the 
following Friday a respite was received at Abingdon Jail, by which the punishment of 
death was removed in the case of the old convict.
	Collins, at the time of his trial, was upwards of seventy years of age, and he 
had served in the navy for many years. His gallant conduct in an action was the cause 
of his losing his leg, and he was compelled to quit the service. He subsequently 
exerted himself to procure his admission to Greenwich Hospital, and eventually 
succeeded; but he was expelled for the misconduct previously related. From that time 
he appears to have supported himself by begging, and he was well known at the 
various fairs and race-courses, which he had previously been in the habit of 
frequenting in a similar character.
	His sentence was eventually commuted to transportation for life, and he was 
sent from this country to Van Diemen's Land. A short residence in that colony ended 
his days. He died at Port Philip in the spring of the year 1834. 


JONATHAN SMITHERS  
Executed 9th of July, 1832, for setting fire to his Shop in Oxford Street, and 
causing the Death of Three People

	ON Monday morning, the 28th of May, 1832, a fire broke out in the lower part 
of the house, No. 398 Oxford Street, in the occupation of Mr Jonathan Smithers, a 
tobacconist, which was attended with very serious consequences. At about six o'clock 
the police ascertained the existence of a conflagration in the lower part of the house, 
by the sudden issue of a large quantity of smoke and flame from the shop and house 
doors, and from the fanlight over the latter, and proceeded immediately to the spot, 
where they found Mr Smithers endeavouring to make his escape into the street by 
means of the area, which communicated with the kitchen. All his efforts to gain the 
footway, and those of the people to force the railings of the area, however, proved 
unavailing, and Mr Smithers was at length compelled to retire through the kitchen. He 
made his way up the stairs, which were on fire, and succeeded in reaching the shop, 
from which he rushed into the street, much burned about his face and hands, and with 
his clothes on fire in many places. The sudden admission of air to the house through 
the shop door tended to increase the fury of the flames; and before any alarm could be 
conveyed to the inmates, who were asleep within, nearly the whole of the lower part 
of the premises was on fire. Mr Smithers was immediately conveyed to the Middlesex 
Hospital, in order that the wounds which he had received might be dressed; and 
almost before he had quitted the spot the lodgers and other remaining occupants of the 
house had been made acquainted with their dangerous situation. Their first impulse 
was to escape by the stairs; but this they found to be utterly impracticable; and the 
scene which soon presented itself to the bystanders in the street was of the most heart-
rending description. At almost every window were to be seen persons, male and 
female, bewailing their dreadful situation, and imploring aid with uplifted hands. The 
servant-girl at the third-floor window made signs that she would throw herself into the 
street, but was entreated to endeavour to descend to a lower floor before she made so 
hazardous an attempt to save her life. The cries which were addressed to her 
prevailed, and she soon appeared at the sccond-floor front room, having experienced 
considerable difficulty in making her way down the staircase. Several men then 
ranged themselves under the window to catch her in her descent; and the girl, exerting 
her courage, presently found strength of mind to throw herself out, and alighted safely 
in the arms of one of those below. The man was knocked down and considerably hurt, 
but the girl walked away comparatively uninjured.
	But the worst part is yet to be related. The second floor of the house was 
occupied by an elderly lady, named Twamley, and her family, consisting of two 
daughters, Eliza and Caroline, an orphan boy about eleven years of age, named 
Farengo, the nephew of the young ladies, and a Miss Thomasin, their niece. When this 
family became sensible of their danger, all hopes of their escape by the staircase had 
vanished, and they ran from window to window in a state of mind which bordered on 
distraction. Miss Eliza Twamley held the boy in her arms, and appeared more alarmed 
for his safety than her own. Terror-stricken, she remained at the window, unable to 
adopt any decisive course, until at length the flames caught what clothes she had on. 
The boy seized hold of the window, but was precipitated to the ground on his head; 
his aunt at the same moment appeared to be suffocated by the smoke, and fell back 
immediately under the window, a prey to the flames. Mrs Twamley, who it appears 
was seventy years of age, was in the last stage of chronic asthma, and unable to get 
out of bed. Her daughter Caroline heroically endeavoured to save her from the 
impending danger; she seized her in her arms, with strength increased by the frightful 
nature of her position, raised her from the bed, and bore her through the window to 
some leads at the rear of the house, from which she hoped to be able to escape, or at 
which she thought they might remain until the flames should be extinguished. Her 
position was seen by some of the neighbours who lived at the back, and they called to 
her to beware of an abyss which lay in her path, and which separated the leads of 
Smithers's house from others at the rear of some other premises, and that they would 
rescue her from her perilous situation. A ladder was procured, and raised against the 
place where she stood; but before efficient aid could be rendered her, overcome by 
fright, she dropped to the leads below, with her mother in her arms. The distance 
which they fell was from twelve to fourteen feet, and both ladies were materially 
injured. Mrs Twamley was immediately conveyed to a place of safety, where medical 
aid was procured; but death put an end to her sufferings after a period of two hours. 
Miss Twamley also received such medical assistance as her injuries required.
	On the following day, Tuesday, a coroner's inquest was held on the body of 
Miss Eliza Twamley; and in the course of the inquiry disclosures were made which 
tended to show that the house had been wilfully set on fire, and that Mr Smithers was 
the person to whom suspicion of guilt of this diabolical act attached. About ten days 
previous to the fire he had purchased two sackfuls of shavings, and these had been 
deposited in a vaulted cellar at the back of the house, with a quantity of old baskets 
and boxes, and other rubbish of the same description. On the day after the fire a 
minute examination of the premises was made by Mr Abrahams, a surveyor. He 
ascertained that the conflagration had originated at the bottom of the kitchen stairs, 
where the remains of burned shavings were distinctly perceptible. In the back vaults, 
adjoining the kitchen, there were even stronger proofs. A species of devil, formed of 
gunpowder pressed into a card, was found communicated by a train to a heap of 
shavings at one end and to a mass of easily ignitable rubbish at the other. Fire had 
been communicated to the shavings, which were placed upon a wooden shelf or 
dresser; but in consequence of the interposition of a piece of greased paper, which had 
been placed among them apparently with a view to increasing the volume of flame, 
but which, instead, had had the effect of extinguishing it altogether, the train of 
powder had not ignited, and the whole remained, affording distinct evidence of the act 
of incendiarism.
	A verdict of wilful murder was returned by the coroner's jury, in the case of 
Miss Twamley, against Mr Smithers. At an inquest held on the body of Mrs Twamley 
a verdict was returned that she had died from fright; but the boy Farengo subsequently 
also died from the injuries which he had received, and in this case also a verdict of 
wilful murder was returned. On Tuesday, the 12th of June, Smithers was removed to 
Newgate, to await his trial upon the charge for which he was already in custody, from 
Middlesex Hospital, where he had been confined by the injuries which he had 
received,
	On Friday, the 6th of July, he was put upon his trial upon an indictment which 
charged him with the murder of Miss Eliza Twamley, and of the boy, Charles Richard 
Napoleon Farengo. After a lengthy inquiry a verdict of guilty was returned at two 
o'clock in the morning. Sentence of death was immediately pronounced upon the 
wretched man, and he was ordered for execution on the following Monday.
	Smithers had carried on business for a considerable period in the shop in 
Oxford Street. He was insured for nearly seven hundred pounds, which may in some 
degree have accounted for his being guilty of the diabolical crime of which he was 
convicted. Miss Twamley, the victim of his foul machinations, had been a dancer at 
Covent Garden Theatre, and was a fine young woman. Her nephew, who was also 
killed, was the son of a deceased married sister. The prosecution of Smithers was 
carried on at the expense of the parish of St Ann, Westminster. His execution took 
place on Monday, the 9th of July, 1832.


JAMES COOK  
Executed 10th of August, 1832, for the Murder of Mr Paas, whose Remains 
he attempted to destroy by Fire

	MR PAAS was a respectable tradesman, and carried on business, at No. 44 
High Holborn, London, as a manufacturer of the brass instruments used by 
bookbinders. Cook, his murderer, was a bookbinder at Leicester. Mr Paas was in the 
habit of taking occasional journeys in the way of business, and in the course of his 
travels Cook became his customer, and ordered goods from him to the extent of about 
twenty-five pounds. Cook at this time was twenty-one years of age, and he had only 
recently entered upon the business of his deceased master, in a small yard leading out 
of Wellington Street, Leicester, upon his own account. In the month of May, 1832, the 
usual period of credit had expired, and Mr Paas wrote to Cook, saying that he should 
visit Leicester in a few days, when he hoped to receive the amount of his bill. On 
Wednesday, the 30th of May, Mr Paas accordingly arrived in Leicester, and put up at 
the Stag and Pheasant Inn. In the afternoon he quitted that house and proceeded upon 
his rounds, for the purpose of collecting the accounts due to him in the town. He 
called at several places, and amongst others at the house of Cook. After he had left 
there he was seen by one of his customers, of whom he made inquiries as to Cook's 
solvency, and whom he informed that he had already called upon him to pay an 
account, and that he had been requested to call again in the evening. Mr Paas was not 
seen alive again after this; and the result showed that he had been wilfully and most 
diabolically murdered by his customer and debtor.
	The circumstances which attended the discovery of the murder were of an 
extraordinary and interesting nature. The workshop which Cook occupied was 
situated over a cowhouse, in the occupation of a Mr Sawbridge, a milkman. On the 
evening of Wednesday, the 30th of May, a very large fire was observed to be blazing 
in his workshop; but as considerable heat was known to be occasionally necessary for 
purposes of trade, no notice was taken of the occurrence. About eight o'clock Cook 
visited the Flying Horse, a beershop in the immediate neighbourhood of his 
workroom. He called for some drink, and played a game of skittles with an 
undisturbed aspect, and then requested change of a sovereign. The landlord, Mr 
Nokes, produced the coin necessary, and Cook, on giving him the sovereign, took 
from his pocket a silk purse containing money to a very considerable amount in gold, 
silver and notes. This excited some surprise, but no remark was made, and Cook went 
away, returning apparently to his workshop. After a short time, however, he went to 
Mrs Sawbridge and told her that he was going to work during the night in order to 
finish some articles which he had in hand, and desired her therefore not to be 
frightened if she should see that he had a fire. At half-past ten o'clock he returned to 
his workshop, and was let in by Sawbridge. From that hour until half-past four o'clock 
the next morning nothing was seen of him, although it was evident that he had 
remained in his room, as he was unable to quit the premises without the knowledge of 
his landlord. A strong light was observed in his workshop, and he was heard 
occasionally to move about, both in the house and in the yard; but although his father 
went to look for him, and to inquire into the cause of his unexpected absence from 
home during the night, he made no answer.
	On Thursday evening the murder was discovered. At about ten o'clock the 
appearance of an unusual degree of light in the workshop of Cook attracted 
observation, and the neighbours had assembled, as fears were expressed that the 
premises had caught fire. The window-blinds were down, and from without no 
distinct information could be obtained of the existence or non-existence of any 
conflagration, so an entrance to the building was in consequence determined on. Mr 
Timson, a broker who resided within two doors, went to the top of the stairs leading to 
Cook's workshop, burst open the door, and immediately entered that apartment. He 
found that the fire which had been kindled in the grate was extended far beyond its 
usual bounds, and a large piece of flesh was burning on the top of it. The flesh was 
taken off and put on the floor, and then the fire was raked out and extinguished. Cook 
was sent for, and he declared that the flesh was horseflesh, and that he had bought it 
for the purpose of feeding a dog; but a surgical examination showed that it was part of 
a human body. The non-return of Mr Paas to his inn at once led to a belief that he had 
fallen a victim to the barbarous machinations of Cook, that he had been murdered, and 
his remains thus mutilated and consumed. A sensation of horror was created as this 
idea gained ground, and evidence which confirmed the general impression was soon 
obtained upon an examination of the premises of the supposed murderer. In the 
chimney of his workshop was found all that remained unburned or unscorched of the 
body of the unfortunate Mr Paas. Two thighs and a leg, separated from each other and 
from the main trunk of the body apparently with great determination by a knife and a 
saw, were found suspended from a nail by a cord in the chimney, about a yard and a 
half above the fireplace, evidently only awaiting a favourable opportunity when they 
too might be consumed, and then all trace of the murder would be destroyed. In the 
room were also discovered the leg of a pair of black trousers covered with blood, 
together with a snuff-box, an eyeglass, a pencil-case with the letter "P" engraved on it, 
and some fragments of cloth much stained with blood. Among the ashes were found 
the horrible remains of the deceased, in the shape of calcined bones; and there was 
also discovered a gaiter of the description known to have been worn by Mr Paas. 
	On Sunday, the 3rd of June, an inquest was held upon the remains of the 
deceased, at the Dog and Gun, in Market Street, and the jury returned a verdict that 
Mr Paas had been wilfully murdered by James Cook.
	A few days sufficed to bring this atrocious malefactor to justice. Cummins, an 
officer of Leicester, started in pursuit of him, and he succeeded in apprehending him 
on Tuesday, on the point of joining a vessel just sailing from Liverpool for America.
	On Wednesday, the 8th of August, the prisoner was put upon his trial at the 
Leicester Assizes, charged with wilful murder. The indictment alleged the murder to 
have been committed in various ways, in order to meet all the circumstances of the 
case.
	The prisoner, when called upon to plead, confessed himself guilty of the 
offence imputed to him. He declared that he was fully acquainted with the effect of 
his plea, and declined to withdraw it.
	Sentence of death was then immediately pronounced by the presiding judge; 
and, in order that the heinous nature of the crime of the prisoner should be more 
especially marked, he ordered that his body be gibbeted in chains after his execution. 
On the following Friday, the 10th of August, the sentence was carried into effect, the 
convict being hanged in front of the jail at Leicester.
	When the body had hung the usual time it was cut down and conveyed back to 
the jail, in order that the necessary preparations might be made to carry out that 
portion of the sentence which directed his remains to be gibbeted in chains. The head 
was shaved and tarred, to preserve it from the action of the weather; and the cap in 
which he had suffered was drawn over his face. On Saturday afternoon his body, 
attired as at the time of his execution, having been firmly fixed in the irons necessary 
to keep the limbs together, was carried to the place of its intended suspension in 
Saffron Lane, not far from the Aylestone Toll Gate, a short distance out of the town of 
Leicester. A gallows, thirty-three feet in height, had been already erected; and the 
horrible burden which it was intended to bear was soon attached to it. The following 
day, thousands of persons were attracted to the spot, to view this novel but most 
barbarous exhibition; and considerable annoyance was felt by persons resident in the 
neighbourhood of the dreadful scene. Representations were in consequence made to 
the authorities, and on the following Tuesday morning instructions were received 
from the Home Office directing the removal of the gibbet, and granting the remission 
of that portion of the sentence by which this exposure, the remnant only of a 
barbarous age, was required. These orders were immediately obeyed, and the body 
was subsequently buried in Leicester.


WILLIAM JOHNSON  
Executed at Newgate, 7th of January, 1833, for murdering a Wig Maker's 
Son, whose Body was found in a Ditch

	THE victim of this foul deed was a young man named Benjamin Danby, the 
son of a respectable tradesman, a forensic-wig maker, in the Temple. Young Danby, 
at an early age, expressed a passion for a maritime life, and he accordingly went to 
sea. After making several voyages he returned and found that his father was dead, that 
the bulk of his property was settled on his sisters, but that an allowance of a guinea 
per week had been secured to him during his life. Towards the close of the year 1832 
he took up his residence at the house of his cousin, a Mr Addington, a baker, who 
lived at Chase Side, Enfield Chase. On Wednesday afternoon, the 19th of December, 
1832, at about four o'clock, he quitted Mr Addington's house for the last time. He took 
his gun with him, saying he was going shooting, but promised to return at ten o'clock. 
He was carried back next day a corpse. He had gone to the Three Horse Shoes, where 
he had met some of his companions. Four persons, named William Johnson, the son 
of a gardener in the vicinity; Richard Wagstaff, a baker; Samuel Cooper, a carter, who 
was quite a lad, and the son of a labouring man and Samuel Sleath, or Fare, a person 
who appeared to have no occupation, were seen in his company. They had been 
playing at dominoes and drinking together, apparently upon excellent terms. At about 
a quarter past ten o'clock young Danby declared that he would have to go home; but 
he had now become somewhat intoxicated, and when he got into the open air he was 
observed by Mrs Perry, the landlady of the public-house, to stagger. Johnson and Fare 
said they would see him home; but their manner induced a suspicion in the mind of 
Wagstaff that they were going to rob him, and he therefore called to young Cooper to 
come away. Cooper's answer was that he had been with them all the evening, and he 
meant to "go up there" with them now. Wagstaff then went away in a direction 
contrary to that taken by Danby and the others.
	On the following morning, at half-past five o'clock, a man named Wheeler, a 
labourer, was passing through a place called Holt White's Lane, about half-a-mile 
from the Three Horse Shoes, when he observed a dead body in the ditch. He called to 
a man named Ashley, and they discovered that it was the body of young Danby. His 
legs were towards the road and his head in the ditch, face downwards; when they 
turned it over it presented a horrible and ghastly spectacle. The face was cut and 
slashed in a most dreadful manner; the flesh was scored out, as it were, in five places; 
and the right whisker was completely cut away, and hung suspended to the jaw by a 
small piece of skin. In the throat of the murdered man they observed a deep stab, 
inflicted in the manner practised by a butcher in killing a sheep, the knife having been 
turned in the wound. They at once communicated the particulars of this horrible 
discovery to the police of the town, who lost no time in procuring the removal of the 
body to a neighbouring public-house–the Old Sergeant–and in conveying the dreadful 
intelligence to Mr Addington.
	Inquiries were instantly set on foot, and the circumstances above detailed 
having been ascertained, Johnson, Fare and Cooper were taken into custody. Cooper 
afterwards sent for one of the constables, and declared that he would tell him all. He 
then proceeded to detail to him the circumstances which attended the murder, which 
he said was committed by Johnson.
	The coroner's jury returned a verdict that the deceased had been wilfully 
murdered by Johnson and Cooper, and that Fare had been accessory before the fact.
	The prisoners were then committed to Newgate to await their trial. Cooper was 
also detained in custody to give evidence.
	On Friday, the 4th of January, 1833, the prisoners Johnson and Fare were put 
upon their trial at the Old Bailey. As no further evidence than there had been before 
the coroner was produced to implicate Fare in the actual murder he was acquitted, and 
removed from the bar; and Johnson was then called on for his defence. He put in a 
written statement, commenting upon the prejudice which had been excited against 
him, and declared that Cooper's hand must have been the one by which the deed was 
done, for that he and Fare had left the deceased with him at the end of Holt White's 
Lane on the night of the murder, and had seen no more of either of them afterwards.
	The jury retired to deliberate upon their verdict; but after an absence of two 
hours they declared the prisoner to be guilty. Sentence of death was instantly passed, 
and the prisoner was executed on the following Monday.
	Fare was on a subsequent day put upon his trial for stealing from the deceased 
the money of which he was known to have been possessed, and a portion of which 
had been found in the prisoner's pockets on his apprehension. A verdict of guilty was 
returned, and Fare was sentenced to be transported for fourteen years.
	Cooper, the companion in guilt of the two convicts, who had been detained in 
custody until the end of the sessions, was then discharged.


JOB COX  
Convicted in May, 1833, of stealing a Letter, he narrowly escaped 
Execution, owing to the City Recorder's Blunder
	JOB COX was a postman in the service of the General Post Office, and he was 
charged with abstracting a letter from those entrusted to him for delivery, and 
appropriating its contents to his own use. On the 18th of March, 1833, a Mr Foreman, 
of No.101 Grafton Street, Dublin, sent a letter, containing a ten-pound bank-note, 
addressed to his brother, Mr H. Foreman, in Queen Street, Clerkenwell, which, 
however, never reached its destination. Inquiry was made at the Post Office, and Cox 
was found to have signed a book in the ordinary way as having received the letter, and 
it was subsequently ascertained that he had paid the same note to Mr Lott, a publican 
in Lambeth, who had given him change for it. Cox was taken into custody, and at the 
ensuing sessions at the Old Bailey, held in the month of May, 1833, he was tried and 
convicted of the offence imputed to him, and on the 20th of the month he received 
sentence of death, in obedience to the requisites of the Act of Parliament.
	At this time it was the practice of the Recorder of London to report to his 
Majesty in Council the cases of the various prisoners in custody upon whom sentence 
of death had been passed. The case of Cox was reported, with others, as usual, and 
upon the return of the learned recorder to London he caused it to be made known to 
the prisoner that his execution was directed to take place. The unhappy wretch had 
looked forward with confidence to the result of the exertions of his friends in his 
favour, and received this intelligence with deep dismay. He was told to prepare for 
death, and the reverend ordinary of the jail proceeded to pay to him those attentions 
usually expected at his hands.
	A blunder of a most extraordinary nature, however, was soon discovered to 
have been made. This discovery is thus described in a newspaper of Sunday, the 23rd 
of June: 
	"On Thursday morning, Sir Thomas Denman, Lord Chief Justice of the King's 
Bench, on casting his eyes on a newspaper, saw the paragraph representing the fact 
that Job Cox was ordered for execution on Tuesday. His Lordship thought the 
statement had been published from false information, and he adverted to the 
circumstance in the presence of one of the under-sheriffs, as of a very mischievous 
nature. The under-sheriff, in some surprise, observed to his Lordship that the 
paragraph was correct–that the recorder's warrant had been received on Wednesday 
evening, at half-past six o'clock, at Newgate–that the intelligence had been 
communicated to the unfortunate culprit, and that notices had been sent to the sheriffs 
and the other officials. 'What!' said Sir Thomas Denman, 'Cox ordered for execution! 
Impossible!' I was myself one of the Privy Council present when the report was made, 
and I know that no warrant for the execution of anyone was ordered. Cox was ordered 
to be placed in solitary confinement, and to be kept to hard labour, previously to his 
being transported for life, to which penalty the judgment to die was commuted.'
	"The under-sheriff repeated the extraordinary information to his Lordship, 
who instantly requested that he would forthwith apply at the Secretary of State's 
office, when he would be reassured of the fact, and receive an order in contradiction 
of the learned recorder's warrant. It is needless to say that the under-sheriff, who was 
very glad to be the bearer of such good tidings to a poor unhappy fellow-creature, 
very speedily executed his mission. He found that the correction of Sir Thomas 
Denman was accurate, according to Mr Capper's books, in which the allotted 
punishment was regularly entered; and Lord Melbourne, immediately upon being 
informed of the mistake under which they laboured at Newgate, sent thither an 
authority to countermand the warrant with the Black Seal, signed 'Newman Knowlys.' 
Cox had just twenty-two hours previously been told, in the usual solemn way, to 
prepare for death; and as he had calculated largely and correctly upon the merciful 
character of the administration, he received the awful news as if he had been struck to 
the earth with lightning. The mistake, upon being mentioned to him, it is unnecessary 
to state, gave full relief to his heart."
	Mr Knowlys, who at this time filled the office of recorder, was immediately 
called upon to explain to the Common Hall of the City of London the circumstances 
which attended the very remarkable error into which he had fallen. When they had 
heard from him whatever excuse he had to urge, on Monday, 24th of June, they came 
to the following resolutions:-
	"Resolved unanimously, that this Common Hall has learned, with feelings of 
the deepest horror and regret, that the life of Job Cox, a convict under sentence of 
death in Newgate, had well-nigh been sacrificed by the act of the Recorder of London 
in sending down a warrant for his execution, notwithstanding his Majesty in Privy 
Council had, in the gracious exercise of his Royal Prerogative of mercy, been pleased 
to commute his sentence for an inferior punishment.
	"Resolved unanimously, that the mildest and most charitable construction 
which this Common Hall can put upon this conduct of the recorder is that it was the 
result of some mental infirmity incident to his advanced age; but contemplating with 
alarm the dreadful consequences which, though happily averted in the present 
instance, may possibly ensue from such an infirmity in that important public 
functionary, this Common Hall feels that an imperative duty to record the solemn 
expression of its opinion that the recorder ought forthwith to retire from an office the 
vitally important duties of which he is, from whatever cause, incompetent to 
discharge."
	The recorder, who was present, was received with deep groans. The 
resolutions of the Common Hall were followed by a resolution of the court of 
aldermen announcing the receipt of a communication from the recorder that from his 
advanced age, ill-health and debility, consequent upon a late very severe fit of illness, 
he had felt himself bound, after serving the city for more than forty-seven years–
upwards of thirty as common serjeant and recorder–to resign the office of recorder.


GEORGE FURSEY  
Acquitted of stabbing two policement during the Calthorpe Street Riot, 30th 
May 1833

	THIS affair, which produced much bitterness of feeling between the people 
and the Metropolitan Police, occurred on Monday, the 15h of May 1833. For some 
time before, the streets of London had been placarded with bills announcing the 
intention of certain parties to hold a meeting in a place called the Calthorpe Estate, at 
the back of the Cold Bath Fields Prison, its professed object being to adopt measures 
preparatory to a National Convention being held. In consequence, a government 
proclamation was issued, declaring a meeting for that purpose to be illegal, and 
warning all persons to abstain from attending it or taking any part in its proceedings.
	This proclamation, there is little doubt, tended in a very material degree to 
produce the very evil which it was intended to repress. The intention to hold the 
meeting was little known, for the party by which it was called was an obscure though 
violent political sect, but the effect of the government notification was to excite the 
curiosity of many who were driven to the spot, to which otherwise they would have 
had no attraction, for the purpose of witnessing whatever might take place. 
Precautions were taken by the Government to secure the public peace, which, had 
they been adopted in a proper spirit, would have been most praiseworthy. The very 
consequence, however, of the extensive preparations which were made, was to attract 
fresh curiosity, and to draw new observers to the scene of the proposed meeting.
	The assemblage was appointed to take place at two o'clock, but long before 
that hour several hundreds of persons had collected upon the spot indicated as the 
place of convocation. Groups of idlers were to be observed dispersed in different 
directions, among which women and children were intermingled to a very 
considerable extent; and there were not wanting among them the partisans of the 
disaffected, to amuse them with declamations on the sufferings of the people and the 
necessity of their taking strong measures to obtain redress.
	In the meantime, the police force of the metropolis were to be seen marching 
from all quarters of town towards the scene of action. Between two and three 
thousand men were placed on duty, all of whom were distributed at certain appointed 
places of rendezvous, under the orders of their superintendents and inspectors, while 
Viscount Melbourne, the Home Secretary, and Messrs Rowan and Mayne, the 
commissioners of police, with a considerable number of police magistrates, sat as a 
species of council to direct their future movements, at the White Hart tavern in Gray's 
Inn Lane. The formidable appearance of the police on their march created new food 
for curiosity, and they were followed by hundreds of persons anxious to ascertain the 
inducement for such an assemblage. The numbers of the mob collected were thus 
every moment increased.
	At one o'clock, between six and seven hundred persons had assembled, and 
this crowd, comparatively insignificant considering the parade which had been made, 
kept gradually swelling until three, when a van was driven up at the end of Calthorpe 
Street, which a young man named Lee, who was afterwards taken into custody, 
mounted, together with three or four other shabby-looking persons. At almost the very 
moment of the van taking its station, however, the driver appeared to become alarmed 
and, notwithstanding the entreaties of Lee and his companions, drove off. Mr Lee and 
the others were in consequence compelled to quit their intended rostrum and to adopt 
one some what less convenient, namely, a paling which stood on the spot. Lee was 
soon raised upon this new pulpit and, after a few prefatory remarks, he proposed that 
Mr Mee should take the chair. It had been stated that 'The National Union of the 
Working Classes', a society of men bound together for the purpose of procuring the 
achievement of certain political objects, would attend the meeting, and their 
committee was known to be assembled at a neighbouring public-house, called 'The 
Union', engaged in arranging the programme of the proceedings of the day. Mr Mee 
was recognized as an active member of the Union, and he was immediately elected 
chairman by acclamation.
	Mr Mee then got upon the paling, and after thanking the meeting for the 
honour which they had conferred upon him, proceeded to address them upon the 
objects with which they had been called together. He declared that he was thankful to 
the ministry for having given the meeting an air of importance which, but for their 
proceedings, it would have wanted, but the question which they had to consider was 
whether, as they had met under such disadvantages as surrounded them, they should 
go on, or whether they should adjourn to a more favourable opportunity? (Cries of 
'No, no! Go on!') He was, he said, but a working man with a family, and if they were 
not prepared to give his family one-tenth of their earnings they should not cry 'go on'. 
He might fall a martyr in the cause, and in that case, he should expect his family to be 
supported. (Cries of 'Yes! Yes!')
	The 'Union', which had been expected every moment, and for which an 
anxious look-out was maintained, at this time appeared in sight. The procession, into 
which it was formed, consisted of about one hundred and fifty persons, and they 
carried among them eight banners. The most conspicuous of these was one which 
bore the motto 'Liberty or Death', with a skull and cross-bones on a black ground and 
a red border: others bore mottoes of 'Holy Alliance of the Working Classes', and 
'Equal Rights and Equal Justice'. There were also to be seen a tri-coloured flag, the 
flag of the American republic, and a pole bearing at its head the Cap of Liberty. The 
procession with these ensigns walked in good order to the spot at which the speakers 
had assembled, but they had scarcely taken up their position, when a body of police 
marched into Calthorpe Street with the greatest order and precision. Their formidable 
appearance seemed to make a momentary impression on the mob, but a person 
pointing to the flag bearing the motto 'Liberty or Death', cried out, 'Men, be firm!' and 
shouts of 'Go on! go on!' instantly resounded from all sides. The police had now 
reached the middle of the street, the crowd clearing the way for them to advance, and 
staves in hand they pressed forward to a man who was still addressing the mob. As 
they advanced near what may be termed the platform, however, they met with much 
resistance. A conflict ensued, and under circumstances respecting which the evidence 
was of the most contradictory nature, one policeman named Robert Cully, No 95 of 
the C division, received a mortal wound from a dagger and died instantly. Two others, 
Serjeant Brooks of the C division, and constable Redwood of the C division, were 
wounded with the same or a similar instrument.
	In time course of the afternoon a great number of persons who had been 
observed to be active in the proceedings of the day, were taken into custody, and all 
the flags were captured. By six o'clock the whole of the mob had been dispersed and 
quiet was restored.
	Pursuant to the instructions of Viscount Melbourne, the prisoners who had 
been secured were taken to Bow Street on the same evening to be examined before Sir 
F. A. Roe, the chief magistrate. The whole street was filled with persons interested in 
the fate of the prisoners, and the proceedings excited a vast degree of interest. The 
result of the examinations taken on that night was the remand of a person named 
Robert Tilly, on suspicion of having been concerned in the murder of Cully (a charge 
which subsequently proved unfounded), and of a man named Fursey, on the charge of 
stabbing Redwood and Brooks. A great number of others were held to bail, or fined 
for the various offences of assault, or rioting, preferred against them.
	On Thursday, Fursey was fully committed on the capital charge of stabbing 
Redwood and Brooks, and on the next day, a true bill was returned against him by the 
Grand Jury.
	On Wednesday, May the 15th, an inquest was held before Mr Stirling, the 
coroner for Middlesex, on the body of Cully. The investigation lasted for several days, 
and the inquest-room and the neighbourhood of the house where the jury sat, were 
crowded by persons interested in the proceedings. A great number of witnesses were 
examined, many of whom declared that the police had acted towards the people with 
unwarrantable harshness, striking and beating them with their truncheons, making no 
distinction between active parties in the meeting and defenceless women, but 
conducting themselves with equal and undue severity towards all, and that they had 
been guilty of this misconduct without any provocation being offered. On the other 
hand, it was sworn, that the mob were violent, and that many of them were armed 
with formidable weapons. Truncheons loaded with lead were used by them in striking 
the police, and the pikes upon which their banners were mounted were headed with 
iron, in obedience to instructions published by Colonel Maceroni, which were 
contained in a book called Defensive Instructions for the People. It was admitted, 
however, that there was no disposition to riot among the people until the arrival of the 
police, that neither the Riot Act nor the Government Proclamation was read, and it 
was further proved, that the deceased had struck the man who wounded him before 
the wound was given. In reference to this part of the case there was considerable 
contradiction in the evidence, for one witness distinctly swore that the deceased was 
speaking to her, and desiring her to go home, when a man suddenly rushed from the 
mob and stabbed him, and grave and important doubts appeared to exist as to the 
proper result to be arrived at. At the conclusion of the inquest on Monday, May the 
20th, the jury returned the following verdict: 'We find a verdict of JUSTIFIABLE 
HOMICIDE on these grounds: that no Riot Act was read, nor any proclamation 
advising the people to disperse; that the Government did not take the proper 
precautions to prevent the meeting from assembling, and that the conduct of the police 
was ferocious, brutal, and unprovoked by the people. We moreover express our 
anxious hope that the Government will in future take better precautions to prevent the 
recurrence of such disgraceful transactions in the metropolis.'
	The announcement of this finding was received with immense cheering among 
the people assembled, but not without remonstrance on the part of the coroner. He 
urged the jury to reconsider their decision, but with obstinate pertinacity they refused 
to alter the determination to which they had arrived.
	The verdict was, however, declared by the law officers of the Crown to be at 
variance with law and with the evidence on which it was founded, and on Thursday, 
May the 30th, upon the motion of the attorney-general in the Court of King's Bench, 
the inquisition was quashed.
	On Thursday, July the 4th, the trial of George Fursey took place at the Old 
Bailey. He was indicted for having riotously and tumultuously assembled at Cold 
Bath Fields, on the 13th of May, with five hundred others, and with having assaulted 
amid wounded Sergeant Brooks, and Redwood, the constable, with intent to murder 
them.
	The evidence by which it was sought to bring home the charge to the prisoner 
was first the positive declarations of Brooks and Redwood, that the prisoner was the 
man who had stabbed them, and secondly, the allegation by a man named Hayles, a 
constable, that after the prisoner had been apprehended, he was conveyed to a stable, 
where he and Tilley were confined together. They lay down on some straw, and when 
they had been removed to a lock-up house, the witness found on the spot where they 
had lain, a loaded pistol and a powder-flask, which Tilley had acknowledged 
belonged to him, and also a short dagger apparently made out of a foil blade, which 
was alleged by Redwood and Brooks to be exactly similar to that with which they had 
been stabbed and which besides was found to correspond in shape with the wounds 
which they had received. Here, as well as before the coroner's jury, there was much 
contradictory evidence as to the conduct of the police. Many witnesses were called for 
the defence, who described their demeanour as having been extremely violent, and 
who said that they saw them strike many persons whose proceedings had not rendered 
such a course justifiable. The trial lasted until two o'clock in the morning, the defence 
being conducted by Messrs C. Phillips and Clarkson, and Mr Justice Gazelee having 
summed up, the jury pronounced the prisoner 'Not Guilty'. This determination was 
received with loud demonstrations of applause by the people assembled within and 
outside the court, which the judges and officers in vain at tempted to repress.
	Much ill-feeling was produced by this unfortunate affair towards the police 
and the Government. The police at their establishment had been exceedingly 
unpopular, from the military constitution of the force, but their usefulness had now 
begun to counterbalance the feeling which had so unfavourably prevailed. Their 
conduct at the Calthorpe Street riot did much to make them hateful to the lower 
orders, who were unable to draw the distinction between the intemperance of a few 
and the usefulness of the main body. The conduct of the mob can be justified only by 
the attack which it is clear was made upon them, but the act of murder and the attempt 
made to kill or disable Brooks and Redwood, are offences which appear to have been 
quite unwarranted by the circumstances which preceded them.
	Fursey, after his trial, recovered 40L. damages against the proprietor of The 
Morning Chronicle newspaper, for publishing a libel, imputing to him the murder of 
Cully. Tilley, whose name has been mentioned, was liberated on bail, on Fursey's 
acquittal taking place, the charge against him, as has been already said, being found to 
be without foundation. 


JAMES LOVELACE and others  
The Tolpuddle Martyrs, transported for forming a trade union, 1834

	IN the instance of the riot in Calthorpe Street, reference has been made to a 
combination or union of the working classes, confederated for the purpose of securing 
certain political objects. The system of 'Unions', which was commenced in the 
metropolis and the larger towns of the kingdom, was not, how ever, confined 
exclusively to those thickly populated districts, nor were the objects of these societies 
limited to those which were merely of a political nature. In various parts of the 
country associations were formed with a view of maintaining the prices of labour, and 
with other objects more especially connected with the social welfare of the 
community.
	The case of the Dorchester labourers is one which has attracted a vast degree 
of general observation and attention. The evil effects of the system may be collected 
from the following statement of the charges preferred against them, at the Dorchester 
assizes, on the 17th of March 1834, and of the facts which were proved in evidence 
upon their trial.
	The names of the prisoners were James Lovelace, George Lovelace, Thomas 
Stanfield, John Stanfield, James Hammet and James Brine, and they were indicted for 
'administering and causing to be administered, and aiding and assisting, and being 
present at, and consenting to administer, a certain unlawful oath and engagement, 
purporting to bind the person taking the same not to inform or give evidence against 
any associate or other person charged with any unlawful combination, and not to 
reveal or discover any such unlawful combination, or any illegal act done or to be 
done, and not to discover any illegal oath which might be taken.' Mr Gambler stated 
that the charge against the prisoners was that on a certain day in December, they, all 
together, or one of them, administered an unlawful oath to a person of the name of 
Legg, for the purpose of binding the party to whom it was administered not to disclose 
any illegal combination which had been formed, and not to inform or give evidence 
against any person associated with them, and not to reveal any unlawful oath which 
might be taken. The first part of the charge was that the purport of the oath was to 
bind the party to obey the orders of a body of men not lawfully constituted. The 
indictment was framed on an Act of the 37th George III, cap. 128, and his lordship 
would be aware that the preamble of that act related to seditious meetings, but the 
enacting part was of a more general nature, including confederacies not formed 
merely for seditious purposes, but for any illegal purpose whatever. There was an 
authority which had decided that the enacting part of the statute was not restrained by 
the preamble, but extended to all societies the object of which was unlawful. One 
clause of the act related to oaths administered for the purpose of binding a party not to 
reveal an unlawful combination. The allegation in the indictment was that the 
prisoners administered an illegal oath to certain persons, binding them not to disclose 
an illegal confederacy. It would be for them to see whether the facts bore out the 
conclusion to which he had come, that a combination formed under the circumstances 
that would be stated, was a combination which the law had pronounced to be illegal, 
and would depend on this–whether any member was required to take any oath of this 
description, or any oath which the law did not require or authorize. He would, 
therefore, show that the combination was illegal–that it was the practice of the 
association to administer oaths, and that they were administered, and that the 
members were bound to obey the commands of men not legally constituted, and that 
they were bound to secrecy. With regard to the form of the oath and the mode of 
administering it, it was proper he should call his lordship's attention to the 5th section 
of the 37th George III, cap. 123, which provided that any engagement in the nature of 
an oath should be deemed an oath within the meaning of the act in whatever form or 
manner the same should be administered.
	The learned counsel then proceeded to state the facts of the case to the jury, 
and to call his witnesses. From the evidence it appeared that the prisoners were 
agricultural labourers, and that on the day stated in the indictment Legg and others 
were conducted to the house of Thomas Stanfield at Tolpuddle and, after waiting a 
short time, were blindfolded and taken into a room, when certain papers were read 
over to them while on their knees: on the bandage being taken from their eyes, they 
saw the figure of a skeleton with the words 'Remember your end' written over it. They 
were then sworn to obey the rules and regulations of the society, and not to divulge its 
secrets or proceedings. They were to pay a shilling on entrance, and a penny a week 
afterwards, to support the men who were out of work (those who had struck) till their 
masters raised their wages. The defendants were all present, and Lovelace wore a 
dress like a surplice. The general laws of the society were produced and read to the 
jury, from which it was collected that the society was to be called 'The Friendly 
Society of Agricultural Labourers'. Regular officers and periods of meeting were 
appointed, and the mode of making collections pointed out. The twentieth and twenty-
first rules were as follows: 'That if any master attempts to reduce the wages of his 
workmen, if they are members of this order they shall instantly communicate the same 
to the corresponding secretary, in order that they may receive the support of the grand 
lodge; and in the meantime they shall use their utmost endeavours to finish the work 
they may have in hand, if any, and shall assist each other so that they may all leave 
the place together and with as much promptitude as possible.' 'That if any member of 
this society renders himself obnoxious to his employer solely on account of taking an 
active part in the affairs of this order, and if guilty of no violation or insult to his 
master, and shall be discharged from his employment solely on consequence thereof, 
either before or after the turn-out, then the whole body of men at that place shall 
instantly leave the place, and no member of this society shall be allowed to take work 
at that place until such member be reinstated in his situation.'
	After the counsel for the defendants had addressed the court, contending that 
no offence had been proved, the judge summed up, enforcing on the jury that they 
must satisfy themselves as to the illegality of the oath which Legg had taken, and 
which had been administered to other members of the society. The precise formality 
of the oath, his lordship observed, was not under inquiry; but the Act of Parliament 
referred to an oath fixing an obligation on a party to whom it is administered. To 
sustain and prove this charge, the jury must be satisfied that the oath administered to 
Legg was to bind him not to divulge the secrets of the society: if so, it came within the 
meaning of the act. It was also a question whether the dress of James Lovelace, which 
resembled a clergyman's surplice, was not intended to give a degree of solemnity and 
additional force to the proceedings. The representation of a skeleton seemed also to 
have been intended to strike awe on the minds of the persons to whom the oath was 
administered. In taking the oath, if they were satisfied that it was intended as an 
obligation on the conscience of the person taking it, it clearly came within the 
meaning of the act. His lordship proceeded to remark on the rules of the society, 
which spoke of time violation of an obligation, evidently referring to the oath which 
was administered by the prisoners, and that such violation would be deemed by the 
society a crime. His lordship also read from a book belonging to the society the names 
of several persons (the prisoners among others), who had contributed to its funds, 
leaving the jury to draw their conclusions from these facts, and the whole chain of 
evidence which had been repeated to them. The jury, after about five minutes' 
consultation, found all the prisoners 'Guilty', and they were sentenced to be 
transported for seven years.
	In pursuance of this sentence the prisoners were subsequently conveyed to 
New South Wales by the Surrey transport ship, the offence of which they had been 
convicted being deemed to be of a nature so heinous as not to be expiated by an 
imprisonment in this country. This proceeding was looked upon by the political 
supporters of the system of unions as one which was exceedingly harsh and 
unjustifiable under the circumstances of the case, and loud and repeated 
remonstrances were made, both within and without the walls of parliament, against it. 
For a considerable time the Government declared its unwillingness to interfere to 
direct any amelioration in the punishment directed to be inflicted upon the offenders, 
but at length they yielded to the constant exertions of the friends of the prisoners and 
granted a free pardon to them all.
	At the commencement of the year 1838, those who had chosen to return to 
England were landed at Plymouth–several of them, however, having preferred to 
remain in the colony to which they had been transported. An attempt was made to 
excite great sympathy in their behalf, and a species of public entry was made by them 
into London, but the whole affair turned out a failure, and the good sense of the 
general order of people was found to have induced a feeling not altogether in 
accordance with a supposition that these men had been martyrs.


PATRICK CARROLL  
Executed 18th of May, 1835, for Murder. Origin of the Central Criminal 
Court

	PATRICK CARROLL was a native of Ballihoy, in Ireland, and at the age of 
twenty-two he enlisted in the 7th Regiment of Fusiliers. He remained in this corps for 
a period of seven years, at the expiration of which time he enlisted in the Marines. 
The company to which he was attached was stationed at Woolwich; and the public-
house which was commonly frequented by him was the Britannia, which was kept by 
a Mrs Browning, a widow. He formed an idea that his attentions were not 
disagreeable to Mrs Browning, and he repeatedly pressed her to marry him. It does 
not appear that she was altogether regardless of his suit; but Carroll having upon more 
than one occasion, while in a fit of intoxication, conducted himself in such a manner 
towards her as to call for her displeasure, she refused any longer to listen to his 
addresses.
	On Sunday, the 26th of April, 1835, he went to the Britannia and found that 
Mrs Browning had invited some friends to tea, amongst whom he was not numbered. 
Some angry words ensued between them, and with difficulty he was ejected from the 
house. The next morning he returned, and demanded that he might be permitted to 
address a few words to Mrs Browning in private. This was declined; upon which he 
entered the bar where she was and, after having repeatedly struck her with his hand, at 
length drew his bayonet, with which he stabbed her.
	On Friday, the 15th of May, the prisoner was tried at the Central Criminal 
Court, held at the Old Bailey, for the murder, when a verdict of guilty was returned. 
Sentence of death was immediately passed, and the prisoner was executed on the 
following Monday.
	[Note: As this is the first case in which allusion has been made to the trial of a 
prisoner at the court constituted as the Central Criminal Court, it may be well to 
mention the change in the law by which this alteration in the title of the "Old Bailey" 
was effected. The extreme inconvenience which attended the prosecuting of offenders 
for crimes committed in the immediate vicinity of the metropolis, but not within the 
district to which the jurisdiction of the Old Bailey extended, involving, as it did, 
among other evils, the necessity of the attendance of witnesses at Maidstone, 
Chelmsford, or the other assize towns of the Home Circuit, had long been felt and 
complained of; and Parliament had been called upon to provide a remedy by which 
the then existing system might be improved. Under the superintending influence of 
Lord Brougham the Central Criminal Court Act was prepared and carried through 
both Houses of Parliament. Ito provisions materially extended the district over which 
the judges sitting at the Old Bailey had jurisdiction. They rendered it necessary that 
there should be at least twelve sessions in the course of the year, thus rendering the 
jail delivery more frequent than formerly: and they also gave the judges of the court 
jurisdiction over offences committed on the high seas, for the trial of which hitherto a 
Special Admiralty Session had been held.]


ROBERT SALMON  
Convicted of Manslaughter, in administering "Morison's Pills," and fined 
Two Hundred Pounds, 4th of April, 1836

	AT the Central Criminal Court sessions which commenced on Monday, the 
4th of April, 1836, Mr Robert Salmon, a medicine vendor in Farringdon Street, was 
indicted for the manslaughter of Mr John M'Kenzie, by administering to him certain 
large and excessive quantities of pills composed of gamboge, cream of tartar and 
other noxious and deleterious ingredients.
	The deceased was the master of a vessel, and lived in the neighbourhood of 
Commercial Road. He was induced to take some of "Morison's Pills" as a purgative, 
upon the representations of a Mrs Lane, a woman who was employed by his wife as a 
sempstress, and who sold the Hygeian medicines. Subsequently Mr Salmon's aid was 
claimed, on account of his suffering from rheumatism in the knee, and he 
recommended increased and still-increasing doses, until at length the deceased 
became so ill that his life was placed in jeopardy. Medical aid was now called in, but 
it was too late, and death soon put an end to his sufferings. A post-mortem 
examination left no doubt that the medicine prescribed by the prisoner had been the 
cause of this termination of the case, and the present indictment was in consequence 
preferred.
	On the part of the defendant a great many persons were called from all parts of 
the kingdom, who stated that they had taken large quantities of these pills, with the 
very best results, as a means of cure for almost every species of malady to which the 
human frame was subject. One person stated that he had taken no fewer than twenty 
thousand of them in two years, and had found infinite relief from swallowing them in 
very large doses.
	Mr Justice Patteson left the case to the jury, who had to decide upon the facts 
which had been proved; and after about half-an-hour's consideration they found a 
verdict of guilty, with a recommendation to mercy–upon the ground that the defendant 
was not the compounder, but only the vendor, of the medicines.
	On the following Saturday, the 9th of April, the defendant was brought up to 
receive judgment. The learned judge sentenced him to pay a fine of two hundred 
pounds, and added: "I think it right to caution you that, in the event of your being 
again found guilty of conduct of a similar description, the character of your offence 
will be materially altered. I hope that the punishment which is now inflicted on you 
will deter others from rashly administering medicines, with the nature of which they 
are unacquainted, in large quantities, as the result may be fatal."


JOHN MINTER HART  
A Cheating Money-Lender, who was transported for Life, 16th of December, 
1836, for forging a Bill of Exchange

	THE offence of which Minter Hart, who was well known as an advertising 
money-lender, was convicted was that of forgery. He was indicted at the Central 
Criminal Court on Thursday, the 16th of December, 1836, for feloniously forging and 
counterfeiting a bill of exchange for five hundred pounds, with intent to defraud the 
Rev. Charles Herbert Jenner.
	In the previous July, the Rev. Charles Herbert Jenner, of Wenvoe, near 
Cardiff, Glamorganshire, saw an advertisement in The Morning Post which offered to 
lend money, with a reference to Mr Blake, 44 Haymarket. Requiring money, he 
directed a letter to Mr Blake, and had an interview with the prisoner, who met him at 
Chislehurst, in Kent, where he resided. He told him he wanted two hundred pounds, 
on personal security, for twelve months. The prisoner agreed to let him have it at five 
per cent. on his bill. He met him the next day at the house of his father, Sir Herbert 
Jenner, in Chesterfield Street, when the prisoner produced a stamp, and at the same 
time showed what appeared to him to be a Bank of England cheque. The prisoner 
asked Mr Jenner to write across the stamp "Accepted–Charles Jenner "; but before he 
signed it he saw the prisoner write something at the left-hand corner; he did not notice 
what he wrote, but subsequently saw it was figures denoting L200. The prisoner then 
took away the stamp, and said he would return with the money in half-an-hour. By 
desire of the prisoner he made the bill payable at the Bank of England. On the bill 
being now produced, the figures "L500" appeared to have been substituted for those 
of "L200." He did not again see the prisoner, nor get any money, although he had 
received several letters. One Mr John William Edwards proved that he had received 
the bill in question from the prisoner, having agreed to purchase it at five shillings in 
the pound. It was then only a blank acceptance, but there was a stain at the corner. 
The prisoner said it was as he had received it. He said it had been obtained from Mr 
Jenner by a person named Elliott, and that he had offered it for sale to one Mr Pook, 
who would give only one hundred pounds for it. If the bill was paid, he, Edwards, was 
to give fifty pounds additional. The bargain was finally settled at a public-house at the 
corner of a court in Jermyn Street, and witness received the blank acceptance, and 
kept it in his possession for a week, when it was given to the prisoner to be drawn and 
endorsed. He returned it regularly drawn and endorsed with the name of "C. Taylor."
	Other witnesses proved a fact which exhibited the boldness and ingenuity with 
which the prisoner had effected his object. It appeared, upon a chemical examination 
of the paper on which the bill was drawn, that that part of it on which, according to 
Mr Jenner's statement, the figures "L200" had been written, had been subjected to the 
action of a strong acid, the effect of which had been to remove all trace of the ink. The 
new figures, "L500" had then been written in their stead, and the bill had been put in 
circulation as a security for that amount.
	An objection was taken to the indictment on the ground that the facts proved 
did not show that any forgery had been committed, although it was admitted that there 
had been a fraud; but the learned judge gave it as his opinion that the indictment was 
sustained, and the prisoner was found guilty.
	His case subsequently formed the subject of discussion before the fifteen 
judges in the Court of Exchequer Chamber, when the conviction was declared to be 
good, and on Tuesday, the 7th of February, 1837, Hart was sentenced to be 
transported for life.


JAMES GREENACRE  
Executed at Newgate, 2nd of May, 1837, for murdering and mutilating a 
Woman

	IN the year 1836 some dwellings, called the Canterbury Villas, situated in 
Edgware Road, at a distance of about a quarter of a mile from the spot at which the 
Regent's Canal emerges from under the pathway, were in progress of completion. On 
the 28th of December a man named Bond, a bricklayer, engaged upon the buildings, 
visited his place of work. About two o'clock in the afternoon he was proceeding in the 
direction towards Kilburn when his attention was attracted by a package enveloped in 
a coarse cloth or sack, which appeared to have been carefully placed behind a paving-
stone which rested there, for the purpose of concealment. He removed the stone in 
order to obtain a more distinct view of the package, and was horrified to observe a 
pool of frozen blood. He called the superintendent of the works and another person to 
the place, and they found that the package consisted of a portion of the remains of a 
human body. The trunk only was there, the head and legs having been removed. It 
proved to be the body of a female, apparently about fifty years of age. The head had 
been severed from the trunk in an awkward manner, the bone of the neck having been 
partly sawn through and partly broken off; and the legs had been removed in a similar 
irregular way.
	An inquest was held on the body on Saturday, the 31st of December, at the 
White Lion Inn, Edgware Road, when the jury returned a verdict of "Wilful murder 
against some person or persons unknown."
	Public excitement was soon afterwards raised to the very highest pitch by a 
notification being given of the finding of a human head in a place called the "Ben 
Jonson Lock" of the Regent's Canal, which runs through Stepney Fields. The 
exhumation of the body now took place, when the necessary comparison was made, 
and Mr Girdwood, surgeon of the district, at once declared that the head and the trunk 
were portions of the same frame.
	Although some public satisfaction was afforded by this most singular event, 
still no clue whatever appeared to have yet been found to conduct the police to the 
murderer. The head was accordingly placed in spirits, and was preserved at Mr 
Girdwood's, where it remained open to the inspection of all persons who it was 
supposed would be able to afford any information upon the subject. The mystery 
which surrounded the case, however, seemed to become greater every day. The 
inquiries of the police for the remainder of the body were unsuccessful until the 2nd 
of February. On that day James Page, a labourer, was employed in cutting osiers in a 
bed belonging to Mr Tenpenny, in the neighbourhood of Cold Harbour Lane, 
Camberwell, when, as he stepped over a drain or ditch, he perceived a large bundle 
lying in it, covered with a piece of sacking, and partly immersed in the water. His 
curiosity prompted him to raise it, and he saw what appeared to be the toes of a 
human foot protruding from it. He became alarmed, and called for his fellow-
workman, who was only a short distance off. When they opened the package they 
found it to contain two human legs. These, like the head, were transmitted to Mr 
Girdwood for examination, and proved to be portions of the frame which had been 
discovered in the Edgware Road.
	On the 20th of March, Mr Gay, a broker, who resided in Goodge Street, 
Tottenham Court Road, applied to Mr Thornton, the churchwarden of the parish of 
Paddington, for permission to inspect such of the remains of the deceased woman as 
had been preserved above ground. He founded his application upon the fact of the 
sudden disappearance of his sister, whose name was Hannah Brown, and who had 
quitted her home on the afternoon preceding Christmas Day and had not since been 
seen or heard of. When Mr Gay saw the head, he at once declared his belief that it was 
that of his unfortunate relation. From the inquiries of the police it was elicited that the 
unfortunate woman had received with favour the advances of a man named James 
Greenacre, to whom she was about to be married; and that on Christmas Eve she had 
quitted her lodgings in Union Street, Middlesex Hospital, in order to accompany her 
intended husband to his house, in Carpenter's Buildings, Camberwell, preparatory to 
their union on the ensuing Monday. Greenacre was the person in whose company she 
had been last seen; and to him, therefore, the authorities naturally turned for 
information as to the manner in which they had parted, if they had parted at all, before 
her death. A warrant was granted by the magistrates of Marylebone police office for 
the apprehension of this man; and after considerable difficulty he was at length taken 
into custody, on the 24th of March, 1837, at his lodgings at St Alban's Place, 
Kennington Road, together with a woman named Sarah Gale, with whom he 
cohabited, and her child.
	The apprehension of Greenacre and Gale took place under circumstances 
which tended to confirm the suspicions of their guilt of murder, and to give conclusive 
evidence of their perfect cognisance of the fact of the death of the deceased. lnspector 
Feltham was the person by whom this capture was effected; and he took the prisoners 
into custody at a small house, No. 1 St Alban's Place, Kennington Road. 
Accompanied by a police constable of the L division, he proceeded to that house and 
found them in bed together. When he entered the room he informed them of the object 
of his visit. Greenacre at first denied all knowledge of any such person as Hannah 
Brown; but subsequently, when questioned further, he admitted that he had been 
going to be married to her, although he did not then know what had become of her. 
The prisoners having dressed themselves, Greenacre declared that it was lucky the 
officer had come that night, as they were to sail the next day for America–a fact which 
appeared to be true, from the appearance of a number of boxes which stood in the 
apartment ready packed and corded for travelling. A minute examination of the 
contents of the trunks afforded highly important evidence. Many articles were found 
in them which were known to have belonged to Hannah Brown; but besides these, 
some remnants of an old cotton dress were discovered, exactly corresponding in 
pattern and condition with the pieces in which the body had been wrapped when first 
discovered in Edgware Road.
	On the 10th of April, 1837, the two prisoners were placed at the bar of the 
Central Criminal Court, and arraigned upon the indictment found against them. 
Greenacre was charged, as the principal, with the wilful murder of the deceased, and 
Gale was indicted for being an accessory after the fact, in consorting, aiding and 
assisting her fellow prisoner.
	Lord Chief Justice Tindal, Mr Justice Coleridge and Mr Justice Coltman were 
the judges, and the court was crowded in every corner.
	The Lord Chief Justice began to sum up at a quarter past six o'clock on the 
second day of the trial, and after an absence of a quarter of an hour the jury returned a 
verdict of guilty against both prisoners. Greenacre was sentenced to death, and the 
woman was ordered to be transported for the rest of her natural life. Greenacre was 
hanged on the 2nd of May, 1837. 


THOMAS MEARS AND OTHERS  
The Canterbury Rioters, 31st May 1838.

  
Courtenay shooting Lieutenant Bennett

	THESE singular but mischievous riots occurred on Thursday, the 31st of May 
1838, at a place called Bossenden Wood, situated about five miles from the ancient 
city of Canterbury, and were the result of the pranks of a madman who had assumed 
the title of Sir William Percy Honeywood Courtenay, Knight of Malta, and whose 
insane spirit communicated itself to the rustics, and produced severely calamitous 
consequences. The infatuation with which this insane impostor was followed, and 
even worshipped, by the peasantry of the district into which he intruded himself, 
affords a striking and melancholy proof of the magic powers of fanaticism. But while 
one is not surprised that among the lower orders he should find persons incapable of 
resisting his wily and specious arguments and the impudent falsehood of his 
assertions, it cannot but be the subject of the greatest astonishment that he should have 
procured the countenance, during a very considerable period, of individuals of 
superior rank and education in the county.
	The best mode of introducing this extraordinary event will be by detailing 
succinctly the circumstances of the early life of the supposed Sir William Courtenay. 
The real name of this pretender was John Nichols Thom, and he was the son of a 
small farmer and maltster at St Columb in Cornwall. While yet a lad, he procured 
employment in the establishment of Messrs Plumer and Turner, wine-merchants of 
Truro, as cellarman, but after five years' service, the firm was broken up and the 
business ceased. Thom now commenced trading on his own account, as a wine-
merchant, maltster and hop-dealer, and for three or four years he carried on his trade 
with great apparent respectability. At the end of that time his premises and stock were 
consumed by an accidental fire, and he recovered from an Insurance office, for the 
losses which he alleged he had sustained by this event, the sum of 3000L., being a 
much larger amount than many judged him to be entitled to. Subsequently he rebuilt 
his house and continued his trade, and, after about two years more, he made a 
considerable sum of money by a successful venture in malt which he disposed of in 
Liverpool. For two years after this event he was lost sight of by his friends and it was 
presumed that he was out of England, and the first intimation which was received of 
his return was his declaring himself a candidate to represent the city of Canterbury in 
Parliament, under the name of Sir William Courtenay, in the month of December 
1832. He was found to have taken up his residence at the Rose Hotel, Canterbury, and 
the splendour of his dress, and the eccentricity of his manners, soon gained for him 
many admirers, even among the respectable inhabitants of the town. During his 
canvass he increased the number of his friends, and his success in procuring 
supporters was most extraordinary. His effort, however, was not fortunate. His 
opponent candidates were the Hon R. Watson and Lord Fordwich, the former of 
whom obtained 832 votes and the latter 802, while Courtenay polled 375. This 
attempt gained him many friends, and great popularity among the lower orders. His 
persuasive language was exceedingly useful to him, but the peculiarity of his dress, 
combined with the absurdity of many of his protestations, induced a belief among 
some of those to whom he procured introduction that he was insane.
	After his defeat, he did not confine his proceedings to Canterbury alone, but 
passed through most of the towns in Kent, declaiming against the poor laws, the 
revenue laws, and other portions of the statutes of the realm which are usually 
considered by the poor to be obnoxious to their interests. By his speeches he obtained 
much éclat, but his exertions in favour of some smugglers led him into a scrape, from 
which he was likely to have suffered serious consequences. An action took place near 
the Goodwin Sands in the month of July 1833 between the revenue cruiser Lively and 
the Admiral Hood smuggler, and, in the course of the flight of the latter vessel and her 
exertions to escape from the Lively, her crew were observed to throw a great number 
of tubs overboard, which, on their being picked up, proved to contain spirit. The 
Admiral Hood was captured, but no contraband goods were found on board, and, on 
the men being taken into custody, Courtenay presented himself as a witness before the 
magistrates. He swore positively that he had seen the whole of the action, and that no 
tubs had been thrown from the Admiral Hood. He further stated, that he had observed 
those which had been picked up by the revenue men floating in the sea all day. This 
was so diametrically opposed to the truth, that a prosecution for perjury was 
determined on, and he was indicted at the Maidstone Assizes on the 25th of July 1833. 
A verdict of conviction followed, and Mr Justice Park, the presiding judge, passed a 
sentence of imprisonment, to be followed by seven years' transportation. The 
difficulty in which he was placed, however, having reached the knowledge of his 
friends in Cornwall, they made representations to the Home Secretary that he was 
insane, and, after having suffered four years' confinement in a lunatic asylum at 
Barming Heath, he was at length liberated, on bail being given for his future good 
behaviour.
	He now took up his abode at the residence of Mr Francis, a gentleman of 
fortune, of Fairbrook near Boughton in the neighbourhood of Canterbury, and 
speedily resumed his wild efforts to gain popularity for himself. His dress now was 
similar to that which he had worn before his incarceration; and the following sketch of 
his personal appearance, extracted from the romance of Rookwood by Mr Ainsworth, 
well describes him. 'A magnificent coal-black beard decorated the chin of this worthy; 
but this was not all–his costume was in perfect keeping with his beard, and consisted 
of a very theatrical-looking tunic, upon the breast of which was embroidered in 
golden wire the Maltese Cross; while on his shoulders were thrown the ample folds of 
a cloak of Tyrian hue. To his side was girt a long and doughty sword, which he 
termed, in his knightly phrase, Excalibur; and upon his profuse hair rested a hat as 
broad in the brim as a Spanish sombrero. Exaggerated as this description may appear, 
we can assure our readers that it is not overdrawn.'
	His impositions, unfortunately, proved as mischievous as they were plausible. 
He succeeded in persuading many of the ignorant peasantry that his origin was as high 
as that of the Saviour. His visits to the cottages of the labouring classes were 
numerous, and his striking appearance seems to have had considerable influence upon 
the minds both of men and women. Many of the poor people believed that he was in 
the habit of receiving barrels of sovereigns every week to meet his current expenses, 
and that he was the rightful owner of some of the largest estates in Kent, from the 
possession of which he was only driven by the violence and fraud of their present 
holders.
	A misunderstanding with Mr Francis compelled his retirement from that 
gentleman's house, and he took up his abode at the residence of one of his most 
devoted followers named Wills, from whence subsequently he again removed to the 
farmhouse of a person named Culver, at Boughton. During these changes he was 
constant in his exertions among the poorer classes, and the influence which he 
obtained over them was extraordinary. The women excited their husbands and sons to 
join him, 'because he was Christ, and unless they followed him, fire would come from 
Heaven and burn them'. They asserted, as he had declared, that 'he had come to earth 
upon a cloud, and would go away from it on a cloud'; and instances were not 
infrequent in which the misguided people, the subjects of his imposture, had actually 
worshipped him as a God.
	At length this excitement was destined to be brought to a conclusion, but not 
without the occurrence of events which are deeply to be lamented.
	On Monday, the 28th of May, Courtenay, with about ten or fifteen followers, 
sallied forth from the village of Boughton, without having any very distinct or 
apparent object in view, and proceeded at once to the cottage of Wills. Here they 
formed themselves into a species of column, and a loaf having been procured, it was 
broken in halves and one half of it was placed on the top of a pole, which bore a flag 
of blue and white upon which a lion rampant was drawn. Wills having joined them, 
they all proceeded to Goodnestone, near Faversham, Courtenay, as they went along, 
haranguing them and the country people whom they met, and producing a great deal 
of excitement and astonishment at his proceedings. From thence they went to a farm 
at Herne Hill, where they received food, and then to Dargate Common. By 
Courtenay's desire they all went to prayers here, and after that they returned to 
Bossenden Farm, where they retired to rest in a barn. At three o'clock on Tuesday 
morning, they went to Sitting bourne, and Courtenay provided them with breakfast, 
for which he paid twenty-seven shillings, and then they went to Newnham where, at 
the George Inn, they had a similar treat. After visiting Eastling, Throwley, Seldwich, 
Lees and Selling, where, as at Sittingbourne and Newnham, speeches were made and 
new followers obtained, the party again returned to Bossenden Farm.
	During these progresses, it appears that Mr Curling, a respectable farmer, lost 
some of his labourers who were enticed away from their work by the crowd, and 
disinclined to permit them to join the riotous proceedings of Courtenay and his party, 
he went before a magistrate of the district, by whom a warrant was issued for their 
apprehension. Nicholas Mears, a constable, and his brother, were entrusted with the 
warrant for execution, and on Thursday morning at about six o'clock they went to 
Culver's farm-house to secure the men. Upon their presenting themselves, Courtenay 
and several of his followers appeared, and almost before the unfortunate Mears could 
state his object, Courtenay drew a pistol from his breast and shot him dead. He 
returned into the house, exclaiming to the men who were there, 'Now, am I not your 
Saviour?' and going out again, he discharged a second pistol at the body of Mears and 
mutilated it with his sword.
	This diabolical murder was communicated to the magistrates directly 
afterwards, and they proceeded to take steps for the apprehension of Courtenay. But 
the latter immediately called out his men and marched them to Bossenden Wood, and 
there he administered the sacrament to them in bread and water. This over, a man 
named Alexander Foad knelt down in the presence of the rest and worshipped him, 
and while on his knees, he demanded to know whether he should follow him in the 
body or whether he should go home, and follow him in the spirit? Courtenay 
answered, 'In the body,' upon which Foad jumped up with great exultation, exclaiming 
'Oh! be joyful, be joyful; the Saviour has accepted me. Now go on; I will follow you 
till I drop.' Another man, named Blanchard, also worshipped him. Courtenay then, in 
answer to a question which was put to him, said that he had shot the constable and had 
eaten a good breakfast afterwards, and added, 'I was only executing the justice of 
heaven in consequence of the power God has given me.' At twelve o'clock Sir 
William and his followers had shifted their position to the Osier-bed, and here he 
harangued them, informing them that he was invulnerable, and that they also could 
not be hurt by reason of the faith they put in him. He defied the attack of the 
magistrates, which he declared would do neither him nor them any harm, but then he 
proposed that they should take up a position in ambush in the wood. This was agreed 
to, and on their way thither, seeing the Rev Mr Handley of Herne Hill observing their 
motions, Courtenay fired at him but happily missed his aim.
	In the meantime, the magistrates had been taking such steps as they deemed 
advisable for the maintenance of the public peace, and in order to secure the person of 
the leader of these extraordinary proceedings with his followers. Acquainted with the 
desperate violence of Courtenay, by his act of the morning, they deemed it unfit that 
an unarmed force should be brought in opposition to him and his party, and they in 
consequence dispatched a messenger to Canterbury, requiring the aid of the military. 
A detachment of one hundred men of the 45th Foot, under the command of Major 
Armstrong, was at once placed at their disposal and marched to Boughton. The rioters 
were known to be posted in Bossenden Wood, from the information of out-scouts, and 
in that direction the troops, accompanied by the magistrates and special constables, 
were marched. The position of Courtenay was ascertained to be about a mile from the 
road in Bossenden Wood. The wood was of very considerable extent, but was 
intersected by two roads; and it was found that the insurgent party were placed so that 
their front and rear were covered by the roads right and left. The military were in 
consequence divided; and while one party of fifty under the command of Captain 
Reed took the road nearest Canterbury, the other was conducted by Major Armstrong, 
assisted by Lieutenant Bennett and Lieutenant Prendergast, along the road next 
Boulton-under-Blea. Thus the insurgents were placed between the two bodies of 
troops and their only chance of escape was to take a straight line through the woods. 
For this, however, the madman who was their leader was in no wise disposed, and he 
soon presented himself to Major Armnstrong's troop. He was required to surrender, 
but without waiting to give any answer, he called upon his followers–now only 
between thirty and forty in number–as if to prepare for the approaching conflict and 
rushed at Lieutenant Bennett, who was rather in advance of the soldiers. Lieutenant 
Bennett observing this movement, rushed forward also, sword in hand, but almost 
before he had reached his assailant, Courtenay presented a pistol, fired, and the ball 
entered the right side and passed completely through the body of the young officer, 
killing him instantaneously. At this moment Courtenay was felled to the ground by a 
constable named Millwood, but he jumped up again, and at the instant of his regaining 
his feet, he was shot by the troops. The order to 'fire', was then given by Major 
Armstrong, and being mounted, he dashed in among the peasantry. By the discharge 
eight men were killed on the spot, and several others were wounded; but the wretched 
peasantry fought desperately, until at length, perceiving the dreadful consequences 
which must result from persevering in their resistance, they dispersed and scattered 
themselves through the woods. In the course of the afternoon twenty-seven prisoners 
were made by the military and constables, and of these seven were wounded, two of 
them mortally. Of the party who were employed in maintaining the law, George Catt, 
a constable, who acted with much determination, was shot, and Lieutenant 
Prendergast received a contused wound on the head from the bludgeon of an 
insurgent.
	During the remainder of the week the coroner of the county was engaged in 
conducting the necessary inquiries into the cause of death of the deceased persons. 
Verdicts of 'Wilful Murder' were returned against Courtenay and his adherents, in the 
cases of the constable Mears and Lieutenant Bennett, while in the case of Catt, the 
jury found 'That he had been killed upon an erroneous belief that he was a rioter.' In 
the cases of death which had occurred amongst the insurgents, the jury found a verdict 
of 'Justifiable Homicide'. The scene which presented itself, during the sitting of the 
jury, was distressing in the extreme. The Red Lion at Boughton was the place at 
which the coroner conducted the investigation, and there also all those prisoners who 
were suffering from the wounds which they had received were detained, while in the 
stable attached to the house, the bodies of the slain were extended. In the yard were 
the wives, widows and children of these deluded men, lamenting bitterly the position 
of danger into which the fanaticism of their relations had drawn them. During the 
sitting of the jury, two of the wounded men died and, upon their decease being 
communicated to the crowd outside, they gave vent to new expressions of grief. The 
body of Lieutenant Bennett lay in an upper chamber of the inn and was a mnelancholy 
spectacle. The unfortunate gentleman was about twenty-five years of age, and had just 
obtained leave of absence when, the news of the riots reaching the barracks, he 
applied for and obtained permission to join the party.
	At the conclusion of the proceedings before the coroner and the magistrates, 
the following prisoners were committed for trial, viz: Thomas Mears alias Tyler (the 
cousin of the murdered constable), Alexander Foad, William Nutting, William Price, 
James Goodwin, William Wills, William Spratt, John Spratt, John Silk, Edward 
Curling, Samnuel Edwards, Sarah Culver, Thomas Myers alias Edward Wraight, 
Charles Hills, Thomas Ovenden, William Couchworth, Thomas Griggs, William Foad 
and Richard Foreman.
	The prisoners Mears, Alexander Foad and Couchworth were wounded. Foad 
was a respectable farmer, cultivating a farm of about sixty acres, and it was a matter 
of some surprise that he should have been implicated in so extraordinary a 
proceeding. The prisoner Sarah Culver was a woman about forty years of age, of 
respectable connexions, and possessing considerable property. She had been a 
devoted follower of Courtenay, but it was presumed that she, like him, was insane. 
The other prisoners were all persons of inferior station.
	On Tuesday, the 5th of June, the greater number of those who had been killed 
at the riot were interred in the churchyard of Herne Hill. Amongst these was 
Courtenay; and the funeral attracted a vast assemblage to the place. Considerable 
apprehensions were entertained lest the mob should use any violence to prevent the 
burial of their late fanatical leader, for many had been heard to declare their firm 
belief that he would 'rise again', but the whole affair passed off quietly and no new 
outrage was committed. The bodies of the other deceased persons were buried by their 
friends.
	At the Maidstone Assizes, on Thursday, the 9th of August 1838, the trial of 
the prisoners commenced before Lord Denman.
	The first persons who were tried were Mears and Price, and after a long 
investigation they were found guilty of being parties to the murder of Mears the 
constable, but recommended to mercy, on the ground of their having been led astray 
by their infatuation in favour of Courtenay.
	Sentence of death was at once passed upon the prisoners, but they were 
informed that their lives would be spared.
	On the next day, William Wills, Thomas Myers alias Edward Wraight, Alex. 
Foad, Edward Curling, Thomas Griggs, Richard Foreman, Charles Hills and Williamn 
Foad were indicted for the murder of Lieutenant Bennett, but upon their being 
arraigned they pleaded guilty, on the same understanding as that which existed in the 
former case, namely, that their lives should be spared. The prosecutions in the cases of 
the other prisoners were not proceeded with, and they were discharged from custody.
	On Friday, the 17th of August, the extent of the commutation of the 
punishment of the convicts was made known to them. Mears and Wills were ordered 
to be transported for life; Price was ordered to be transported for ten years; and 
Wraight, the two Foads, Curling, Griggs, Foreman and Hills were directed to undergo 
one year's imprisonment and hard labour in the House of Correction, during which, 
each of them was to pass one month in solitary confinement. A pension of 40L. per 
annum was granted to the widow of Mears the constable, in consideration of the death 
of her husband.
	The unfortunate Courtenay appears to have been a man by no means devoid of 
ability, and who had turned what little education he possessed to the very best 
account. His speeches were energetic and well put together, and he possessed an 
ample flow of language. He was abundantly supplied with scriptural quotations, and 
appeared to be fully and intimately acquainted with the Old and New Testaments.
	Shortly before the dreadful affray in which he lost his life, he left off the 
picturesque attire in which he had hitherto been in the habit of dressing, and assumed 
one of a more homely character. This was a blouse or frock of brown holland with a 
black belt, in which he carried a brace of pistols; and a round hat. He was usually also 
armed with a sword and dagger, but his miserable followers possessed no other 
weapons than those which the hedges or woods through which they passed afforded 
them. It is remarkable that none of them were of so low a station as to render it at all 
probable that want had induced them to listen to the insane promises of their leader. 
The precise object which was held in view appears to have been unknown even to the 
misguided men themselves; but the general impression was, that Courtenay, by his 
power, would take possession of all the private estates of the county, which he would 
bestow upon his trusty followers. The Sunday after the riot, according to the 
statements and promises which he made, was to have been 'a glorious but a bloody 
day', and some persons did not scruple to assert that it was his intention on that day to 
fire Canterbury. It is probable, therefore, that the distressing events of the 51st of May 
served to prevent the occurrence of scenes even more terrible.
	The visual proof of the existence of a degree of superstition so gross as that 
which is shown here to have been exhibited is almost necessary to induce its belief; 
but there can be no doubt that the lamentable ignorance and fanaticism of the 
peasantry was even more striking than we have described it to be. The general happy 
contentedness of the inhabitants of the county of Kent, the proximity of their position 
to the metropolis, and the high state of cultivation to which the soil of that county has 
been brought, one would have thought would have tended to forbid the possibility of 
such occurrences among them. These remark able details, however, only serve to 
afford an additional proof of the facility with which the human mind is moved, and 
how open it is to the operations of the allurements of fanaticism.


FRANCIS LIONEL ELIOT, EDWARD DELVES 
BROUGHTON, JOHN YOUNG AND HENRY WEBBER  
Indicted for a Murder committed in a Duel on Wimbledon Common on 22nd 
of August, 1838

	ON the evening of Wednesday, the 22nd of August, 1838, a duel took place on 
Wimbledon Common, which, unhappily, was attended with fatal consequences. The 
principal parties were Mr Francis Lionel Eliot and Mr Charles Flower Mirfin; and 
they were accompanied, the former by Messrs Young and Webber, the latter by 
Broughton and another person, whose name, we believe, was never ascertained with 
certainty, and also by Dr Scott, who attended to render that professional aid which it 
was deemed possible might be required of him.
	The circumstances which led to this duel were as follows: During Epsom 
Races, 1838, both Mr Mirfin and Mr Eliot attended that far-famed sporting meeting. 
On Derby Day, as they were returning to town, Mr Eliot driving a phaeton and Mr 
Mirfin a gig, by some accident the two vehicles came in contact, and Mr Mirfin was 
overturned. In the fall some of his ribs were fractured. On his getting up, an 
altercation arose, and offensive language passed, which ended in Mr Eliot striking Mr 
Mirfin a blow on his already injured side, of which injury, however, it is due to say, 
Mr Eliot was ignorant. The pain at the moment was excessive, and Mr Mirfin had 
only a faint recollection that the name of the party with whom he had come in contact 
was Eliot. He had been unable to obtain his address, and therefore had no clue to his 
discovery, although he was extremely anxious to call him to account. Months rolled 
by, and on only one occasion, till Tuesday night, the 21st of August, had he obtained a 
transient view of Mr Eliot in a cigar-shop, but almost instantly lost sight of him. On 
Tuesday night, in company with two friends, he entered a saloon in Piccadilly, and 
while he was there he heard the name of Eliot mentioned. The name at once struck 
him, and on looking at the party by whom it was acknowledged he recognised him as 
the person whom he had so long sought, and from whom he had received a blow. He 
immediately requested one of his friends, Mr Broughton, to address Mr Eliot, and call 
the matter to his recollection. Mr Eliot admitted the fact, and offered to make an 
apology. It would seem, however, that neither party was in a situation to enter upon 
the subject then, and it was agreed that mutual friends should meet at the Opera 
Colonnade Hotel at twelve o'clock the next morning to discuss the matter. Mr Mirfin 
then proceeded to his residence, No. 2 Pleasant Place, West Square, Lambeth, where 
he retired to rest. At the time appointed the friends met, when an objection was made 
on the part of Mr Eliot to meet Mr Mirfin. A firm determination having been 
expressed, however, that such meeting must take place, on a second application to Mr 
Eliot he acceded to the proposition, and a hostile meeting was arranged for the same 
evening, on Wimbledon Common.
	The individuals named accompanied the principals to the intended scene of 
action, A suitable spot having been selected, the parties proceeded to adjust the 
preliminaries. After some conversation between the parties, in which Mr Mirfin 
refused to consent to receive a verbal apology, the ground was measured–twelve 
paces–and the principals were placed in their positions, each provided with a pistol. 
At a concerted signal both fired, when the ball of Mr Eliot's pistol passed through Mr 
Mirfin's hat, whilst that of Mr Mirfin went harmlessly past his antagonist. Mr Mirfin 
then impatiently demanded another pistol, as he had previously declared he would 
face a dozen shots rather than submit to the insult he had received. The second fire 
quickly followed, when Mr Mirfin placed his hand on his side, and exclaimed, "He's 
hit me! " then staggered a few paces back and fell into the arms of Dr Scott and his 
second. The former soon ascertained that the wound was fatal, and in a moment the 
unfortunate man breathed his last. The ball had taken a transverse direction, and had 
passed through his heart.
	On Saturday, the 25th of August, an inquest was held on the body of the 
deceased, which was continued by adjournment until the following Tuesday, when the 
jury returned a verdict of wilful murder against all the parties concerned as principal 
or seconds; the verdict as to the latter, however, only referred to them as being 
accessory to the offence.
	At the ensuing session at the Central Criminal Court indictments were 
preferred against the various parties concerned: and it being understood that Mr 
Broughton would surrender to take his trial on Friday, the 21st of September, on that 
day the court was much crowded.
	When Mr Broughton was called, however, he did not appear, and his absence 
was stated to be accounted for by the indisposition of Mr Clarkson, who had been 
retained as counsel on his behalf; but Messrs Webber and Young presented 
themselves, and declared themselves ready to take their trial. They were defended 
respectively by Mr Adolphus and Mr C. Phillips, while Mr Chambers conducted the 
case for the prosecution.
	The whole of the facts were then again proved in evidence; and eloquent 
appeals having been made on behalf of the prisoners by their counsel, a great number 
of highly respectable witnesses were called, who gave them excellent characters for 
the general humanity of their disposition.
	The jury, after some consideration, found the prisoners guilty, and at the same 
time declared their opinion that Dr Scott himself should have stood at the bar with 
them. Mr Justice Vaughan expressed himself to be of the same opinion, and sentence 
of death was then recorded against the prisoners.
	They were instantly conveyed to the interior of Newgate, where they were 
placed, in obedience to the usual course, in the condemned cells. The application of 
their friends to the Crown, however, soon procured their liberation from this 
disagreeable confinement; but the sentence of death was only removed upon condition 
of their undergoing twelve months' imprisonment in the house of correction at 
Guildford, one month of which was to be passed in solitude.
	On Friday, the 8th of February, 1839, Mr Broughton surrendered at the Old 
Bailey to take his trial, and pleaded guilty to the indictment. Sentence of death was 
recorded against him; but in this case, as in that of Webber and Young, the 
punishment was reduced to twelve months' imprisonment. 


FRANCIS HASTINGS MEDHURST  
Convicted on 13th of April, 1839, of the Manslaughter of a Schoolfellow

	MR MEDHURST was a young man of highly respectable connections, and the 
offence of which he was found guilty was that of the manslaughter of a schoolfellow, 
Mr Joseph Alsop, at the Rectory House Academy, at Hayes, in Middlesex. This 
establishment was kept by the Rev. Mr Sturmer, a clergyman of the Established 
Church, and minister of the parish of Hayes.
	Mr Alsop and Medhurst were his pupils, the latter being about twenty-two and 
the former twenty-one years of age. On Saturday, the 9th of March, 1839, Mr Sturmer 
was in his study with Mr Alsop, and a pupil named Bunney, when Medhurst entered 
the apartment and complained to Mr Sturmer that Dalison, another pupil, whom he 
designated as "a blackguard," had broken the glass of his watch. Mr Alsop, who had 
been the constant companion of Mr Dalison, indignant at the language applied to his 
friend, and perhaps irritated at former bickerings with Medhurst, exclaimed: "You are 
a liar and a blackguard for saying so!" and thereupon Medhurst, who carried a stick in 
his hand, immediately struck him several severe blows over the head and arms. A 
scuffle ensued, in the course of which Alsop wrested the stick from his opponent, and 
they had separated to a distance of five or six feet when, just as Alsop was again 
advancing towards Medhurst with the stick upraised as if to strike him, the latter 
suddenly drew a clasp-knife from his pocket, opened it, and stabbed his antagonist in 
the belly. Surgical assistance was obtained, but it proved to be without avail, and after 
lingering a few days the unfortunate young man died.
	It was not, however, until Friday, the 15th of March, that Medhurst was taken 
into custody; and on the next day and the following Monday an inquest was held on 
the body of the deceased. A verdict of wilful murder was returned against Mr 
Medhurst, and he was conveyed to Newgate to await his trial upon that charge.
	At the Central Criminal Court, on Saturday, the 13th of April, the prisoner was 
put to the bar to be tried upon the indictment which had been preferred against him, 
and he was found guilty of the minor offence of manslaughter. Upon this conviction 
he was sentenced to three years' imprisonment in the house of correction.
	Mr Medhurst was a young man of considerable expectations. It is not a little 
remarkable that his grandfather was also tried for murder, though he escaped the 
consequences of his act by proof being given of his insanity. His wife was the victim 
of his attack; and her death was caused by a stab which she received from the hand of 
her husband in a moment of passion. For this alleged murder he was tried at the York 
Assizes in the year 1804, but acquitted on the ground of his being insane. 


GEORGE CANT  
Convicted of Rape, 31st October 1839

	THE case of this individual presents circumstances of so remarkable a 
character to our notice, that we should be guilty of a neglect of our duty if we omitted 
their recital.
	At the Central Criminal Court on Thursday, the 31st of October 1839, George 
Cant, a publican aged forty years, was indicted for a rape upon Jane Bolland, and in 
order that the course which the case took may be understood, we shall repeat the 
evidence which was given by the witnesses at the trial in preference to a general 
narrative of the proceedings.
	Jane Bolland deposed that she resided with her brother in Solomon Terrace, St 
George's-in-the-East. On the 30th of September she went to live as barmaid at the 
Windsor Castle public house, Holborn, kept by the prisoner. She slept in one of the 
attics and the prisoner and his wife slept in the room underneath. The prisoner called 
her on the morning of Thursday, the 3rd of October. When she came down to the bar, 
the prisoner patted her on the cheek with something; he laid his hand upon her breast 
and insisted upon kissing her. She threatened to inform Mrs Cant of his conduct, and 
he said, "What the eye did not see the heart would not believe." He then wished her to 
leave the door of her room open that he might come in when he came to call her in the 
morning, but she told him that she was not the sort of person he imagined her to be 
and left the parlour. In the course of the day her brother and a person named Balfour 
called upon her, and she communicated to them what the prisoner had said and done 
to her. Mr Balfour said that, after what had passed, he did not think the prisoner would 
again attempt to use indecent liberties with her, and her brother, at the suggestion of 
Mr Balfour, advised her not to leave her situation. Subsequently on that day she 
became unwell, and about eight o'clock in the evening she was conveyed upstairs to 
bed, but she was then so ill that she could not recollect who went up to her room with 
her. She was insensible when she reached her bed, but during the night she partially 
recovered, and then she found the prisoner at the bedside. He placed one of his hands 
upon her mouth to prevent her calling out, a struggle took place and she fainted. There 
was a candle on the table in the room. About six o'clock in the morning she recovered 
her senses, and found her clothes, which had not been taken off; in disorder, and the 
bone of her stays broken: the offence charged in the indictment had been committed 
when she was in a state of insensibility. She then saw the prisoner standing at the door 
of her room, and she cried out to him, 'You villain, you shall not come in.' He 
answered that she was a drunkard and should not again enter his bar. She went 
downstairs to inform Mrs Cant of what the prisoner had done, but when she told that 
person that her husband had used indecent liberties with her, Mrs Cant said, 'I will not 
hear you, you drunken hussy.' She immediately left the house and went to her 
brother's, where she told what had happened to her. On the Saturday following she 
was examined by a medical gentleman.
	On her cross-examination by Mr C. Phillips, who appeared for the prisoner, 
she stated that a young man named Joseph Edwards had slept at her master's house on 
the night of the 3rd of October, and that he accompanied her home on the next day. 
He was a friend of Mr Cant's and she had observed him in attendance at the Court. 
She was subject to a swimming in the head, and was suffering from this complaint 
when she went to bed on the evening in question. She was not intoxicated and had 
taken nothing during the whole day, with the exception of one glass of half-and-half.
	The brother of the prosecutrix and Mr Balfour, a wine-merchant's clerk, 
corroborated that part of the evidence of the witness, which referred to her 
conversation with them. Bolland further deposed, that his sister had some years 
previously suffered from a severe attack of erysipelas in her head, from the effects of 
which she had been for some time insane. She was still occasionally subject to 
determination of blood to the head.
	The wife of Bolland, and the medical man referred to, both gave evidence 
which left no doubt that the offence which was complained of by the prosecutrix had 
been committed upon her person, and Mrs Bolland declared that her sister-in-law, 
when she saw her on the Friday, exhibited all the agitation which might be supposed 
to be incident to such an occurrence.
	The prisoner was proved to have been taken into custody by a constable 
named Wells, when he said that he had 'only kissed the girl'. This closed the case for 
the prosecution.
	Mr Phillips then addressed the jury for the prisoner, and disclosed a most 
extraordinary defence on his behalf. He disclaimed all intention of impeaching the 
young woman's character and was happy that he had no reason for making even an 
insinuation against her in regard to her conduct previous to this occasion. That she 
was deeply to be commiserated he owned, and that she had come here to tell what she 
believed to be the truth, he had not the least doubt. He was sure, however, that both 
reason and a sense of justice would compel the jury (if the witnesses he intended to 
call for the prisoner should speak the truth) to say that they could not see their way 
through the case, and that such doubt was created in their minds, as would warrant 
them in acquitting the man at the bar.
	He approached the defence of the prisoner with the greatest anxiety of mind, 
because, if the evidence he intended to adduce should be discredited, the 
consequences to the prisoner would be truly awful. The giddiness in the head had 
induced those who had only been acquainted with the girl for four or five days to 
believe that she was intoxicated; and this was most natural, for the swimming in the 
head would produce all the appearances of intoxication. She was taken upstairs by a 
servant of the prisoner, who would describe her appearance at the time, and would 
also state that the young man Edwards came to the door with her. That she had been 
violated there was not the least doubt, but that the prisoner had committed the offence 
was by no means clear, and it would be his duty to call the young man Edwards, who, 
if he (Mr Phillips) was rightly informed, would state that he was the guilty party. The 
young woman had given her evidence very fairly, however, and had doubtless stated 
only what she considered to be truth. After Mr Cant had been committed, Edwards 
had called at the office of Mr Williams, the solicitor for the prisoner, and made a 
disclosure which left no doubt of the innocence of the man at the bar. He did not mean 
for an instant to justify the conduct of Edwards, and it was a pity that he did not make 
all the amends in his power to the young woman. He was a young unmarried man and 
might have done so. It was unlikely the prisoner committed the offence, for, if he had 
been guilty, it was not probable that he would have conducted himself towards the 
young woman as she had stated he had done in the morning after she had recovered 
from her illness. He (Mr Phillips) believed he had been a foolish man in using even 
the liberty he himself confessed he had done with the girl, and it would be a warning 
to others to beware of the consequences of the smallest deviation from a virtuous line 
of conduct. The liberty he had used in the morning had induced the girl to suppose 
that he had committed the capital offence upon her during the night. Unfortunately 
there were many cases in which the innocent suffered for the guilty, but there was no 
instance in which the innocent had actually come forward to place himself in the 
situation of the guilty. It was very unlikely that an individual, entirely innocent of a 
capital charge like the present, would come forward and put a rope about his neck, in 
order to free the man who had actually committed the crime. He could not, therefore, 
see any reason to throw doubt on the testimony of Edwards.
	Jane Hollier was then called, and, on being sworn, stated that she was at the 
Windsor Castle public-house, when this transaction was stated to have occurred. At 
about eight o'clock she assisted the prosecutrix to bed. Witness thought she was in a 
state of intoxication at the time. About twelve o'clock witness again went up to the 
bedroom of the prosecutrix, accompanied by Joseph Edwards. Edwards remained at 
the door while she went in. She asked him to come up with her, as there was only one 
candle. The poor girl was lying on the bed, with her clothes on, asleep; witness 
covered her with blankets. Witness was in the room about five minutes, and the door 
was closed during that time. When she came out she found Edwards at the door. She 
gave him the light and he went towards his bedroom. She neither saw the prosecutrix 
nor Edwards again that night.
	Cross-examined by Mr Adolphus: The prosecutrix was not able to speak on 
her way upstairs. She heard the prosecutrix say to the prisoner, 'You took liberties 
with me, you villain.'
	Mr George Williams, the attorney for the prisoner, stated that he knew Joseph 
Edwards: that person came to his office after Cant was committed, and made a 
communication to him. The communication was made after the prisoner had been 
admitted to bail.
	Thomas Shipton, pot-boy at the Windsor Castle, stated that the prosecutrix 
appeared to be intoxicated on the day in question. He saw her before she went 
upstairs, and she then presented the appearance of a person who had taken liquor.
	Mrs Sarah Goodchild, a washerwoman, stated that she was employed by Mr 
Cant. She went up to the bedroom of the prosecutrix about nine o'clock on the night in 
question, accompanied by the prisoner and his wife. The girl was then lying across the 
bed, and witness, assisted by Mr Cant, placed her straight upon the bed. They all left 
the room together. No light was left in the room.
	Joseph Edwards was called and examined by Mr Phillips: He was a 
bootmaker, and formerly slept at the house of the prisoner. He now resided at No 2 
Fenton's Buildings. He was in the habit of visiting the prisoner's family occasionally, 
and he slept there on the 3rd of October when the girl Bolland was there. She went 
upstairs, he believed, between nine and ten o'clock. She appeared then to be 
intoxicated. He saw her the next morning about half-past six o'clock, and went to her 
brother's house with her. They went down Chancery Lane, along Fleet Street and over 
Blackfriars Bridge. He told her that was the way to the Commercial Road, believing 
that she lived near the Commercial Road, Lambeth, but it appeared that it was 
Commercial Road East, she wished to go to. After the prisoner was committed, he 
called at the office of Mr Williams, and made a communication to that gentleman 
which was true. He made a similar communication to a friend of the name of Murphy. 
He went into prosecutor's room about eleven o'clock on the night of the 3rd of 
October. He had no light with him. She was in bed. Edwards proceeded to state that 
he had criminal intercourse with the girl, and he felt it his duty, when the prisoner was 
committed, to in form Mr Williams of what he had done.
	Cross-examined by Mr Adolphus: Witness was out of employment at the time 
of this transaction. He knew Mr Cant, and the first time he slept at the Windsor Castle 
was on the 3rd of October. He had known Cant for four or five years. He had lodgings 
at Bartholomew Close on the 3rd of October. When he stayed at the Windsor Castle 
late, he was asked to sleep there. The girl did not appear at all unwilling to submit to 
the intercourse, but on the contrary, appeared quite willing. He had not gone to bed 
before. She was not covered with blankets. He heard all that had been stated that day, 
when the prisoner was examined before the justices, but he did not then mention a 
word of what he had now said. On the way home on Friday, the prosecutrix said that 
Mr Cant had called her a drunkard, and she would fix him for it. She then seemed 
happy enough.
	Murphy corroborated this statement by declaring that the witness had told him 
of what he had done, after the time at which the communication had been made to Mr 
Williams.
	A number of witnesses were then called, who gave the prisoner an excellent 
character, and Mr Adolphus proceeded to reply. He rejoiced that Mr Phillips had not 
attempted to cast any aspersion upon the character of the prosecutrix, and declared his 
belief that no attempt could be successfully made to show that she was unworthy of 
belief. The case depended entirely now upon the testimony of Edwards, and the 
simple question was, whether the jury would credit his statement in preference to that 
of the girl Bolland. No attempt was made to deny the advances which Cant had made 
to the girl on the morning of the 3rd of October, and he asked the jury first, whether 
having made those advances, it was improbable that he should have followed them up, 
and secondly, whether they could believe a person who came forward and told such 
an improbable tale as Edwards. The testimony of the prosecutrix was materially 
sustained in many particulars–that of Edwards received no important confirmation. 
True, he had gone to two persons to relate his story before he told it here, but at that 
time the prisoner was at large on bail, and it was to be observed that he might have 
done so for the express purpose of propping up an improbable story. He had said 
nothing about it at the police office, although he had heard the prosecutrix examined 
there, and the whole relation bore so much of the impress of fiction, that the jury, he 
was sure, would attach no credit to his declaration.
	The learned judge (Mr Baron Gurney) in summing up contrasted the 
statements of the prosecutrix and Edwards with great force, and having instructed the 
jury upon the law affecting the case, informing them that the offence of rape might 
have been committed upon the prosecutrix while she was in a state of insensibility, 
although no resistance had been made by her, left the whole case to them for decision.
	After about two hours' consideration, a verdict of 'Guilty' was returned. The 
prisoner appeared somewhat astonished at this conclusion of the case, and loudly 
declared his innocence. Judgement of death was, however, recorded against him, and 
he was removed from the bar.
	The very peculiar circumstances of this case attracted a large share of public 
attention; and a feeling was commonly entertained that the verdict was founded upon 
an erroneous view of the facts of the case. The persons who adopted this impression 
lost no time in conveying their opinion to the Secretary of State for the Home 
Department, but in spite of their most strenuous exertions in favour of Mr Cant, the 
Government declined to give a decision in opposition to that which had been arrived 
at by the jury, although it was resolved that the sentence of death should be changed 
for a punishment of transportation for life.
	In obedience to this determination Mr Cant was subsequently sent out of the 
country. 


WILLIAM JOHN MARCHANT  
A young Footman, who was hanged for murdering a Housemaid in a 
Magistrate's Drawing-Room

	THE criminal in this case held the situation of footman to Mr Henry Edgell, a 
magistrate, resident at No. 21 Cadogan Place, Chelsea, and the victim of his crime 
was a young woman, named Elizabeth Paynton, who lived as under-housemaid in the 
same family.
	On Friday, the 17th of May, 1839, Mr Edgell and his family quitted the house 
in Cadogan Place in their carriage, for the purpose of proceeding to Foot's Cray, in 
Kent, leaving Marchant, the deceased, the cook and the upper housemaid, at home. 
The two latter individuals also went out, and thus Marchant and the girl Paynton were 
left alone in the house. On their return they were unable to obtain admittance; and the 
coachman and upper-footman having come back from Foot's Cray, they went to the 
stables and procured their aid. Middleton, the coachman, scaled the garden wall, and 
with some difficulty burst open the back-kitchen door. He let in the other servants, 
and they all proceeded to examine the house. When they reached the drawing-room 
they saw the deceased lying on the floor, and it was at first supposed that she and 
Marchant were lying there together. This idea, however, was immediately dispelled 
by the discovery of a pool of blood near the head of the unfortunate young woman, 
whose throat was observed to be dreadfully cut. A razor lay by her side, which was 
evidently the weapon with which she had been killed. When it was ascertained that 
Marchant had absconded, suspicion at once attached to him.
	On the Sunday after the murder, Marchant surrendered himself into the 
custody of a police officer at Hounslow, to whom he at once confessed the murder, 
without, however, assigning any reason for its commission. He appeared to be 
terrified at what he had done; and as he walked into town he frequently looked behind 
him, declaring that he fancied he heard the murdered woman at his back.
	On Friday, the 21st of June, the prisoner pleaded guilty to the indictment for 
the murder which had been found against him at the Central Criminal Court, and 
sentence of death was immediately passed upon him. On Monday, the 8th of July, the 
wretched culprit, who was only eighteen years old, was executed. He met his death 
with much firmness, and was apparently sincerely penitent.


ROBERT TAYLOR  
Convicted of bigamy, 29th of June, 1840

	ON Monday, the 29th of June 1840, Robert Taylor, one of the most impudent 
impostors that we ever remember to have read of, was tried at the Durham Sessions 
for polygamy. The offender was a mere youth, between nineteen and twenty years of 
age, but his numerous matrimonial adventures and devices to obtain money, marked 
him as a person of singular cunning and dexterity. His plan seems to have been in all 
cases to practise first on the cupidity of his own sex, by holding out a pecuniary 
reward to anyone who would procure him a suitable alliance, and then, by 
representing himself to be of aristocratic birth and heir to extensive possessions, to 
dazzle and win over the victim and her friends. To aid his views, he represented 
himself as a son of Lord Kenedy, of Ashby Hall, Leicestershire. He was furnished 
with numerous documents, framed to corroborate his misrepresentations. These, 
which he carried in a tin case, were found on his person when he was apprehended. 
Amongst them was a parchment, on which was written, in a fine clerkly hand, what 
purported to be 'The last will and testament of Lord Kenedy', &c. By this document 
Taylor appeared to be the heir to 1,015,000L. three per cent consols, besides immense 
wealth in coal mines, salt factories, woollen factories, quarries, machinery, houses, 
plate, jewellery and even ships; and 'John Nicholson, Thomas Johnson and Mrs 
Robinson' appeared to have been constituted 'guardians of the said Robert Taylor'. 
The documents bore date 22nd of September 1829, and exhibited the signatures, first, 
of the supposed testator 'Kenedy', and then of the attesting witnesses, 'Samuel 
Robinson, clerk to James Lee and John Turner' and 'William Cowley, barrister'. He 
had also an indenture certifying the correctness of the will, and describing his person 
by certain marks on his right arm, and elsewhere. He had sundry other papers 
ingeniously enough contrived for the purpose of aiding his deception, but, as he was a 
youth of coarse and vulgar manners, the success which attended his impostures can 
only be accounted for by the blind avarice of his dupes. At the time of his trial, six of 
his marriages, in several parts of the north of England, had come to the knowledge of 
the police, but there was good reason to suppose that there were many other instances 
in which he had successfully conducted his plans.
	Like many who have pursued a career of base and unprincipled deception, this 
scoundrel affected great sanctity, and connected himself at different times with both 
the Wesleyan and Primitive Methodists. Indeed, one of his principal dupes was a Mr 
Fryer, a preacher in the last-named connexion, who, Taylor having promised a reward 
of 10L. to anyone who would procure him a young and religious wife, offered him the 
choice of his two sisters-in-law. Taylor chose the younger, a girl about eighteen years 
of age, and was married to her. This preacher not only failed to obtain the expected 
reward, but was swindled out of 12L. which he lent to the roguish adventurer. This, 
however, proved the last of his exploits, for having made several fruitless attempts to 
run away from this wife, he was at length compelled to take her with him, and on his 
way through the county of Durham he was apprehended.
	The budget of papers found in the prisoner's possession contained a multitude 
of curiosities besides those above alluded to, which our space will not allow us to 
particularize. It appeared from one of them, an indenture of apprenticeship, that at the 
age of thirteen he had been apprenticed to a sweep and collier in Staffordshire till he 
should be twenty-one years old. The indenture described him as a poor child from 
Fatfield, in the county of Durham. There was several licences and documents relating 
to his marriages. One of these was a memorandum of an agreement between Robert 
Taylor and Mary Wilson, of Newcastle on-Tyne, to marry in three months from 
October 16 1839, Taylor to forfeit 20,000L. if he married any other woman and Mary 
Anne to forfeit one-third per annum of her yearly salary if she proved faithless. 
Annexed to this was a memorandum of a loan of 4L. from Mary Anne's father, with 
an engagement, on the part of Taylor, to pay 1L. per annum interest. Many of the 
papers related to the prisoner's connexion with the Wesleyan and Primitive 
Methodists, and with the Teetotallers, of which latter society he appears to have been 
a staunch adherent. The most curious paper was 'a memorandum of agreement made 
between Robert Taylor, Esq, son of the late Lord Kenedy, of Ashby Hall, in the parish 
of Ashby-de-la-Zouch, and those he may engage as servants'. We regret that we 
cannot give this amusing document entire. It bears what purports to be the prisoner's 
signature, and from it he appears to have engaged an establishment of stewards, 
butlers, footmen, grooms, coachmen, gamekeepers, helpers, &c, sufficient for half a 
dozen princes at salaries of from 20L. to 60L. per annum. The stipulation of the 
engagement was, that the servants, butlers included, were to observe the teetotal 
pledge.
	When the prisoner was placed at the bar to take his trial, the court was 
excessively crowded, and all eyes were fixed upon the young Lothario who had so 
readily succeeded in procuring half a dozen wives. Instead of a handsome, seductive 
gallant, there stood before the court a shabby-looking individual, with a face not 
merely ordinary but repulsive. He was evidently much amused at the sensation which 
his appearance produced, and joined in the smiles of the bystanders. He was perfectly 
unabashed and conducted himself throughout the trial with the utmost ease and 
unconcern.
	The first case taken was that of the prisoner's intermarriage with Mary Ann 
Davidson, the sister-in-law of Mr Fryer, the Primitive Methodist preacher. John 
Wood, a wagoner of Birmingham, was called to prove the first marriage of which the 
authorities had any knowledge. It appeared, that this witness met the prisoner in 
Birmingham in 1838. The prisoner told Wood he was heir to 60,000L. a year under 
the will of his father, Lord Kenedy. In proof of this assertion he produced papers. He 
said he had a great wish to be married to a respectable young lady, and if Wood could 
introduce him to such a one, he would make him a handsome present. Wood 
introduced him to Miss Sarah Ann Skidmore and to her father, who was a shopkeeper. 
The documents were shown to the young lady and her parents: the licence and the 
wedding-ring were procured that very day, and the couple were married the next 
morning. Shortly after, the prisoner went to London to settle his affairs. He 
subsequently returned and lived with his wife; but he had not been married more than 
six or seven weeks when he deserted her altogether.
	As the prisoner was undefended, the court asked him if he had any questions 
to put to the witness.
	Prisoner: 'I'll ax him one or two. I axed you if you knew a decent girl as 
wanted a husband and you said you did, you knew as how one Sarah Ann Skidmore 
wished to be married. And I told you I'd advertised and offered a reward of 10L. You 
took me to Benjamin Skidmore. Now, are you sure as how he saw the dockyments?'
	Witness: 'Yes, quite sure: you showed him a document stating that you would 
have 60,000L. a year when you came of age.'
	Prisoner's mother (from the middle of the court): 'Robert, tell them thou's 
under age, and thy marriage can't stand good.'
	The prisoner gave a lordly wave of the hand, accompanied by a significant 
gesture, intimating to his maternal parent to leave the management of the case to his 
superior skill. Then, turning to the witness, he said, 'Are you sure that you yourself 
saw the will?'
	Witness: 'Yes.'
	Prisoner: 'No, it was not the will: it was only the certicket of my guardians to 
show who I was and what property was coming to me.'
	Here Mr Granger, the counsel for the prosecution, drew forth the tin case, 
which was a pitman's candle-box bearing the following inscription, 'Robert Taylor, 
otherwise Lord Kenedy'. From this case the learned counsel drew the 'dockyments'. 
The 'will' was rich alike in its bequests and its odours. It was a foul and filthy affair to 
look upon and to approach. Disregarding the usual long and dry prefaces in which 
lawyers are accustomed to indulge, it rushed at once into the marrow of the subject. 
Mr Granger tickled the ears of the court with a line or two. Thus:
	'I give and bequeath to Robert Taylor, son of Elizabeth Taylor, single woman, 
1,015,000L. three per cent Consols and no more.' The will proceeded to bestow upon 
him four coal-pits, a woollen factory, two or three ships, and sundry other trifles, as 
before mentioned.
	Mary Davidson, a neat, modest-looking girl, detailed the circumstances which 
led to her marriage with the prisoner. The latter, she said, was introduced to her at the 
house of her father, on the 4th of April, by Benjamin Fryer, her brother-in-law, who 
was a preacher among the Primitive Methodists. The latter said he had known the 
prisoner some time, and he recommended him as a pious young man whom he had 
brought to the house on purpose to marry her. The prisoner said he was the son of 
Lord Kenedy, and the moment he arrived in London with a wife he would have 700L., 
and 20L. a year till he was of age, when he would have 60,000L. per annum. He 
showed her several documents, one of which was a certificate that he was Lord 
Kenedy's son and would have 60,000L. a year when he came of age. He had 
previously seen her unmarried sister, whom he rejected in favour of her. They were 
married by licence the very next morning. They lived together three weeks, during 
which time the prisoner had made several attempts to get away; and many times, in 
the night, he had endeavoured to slide the ring off her finger. While they were 
together, he lived upon the money which he borrowed from her brother-in-law, to 
whom he owed 22L.
	The prisoner being again directed to ask the witness any questions he pleased 
said, placing his hands upon the bar and leaning forward in a counsellor-like attitude, 
'Now, Mary, are you certain that I had 22L. from your brother-in-law?' Witness: 'You 
had 12L. in money and you were to pay him a reward of 10L.'
	Prisoner: 'You say I had 12L. in money, Mary. Now there was 10s to be paid 
for the ring, 5s for fees, 3L. 10s. for the licence, and 8L. had in money, which makes 
12L 5s. So you see, Mary, you are wrong. You was also wrong when you said I told 
you I was to have 20L. per annum per year.' Witness: 'You said 20L.'
	Prisoner: 'No, Mary, I said 150L. per year per annum. And I wish to ax you if I 
didn't say, "Will you have me, money or no money?"' Witness: 'No, you did not.'
	Prisoner: 'Yes, Mary, I axed you, would you have me, money or no money, 
and you consented either way.'
	The prisoner spoke at considerable length in his defence, giving a rambling 
account of his various migrations from the north to 'Brummagem', from 'Brummagem' 
to the north, &c, with some amusing particulars of his marriages and courtships, 
whereby he wished to make it appear that all the young ladies he came near wanted to 
have him, and that he had been in every instance inveigled into wedlock for the sake 
of his possessions. His main defence was that he was under age, and that all his 
marriages were illegal; and his conclusion seemed to be that having contracted one 
illegal marriage, he thought himself perfectly justified in contracting a hundred.
	The prisoner's mother having expressed a wish to give evidence, and the 
prisoner having consented, she took her place in the witness-box, and deposed that she 
was now the wife of Michael Rickaby. The prisoner was not born in wedlock; she had 
him in a love affair. But she would not say who his father was. She had not come 
there for that. He was under age.
	The jury found the prisoner 'Guilty'.
	The prisoner was next indicted for having, in October 1839, married Mary 
Ann Wilson, daughter of George Wilson, a tobacconist of Newcastle. The marriage to 
Miss Skidmore was again proved by the certificate, which bore his lordship's mark. 
The prisoner, it appeared, had advertised for a wife in the Newcastle papers. In that 
town he appears to have attached himself to the Wesleyan Methodists. By his 
professions of religion and his teetotal pledges, he obtained a high character for 
morality and sanctity. Miss Wilson said she first saw the prisoner in October at a 
Methodist chapel in Newcastle. On the same day she met him at a class meeting. On 
the 16th of October she was introduced to him by a friend, when he promised to call 
upon her at three o'clock that afternoon. He did so, and as soon as he sat down, he 
pulled out a tin case which was marked 'Robert Taylor, otherwise Lord Kenedy'. He 
said he was entitled to 60,000L. a year and other hereditaments. The following day he 
made her an offer of marriage and she accepted him. He said if he could get the loan 
of some money, they would be married the next morning. Her father lent him 4L., a 
licence was bought, and they were married the day but one after she had accepted him 
and three days after her introduction to him. Eighteen days after this he deserted her, 
and she heard no more of him till he was in custody.
	The jury returned a verdict of 'Guilty'.
	The court having spent some time in deliberation, The chairman said: 'You 
have for some time been going about the country in a most unprincipled way, 
marrying weak and unsuspecting girls and bringing misery upon them and their 
friends. We have seriously considered whether it is not imperative upon us to visit you 
with the severest penalty that the law allows. We have determined, however, to stop 
short of this; but you must be punished with great severity for your wicked con duct. 
For the first offence of which you have been convicted, you are sentenced to be 
imprisoned one year to hard labour, and for the second, to be imprisoned eighteen 
months to hard labour, making altogether two years and a half.'
	Prisoner: 'Gentlemen, when I come out again, will any of my wives have a 
claim upon me?'
	The court declined to answer the question, and he then requested that his 
'dockyments' might be restored to him.
	The court thought it better to make no order: they might be placed in the hands 
of the governor of the jail.
	The mother of the prisoner, on quitting the court, finding herself an object of 
some attraction, became somewhat communicative on her family history. Among 
other things, she stated that her son was one of General Evans's 'Legion', and that she 
had sent a letter into Spain, which had the effect of procuring his return to England. 
She had come from Workington, in Cumberland, a distance of one hundred and 
fifteen miles, to attend the trial, for 'her son was her son', and she could not rest 
without coming. One thing she would not allow curiosity to penetrate–and that was, 
the mystery which hung over the prisoner's birth. She had 'kept the secret' nineteen 
years and was not going to reveal it in the twentieth. All that she would say was, that 
'she had him to a real gentleman'. 


FRANCOIS BENJAMIN COURVOISIER  
Executed, 6th of July, 1840, for murdering Lord William Russell while 
sleeping in his House in Norfolk Street, Park Lane

	ON the morning of Wednesday, the 6th of May, 1840, Lord William Russell, 
an aged member of the illustrious house of Bedford, was discovered to have been 
murdered in his bed, at his house, No.14 Norfolk Street, Park Lane. The deceased was 
the posthumous child of Francis, Marquis of Tavistock, eldest son of the fourth Duke 
of Bedford, by Lady Elizabeth Keppel, daughter of the second Earl of Albemarle. He 
was the third and youngest brother of the two late Dukes of Bedford, and uncle of the 
existing duke, who was the seventh of the family who had succeeded to the title. He 
was uncle also to the noble and highly talented Lord John Russell, who at the time of 
this most melancholy catastrophe held the office of Secretary of State for Colonial 
Affairs. By his marriage with Lady Charlotte Villiers, eldest daughter of the fourth 
Earl of Jersey, his lordship had seven children, several of whom were still alive and 
were married into other noble families; but at the time of his death he was a widower, 
his wife having died in the year 1806. His lordship was born in August, 1767, and was 
consequently in the seventy-third year of his age.
	Lord William Russell resided, attended only by his servants, at the house in 
Norfolk Street, Park Lane. His household consisted of two female servants–a 
housemaid, Sarah Mancer, and a cook, Mary Hannell–his valet, Francois Benjamin 
Courvoisier, and a coachman and groom, all of whom lived in the house, with the 
exception of the two latter individuals. The house was small, and consisted of only 
two rooms on a floor. On the basement storey were the kitchen and the usual offices, 
and a room used by Courvoisier as a pantry. On the ground floor were two parlours, 
used as dining-rooms; on the first floor were the drawing-room and library; on the 
second floor were the bedroom and dressing-room of his lordship; and in the story 
above were the sleeping apartments of the servants. His lordship was a member of 
Brooks's Club, in St James's Street, and usually spent a considerable portion of the 
day there; but he generally dined at home, and then, having passed several hours in 
reading, commonly retired to rest at about twelve o'clock. The valet had been in his 
lordship's service for a period of only five weeks; and in the course of that time had 
been heard by his fellow-servants to express himself in terms of dislike to his master, 
whom he described as testy and dissatisfied, and to declare that if he only had his 
money he should soon return to Switzerland, of which country he was a native.
	On the 5th of May his lordship rose at nine o'clock, and breakfasted at the 
usual hour; and at about noon he went out to go to Brooks's, in accordance with his 
usual habit. Before he quitted the house, however, he called his valet, and gave him 
several messages to deliver, amongst which was one to the coachman to prepare his 
carriage and be in readiness to take him home from his club at five o'clock. Upon 
Courvoisier going into the kitchen after this, he declared his fears that he should 
forget some of his errands; and when he recounted them he omitted that to the 
coachman. At half-past five his lordship returned home to dinner in a cab, and showed 
some dissatisfaction at the neglect of his servant; but it does not appear that he 
exhibited any such anger as could well excite a feeling of hatred or ill-will. Dinner 
was served at about seven o clock; coffee was subsequently handed to his lordship, 
and at about nine o'clock he retired to his library. At this time the three house-servants 
only were at home. Some other persons had called in the course of the day, but they 
had all left; and now Courvoisier, Sarah Mancer and Mary Hannell only were in the 
house, Hannell had been out, but upon her return Courvoisier admitted her, and it was 
observed that he locked and chained the street door after her entrance. Supper was, at 
about ten o'clock, prepared in the kitchen, and some beer was fetched by Courvoisier; 
but he quitted the house and returned by way of the area, and the gate and kitchen 
door were fastened by Hannell upon his readmission. The means of access to the 
house from the street, therefore, were closed, and the only entrance from the back, on 
the basement storey, was through the pantry.
	At about half-past ten the women-servants went to bed leaving Courvoisier to 
attend upon his master, and it was not until half-past twelve o'clock that his lordship 
rang his bell for him to assist him in retiring to his apartment.
	On the following morning, at about half-past six o'clock, Sarah Mancer, the 
housemaid, rose from her bed, and, having dressed herself, quitted her bedroom. As 
she passed the door of the valet's room she knocked, in order to awake him, and then 
proceeded downstairs. Upon reaching the lower floors of the house she found 
everything in such a state of confusion as to excite a suspicion in her mind that thieves 
had entered the house with a view to the commission of a robbery. She hurried 
through the drawing-room, the parlour and the passage on the ground floor, and there 
she found the furniture strewed about, the drawers and boxes open, and a bundle lying 
on the ground, as if ready packed up to be carried off, while the street door had been 
unfastened, and was only upon the latch. A momentary examination of these matters 
was sufficient to excite alarm in her mind, and, hurrying upstairs again, she repaired 
to the cook to inform her of what she had seen, by whose directions she at once 
proceeded to the apartment of the valet. Ten minutes had scarcely elapsed since she 
had previously knocked at his door, and half-an-hour was ordinarily occupied by him 
in dressing, but, to her surprise, she now found him dressed and ready to descend. 
Hastily she informed him of what she had witnessed below, and he accompanied her 
downstairs. Upon his seeing the state in which the lower part of the house appeared to 
be, he exclaimed "Oh God! somebody has robbed us." Mancer now suggested the 
propriety of their ascertaining whether anything had occurred to his lordship, and they 
went together to his bedroom.
	Immediately upon their entrance Courvoisier proceeded to the window to open 
the shutters, but Mancer went to the bedside, and saw the pillow saturated with blood, 
and his lordship lying in bed, dead, with his throat cut. The woman screamed and ran 
out of the room, then rushed from the house and obtained the aid of some neighbours 
and of the police, by whom a surgeon was called in. Upon the entrance of these 
persons, Courvoisier, whose conduct throughout the whole transaction had been of the 
most singular description, was found dreadfully agitated, leaning on the bed where the 
body of his master lay; and although questions were asked him he made no answer, 
and took no part in the proceedings which succeeded. In a few minutes he appeared to 
recover, and at his suggestion an intimation of the occurrence was conveyed to the son 
of the deceased nobleman, who resided in Belgrave Square. When Courvoisier went 
downstairs he immediately took Sarah Mancer into his pantry, pointed to some marks 
of violence which were perceptible upon the door, which was open, and remarked: "It 
was here they entered."
	The police now took possession of the house, and a minute examination of the 
premises was made, the result of which was a firm conviction in their minds that the 
murder had been perpetrated by an inmate of the house, and that a simulated robbery 
had been got up. A parcel was found to contain many articles of his lordship's 
property. A cloth cloak, which had been hanging up in the hall, was found rolled up, 
and within it were his lordship's gold operaglass, his gold toothpick, a silver sugar-
dredger, a pair of spectacles, a caddy-spoon, and a thimble belonging to the cook; but 
it was remarked that the latter articles were of a nature which a thief would rather 
have put into his pocket than have packed up in so large a parcel; and although the 
drawers of the sideboard in the parlour and of the writingdesk in the drawing-room 
were pulled open, nothing was found to have been extracted. In his lordship's 
bedroom a state of things presented itself which tended to confirm the suspicions of 
the police, and to supply a motive for the crime. His lordship had been in possession 
of a case containing ivory rouleau boxes, which were usually employed to hold gold 
coin. The boxes which belonged to his lordship would hold about five hundred 
sovereigns, and it had been remarked by Courvoisier that although he was entrusted 
with the keys of his master's drawers and trunks, his lordship would never permit him 
to go to this case. Upon examination by the police the rouleau case was found to have 
been opened, and the rouleaux having been searched, fruitlessly, for money, they had 
been placed on one side. The jewel-box and the note-case of the deceased had also 
been opened, and while from the former several articles of small value had been 
taken, from the latter a ten-pound note, known to have been in the possession of his 
lordship, had been carried off. A purse which contained gold had also disappeared. 
These circumstances induced a strong suspicion against Courvoisier, and his boxes 
were searched, but nothing was discovered which tended to fix upon him the guilt of 
the crime; but it was nevertheless thought advisable that he should remain under 
surveillance.
	On Friday, the 8th of May, a police officer examined the floor, the skirting-
board and the sink, and behind the skirting-board he found five gold rings, the 
property of his lordship. In the same place were also found five pieces of gold coin 
and a piece of wax. Behind another part of the skirting-board was found a Waterloo 
medal, which was known to have been in the possession of his lordship, with a ribbon 
attached to it; and there was also found the ten-pound note which has been mentioned 
before. The fact of the discovery of this note was a most important feature in the case. 
If it had been removed from the note-case, in which it had been placed, by any 
ordinary thief, it would undoubtedly have been carried off by him. Found as it was, 
however, concealed behind the skirting-board of this pantry, it was taken as almost 
conclusive of the guilt of the valet, because no hand but his could have placed it in 
that position; for it was proved that, from the moment of the discovery of the murder, 
he was placed under surveillance, and could not, therefore, have conveyed away 
anything from the house. A further search was subsequently made, and a split gold 
ring, on which his lordship had kept his keys, and which had been attached to his 
watch by a ribbon, was found; and then, on the evening of the next day, a locket was 
taken from Courvoisier's pocket; it contained a small portion of the hair of the 
nobleman's deceased lady. A short time before his murder he had missed this relic, to 
which he attached great value. Upon this the police thought fit to take Courvoisier into 
custody, and, after he had been taken off, still further discoveries were made. On the 
11th of May a chased gold key was discovered; and on Wednesday, the 13th, it was 
determined to examine the sink in the pantry. A part of the sink was covered with 
lead, and when that portion had been removed in the course of the investigation, it 
occurred to the police officer that there was something extraordinary in the 
appearance of the lead. He turned it up, and there he found the watch which had been 
placed at the noble lord's bed-head on the night of the murder, but which, the next 
morning, was discovered to have been removed.
	These were the material facts adduced in evidence against Courvoisier upon 
his various examinations before the magistrates; but strong as were the suspicions 
excited against him, it was felt that there was still good reason to believe that he 
would escape conviction. An experienced attorney, Mr Flower, was engaged to 
conduct his defence, and so strong a feeling had been excited in his behalf that a 
liberal subscription was raised among the foreign servants in London to defray the 
expenses of employing the necessary counsel to appear for him at his trial. Mr Hobler, 
an attorney, was engaged on behalf of the prosecution; and at length, on Thursday, the 
18th of June, the trial of the prisoner came on at the Central Criminal Court, before 
Lord Chief Justice Tindal and Mr Baron Parke.
	The court was then crowded, and amongst the noble and distinguished 
individuals present were the Duke of Sussex, the Countess of Charleville, Lady 
Burghersh, Lady Sondes, Lady A. Lennox, Lady Granville Somerset, Lady Julia 
Lockwood, Lady Bentinck; the Earls of Sheffield, Mansfield, Cavan, Clarendon, 
Lucan and Louth; Lords Rivers, Gardner and A. Lennox; M. Dedel, the Dutch 
ambassador; Marshal Saldanha, the Portuguese ambassador-extraordinary; Sir Gilbert 
Heathcote, Sir Stratford Canning, Sir W. Montagu, Colonel Fox, Lord Frederick 
Gordon, Hon. Mr Villiers, etc. As a proof that every part of the court was brought into 
requisition it may be mentioned that the prisoners' dock was filled with chairs, every 
one of which was occupied.
	Mr Adolphus, Mr Bodkin and Mr Chambers appeared for the prosecution. The 
prisoner was defended by Mr C. Phillips and Mr Clarkson.
	The prisoner, who was an alien, elected to be tried by a jury of Englishmen; 
and when the indictment was read he pleaded not guilty.
	Evidence in proof of the circumstances which we have detailed was then 
produced, and the first day's proceedings had closed when new and important 
testimony, affording conclusive proof of the guilt of the prisoner, was discovered.
	In the course of inquiries which had been made subsequent to the murder, 
some articles of plate were found to have been removed from the house of his 
lordship; but, after the minute examination of the house which took place, there was 
good reason to believe that this portion of the transaction had occurred long before, 
and not after, the murder. All the efforts of the police to discover this stolen property 
had proved ineffectual; and, although large rewards had been offered for its 
production, it was not until the evening of the first day's trial that it was brought 
forward. An intimation was then conveyed to Mr Hobler of the fact of its being in the 
possession of Madame Piolaine, the keeper of a French hotel in Leicester Place, 
Leicester Square; and when it was inspected by persons who were competent to speak 
to its identity, they at once most positively proved that it was the same which had 
been formerly in the possession of his lordship. The circumstance of this most 
extraordinary discovery was directly notified to the prisoner's attorney; and when 
Courvoisier was by him consulted as to the truth of the allegations made, he at once 
admitted his guilt.
	At this stage of the proceedings it was felt that such a confession placed the 
advocates who had been employed on his behalf in a condition of the greatest 
difficulty. For them to have thrown up their briefs would have been at once to admit 
the uselessness of any efforts to save their client from an ignominious death–a duty to 
the performance of which they had pledged themselves; and it was therefore 
determined that they should continue their defence of the prisoner, although the line 
of conduct which it became proper to pursue was necessarily much altered by the 
discovery which had been made to them. The instructions which they had originally 
received went to the extent of calling upon them to endeavour to procure the 
implication of the female servants of his lordship, and of the police, who were to be 
charged as their companions and associates in crime in the murder of Lord Russell, 
and in a conspiracy to secure the conviction and execution of the valet; but although 
the former portion of this defence was of course deemed fit to be withdrawn, a 
considerable degree of abuse was heaped upon the police by Mr C. Phillips in his 
speech for the defence of the prisoner, in consequence of some improper conduct of 
which, he alleged, they had been guilty, tending to prejudice his case, and even going 
to the length of fabricating evidence to excite suspicion in the minds of the jury 
against him.
	Mr C. Phillips addressed the jury at very great length on the part of the 
prisoner; he contended with great talent that the evidence was that of suspicion only. 
Lord Chief Justice Tindal having summed up, a verdict of guilty was returned, and the 
learned judge passed upon the prisoner the sentence of death.
	On the following day the wretched man made a confession, in which he said:
	"His lordship was very cross with me and told me I must quit his service. As I 
was coming upstairs from the kitchen I thought it was all up with me; my character 
was gone, and I thought it was the only way I could cover my faults by murdering 
him. This was the first moment of any idea of the sort entering my head. I went into 
the dining-room and took a knife from the sideboard. I do not remember whether it 
was a carving-knife or not. I then went upstairs, I opened his bedroom door and heard 
him snoring in his sleep; there was a rushlight in his room burning at this time. I went 
near the bed by the side of the window, and then I murdered him. He just moved his 
arm a little; he never spoke a word."
	The execution was carried out at Newgate, on the 6th of July, 1840.


EDWARD OXFORD  
Tried on 9th of July, 1840, for High Treason, in shooting at Queen Victoria 
while riding along Constitution Hill with Prince Albert, and found insane

  
Oxford Shooting at Queen Victoria
	THE trial of Edward Oxford took place at the Central Criminal Court, on 
Thursday, the 9th of July, 1840, before Lord Denman, Mr Baron Alderson and Mr 
Justice Patteson.
	The indictment was in the following terms:--
	"Central Criminal Court, to wit.-- The jurors for our lady the Queen, upon 
their oath present, that Edward Oxford, late of Westminster, in the county of 
Middlesex, labourer, being a subject of our lady the Queen, heretofore, to wit, on the 
10th of June, in the year of our Lord 1840, within the jurisdiction of the said court, as 
a false traitor to our lady the Queen, maliciously and traitorously, with force and arms, 
etc., did compass, imagine, and intend to bring and put our said lady the Queen to 
death. And to fulfil, perfect, and bring to effect his most evil and wicked treason, and 
treasonable compassing and imagination aforesaid, he the said Edward Oxford, as 
such false traitor as aforesaid, to wit, on the said 10th day of June, in the year of our 
Lord 1840, aforesaid, and within the jurisdiction of the said court, with force and 
arms, maliciously and traitorously did shoot off and discharge a certain pistol, the 
same then and there being loaded with gunpowder and a certain bullet, and which 
pistol he the said Edward Oxford then and there had and held in one of his hands at 
the person of our said lady the Queen, with intent thereby and therewith maliciously 
and traitorously to shoot, assassinate, kill, and put to death our said lady the Queen. 
And further, to fulfil, perfect, and bring to effect his most evil and wicked treason and 
treasonable compassing and imagination aforesaid, he the said Edward Oxford, as 
such false traitor as aforesaid, afterwards, to wit, on the said 10th day of June, in the 
year of our Lord 1840, aforesaid, and within the jurisdiction of the said court, with 
force and arms, maliciously and traitorously did shoot off and discharge a certain 
other pistol, the same then and there being loaded with gunpowder and a certain 
bullet, and which pistol he, the said Edward Oxford, then and there had and held in 
one of his hands, at the person of our said lady the Queen, with intent thereby and 
therewith maliciously and traitorously to shoot, assassinate, kill, and put to death our 
said lady the Queen, and thereby then and there traitorously made a direct attempt 
against the life of our said lady the Queen, against the duty of the allegiance of him 
the said Edward Oxford, against the form of the statute in that case made and 
provided, and against the peace of our said lady the Queen, her crown, and dignity."
	To this indictment the prisoner pleaded not guilty.
	The prosecution was conducted by the Attorney-General, the Solicitor-
General, Sir F. Pollock, Mr Adolphus, Mr Wightman and Mr Gurney; and Mr Sidney 
Taylor and Mr Bodkin appeared for the defence. 
	The court was crowded to excess by persons of distinction during the two days 
occupied by the trial.
	The Attorney-General opened the case to the jury, and in the course of his 
address he said:
	"The prisoner at the bar is a young man, about eighteen or nineteen years of 
age. He was born, as I understand, at Birmingham. He came, when very young, to 
London, and was sent to school at Lambeth. He afterwards served in many public-
houses, in the capacity of what is called a barman. Gentlemen, it would appear that he 
formed and matured a plan to make an attempt on the life of the Sovereign. On the 4th 
of May, in the present year, when he was at his lodgings, he bought a pair of pistols 
from a person named Hayes, living in Blackfriars Road, for the sum of two pounds. 
He bought at the same time a powder-flask. It will appear by the evidence that he 
practised shooting in shooting-galleries. He was at a shooting-gallery in Leicester 
Square, at a gallery in the Strand, and at another at the west end of the town. On 
Wednesday, the 3rd of June, a week before the day laid in the indictment, he went into 
the shop of a person named Gray, with whom he had been at school, in Bridge Road, 
Lambeth, and bought half a hundred copper caps to be used for firing. He asked Gray 
at the same time where he could buy some bullets and threepennyworth of 
gunpowder. He was told where the bullets could be had, and Gray sold him some 
gunpowder. On the evening of the 9th of June he showed a loaded pistol; and when 
asked what he meant to do with it, he refused to tell, but said he had been firing at a 
target. I now come, gentlemen, to the day in question, the 10th of June.
	"You are probably aware that it is the custom of her Majesty Queen Victoria, 
since she has been united with Prince Albert, frequently to take an airing in the 
afternoon or evening in the parks without any military escort, and with the simplicity 
of private life. This custom was well known to all her loyal subjects, and indeed to the 
whole community. It will appear that on this day, Wednesday, about four o'clock, the 
prisoner went into the Park. He saw Prince Albert returning from Woolwich, and 
going to the Palace. The prisoner then went to Constitution Hill, and there remained, 
expecting the appearance of the Queen. About six o'clock the Queen, accompanied by 
her Royal Consort, left the Palace in a low open carriage, drawn by four horses, and 
with two outriders, who went before, but with no other attendants. Her Majesty was 
seated on the left side of the carriage, and Prince Albert on the right. The carriage was 
driven up Constitution Hill. About one hundred and twenty yards from the Palace–that 
is, about one-third of the distance between the Palace and the Triumphal Arch–there 
was the prisoner, Edward Oxford, watching their progress. He was on the right-hand 
side, near the iron railings which divide Constitution Hill from the Green Park. When 
he saw the carriage he turned round towards it; he drew a pistol from his breast, and 
then, as the carriage went on, discharged it. The providence of God averted the blow 
from her Majesty. The ball was heard to whiz by on the opposite side. In all 
probability her Majesty was quite unconscious at that moment that any attempt had 
been made upon her life. The carriage proceeded. The prisoner then looked back to 
see if anyone was near to perceive him; he drew another pistol from his breast, 
whether with his right hand or his left is uncertain, and aimed at her Majesty. It would 
appear that her Majesty saw him fire, because she stooped down. Again the 
providence of God interfered. The prisoner fired, the ball was heard to whiz on the 
other side–her Majesty escaped. The Queen immediately drove on, to allay the alarm 
which might be caused by news brought to her august parent with respect to an event 
so momentous. There was a considerable number of persons on the side of the Park 
between the road and the gardens of Buckingham Palace. Curiosity and loyalty had 
led many persons to that spot, in the expectation of her Majesty showing herself to her 
subjects. There was a man named Lowe, whom I shall call as a witness, who 
immediately rushed across, seized Oxford, and took the pistols from him. That person 
at first was believed to be the offender by the parties around, who said: 'You 
confounded rascal! how dare you shoot at our Queen? ' On which Oxford said: 'It was 
I.' He was immediately taken into custody, and taken to the station-house, where he 
voluntarily put the question: 'Is the Queen hurt?' and on being told the Queen was not 
hurt, he was asked whether there were not bullets in the pistols, and he admitted at 
once that there were bullets.
	"When he had been secured, and when it had been ascertained that his 
lodgings were, as he said, in West Place, West Square, a policeman was immediately 
dispatched to search them. The prisoner occupied a room on the first-pair back. The 
door of the room was open. The policeman found a box which undoubtedly belonged 
to the prisoner. That box was locked; but I shall show that he had in his pocket a key 
that fitted it, and that he acknowledged that it was his box, as were also the contents. 
The box was opened, and in it were found the following articles:–a sword and 
scabbard, two pistol-bags, some black crape, a powder-flask, three ounces of powder, 
a bullet-mould, five leaden bullets and some percussion caps marked, and which had 
been bought by the prisoner from Gray, his schoolfellow. There was also found a 
pocket-book containing some papers. The box and its contents were brought to the 
station-house and shown to the prisoner, who stated that the papers belonged to him, 
and that he had meant to destroy them in the morning before he went out. These 
papers I will now read. The first bears no date: it is headed 'Young England,' and the 
rules and regulations are eleven in number." The learned gentleman then read the 
following paper:-
YOUNG ENGLAND
Rules and Regulations
	I. That every member shall be provided with a brace of pistols, a sword, a rifle, 
and a dagger. The two latter to be kept at the committee-room. 
	2. That every member must, on entering, take the oath of allegiance to be true 
to the cause he has joined.
	3. That every member must, on entering the house, give a signal to the sentry.
	4. That every officer shall have a fictitious name. His right name and address 
to be kept with the secretary.
	5. That every member shall, when he is ordered to meet, be armed with a brace 
of pistols (loaded) and a sword to repel any attack; and also be provided with a black 
crape cap, to cover his face with his marks of distinction outside.
	6. That whenever any member wishes to introduce any new member, he must 
give satisfactory accounts of him to their superiors, and from thence to the council.
	7. Any member who can procure a hundred men shall be promoted to the rank 
of captain.
	8. Any member holding communications with any country agents must 
instantly forward the intelligence to the secretary.
	9. That whenever any member is ordered down the country or abroad, he must 
take various disguises with him (as the labourer, the mechanic, and the gentleman), all 
of which he can obtain at the committee-room.
	10. That any member wishing to absent himself for more than one month must 
obtain leave from the commander-in-chief.
	11. That no member will be allowed to speak during any debate, nor allowed 
to ask more than two questions. All the printed rules to be kept at the committee-
room.
LIST OF PRINCIPAL MEMBERS  
(Fictitious Names)
PRESIDENT  
Gowrie 
Justinian 
Aloman 
Coloman 
Kenneth 
Godfrey
COUNCIL 
Hanibal 
Ernest 
Augustin 
Ethelred 
Ferdinand 
Nicholas 
Gregory 
GENERALS 
Frederic 
Augustus 
Othoe 
Anthony
CAPTAINS  
Oxonian  
Mildon 
Amadeus  
Louis
LIEUTENANTS  
Hercules 
Neptune 
Mars 
Albert 
Marks of Distinction
Council–A large white cockade. President–A black bow. General–Three red bows. 
Captain–Two red bows. Lieutenant–One red bow.  
	A. W. SMITH, Secretary.
	"There were in the same pocket-book three letters, purporting to be orders 
addressed to the same secretary, Smith, to Oxford; the first was as follows: --
	YOUNG ENGLAND, May 16, 1839.  
	SIR,–Our commander-in-chief was very glad to find that you answered his 
questions in such a straightforward manner; you will be wanted to attend on the 21st 
of this month, as we expect one of the country agents in town on business of 
importance. Be sure and attend.  
	A. W. Smith, Secretary.  
	P.S.–You must not take any notice to the boy, nor ask him any questions. 
"Addressed–"Mr Oxford, at Mr Minton's, High Street, Marylebone."
	"The next letter ran thus:–-
	YOUNG ENGLAND, Nov. 14, 1839. 
	SIR,–I am very glad to hear that you improve so much in your speeches. Your 
speech the last time you were here was beautiful. There was another one introduced 
last night by Lieutenant Mars, a fine, tall, gentlemanly-looking fellow, and it is said 
that he is a military officer, but his name has not yet transpired. Soon after he was 
introduced we were alarmed by a violent knocking at the door; in an instant our faces 
were covered, we cocked our pistols, and with drawn swords stood waiting to receive 
the enemy. While one stood over the fire with the papers, another stood with lighted 
torch to fire the house. We then sent the old woman to open the door, and it proved to 
be some little boys who knocked at the door and ran away. 
	A. W. SMITH, Secretary. 
	You must attend on Wednesday next. 
	"Addressed–'Mr Oxford, at Mr Farr's, Hat and Feathers, Goswell Street.' 
	"The last was in the following terms:–-
	YOUNG ENGLAND, April 3, 1840 
	SIR,–You are requested to attend to-night, as there is an extraordinary meeting 
to be holden, in consequence of having received some communications of an 
important nature from Hanover. You must attend, and if your master will not give you 
leave, you must come in defiance of him.  
	A. W. SMITH, Secretary.  
	"Addressed–-'To Mr Oxford, at Mr Robinson's Hog-in-the-Pound, Oxford 
Street.' 
	"Under these circumstances, gentlemen, if the prisoner is accountable for his 
acts, will you say whether there is any reasonable doubt of his guilt? It appears to me 
that if the prisoner was at the time accountable for his actions, there can be no doubt 
of his guilt. I now come to the question whether the prisoner was accountable for his 
actions at the time when the offence was committed. And I will at once admit, under 
the law of England, that if he was then of unsound mind–if he was incapable of 
judging between right and wrong–if he was labouring under any delusion or insanity, 
so as not to be sensible of his crime, or conscious of the act which he committed–if at 
the time when that act was committed he was afflicted with insanity, he will be 
entitled to be acquitted on that ground, I have a duty to discharge to the Crown and to 
the public, and I must say that, so far as I have yet learned, there is no reason to 
believe that the prisoner at the time he committed this crime was in a state of mind 
which takes away his criminal responsibility for the deed."
	The evidence for the prosecution was then gone through in corroboration of 
the statements of the learned Attorney-General, and Mr Sidney Taylor addressed the 
jury for the defence. Having argued upon the facts of the case proved by the witnesses 
for the prosecution, upon which he contended, first, that it was quite consistent that 
the pistols were not fired at the Queen, but with a view only to excite alarm; and 
secondly, that the pistols might not have been loaded with ball, both of which were 
necessary elements of the crime; he proceeded, thirdly, to the equally important issue 
of insanity. It was not the first time, unhappily, that the life of the Sovereign of this 
country had been attempted to be taken away; but he rejoiced to say, for the sake of 
our national character, that in no one instance had such an act been done by a person 
possessing a sane mind.
	A vast body of evidence was then adduced with a view to supporting the 
defence of insanity which was set up. From it, it appeared that the grandfather of the 
prisoner was a person of colour, and that he was frequently, when intoxicated, guilty 
of acts of the wildest and most wanton description. Expressions were proved to have 
been occasionally used by him which indicated a mind bereft of reason, and he was 
stated to have suffered severely at one period of his life from a fever. With regard to 
the father of the prisoner, evidence of a similar tendency was adduced. His wife, the 
mother of the prisoner, was called, and she gave a dreadful detail of the injuries which 
he had inflicted upon her subsequently to her marriage with him, and of the brutal 
treatment to which he had subjected her. He had several times taken poison in her 
presence, and had otherwise been guilty of the most extraordinary and outrageous 
conduct. The prisoner, she proved, had been born in the year 1822, and throughout his 
life had exhibited symptoms of imbecility. He would frequently burst into tears, or 
into fits of laughing, without any assignable cause, and was in the habit of talking in a 
strain which exhibited a most anxious desire on his part to obtain celebrity in the 
world. He was always fond of the use of fire-arms, and frequently presented pistols at 
the head of his sister or his mother. Medical witnesses were also examined, who gave 
their decided opinion that the prisoner was in an unsound state of mind.
	Lord Denman summed up the evidence, and at the end of the second day's trial 
the jury returned a verdict acquitting the prisoner, upon the ground of insanity. He 
was ordered to be detained during her Majesty's pleasure, and was subsequently 
conveyed to Bedlam.


THE EARL OF CARDIGAN  
Tried on 16th of February, 1841, at the Bar of the House of Lords, for an 
Assault committed in a Duel

	ON Tuesday, the 16th of February, 1841, the Right Hon. the Earl of Cardigan 
was tried by his peers, at the bar of the House of Lords, for an assault with intent to 
murder, alleged to have been committed by him when fighting a duel with Mr Harvey 
Garnett Phipps Tuckett.
	The Earl of Cardigan, in the year 1840, held the rank of Lieutenant-Colonel of 
the 11th Regiment of Hussars, of which his Royal Highness Prince Albert had 
recently received a commission as Colonel. It had been the object of the Earl of 
Cardigan to advance the discipline and general conduct of his regiment to such a state 
as to entitle it to be esteemed in the light in which it was held–that of a favourite 
regiment. The Earl had been appointed to the regiment in the year 1838, while it was 
serving in India, but in the spring of the ensuing year, the usual period of service 
abroad having expired, the 11th Hussars were ordered home, and soon after received 
the title of "Prince Albert's Own." While stationed at Brighton, in the course of the 
year 1840, some differences arose between the noble Earl and the officers under his 
command, which procured for the former a considerable degree of notoriety, and 
placed his character as the commander of a regiment in an unenviable position. 
Complaints to the War Office were the result of these misunderstandings, and the 
subject became matter of discussion in the various newspapers of the day. Amongst 
those journals which took a prominent part in these debates was The Morning 
Chronicle, and in the columns of that paper a series of letters appeared under the 
signature of "An Old Soldier," which eventually proved to be the contributions of Mr 
Tuckett, formerly a captain under the command of the Earl of Cardigan. Many of 
these letters undoubtedly contained matter highly offensive personally to the Earl of 
Cardigan, and when the noble Earl discovered their author he called upon him to 
afford him that satisfaction usually deemed to be due from one gentleman to another 
under circumstances of insult or any other provocation. A meeting took place at 
Wimbledon Common, on the 12th of September, 1840, the respective combatants 
being attended by seconds, the result of which was that at the second shot Captain 
Tuckett was wounded. The whole affair was witnessed by some persons resident in 
the neighbourhood, and the parties were all taken into custody, and eventually bound 
over to appear to answer any charge which might be preferred against them at the 
ensuing sessions at the Central Criminal Court.
	A police constable was directed to institute a prosecution, and bills of 
indictment were laid before the grand jury against Captain Tuckett and Captain 
Wainewright, his second; and also against the Earl of Cardigan and Captain Douglas, 
who had attended him in the capacity of his friend. In the cases of the two first-named 
individuals the bill was ignored, but a true bill was returned against the Earl of 
Cardigan and Captain Douglas.
	The extent of jurisdiction of the judges at the Old Bailey prevented them from 
trying the Earl of Cardigan, whose alleged offence the noble Earl was entitled to have 
inquired of by his peers, and the investigation of the case against the parties indicted 
was therefore postponed from session to session until the sitting of Parliament, the 
Court declining to enter upon the case of Captain Douglas until that of the principal to 
the offence alleged against him had first been disposed of. Parliament assembled on 
the 16th of January, 1841, and then, so soon as the forms of the House of Lords would 
admit, the bill of indictment was removed by certiorari, in order to be disposed of by 
their Lordships. The customary preliminary forms having been complied with, on the 
day above named–namely, Tuesday, the 16th of February–the trial took place.
	The public had been made acquainted with the fact that the trial would not 
take place in Westminster Hall, and that the Painted Chamber, in which the Peers had 
met for parliamentary business since the destruction of the old House by fire, was 
under preparation for this solemn and imposing scene. The smallness of the 
apartment, and the general desire amongst the peeresses and the various members of 
the nobility and rank of the land to be present upon so important and interesting an 
occasion, rendered it necessary that very extensive alterations should be made to 
secure sufficient accommodation, and considerable ingenuity had been exercised in 
order to accomplish that object, every corner and nook from which a glimpse of the 
court could be snatched being provided with sittings. But the capacity of the building 
prevented the architect, with all his skill, from making the supply equal to the 
demand. The benches, galleries and floor were covered with crimson cloth, and the 
walls themselves with paper in which that colour was predominant, and the effect was 
to make the gorgeous robes of the peers and the splendid dresses of the peeresses 
stand out in dazzling relief.
	At a quarter before eleven o'clock the Lords' Speaker (Lord Denman), having 
robed in his private room, entered the House. A procession was formed in the usual 
manner, his Lordship being preceded by the Purse-bearer with the purse, the serjeant 
with the mace, the Black Rod carrying the Lord High Steward's staff, and Garter 
carrying his sceptre. 
	Garter and Black Rod having taken their places at the bar, the Lord Speaker 
proceeded to the woolsack, when, after he was seated, prayers were read by the 
Bishop of Lichfield.
	The clerk-assistant of Parliament then proceeded to call over the Peers, 
beginning with the junior baron.
	When this necessary ceremony was completed, the clerks of the Crown in 
Chancery and in the Queen's Bench jointly made three reverences, and the clerk of the 
Crown in Chancery, on his knee, delivered the commission to the Lord Speaker, who 
gave it to the clerk of the Crown in the Queen's Bench to read; then both clerks retired 
with like reverences to the table.
	The serjeant-at-arms then made proclamation, and the Lord Speaker informed 
the Peers that her Majesty's commission was about to be read, and directed that all 
persons should rise and be uncovered while the commission was being read.
	The commission appointing Lord Denman as Lord High Steward was then 
read, and Garter and Black Rod, having made their reverences, proceeded to the 
woolsack and took their places on the right of the Lord High Steward, and both 
holding the staff, presented it on their knees to his Grace.
	His Grace rose and, having made reverence to the throne, took his seat in the 
chair of state provided for him on the uppermost step but one of the throne. 
Proclamation was then made for silence; when the Queen's writ of certiorari to 
remove the indictment, with the return thereof, and the record of the indictment were 
read by the clerk of the Crown in the Queen's Bench. The Lord High Steward then 
directed the serjeant-at-arms to make proclamation for the yeoman usher to bring the 
prisoner to the bar.
	The Earl of Cardigan immediately entered the House and advanced to the bar, 
accompanied by the yeoman usher. He made three reverences, one to his Grace the 
Lord High Steward, and one to the peers on either side, who returned the salute. The 
ceremony of kneeling was dispensed with. The noble Earl, who was dressed in plain 
clothes, was then conducted within the bar, where he remained standing while the 
Lord High Steward acquainted him with the nature of the charge against him.
	The prisoner was arraigned in the usual form, for firing at Harvey Garnett 
Phipps Tuckett, on the 12th of September, with intent to kill and murder him. The 
second count charged him with firing at the said Harvey Garnett Phipps Tuckett with 
intent to maim and disable him; and the third count varied the charge–with intent to 
do him some grievous bodily harm.
	The clerk then asked: "How say you, James Thomas, Earl of Cardigan, are you 
guilty or not? "
	The Earl of Cardigan, in a firm voice, replied: "Not guilty, my Lords."
	THE CLERK: How will you be tried, my lord?
	THE EARL OF CARDIGAN: By my peers.
	The noble prisoner then took his seat on a stool within the bar, and his Grace 
the Lord High Steward removed to the table, preceded by Garter, Black Rod and the 
Pursebearer, as before. When his Grace was seated, Black Rod took his seat on a stool 
at a corner of the table, on his Grace's right hand, holding the staff, Garter on a stool 
on Black Rod's right, and the serjeant at the lower end of the table on the same side.
	Mr Waddington opened the pleadings; he stated the nature of the offence as set 
out in the indictment, and added that the noble prisoner had, for his trial, put himself 
upon their Lordships, his peers.
	The Attorney-General in a lengthy address explained the law and the facts of 
the case; and the evidence of various persons who had witnessed the transaction of the 
duel was then produced; but at the close of the case it was objected by Sir William 
Follett, on behalf of the Earl of Cardigan, that there was no evidence to show that the 
person against whom the shot was discharged was Mr Harvey Garnett Phipps Tuckett. 
The card of "Mr Harvey Tuckett" had been put in; but this might have been quite 
another person from the individual pointed to by the indictment.
	The Attorney-General was heard on the other side; but, after a short 
deliberation, the Lord High Steward announced that the evidence which fixed the 
identity of the individual was insufficient, The Peers thereupon declared the noble 
defendant not guilty.
	At the Central Criminal Court, on Wednesday, the 3rd of March, Captain 
Douglas was put upon his trial, before Mr Justice Williams, upon the indictment 
which had been found against him; but the jury, in the absence of positive evidence to 
identify Mr Tuckett, came to the same conclusion as that which had been arrived at by 
the House of Peers; and a verdict of acquittal was returned. 


WILLIAM STEVENSON  
Transported, 17th of March, 1841, for stealing a Bag of Gold from his 
Employers 

	THE charge preferred against William Stevenson, and of which he was found 
guilty, was that of stealing from his employers, Messrs Mercer & Co., of the 
Maidstone Bank, a bag containing five hundred pounds in gold. For this offence he 
was tried at the Maidstone Spring Assizes, on the 17th of March, 1841, before Lord 
Denman, when the following remarkable facts were proved in evidence.
	In the month of October, 1839, Mr Mercer wrote to his London agents, Messrs 
Masterman, the bankers, to remit to him fifteen hundred pounds in gold and five 
hundred pounds in silver, and that sum was accordingly placed in seven bags, one 
containing a thousand pounds in gold, another five hundred in gold, and five bags, 
each containing one hundred pounds in silver, and the whole were placed in a box, of 
which Messrs Masterman and Mercer had each a duplicate key, and the box was then 
committed to the care of Wallis, one of the Maidstone coachmen, to be conveyed to 
that place. The box was duly carried to Maidstone, and the prisoner, who acted as 
porter at Mr Mercer's bank, was sent to fetch it, and he brought the box to the bank 
about seven o'clock in the evening, and it was taken from him by Mr Mercer, jun., 
who unlocked it and took out the bags of coin, and, without examining them, placed 
them in the strong chest; but he observed that at this time there were only six bags–
namely, one large one, which he supposed contained the fifteen hundred pounds in 
gold, and the five bags of silver. The next morning, when the money was examined, it 
was found to be five hundred pounds short of the proper quantity of gold; and on 
communication being made to Messrs Masterman, the loss of the second bag of gold 
was discovered.
	No clue whatever at this time could be obtained as to the perpetrator of the 
robbery, and no suspicion was entertained of the prisoner, for he was retained in the 
prosecutors' service until the following month of January, when, for some act of 
misconduct, he was dismissed. Shortly after this the prisoner set up in business in the 
town as a grocer, but some other circumstances which came to the knowledge of the 
prosecutors induced a suspicion that he was the thief, and a search warrant was 
obtained and placed in the hands of Faucett, the superintendent of the Maidstone 
police, who proceeded to the prisoner's house, and, upon searching it, found a number 
of watches and time-pieces. When the prisoner was told by the officer what the nature 
of the charge was against him, he denied all knowledge of the robbery and told him he 
might search where he pleased. The officer then asked what money they had in the 
house, and about seven pounds in gold and silver were produced by the prisoner's 
wife. He asked whether they had not any more money, and the prisoner's wife went up 
to the bedroom with him and produced from between the bed and the mattress a bag 
containing forty-five pounds in sovereigns and half-sovereigns. He also found an IOU 
for ten pounds, signed by a person named Merston, who proved that the prisoner had 
lent him ten sovereigns upon it, and that he was paying him interest.
	It was also proved that before the robbery the prisoner had been in receipt of 
only a pound a week, and that he was in very poor circumstances; and that after he 
was discharged he had purchased two houses in Maidstone, for which he had paid 
three hundred and fifty pounds, and the payment was wholly in sovereigns and half-
sovereigns. Further, it was shown that the prisoner had taken the grocer's shop and 
had paid a considerable sum for goodwill and stock-in-trade without having any 
means to do so, except, as was suggested, by that of having committed the robbery.
	Witnesses were called for the defence for the purpose of showing that at the 
various elections in the Borough sums of money had been given to the prisoner, and it 
was elicited that a vote was always worth something, and one witness went so far as 
to say that he considered his vote worth fifteen pounds.
	Several other witnesses were examined; but although it was admitted that 
money had been given to the prisoner, in sums of eight pounds and ten pounds at 
different times, the witnesses said the money had been given only out of charity, and 
the evidence did not in the slightest degree show a probability that the prisoner could 
be lawfully in the possession of the money he had expended.
	The jury returned a verdict of guilty, and his Lordship then ordered the 
prisoner to be transported for fourteen years.


JAMES INGLETT  
Convicted, at the Age of Ninety-four, of the Manslaughter of a Woman, by 
carelessly administering Arsenic to her

	THIS case excited considerable interest, as well on account of the peculiar 
circumstances by which it was surrounded as of the great age and high respectability 
of character of the accused. Inglett, at the time of his trial, had attained the age of 
ninety-four years. He was indicted at the Huntingdon Assizes, on the 19th of March, 
1841, for feloniously killing and slaying one Elizabeth Harlett, by administering to 
her a quantity of arsenic.
	The venerable person who stood charged with this offence had for many years 
carried on the business of farmer and "cow-leech," and in the latter character was in 
the habit of administering medicines to various kinds of cattle. His great age and long 
acquaintance with the healing art had caused him to be regarded with much respect 
among the simple people of his neighbourhood, where his character had been 
unexceptionable. The deceased, who lived in the village of Houghton, near 
Huntingdon, took ill, during the year 1840, and the parish apothecary used all his art 
to restore her to health, but in vain. About Christmas the prisoner was called in to see 
her, and he immediately administered to her a dose of liquid medicine, which made 
her very sick, and caused her great suffering; but she got better after taking it. On the 
morning of Monday, the 11th of January, the prisoner called to see her. As soon as he 
had left the house, one of her sisters saw standing on the mantelpiece of the room in 
which the deceased was sitting a cup full of a similar medicine to that which he had 
before administered to her, and which had made her so sick and ill. When, three or 
four hours afterwards, this sister went again into the room, she found the deceased 
very unwell, and the cup standing empty on the table. The deceased got much worse 
towards night, and from that time till her death she was constantly sick, and suffered 
excruciating pain, with almost intolerable thirst. Early on Wednesday morning, the 
13th of January, having taken some opium pills, she fell into a quiet doze, and soon 
afterwards death put an end to her sufferings. No suspicion was then entertained of 
her having died any other than a natural death, and in due time she was buried. When 
she had been ten days in the earth, however, various rumours got abroad respecting 
the cause of her death; and the county coroner directed the body to be exhumed, and a 
jury to be summoned. Two surgeons examined the disinterred body and found it in a 
generally healthy state, the organs being sound and free from disease, but the stomach 
and bowels were much inflamed; and the jury returned a verdict that she had died 
from the incautious and improper administration by the prisoner of "a certain noxious, 
inflammatory and dangerous thing, to the jurors unknown." The old man was 
therefore committed to prison for manslaughter.
	At the time of the inquest the nature of the "thing" to which the verdict 
referred in terms so vague had not been ascertained; but the contents of the stomach of 
the deceased were preserved, and afterwards subjected to the usual tests of the 
presence of arsenic, which left no doubt that the deceased had taken that dreadful 
poison shortly before her death. It appeared, by the evidence of a chemist's shopman, 
that three or four months previously the prisoner had bought of him an ounce of 
arsenic; but as he was in the habit of using that drug in the manufacture of his cattle 
ointments the purchase excited no suspicion at the time. In order to show that it was 
the prisoner by whom or by whose direction the poison was administered, it was 
proved that on the morning of the death of the deceased he called at the house in 
which she had breathed her last, and a conversation ensued between the relatives of 
the unfortunate woman and himself, in which he almost in terms admitted that the fact 
was so. After some introductory matters a sister of the deceased told him it was his 
"stuff" that had killed her; to which he replied that could not be, for he had given her 
only half-a-grain, whereas he had given his own son, and others, a grain and more, 
without any harm. The sister rejoined: "Then it was too strong for her stomach"; to 
which the prisoner answered: "Like enough, poor thing!-for her stomach was almost 
gone." This, and his observation on the day of her funeral that he would not for twenty 
pounds have given her anything if he had known it, for he'd rather have done her good 
than harm, constituted the evidence on which the prosecution relied for proof of his 
having been the hand which administered, or the advice which directed, the arsenic. 
The family of the deceased spoke very favourably of his kindness and attention to her 
in her illness.
	Lord Chief Justice Tindal told the jury that they would have first to satisfy 
themselves whether, in point of fact, the deceased had died from the taking of arsenic, 
and whether the prisoner had administered it. If they were satisfied of those two facts, 
they would then have to say whether the prisoner had conducted himself so rashly and 
with such gross negligence as made him liable to an indictment for manslaughter. The 
question was whether, in reference to the nature of the remedy he applied, he acted 
with a due degree of care and caution, or whether he acted with rashness and gross 
negligence. If they were of opinion that he acted with gross negligence, and want of 
due and proper caution, he was in point of law guilty of the crime with which he was 
charged upon this indictment.
	The jury consulted together for some time, and then returned a verdict of 
guilty.
	The Lord Chief Justice in passing sentence observed that the ends of justice 
would be answered by the responsibility to which the prisoner had subjected himself 
being generally known. If any person presumed to administer medically a deadly 
poison, being grossly ignorant of its character and effects, or with rash negligence in 
its use, and death ensued, he would be liable to be convicted of the offence of 
manslaughter. Such a person might have no evil intention, and indeed might be 
actuated by a desire to alleviate the sufferings of a fellow-creature, but it behoved him 
to proceed with caution and care. At the time of life at which the prisoner had arrived 
it would be useless cruelty to inflict upon him a severe punishment; and as he had 
been already in jail six weeks, the Court would sentence him to a further 
imprisonment of fourteen days only.
	The old man, who appeared to possess his mental and physical powers almost 
unimpaired, paid great attention to the case as it proceeded. His respectful demeanour, 
silvery hair and mild countenance secured for him considerable compassion in court, 
which was strongly increased by the sorrow depicted on his countenance for the deed 
of which he had been so unwittingly guilty.


HUFFEY WHITE AND RICHARD KENDALL  
Executed at Northampton, for Robbing the Leeds Mail

	THE trial of these two notorious characters, and their accomplice, lasted 
upwards of fourteen hours, and the guilt of the two former was established by nearly 
40 witnesses. In the first instance, the arrival of the mail at Kettering, on Monday, the 
26th of October, at the usual hour, with the different bags all safe, which were 
forwarded from thence with the Kettering and other bye bags, were satisfactorily 
proved; as likewise the whole being safe at Burton-Latimer, three miles from 
Kettering, when the guard, after travelling about three quarters of a mile from Burton, 
quitted his seat, and went over the roof of the coach, and rode on the box with the 
coachman till they approached near to Higham-Ferrers, when he resumed his seat 
behind the coach. Having arrived at Higham, the guard, on going to unlock the mail-
box, dicovered that the lock had been broken off, and on opening the lid, that the bags 
had been taken away. At the different post towns the rest of the way to London, he 
gave information of the robbery; and, on his making the circumstance known at the 
general post-office, the postmasters general immediately dispatched several Bow-
street officers to endeavour to ascertain how and by whom the robbery had been 
committed. On Lavender's arrival in the country, he learned that Kendall, a known 
suspicious character, lived at Wellinghorough, in quest of whom he immediately 
went, and caused him to be apprehended; when, on inquiry, it appeared, that Kendall, 
with another man, had travelled in a chaise-car from Keyston toll-gate, Hants, through 
Thrapston to Wellingborough, in the afternoon previously to the robbery, and that 
they would arrive at the point where the road from Thrapston to Wellingborough 
crosses the London-road, near the obelisk, in the parish of Finedon, before the mail-
coach would pass, and near to which place it was supposed the robbery was 
committed, from the circumstance of four small bye bags being found on the road 
unopened.
	On farther investigation respecting Kendall's companion, there appeared very 
strong reasons to suspect that White was the party, as it was ascertained that he had 
occasionally been residing at Reyston-gate, but was known by the name of Wallis. In 
consequence of these circumstances, rewards were immediately offered for his 
apprehension, which was at length effected. From the evidence adduced it was dearly 
proved, that White was the companion of Kendall, and that they had been seen 
together several times; notwithstanding Kendall, in his examination before the 
magistrates, denied having any knowledge of the person who rode with him in his 
chaise-car on the day of the robbery, and stated that it was a person he accidentally 
met with and took up on the road. It further appeared in evidence, that about half an 
hour after the mail passed the obelisk at Finedon, two men were observed in a cart or 
gig travelling towards Wellingborough, and that one of them said to the other, "It's a 
complete job; d--n you, drive on;" and that shortly afterwards, one man in a car or gig 
went through the turnpike-gate between Finedon and Wellingborough, who before he 
arrived at the gate was heard speaking to another person, who passed the gate on foot; 
the turnpike gate-keeper stated that no other cart or gig had gone through the gate that 
night.
	It was then proved that White and Kendall were seen together at 
Wellingborough the next morning (Tuesday the 27th), from whence the former took a 
post-chaise at Rythorne, which is near Keystone-gate, then kept by Mary Howes, who 
went by the name of Taylor; but at a short distance before he arrived there, be ordered 
the post-boy to set him down in the road, and he walked towards the gate. It appeared 
that after his arrival at the toll-gate, Mary Howes requested a person who was going 
through the gate, to order a chaise and pair from the George Inn, at Thrapston, to be 
sent to the gate to go to Huntingdon. The chaise arrived in a short time, in which 
White and Howes immediately set off for Huntingdon, which they reached about eight 
o'clock on Tuesday evening, and then walked together to Godmanchester; there they 
endeavoured to hire a horse and gig to convey them to Kisby's Hut, a public house 
about three miles and a quarter from Caxton, in Cambridgeshire; not being able to 
procure a gig, they went on the outside the Edinburgh mail to the Hut, where they 
stopped a short time, and were conveyed from thence to Caxton, by the landlord in his 
taxed cart. From Caxton they travelled the direct road to London in post-chaises; 
arriving in Bread-street, Cheapside, about eight o'clock on Wednesday morning, and 
were set down in the street. It appeared, that in a short time after, White, accompanied 
by a woman, went to the Bull's Head Tavern, in Bread-street, where the latter stopped 
till Thursday evening, and the former till the Saturday following. During White's stay 
at the Tavern, and previously to the woman's departure, one Samuel Richardson, a 
noted character, who has been connected with the desperate gang of public 
depredators lately apprehended, swore, that White had shewn to him a considerable 
number of notes and bills, which he told him had been taken from the Leeds mail, and 
particularly a bill of exchange for £200 which became due on the following day, 
(Friday, the 9th) and offered to sell them to Richardson, who declined purchasing 
them, saying that they would not suit him. The above £200 bill was identified as 
having been stolen from the mail the night it was robbed.
	After the production of a variety of other testimony, all agreeing in the most 
satisfactory manner to substantiate the guilt of White and Kendall, the jury, on 
receiving from the learned judge (Mr Baron Thompson) a charge distinguished for its 
impartiality, perspicuity, and humanity, found the prisoners, White and Kendall 
guilty, and acquitted Howes, upon a point of law, under direction of the judge, who 
immediately after, passed the awful sentence of death upon the two former.
	White was engaged, with several others, a short time before the robbery for 
which he was executed, in breaking open the Kettering bank, and such was the 
dexterity with which the robbers conducted the business, that the proprietors, Messrs. 
Keep and Gotch, were entirely ignorant of any circumstance of that kind having 
occurred, till a considerable time afterwards, when they were made acquainted with it 
by the accomplice, who turned king's evidence upon Huffey's trial. The bankers 
conceiving it impossible that such an affair could have transpired without their 
knowledge, and without exciting the least suspicion, at first treated it very lightly; nor 
could they be brought to rely upon the truth of the information, until they were told 
the number of the page on which their London banking account was kept–the amount 
of the balance as it then stood, and many other particulars, which could only be 
obtained from an inspection of their private ledger. It appears, that on searching the 
premises they found an iron chest, which they could not open, and concluded that in 
this chest was deposited some gold, they determined, as they had gained so easy an 
entrance, upon leaving everything in the bank as they found it, and renew the attack 
on some future occasion, when they had provided themselves with a proper key.
	White, previous to his execution, gave up £322 in bank of England notes to Mr 
Howes, of that town; and Mr H. advertised that those who had lost property might 
apply for the recovery. 


RICHARD CORDUY  
Imprisoned Two Years in Chelmsford Jail for robbing the Royal Forest at 
Waltham of Six Pieces of Wood

	AT the Summer Assizes for Essex, before the Lord Chief justice of England, 
Richard Corduy was indicted for stealing six pieces of wood, the property of the King. 
He was deputy wood-ward of the Royal Forest of Waltham, and had sold the wood in 
question to a carpenter soon after a sale had taken place of some refuse wood of the 
forest, by order of Lord Glenbervie, the Surveyor-General of Woods and Forests. 
Upon being charged with the fraud, he said one Byrne, who was his head woodman, 
had given him the wood in question, to make up the deficiency which had occurred in 
a lot sold in the sale, and for which he had paid the money to the auctioneer.
	Byrne on being called denied this altogether; and the auctioneer, though he 
admitted that the prisoner had paid him the deficiency of the lot in question, denied 
his knowledge of any arrangement between Byrne and the prisoner on the subject.
	The jury found the prisoner guilty, and Lord Ellenborough, after commenting 
at some length, and with considerable severity, on the nature of the offence, which 
was carried on to an enormous extent in the royal forests, sentenced the prisoner to 
two years' confinement in the jail. Admiral Harvey and Mr Raikes, and several other 
magistrates and clergymen of the county, gave him an excellent character for honesty 
and good conduct for the last thirty years. 


PRIVATE HALES  
Pitiful Scene in an Attempt to hang him at Jersey

	SOME soldiers belonging to the 34th Regiment were brought to trial at 
Jersey–and two of them condemned to suffer death. Only one of them, however, 
named Hales, was left for execution. This poor fellow was constantly visited during 
his confinement by the Rev. G. Du Heaume, became resigned to his fate, and awaited 
the awful moment with manly but Christian fortitude.
	He was accompanied to the place of execution by the above gentleman. He 
joined him in prayer, and ascended the scaffold with coolness and composure. At 
length he was turned off; and, when he had hung about a minute and a half, the 
executioner, taking hold of his convulsed body, suspended himself on it, and by this 
additional weight the rope gave way, in such a manner that the miserable sufferer's 
feet touched the ground. The executioner then pulled him sideways, with a view to 
strangling him, and being unable to effect it in this way got upon his shoulders. To the 
great surprise of all who witnessed this dreadful scene, the poor criminal rose straight 
upon his feet, with the hangman on his shoulders, and immediately loosened the rope 
from his throat with his fingers.
	No language can describe the sensations which were excited among the 
bystanders by this shocking scene. The sheriff ordered another rope to be prepared; 
but the spectators interfered, and the sheriff agreed that, before proceeding to the 
execution of the sentence, he would wait till the will of the magistracy should be 
known. The civil magistrate not being in town, orders were sent by the Commander-
in-Chief to carry the man back to jail. By this time the poor fellow had recovered his 
senses. The interest which the scene excited cannot be described–all became deeply 
interested in the man's fate. Captain Nicholls and another gentleman took him under 
the arms to conduct him, and by their assistance he was able to walk back to the 
prison. The Court decided that the whole matter relative to poor Hales should be 
transmitted to the King; and the execution of the sentence, in consequence, was 
suspended till his Majesty's pleasure was known. Petitions were prepared by the 
inhabitants and forwarded to his Majesty, and he was pardoned accordingly. 


MARTHA DAVIS  
Sentenced to Death for robbing a Foot-Boy while on an Errand for his 
Master

	IN London a set of daring prostitutes of the lowest description all night long 
prowled about the streets in order to prey upon unguarded youth. Even in the light of 
day, as in the present case, they were often daring enough to seize any victim who 
might accidentally pass their door, drag him into their den of misery, then ill-treat and 
plunder him.
	Circumstances of this nature have come to our knowledge, where apprentices 
and servant-lads have been inveigled by them, stripped, forcibly detained till 
midnight, and then, almost naked, turned into the street. The sufferer, in his fright, and 
happy to escape with life, finding himself at liberty again, runs from the scene of 
wickedness; and, forgetting the place, the plunderer too often escapes with impunity.
	Of this description of dangerous women was Martha Davis. She was indicted 
at the sessions at the Old Bailey for stopping Thomas Tidswell, the foot-boy of Mr 
Lewis, the comedian, on the highway, carrying him by force into a wretched 
apartment in Dyot Street, St Giles's, and there robbing him of his hat and two-and-
sixpence in money. The boy was sent with a message to Broad Court, Covent Garden, 
and having to pass from his master's house, in Hart Street, Bloomsbury, into Holborn, 
took Dyot Street, by mistake, in his way. The prisoner was standing at her door, and 
she forcibly seized him, dragged him into her room, and beat and robbed him. She 
then turned him into the street, when he alarmed the watch, and she was apprehended. 
The prisoner said in her defence that the prosecutor, with other boys, were engaged in 
throwing mud at her, seeing her intoxicated; and, having caught Tidswell, she dragged 
him into her room and boxed his ears, but denied robbing him. This was evidently a 
fabrication, and the jury found her guilty. Sentence of death was passed.


JOHN ROBINSON  
Executed at York, for a most cruel and deliberate Murder of a Servant-Girl

	JOHN ROBINSON was a substantial farmer at Mickleby, near Whitby, in the 
county of York; and Susannah Wilson, the deceased, had formerly lived with him as 
servant, but afterwards went to reside with a relation at Guisborough. This poor girl 
left her friends at Guisborough on the morning of the day in the evening of which, 
there is every reason to believe, she was murdered (though her body was not found till 
upwards of five weeks afterwards), alleging that she was going to see her master, who 
had promised to meet her with a bushel of wheat; but previous to her setting out she 
told them (to use her own language) a fear had come that morning, and that if 
anything but good came to her they were to look to nobody but Robinson.
	Some weeks having elapsed without any tidings being received of her, it was 
conjectured she had been murdered; and as she had left Guisborough to proceed 
towards Mickleby (a distance of twelve miles) for the avowed purpose of meeting 
Robinson, suspicion naturally fell upon him. This mysterious affair having become a 
common topic of conversation, on Good Friday several country people made a strict 
search for the body, which they at last found buried in a part of Robinson's ground. 
Robinson's servant deposed that his master left home about five o'clock in the evening 
of the day on which the girl left Guisborough, and told his family he was going to 
Straiths, about four miles distant. It appeared that he arrived at Straiths about half-past 
nine, and slept there that night; so he must have proceeded to that place immediately 
after he had perpetrated the murder. The unhappy victim was, at that time, in an 
advanced state of pregnancy.
	Other evidence was adduced which left no doubt of his guilt in the minds of 
the jury, who brought in their verdict accordingly; and he immediately received 
sentence of death. He still, however, persisted in his innocence; until the 
compunctions of conscience, in the condemned cell, drew from him a full confession 
of his crime. He there acknowledged that the unfortunate victim of his lust and cruelty 
met him, according to appointment, in his own grounds, near the spot where the body 
was found; that he and this ill-fated young woman walked together nearly an hour, 
conversing on the subject for which she had met him. During this conversation, 
though he had met her fully determined to effect her death, he more than once 
relented of his cruel purpose. He, however, resisted these compunctious visitings of 
nature, and fortified himself in his murderous purpose.
	About eight o'clock they sat down together: the deceased continued frequently 
to lament in the most affecting terms her unhappy situation, unconscious of the fate 
that awaited her. At this moment the prisoner stole unobserved behind her and, with 
an axe he had previously furnished himself with, gave her a mortal blow on the back 
of the head, which penetrated through the skull to the brain, and instantly killed her; 
but the prisoner, to make more sure of her death, mangled her dead body with the 
murderous axe, inflicting now on her lifeless corpse many deep wounds. The body 
was then deposited by him in the place where it was afterwards found, covered with 
whins. The prisoner after his confession seemed relieved of a great weight, and the 
ordinary said he never witnessed so great a change in any criminal.
	About eleven o'clock on the Monday the sheriff, accompanied by his 
attendants, went to the castle to demand the prisoner; and a few moments after he 
appeared, accompanied by the clergyman and the officers of justice, on the fatal 
platform. The unhappy man appeared extremely agitated, and trembled excessively. 
After joining in prayer with the ordinary, he prayed by himself for a few moments 
with great earnestness. The executioner then proceeded to his office, and in a moment 
the fall of the platform terminated his mortal existence. He died instantly.
	He was a tall, stout man, thirty-three years of age, and left a widow and four 
young children to lament his untimely and ignominious exit from the stage of life. His 
body was delivered to the surgeons for dissection. 


LEVI MORTGEN AND JOSEPH LUPPA  
Two Swindling Jews, transported for Seven Years for a Conspiracy to 
defraud

	THIS brace of Hebrew villains were indicted at Hicks's Hall for a conspiracy 
to defraud Mr Long, the keeper of an hotel in Dover Street, Piccadilly, of the sum of 
eight pounds, which they obtained from him under false pretences.
	Mr Long deposed that Mortgen went to his hotel, and represented himself as 
the agent of a Russian family. After looking over the different apartments, he stated 
that he was deputed to take the most elegant, for two Russian princes and two 
princesses, who had arrived at Portsmouth, and were only waiting the arrival of 
passports to proceed to London. The prisoner engaged apartments, and said he was 
then going to the Alien Office to obtain passports. He was afraid that he might not 
have cash enough in his pocket to accomplish his object and, after a seeming delicacy, 
he ventured to ask the loan of eight pounds until his return. His manner was so 
convincing that the loan was granted. Soon after this Luppa appeared, as a servant, in 
which character he represented himself as a messenger from the Russian party, and 
after being informed that apartments had been engaged by Mortgen he affected to be 
acquainted with his character, etc., talked about the instructions he had received, and 
begged to see the apartments. He ordered a supper to be ready at nine o'clock, and 
took leave. Mortgen informed the hotel-keeper that he had got an order to draw on 
Abraham Goldsmid, Esq., to the amount of five hundred pounds, and that on his 
return in the evening he would deposit one hundred pounds in order to ensure the 
keeping of the rooms. He, however, soon made his appearance again, and, saying he 
could not get cash that evening, requested a further loan of one pound to expedite the 
arrival of the Russians. This sum, however, was refused; and as the parties did not 
attend to partake of the supper their conduct was suspected, and they were 
apprehended. The prisoners were genteel-looking men, and had the appearance of 
foreigners. On searching them, documents were found which gave rise to an opinion 
that their depredations had been very general. The conspiracy was clearly proved, and 
the jury found both the prisoners guilty.
	Luppa presented several passports received by him from the British 
Government, and expressed a hope that the Court would mitigate his punishment, on 
the ground that he had brought off one hundred and fifty pieces of cannon from 
Hanover when the French took possession of that city. The sentence of the Court was 
that the prisoners should be transported for seven years.


ELIZABETH MIDDLETON  
Imprisoned for Fourteen Days for Shocking Cruelty to her Orphan 
Apprentice

	AT the Middlesex Sessions, Elizabeth Middleton was indicted by the parish 
officers of Whitechapel for cruelty to Elizabeth Summerfield, an orphan female, nine 
years of age, placed under her care by the parish. The defendant resided in Plumber's 
Row, near Commercial Road. The child had been with her two years, during which 
she had continually ill-used her. The child's cries frequently alarmed the neighbours, 
many of whom remonstrated with the defendant on the inhumanity of her conduct, but 
without producing any change in her behaviour. It was customary with her to turn the 
infant into the yard almost naked, in cold frosty weather, and keep her in such 
situation half-an-hour. On the 27th of July the defendant beat the child, holding her by 
the head, while a woman who lodged in the same house held her legs. This act of 
cruelty was seen by two persons, who looked over the yard wall, and they 
immediately gave information to the parish officers. The little girl corroborated the 
above facts; and, after the defendant had alleged in her defence that her conduct was 
misrepresented by her neighbours, the jury found her guilty, and she was sentenced to 
be imprisoned fourteen days. 


JOHN MUCKETT  
A Soldier, who was executed at Chelmsford for the Murder of his Wife, with 
whom he quarrelled because he had no Potatoes for Dinner

	JOHN MUCKETT was in the first battalion of the 4th Regiment of Foot, 
quartered at Colchester.
	At the trial, Thomas King and his wife stated that the prisoner and his wife and 
the witnesses lodged in the same room. About five o'clock on the day stated in the 
indictment the prisoner came home, and said he would have some dinner. His wife 
said she would put the kettle on, and get him some tea. He replied that he would not 
have tea always, he would have some bacon. His wife accordingly got him some 
bacon, and laid it on a stool near the bed where he was lying. He then grumbled 
because he had no potatoes. She immediately set about preparing some. He damned 
her for not making more haste. She replied she could not handle the dirty kettle and 
iron the officers' linen at the same time. He said he would have no half words and 
grumbling at him, and immediately knocked her off the stool. She gave him a small 
blow in return, on the shins, with the nozzle of the bellows, upon which he kicked her, 
and threw her across the room.
	King then interfered, and said the prisoner should not beat her any more. He 
said he would: she was his own wife, he would do as he pleased with her, and he 
would kill her as soon as not. He again gave her several violent blows on the head. 
The poor woman attempted to walk across the room, but was very lame, and was 
obliged to lie down on another soldier's bed. Her husband made her come from 
thence, and lie on their own bed. She was very sick in the evening, and he appeared 
sorry for his conduct.
	The deceased was put to bed; and nothing more occurred until the witnesses 
heard the prisoner calling in the night: "Betty! Betty!" He said his wife was very ill. 
Mrs King got up, and found her dead. The prisoner then, in a state of remorse, went 
down on his knees, exclaiming he was a wretched man, for he had murdered her.
	The Lord Chief Baron told the jury that this was a clear case of murder, and 
the jury having found him guilty he was sentenced to be hanged. At the place of 
execution he addressed the spectators, acknowledging the justice of his sentence, 
though he solemnly declared he had not the most distant idea of causing the death of 
his wife when he inflicted the fatal blows; and he earnestly exhorted the spectators to 
bear in mind the dreadful example they had before them of the consequence of 
suffering a sudden impulse of anger to get the better of their understanding. 


PATRICK M'DONALD  
A Poor Boy, convicted at the Old Bailey of stealing, and presented with a 
Deluge of Shillings

	THE miserable subject of the present case, an emaciated lad of about fourteen 
years of age, appeared at the bar at the Old Bailey. He was indicted for stealing a 
jacket, being almost naked, valued at fourteen shillings. The evidence against him was 
too clear. 
	 Being asked what he had to say in his defence, he told an artless, affecting 
tale : that he came from the United States of America, and was a cabin-boy in a 
merchant vessel from that country, which arrived six months before, but returned 
without him; that he found himself destitute and without a penny; and that cold and 
hunger alone had compelled him to steal clothes and food. 
	 One of the jury asked him if had eaten anything that day, to which he 
answered : " No, sir; nor a bit the day before." He then burst into tears, which 
produced such an effect that the sheriff gave him some silver, and the jury, before 
they gave their verdict, each handed him a shilling. They then asked whether such 
misery and hunger could possibly plead his excuse in a court of justice. The learned 
judge said he sympathised with the jury, but was bound to inform them that no 
distress whatever could, in the eye of the law, excuse the prisoner's offence. The jury, 
bound by their oaths to do strict justice between their country and the prisoner, 
reluctantly found him guilty. 
	 The judge then ordered that the boy should be taken care of, until an 
opportunity offered to find him a proper master, and observed that he would then 
procure his pardon. While this child of poverty and wretchedness was withdrawing, 
shillings, from all parts of the court and gallery, were thrown to him, which amounted 
to a sum sufficient to clothe and nourish him. 


JAMES BULLOCK  
Executed, under the Bankruptcy Act, for a Felonious Embezzlement

	JAMES BULLOCK was capitally indicted for feloniously secreting and 
embezzling the effects of his creditors, he being a bankrupt, with intent to defraud the 
said creditors, and to convert the same to his own use, against the statute. Mr Gurney 
stated the case to the jury, and after detailing the facts with great accuracy, and 
charging the prisoner with the embezzlement of property to the amount of one 
thousand, two hundred pounds and upwards, he concluded by saying that the offence 
imputed to the prisoner was the result of the most criminal artifice and deep 
deliberation, and that the creditors would have compromised their duty to the public, 
and the justice due to themselves, had they not prosecuted the present indictment. The 
jury, he added, might pity the man's infirmities, but should he make out the charge 
preferred in evidence they were bound to find him guilty.
	The first witness called was John Hubbard, clerk and cellarman to Messrs John 
& George Cowell, who proved the petitioning creditors' debt, amounting to one 
thousand, four hundred and seventy-two pounds, for rums and brandies sold to him.
	William Bryant, the prisoner's travelling clerk, proved the fact of bankruptcy, 
and James Tracey and James Mabbs proved the prisoner's absconding from his 
counting-house, in Scotch Yard, Bush Lane, and from his country house at Dulwich, 
to avoid the pecuniary difficulties into which he said he had fallen. The last witness 
also proved that the goods were carted away from the country house, under the 
prisoner's direction, and carried to a house in Bouverie Street, Fleet Street, and 
afterwards to a house in Hungerford Market. There were two loads of goods carted 
away from Dulwich. In the first cart there was a bookcase, and in the second ten 
boxes.
	Anthony, the officer, was then dispatched to Leith, information having been 
obtained of his flight to that place, and the prisoner was apprehended, passing under 
the name of Brown, and claiming in that name seventeen packages, which had been 
shipped in London for that place, on board the Leith packet, containing effects which 
the prisoner was bound to have surrendered under his commission to the use of his 
creditors.
	Mr Thomas Wilde deposed that the prisoner deposited with him certain 
securities, rums, wines, etc., upon which he lent him eight hundred pounds, giving 
him a cheque upon the house of Prescott & Co. for the amount. This money the 
prisoner placed in the hands of Messrs Herries & Co., bankers, in St James's Street, in 
the name of "J. Brown, of No. 11 Chapel Street, Park Lane," and four days after he 
withdrew the whole amount, and carried it with him to Scotland. This money was 
found in the packages, and constituted part of the effects. A variety of other evidence 
was adduced to corroborate the various embezzlements, and to show the felonious 
intention of the prisoner to secrete his effects from his creditors. Mr Justice Heath 
summed up the evidence; and, having commented upon the whole of the prisoner's 
conduct–his changing his name, and subsequent flight to Scotland–concluded by 
saying that charity itself could not suggest a doubt in his favour.
	The jury found the prisoner guilty, and he was sentenced to death. He was 
genteelly dressed in black, and exhibited uncommon skill and address during the 
progress of his trial. 


FREDERICK SMITH ALIAS HENRY ST JOHN  
Convicted at the Old Bailey, and sentenced to Transportation for a Curious 
Kind of Fraud

	FREDERICK SMITH alias Henry St John was indicted before the Lord Chief 
Baron and Mr Justice Laurence for stealing a three-hundred-pound bank-note 
privately from the person of Thomas Bartlett. The prosecutor, who appeared to be a 
very weak man, stated that he was a slop-seller, and that the prisoner was introduced 
to him by one Benjamin Davis. The prisoner was represented as a captain in the army.
	The prosecutor had parted with his wife, who had gone to Ramsgate, but 
wished very much to be reconciled to her. The prisoner told him that his wife and two 
attorneys were in a conspiracy to have him declared a lunatic, that they would get all 
his property, and lock him up in a madhouse for life. He therefore advised him to sell 
all his investments so as to save the money from them. By his advice, on the 7th of 
July, he sold out one thousand pounds Consols., and received six hundred and 
nineteen pounds as the purchase-money. 
	The prisoner then told him that he had a scheme in his head to reconcile him to 
his wife: that they should both go down to Ramsgate, and, if she would not come too, 
they would then threaten to send her son to sea, as she was very fond of him.
	They accordingly went to Ramsgate; but the prisoner pretended that he could 
never see the wife, and advised that they should go to Fulham, where the son lived. 
They accordingly posted to Fulham, and went to Mr Newbott's, where the son was; 
but the prisoner told him that he was gone to Oxford. This was on the 10th of July. 
They then came up to town together, and the prisoner pressed the prosecutor to drink 
all the way, by which he became rather forward. He had the notes and all the six 
hundred pounds in his pocket-book, in his coat-pocket.
	They came up to London together, and went to a public-house in Soho, kept 
by one Kelly, where they had some tea; and, when he took out his pocket-book to pay, 
all the notes were gone. He immediately told the prisoner that he must have picked his 
pocket, as no one else had been near him. The prisoner appeared much offended, and 
threatened to knock him down.
	It was found by other evidence that the prisoner afterwards paid the three-
hundred-pound bank-note to Haywood & Co., bankers, at Manchester, with whom he 
opened an account under the name of "Henry St John," and the clerk fully identified 
his person.
	He was convicted, and transported. 


SAMUEL OLIVER  
A Shop-Boy, transported for Seven Years for committing a Petty Theft

	SAMUEL OLIVER had been some time shop-boy to Mr Thomas Stirderan, a 
hosier, in Holborn, and had incurred some suspicion of dishonest practices. Mr 
Stirderan having consulted a friend, it was agreed to mark seven shillings, and to send 
one Sarah Lock to purchase goods of the prisoner to that amount.
	This being done, some of the articles so purchased by her were omitted in the 
entry of sales, and two of the marked shillings were found on the prisoner. He was 
therefore apprehended, and committed to Newgate.
	On his trial at the sessions held at the Old Bailey his master and other 
witnesses gave testimony against him, to the effect above stated.
	Mr Garrow was his counsel, and pleaded hard to save him. He said that Oliver, 
being entrusted with the money for the use of his master, was at liberty to exchange it, 
or put it in his pocket, until called upon to make up his accounts. But the omission in 
the book of entries being looked on by the judge as sufficient evidence of the intended 
fraud, the jury without hesitation found him guilty.
	The recorder then passed sentence on him as follows:--
	"Samuel Oliver, you have been tried by a jury of your country, and found 
guilty of one of the very worst descriptions of theft. You ungratefully betrayed the 
trust reposed in you by your employer, who paid you to be faithful to him. It is greatly 
to be lamented that young men, by so mean an offence, should bring themselves into 
the shameful situation in which you are now placed; and that there is a necessity of 
proceeding with rigour against a person who had apparently preserved a good 
character; but yours is a crime which the courts are determined never to treat with 
lenity. It is in itself hostile to every idea of domestic security. It is so harsh a violation 
of the confidence reposed, and of every bond of civil society, that, whenever it is 
proved, it cannot be punished with too much severity. The sentence, therefore, of this 
Court is, that you be transported beyond the seas, for the term of seven years, to such 
place as his Majesty shall think fit."
	He was accordingly sent to Botany Bay. 


THOMAS WHITE AND WALTER WYATT  
Two Thieves, who were the First Criminals to be executed at Oxford by the 
new method

	ONE of the unfortunate sufferers on this melancholy occasion was Thomas 
White, a daring robber, who had the temerity to break into Blenheim House, the 
magnificent seat of the Duke of Marlborough, built by order of Queen Anne as a mark 
of favour to her Generalissimo, the conqueror of Louis XIV. of France, and he who 
dictated the terms of peace before the gates of Paris.
	White forcibly entered this strong range of buildings, and stole thereout silver 
plate to the value of more than five hundred pounds, with which he got off to London, 
where he sold it to a Jew in Houndsditch, who immediately melted it down. Of this 
robbery he was convicted, and sentenced to die.
	The other malefactor was Walter Wyatt, a clerk to the postmaster of Witney, 
who had been entrusted with the sorting of letters, and the other business of the office.
	In this capacity he stole letters containing bank-notes and bills to a 
considerable amount, for which robbery and breach of trust he was thus deservedly 
condemned.
	A gallows and platform having been prepared within the walls of the castle, at 
twelve o'clock precisely the fatal procession began–viz. six sheriff officers, armed 
with javelins, two and two; the executioner and sword; the two malefactors, pinioned, 
with white caps on their heads, between the turnkeys, armed; Redditch, a condemned 
criminal, but reprieved, guarded by two constables. The remainder of the felons, two 
and two, guarded to the place appointed for them, near the gallows, where they were 
compelled to be spectators of the horrible scene.
	The two malefactors having ascended the platform, before which was a 
prodigious assemblage of spectators, they delivered up their books of devotion. The 
cords were then fixed, the caps pulled over their eyes, and in little more than two 
minutes (having themselves requested dispatch) the platform sank, and they were 
launched into eternity. 


APPENDIX I  
Description of Newgate.

	Anciently, the City of London was encompassed by a wall, in which, at 
proportionate distances, were several gates, with posterns, resembling the gate which 
still remains, called Temple Bar. The exact period of time when Newgate, or, as it was 
first called, the New Gate was erected it is not easy to determine; but we find that as 
early as the year 1211, its apartments were used for the confinement of felons, as a 
county gaol for London and Middlesex. This gaol was re-edified in 1422, by the 
executors of Sir Richard Whittington, and afterwards rebuilt with greater strength and 
more convenience for prisoners, and with a gate and postern for passengers. The 
prison then crossed the west end of Newgate Street. In 1780, Newgate was almost 
burnt down by the rioters. It has since been restored, and now presents a fine uniform 
exterior to the west, consisting of two wings, the debtors' and felons' side, with the 
gaoler's house in the middle.
	The north side, appropriated to debtors, men and women, consists of two 
court-yards, which are far too circumscribed for the inhabitants; the men's court being 
only 49 feet by 31 feet; the women's of the same length, and about half the width. 
They are entirely surrounded by the wards, which rise three stories above the 
pavement. The women debtors are separated from the men by a wall 15 feet in height.
	The four sides are called the master's side, the cabin, from the cabin bedsteads 
in them, the common side, and the women's side. The men's apartments are fourteen 
in number; all of which, except one which occupies in length the whole side of the 
prison, are nearly of the same dimensions, 23 feet by 15. The number of inhabitants in 
the rooms is from 12 to 20 in each. The largest room is sometimes inhabited by as 
many as thirty. The Debtors' side almost always contains 200 and sometimes as many 
as 300. The painted-room, as it is called —- having been painted by a prisoner —- has 
been occupied by a debtor ever since the prison was repaired; This apartment also 
serves the purpose of a room for case of conscience debtors. Two very close rooms 
are inhabited by prisoners, one at the bottom of the master's, and another of the 
common side, which serve the purposes of chandlers' shops by day, and sleeping-
rooms by night. This side is always too full, indeed it is difficult to conceive how the 
prisoners exist, crowded as they generally are, and breathing the same polluted air; for 
even the windows only open towards the prison court.
	Women debtors have two rooms, one on the whole side length of the debtor's 
court, the other much smaller; in these the inhabitants are generally not very 
numerous, though some times they are crowded. Debtors on the poor and women's 
sides have eight stone of beef weekly, without bone, sent in by the Sheriffs. Debtors 
on the master's side pay thirteen shillings and sixpence, eighteen pence of which is 
spent in beer; the remainder goes to the ward, and finds coals, candles, wood, mops, 
brooms, and pails. Those who plead poverty are to keep the rooms clean.
	On the south side which properly belongs to felons, not only felons, but 
offenders against government, libellers, sellers of libels, and persons for small 
offences, are confined. This court is rather larger than the men debtors': the rooms are 
in general in good condition, being often let as single rooms to prisoners who can 
afford to pay for such an indulgence. There are also four other small yards in which 
felons are lodged, the number of the whole varying from 140 to 300.
	The chapel is plain and neat, with galleries on each side; three or four pews are 
appropriated for the felons; that in the centre is occupied by the condemned. Service is 
performed by the chaplain twice every Sunday.
	Malefactors under sentence of death are secured in cells built expressly for 
that purpose; there are five upon each of the three floors, each vaulted, in height about 
nine feet to the crown of the arch, and about nine feet in length, by six in width. In the 
upper part of each cell is a small narrow window double-grated. The doors are four 
inches thick. The strong wall is lined all round with planks, studded with broad-
headed nails. In each cell is a barrack bedstead. It is observed, that prisoners who had 
affected an air of boldness during their trial, and appeared quite unconcerned when 
sentence was pronounced on them, were struck with horror, and shed tears, when they 
were brought to these dark and solitary abodes.
	Condemned felons are executed in front of the prison, on a large moveable 
scaffold, (called the New Drop,) which is kept in the Press Yard for this occasion. The 
malefactors stand upon a false floor, and when their devotions are finished, on a 
signal being given, the floor suddenly drops, leaving the unhappy sufferers suspended 
in the air.


APPENDIX II  
The Origin of the Gibbet in England

	IT is well known that the gibbet, so often named, in this work, is now used in 
England, for carrying into effect the final sentence of the law upon murderers; that 
their bodies may hang a dreadful warning to the passenger, not to stray from the path 
of honesty; yet, perhaps, few have inquired into its origin.
	The gibbet we find of doubtful derivation. It is both an English word and a 
French word, implying the same meaning, 'A post on which malefactors are exposed.' 
We find this punishment recorded in Holy Writ, Joshua chap. viii. ver. 28,29:
	'And Joshua burnt Ai, and made it an heap for ever, even a desolation unto this 
day. And the king of Ai he hanged upon a tree, and as soon as the sun was down, 
Joshua commanded that they should take his carcase down from the tree, and cast it at 
the entering of the gate of the city, and raise thereon a great heap of stones, that 
remaineth unto this day.'
	Searching farther back into ancient history, we find from Martinius, the 
learned etymologist, that this mark of the grossest infamy which can be inflicted on a 
criminal, was not unknown to the Greeks. It is most probable, however, that we had 
the mode of punishment of the gibbet from the French; the people of that nation 
seldom taking any usage or custom from the English, at so early a period as the 
thirteenth century, when it was used here, and known by that name.
	In the year 1242, says the historian, Matthew Paris, William De Marisco, a 
knight, was judicially condemned and ignominiously put to death. He was brought 
from the Tower to that infernal machine, vulgarly called the gibbet; and, after he had 
breathed his last, was hung on one of the hooks, and being taken down after he was 
grown stiff, was disembowelled: his bowels were burnt, and his body being divided 
into four parts, the quarters were sent to four cities. This evidently answers to our 
hanging, drawing, and quartering, and has the intention of exhibiting a terrible 
spectacle to the people, just as our hanging a dead body in irons is meant to do. But it 
varies much, we observe, from gibbeting. The gibbet, in this case, serving only as a 
common gallows.
	The same author, Matthew Paris, in speaking of the execution of two men, 
says, 'Paratum est horribile patibulum Londini quod vulgus gibitem appellat.'
	One of these criminals, after he was dead, was hung upon a gibbet, and the 
other was gibbetted alive, to perish by pain and hunger. These cases come fully up to 
the point in hand, as the body of the first was put upon the gibbet when dead, in order 
to be a permanent spectacle of terror; and the other was not to die, as probably being 
the most guilty, by the mere simple act of suspension, but by a more lingering kind of 
death.
	About the same period of which Paris gives a history, the king of France 
ordered all clippers of the coin, patibulis laqueatos, vento praesentari, that is, to be 
hanged, and then exposed to the wind; which, though irons be not mentioned, appears 
to be the very thing the English do now, and to have the same intention.
	The first gibbet used in England, whereon to expose criminals, after death, by 
hanging, was in the reign of King Henry III. A.D. 1236.
	We have shown that the ancient writer above quoted, adduces an instance of a 
criminal being gibbetted alive, and left to perish by that miserable death; but the 
severing the hand from the body, and placing it above the carcase of the criminal, 
when gibbetted, the knife stuck through it with which the murder was committed, we 
believe to be exclusively Scottish; for we have not found it practised by any other 
nation.
	We should hardly believe that in a part of our habitable globe individuals, 
worked into the frenzy of fanaticism, inflict upon themselves a temporary and more 
painful gibbetting; as though their torture would expiate their supposed sins. Yet true 
it is, and we have just met an account of this frightful penance, which places its truth 
beyond the shadow of doubt: after reading accounts of the voluntary sacrifice of a 
widow of Malabar burning herself to ashes upon her husband's funeral pile, we may 
give credit to the horrid voluntary gibbetting of the same race of people.
	The following account of this shocking spectacle has been well authenticated 
by several officers in the service of the East India Company, who have witnessed this 
religious rite among the Gentoos.
	There were three voluntary victims. The first was attended by a numerous 
procession, and preceded by music and dancers. According to the custom of Indian 
festivals, they were adorned with flowers, clothed in their best apparel, and attended 
by their relations.
	They marched, or rather ran, round the apparatus several times, flowers being 
in the mean time strewed before them.
	The engine of torture used upon this occasion was a stout upright post, thirty 
feet in height. At the bottom was a stage, and about half way towards the top another 
on which two priests, or rather executioners, were mounted with drawn sabres, in 
place of books of religion in their hands. Across the top of the post, or pole, was 
another, of about half the length and circumference, strongly lashed thereto with 
ropes. At each extremity were hooks of iron, somewhat resembling, but larger than 
those used by butchers in England, to hang up their meat in the shambles.
	The sufferer was hoisted up to the executioners. They immediately proceeded 
to strip their prey of his robes, and then fixed the hooks into the fleshy part of his 
back, near the shoulder blades. The ropes affixed to these hooks, and tied to the 
transverse beam. Behind him two smaller ropes depended from the beam which 
received his great toes in separate loops. Over the penitent's head was suspended a 
kind of flat muslin canopy, with a narrow flounce, just sufficient to shade his face 
from the sun, but not conceal him from the view.
	Thus prepared he is slung into the air, by means of ropes tied at the opposite 
end of the pole, and hanged round to give full views to the surrounding crowd. The air 
was now rent with shouts of applause, almost to adoration. The trumpets sounded, the 
drums beat, and pateraroes fired. The traverse beam, turning upon a pivot, was slowly 
moved round, over the beads of the multitude. Notwithstanding the torture which the 
victims must feel, they supported it generally with patient firmness. The writer of the 
account now quoted, says he was an eye-witness to three persons submitting to this 
punishment on one afternoon.
	The first sufferer, continues the narrator, was a young man, about twenty-four 
years of age. He got upon the scaffold with affected indifference; but when launched 
into the air, I could distinctly bear him send forth some agonising yells. Still he 
persevered, and described the circle three times; he held a fan in one hand, and a 
bundle of cajans (leaves of the palmira tree) in the other, which he continued waving 
with seeming composure, until he made a signal, and thereupon was let down.
	There was no difference in the mode of suspending the other two, excepting 
that one beat a small taum taum (great drum) the whole time; and that the second held 
a basket of flowers in one hand, and scattered them with the other among the 
spectators, who eagerly caught them. Either from the various accompanying noises, or 
from the superior fortitude of the two latter, I could not distinguish any expression of 
pain.
	When let down their backs were rubbed with turmeric; and they were received 
by their friends with the highest marks of veneration and joy.
	I was informed that these men were thenceforward esteemed the particular 
favourites of Swamee (the Deity), and entitled to particular privileges. I was also 
present at this ceremony, at Madras, near the Black-Town. If I was to relate the many 
singular customs of the disciples of Brama, of which I have frequently been a 
spectator, I should only gain credit from Asiatic travellers, who know from 
experience, the truth of Hamlet's observation, that 'there are more things on earth, than 
are dreamt of in the philosophy of the many.'


APPENDIX III  
The Maiden, or Scottish Guillotine

  
The Maiden

	The Maiden seems to have been confined to the limits of the forest of 
Hardwicke, or the eighteen towns and hamlets within its precincts. The time when this 
custom took place is unknown; whether Earl Warren, lord of this forest, might have 
established it among the sanguinary laws then in use against the invaders of the 
hunting rights, or whether it might not take place after the woollen manufactures at 
Halifax began to gain strength, is uncertain. The last is very probable, for the wild 
country around the town was inhabited by a lawless set, whose depredations on the 
cloth-tenters might soon stifle the efforts of infant industry. For the protection of trade 
and for the greater terror of offenders by speedy execution this custom seems to have 
been established, so as at last to receive the force of law, which was that "If a felon be 
taken within the liberty of the forest of Hardwicke, with goods stolen out or within the 
said precincts, either hand-habend, back-berend or confessioned, to the value of 
thirteenpence halfpenny, he shall, after three market-days, within the town of Halifax, 
next after such his apprehension, and being condemned, be taken to the gibbet, and 
there have his head cut from his body.'"
	The offender had always a fair trial, for as soon as he was taken he was 
brought to the lord's bailiff at Halifax; he was then exposed on the three markets, 
which here were held thrice in a week, placed in the stocks with the goods stolen on 
his back, or if the theft was of the cattle kind they were placed by him; and this was 
done both to strike terror into others and to produce new informations against him. 
The bailiff then summoned four freeholders of each town within the forest to form a 
jury. The felon and prosecutors were brought face to face, and the goods, the cow or 
horse, or whatsoever was stolen, produced. If he was found guilty he was remanded to 
prison, had a week's time allowed for preparation, and then was conveyed to the spot 
where his head was struck off by this machine. I should have premised that if the 
criminal, either after apprehension or on the way to execution, could escape out of the 
limits of the forest (part being close to the town), the bailiff had no further power over 
him; but if he should be caught within the precincts at any time after, he was 
immediately executed on his former sentence. 
	This privilege was very freely used during the reign of Elizabeth; the records 
before that time were lost. Twenty-five suffered in her reign and at least twelve from 
1623 to 1650; after which, I believe, the privilege was no more exerted. 
	This machine of death is now destroyed, but I saw one of the same kind in a 
room under the Parliament House in Edinburgh, where it war, introduced by the 
Regent Morton, who took a model of it as he passed through Halifax, and at length 
suffered by it himself. It is in form of a painter's easel and about ten feet high; at four 
feet from the bottom is a cross bar, on which the felon lays his head, which is kept 
down by another placed above. In the inner edges of the frame are grooves; in these is 
placed a sharp axe, with a vast weight of lead, supported at the very summit by a peg; 
to that peg is fastened a cord, which the executioner cutting, the axe falls, and does the 
affair effectually, without suffering the unhappy criminal to undergo a repetition of 
strokes, as has been the case in the common method. I must add that if the sufferer is 
condemned for stealing a horse or a cow, the string is tied to the beast, which, on 
being whipped, pulls out the peg and becomes the executioner.
	Thus we find, adds a commentator at the time, that the guillotine of France is 
not an instrument of death of the invention of that country. During the anarchy caused 
by a corrupt Court and the oppression of the people this instrument, precisely on the 
model of the Maiden, was in mercy applied to the King and Queen, their nobles and 
the clergy, who it was calculated engrossed three-fourths of the wealth of their nation. 
We say in mercy, because it produces a death more instantaneous and consequently 
less painful than that inflicted on criminals in Britain. A short period of time has 
brought about wonderful revolutions and great changes in all European nations, save 
our own islands, and we sincerely hope that a timely reform in our internal affairs 
may render the return of the Maiden entirely unnecessary. 
	Beheading was a military punishment among the Romans, known by the name 
of decollatio. Among them the head was laid on a cippus, or block, placed in a pit dug 
for the purpose; in the army, without the vallum; in the city, without the walls, at a 
place near the porta decumana. Preparatory to the stroke the criminal was tied to a 
stake and whipped with rods. In the early ages the blow was given with an axe, but in 
after-times with a sword, which was thought the more reputable manner of dying. The 
execution was but clumsily performed in the first times, but afterwards they grew 
more expert, and took the head off clean with one circular stroke. 
	In England, beheading was the punishment of nobles, being reputed not to 
derogate from nobility, as hanging does. In France during the revolutionary 
government, the practice of beheading by means of an instrument called a guillotine 
(so denominated from the name of its inventor) was exceedingly general. It resembles 
a kind of instrument long since used for the same purpose in Scotland, and called a 
"Maiden." 
	It is universally known that at the execution of King Charles the First a man in 
a visor performed the office of executioner. This circumstance has given rise to a 
variety of conjectures and accounts, in some of which one William Walker is said to 
be the executioner, in others it is supposed to be a Richard Brandon, of whom a long 
account was published in an Exeter newspaper of 1784. But William Lilly, in his 
History of my Life and Times, has the following remarkable passage: "Many have 
curiously inquired who it was that cut off his [the king's] head: I have no permission 
to speak of such things; only thus much I say, he that did it is as valiant and resolute a 
man as lives, and one of a competent fortune." When examined before the Parliament 
of Charles II. he states that "The next Sunday but one after Charles the First was 
beheaded, Robert Spavin, secretary to Lieutenant-General Cromwell at that time, 
invited himself to dine with me, and brought Anthony Pierson and several others 
along with him to dinner. That their principal discourse all dinner-time was only who 
it was that beheaded the king. One said it was the common hangman; another, Hugh 
Peters; others also were nominated, but none concluded. Robert Spavin, so soon as 
dinner was done, took me by the hand and carried me to the south window: saith he: 
"These are all mistaken; they have not named the man that did the fact; it was 
Lieutenant Colonel Joice. I was in the room when he fitted himself for the work; stood 
behind him when he did it; when done, went in with him again. There is no man 
knows this but my master [viz. Cromwell], Commissary Ireton, and myself." "Doth 
not Mr Rushworth know it?" saith I. "No, he doth not know it," saith Spavin. "The 
same thing Spavin hath often related to me when we were alone." 


APPENDIX IV  
The Newgate Bellman
	IT was an ancient practice, on the night preceding the execution of condemned 
criminals, for the bellman of the parish of St Sepulchre to go under Newgate and, 
ringing his bell, to repeat the following, as a piece of friendly advice to the unhappy 
wretches under sentence of death:--
	"You prisoners that are within, who for wickedness and sin, after many 
mercies shown you, are now appointed to die tomorrow in the forenoon, give ear and 
understand that in the morning the greatest bell of St Sepulchre’s shall toll for you in 
form and manner of a passing bell, to the end that all godly people, hearing that bell 
and knowing that it is for your going to your deaths, may be stirred up heartily to pray 
to God to bestow His grace upon you while you live. I beseech you for Jesus Christ’s 
sake to keep this night in watching and prayer for the salvation of your own souls, 
while there is yet time for mercy, as knowing tomorrow you must appear before the 
judgment seat of your Creator, there to give an account of all things done in this life 
and to suffer eternal torments for your sins committed against Him, unless upon your 
hearty and unfeigned repentance you find mercy through the merits, death and passion 
of your only Mediator and Advocate, Jesus Christ, who now sits at the right hand of 
God to make intercession for as many of you as penitently return to Him."
	The following extract from Stowe’s Survey of London, p. 125 of the quarto 
edition printed in 1618, will prove that the above verses ought to have been repeated 
by a clergyman instead of a bellman:--
	"Robert Dow, Citizen and Merchant Taylor, of London, gave to the parish 
church of St Sepulchre's, the sum of 50L. That after the several sessions of London, 
when the prisoners remain in the gaol, as condemned men to death, expecting 
execution on the morning following; the clerk (that is, the parson) of the church 
should come in the night time, and likewise early in the morning, to the window of the 
prison where they lie, and there ringing certain tolls with a hand-bell, appointed for 
the purpose, he doth afterwards (in most Christian manner) put them in mind of their 
present condition, and ensuing execution, desiring them to be prepared therefor as 
they ought to be. When they are in the cart, and brought before the wall of the church, 
there he standeth ready with the same bell, and after certain tolls rehearseth an 
appointed prayer, desiring all the people there present to pray for them. The beadle 
also of Merchant Taylors Hall hath an honest stipend allowed to see that this is duly 
done."


APPENDIX V. 
The punishment of whipping in England, Russia, and France

  
A whipping in the press-yard of Newgate Prison

	In Russia, this punishment is such as may well serve for the sake of example. 
It is there very severe, while (through the instrumentality of a guinea or so) it is often 
too leniently inflicted in England.
	The knout of Russia would be well applied to the shoulders of an English 
swindler. The instrument with which whipping is inflicted in Russia is made of leather 
curiously twisted, and brought to a fine end like whipcord: with this whip the 
executioners dexterously carry off a slip of skin from the neck to the bottom of the 
back, laid bare to the waist; and, repeating their blows, in a little while rend away all 
the skin off the back in parallel stripes. In the common knout, the criminal receives 
the lashes suspended on the back of one of the executioners; but in the great knout, 
which is generally used on the wheel in France, the criminal is hoisted into the air by 
means of a pulley fixed to the gallows, a cord fastened to the two wrists tied together, 
and another, of a crucial form, under his breast. Sometimes his hands are tied behind, 
over his back; and when he is pulled up in this position, his shoulders are dislocated. 
The executioners make this punishment more or less cruel; and it is said are so 
dexterous, that, when a criminal is condemned to die, they can make him expire at 
pleasure, either by one or several lashes.


APPENDIX VI. 
Fleet Marriages
	ONE of the most disgraceful customs observed in the Fleet Prison in the 
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries was the performance of the marriage ceremony 
by disreputable and dissolute clergymen. These functionaries, mostly prisoners for 
debt, insulted the dignity of their holy profession by marrying in the precincts of the 
Fleet Prison at a minute's notice, any persons who might present themselves for that 
purpose. No questions were asked, no stipulations made, except as to the amount of 
the fee for the service, or the quantity of liquor to be drunk on the occasion. It not 
unfrequently happened, indeed, that the clergyman, the clerk, the bridegroom and the 
bride were drunk at the very time the ceremony was performed.
	These disgraceful members of the sacred calling had their "plyers," or 
"barkers," who, if they caught sight of a man and woman walking together along the 
streets of the neighbourhood, pestered them with solicitations, not easily to be shaken 
off, as to whether they wanted a clergyman to marry them. Mr Burn, a gentleman who 
published a curious work on the Fleet Registers, had in his possession an engraving 
(published about 1747) of A Fleet Wedding between a Brisk Young Sailor and 
Landlady's Daughter at Rederiff. "The print," he wrote, "represents the old Fleet 
market and prison, with the sailor, landlady and daughter just stepping from a 
hackney-coach, while two Fleet parsons in canonicals are contending for the job. The 
following verses were in the margin:--
"Scarce had the coach discharg'd its trusty fare 
But gaping crowds surround th'amorous pair;  
The busy Plyers make a mighty stir,  
And whisp'ring cry, 'D'ye want the Parson, sir? 
Pray step this way–just to the pen in hand, 
The Doctor's ready there at your command':  
'This way' (another cries), 'sir, I declare, 
The true and ancient Register is here':
Th'alarmed Parsons quickly hear the din, 
And haste with soothing words t'invite 'em in: 
In this confusion jostled to and fro, 
Th'enamour'd couple know not where to go, 
Till, slow advancing from the coach's side, 
Th'experienc'd matron came (an artful guide) 
She led the way without regarding either, 
And the first Parson splic'd 'em both together."
	One of the most notorious of these scandalous officials was a man of the name 
of George Keith, a Scottish minister, who, being in desperate circumstances, set up a 
marriage office in Mayfair, and subsequently in the FIeet, and carried on the same 
trade which has since been practised in front of the blacksmith's anvil at Gretna 
Green. This man's wedding business was so extensive and so scandalous that the 
Bishop of London found it necessary to excommunicate him. It was said of this 
person and "his journeyman" that one morning, during the Whitsun holidays, they 
united a greater number of couples than had been married at any ten churches within 
the bills of mortality. Keith lived till he was eighty-nine years of age, and died in 
1735. The Rev. Dr Gaynham, another infamous functionary, was familiarly called the 
Bishop of Hell.
	"Many of the early Fleet weddings," wrote Mr Burn, were really performed at 
the chapel of the Fleet; but as the practice extended, it was found more convenient to 
have other places, within the Rules of the Fleet (added to which the Warden was 
forbidden, by Act of Parliament, to suffer them), and thereupon many of the Fleet 
parsons and tavern-keepers in the neighbourhood fitted up a room in their respective 
lodgings or houses as a chapel! The parsons took the fees, allowing a portion to the 
plyers, etc.; and the tavern-keepers, besides sharing in the money paid, derived a 
profit from the sale of liquors which the wedding-party drank. In some instances the 
tavern-keepers kept a parson on the establishment, at a weekly salary of twenty 
shillings! Most of the taverns near the Fleet kept their own registers, in which (as well 
as in their own books) the parsons entered the weddings." Some of these scandalous 
members of the highest of all professions were in the habit of hanging signs out of 
their windows with the words "WEDDINGS PERFORMED CHEAP HERE."
	Keith, of whom we have already spoken, seems to have been a barefaced 
profligate; but there is something exceedingly affecting in the stings of conscience 
and forlorn compunction of one Walter Wyatt, a Fleet parson, in one of whose pocket-
books of 1716 are the following secret (as he intended them to be) outpourings of 
remorse:--
	"Give to every man his due, and learn ye the way of truth."
	"This advice cannot be taken by those that are concerned in ye Fleet 
marriages; not so much as ye Priest can do ye thing yt it is just and right there, unless 
he designs to starve. For by lying, bullying, and swearing, to extort money from the 
silly and unwary people, you advance your business and get ye pelf, which always 
wastes like snow in sunshiney day."
	"The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. The marrying in the Fleet is 
the beginning of eternal woe."
	"If a clerk or plyer tells a lye, you must vouch it to be as true as ye Gospel, and 
if disputed, you must affirm with an oath to ye truth of a downright damnable 
falsehood, Virtus laudatur & algetur."
	"May God forgive me what is past, and give me grace to forsake such a 
wicked place, where truth and virtue can't take place unless you are resolved to 
starve."
	But this very man, whose sense of his own disgrace was so deep and 
apparently so contrite, was one of the most notorious, active and money-making of all 
the Fleet parsons. His practice was chiefly in taverns, and he was known to earn 
nearly sixty pounds in less than a month.
	With such facilities for marriage, and such unprincipled ministers, it may 
easily be imagined that iniquitous schemes of all sorts were perpetrated under the 
narne of Fleet weddings. The parsons were ready, for a bribe, to make false entries in 
their registers, to antedate weddings, to give fictitious certificates, and to marry 
persons who would declare only the initials of their names. We read in a a journal of 
the time the following case:--
	"On Saturday last a Fleet parson was convicted before Sir Ric. Brocas of forty-
three oaths (on the information of a plyer for weddings there), for which a warrant 
was granted to levy L4, 6s. on the goods of the said parson but, upon application to 
his Worship, he was pleased to remit 1s. per oath upon which the plyer swore he 
would swear no more against any man upon the like occasion, finding he could get 
nothing by it."–Grub Street Journal, 20th July, 1732.
	Thus if a spinster or widow in debt desired to cheat her creditors, by 
pretending to have been married before the debt was contracted, she had only to 
present herself at one of the marriage-houses in the Fleet and, upon payment of a 
small additional fee to the clergyman, a man could instantly be found on the spot to 
act as bridegroom for a few shillings, and the worthless chaplain could find a blank 
place in his register for any year desired, so that there was no difficulty in making the 
necessary record. They would also, for a consideration, obliterate any given entry. 
The sham bridegrooms, under different names, were married over and over again, 
with the full knowledge of the clerical practitioners. If, in other instances, a libertine 
desired to possess himself of any young and unsuspecting woman who would not 
yield without being married, nothing was easier than to get the service performed at 
the Fleet, without even the specification of names; so that the poor girl might with 
impunity be shaken off at pleasure. Or if a parent found it necessary to legitimatise his 
natural children, a Fleet parson could be procured to give a marriage certificate at any 
required date. In fact, all manner of people presented themselves for marriage at the 
unholy dens in the Fleet taverns–runaway sons and daughters of peers; Irish 
adventurers and foolish rich widows; clodhoppers and ladies from St Giles's; footmen 
and decayed beauties; soldiers and servant-girls; boys in their teens and old women of 
seventy; discarded mistresses "given away" by their former admirers to pitiable and 
sordid bridegrooms; night-wanderers and intoxicated apprentices; men and women 
having already wives and husbands; young heiresses conveyed thither by force and 
compelled, in terrorem, to be brides, and common labourers and female paupers 
dragged by parish officers to the profane altar, stained by the relics of drunken orgies 
and reeking with the fumes of liquor and tobacco! Nay, it sometimes happened that 
the "contracting parties" would send from houses of vile repute for a Fleet parson, 
who could readily be found to attend even in such places and under such 
circumstances, and there unite the couple in matrimony!
	Of what were called the "Parish Weddings" it is impossible to speak in terms 
of sufficient reprobation. Many of the churchwardens and overseers of that day were 
in the frequent practice of "getting up" marriages in order to throw their paupers on 
neighbouring parishes. For example, in The Daily Post of the 4th of July, 1741, is the 
following paragraph:--
	"On Saturday last the churchwardens for a certain parish in the City, in order 
to remove a load from their own shoulders, gave forty shillings, and paid the expense 
of a Fleet marriage, to a miserable blind youth, known by the name of Ambrose Tally, 
who plays on the violin in Moorfields, in order to make a settlement on the wife and 
future family in Shoreditch parish. To secure their point they sent a parish officer to 
see the ceremony performed. One cannot but admire the ungenerous proceeding of 
this City parish, as well as their unjustifiable abetting and encouraging an irregularity 
so much and so justly complained of as these Fleet matches. Invited and uninvited 
were a great number of poor wretches, in order to spend the bride's parish fortune."
	In the Grub Street Journal for 1735 is the following letter, faithfully 
describing, says Mr Burn, the treachery and low habits of the Fleet parsons:--
	SIR,–There is a very great evil in this town, and of dangerous consequence to 
our sex, that has never been suppressed, to the great prejudice and ruin of many 
hundreds of young people every year, which I beg some of your learned heads to 
consider of, and consult of proper ways and means to prevent for the future. I mean 
the ruinous marriages that are practised in the liberty of the Fleet and thereabouts, by 
a set of drunken, swearing parsons, with their myrmidons, that wear black coats, and 
pretend to be clerks and registers to the Fleet. These ministers of wickedness ply 
about Ludgate Hill, pulling and forcing people to some pedling ale-house or a brandy-
shop to be married, even on a Sunday stopping them as they go to church and almost 
tearing their clothes off their backs. To confirm the truth of these facts I will give you 
a case or two which lately happened.
	Since Midsummer last a young lady of birth and fortune was deluded and 
forced from her friends, and, by the assistance of a wrynecked, swearing parson, 
married to an atheistical wretch, whose life is a continued practice of all manner of 
vice and debauchery. And since the ruin of my relation, another lady of my 
acquaintance had like to have been trepanned in the following manner. This lady had 
appointed to meet a gentlewoman at the Old Playhouse, in Drury Lane, but 
extraordinary business prevented her coming. Being alone when the play was done, 
she bade a boy call a coach for the city. One dressed like a gentleman helps her into it 
and jumps in after her. "Madam," says he, "this coach was called for me, and since the 
weather is so bad, and there is no other, I beg leave to bear you company. I am going 
into the City, and will set you down wherever you please." The lady begged to be 
excused; but he bade the coachman drive on. Being come to Ludgate Hill, he told her 
his sister, who waited his coming but five doors up the court, would go with her in 
two minutes. He went, and returned with his pretended sister, who asked her to step in 
one minute, and she would wait upon her in the coach. Deluded with the assurance of 
having his sister's company, the poor lady foolishly followed her into the house, when 
instantly the sister vanished and a tawny fellow in a black coat and black wig 
appeared. "Madam, you are come in good time; the Doctor was just a-going." "The 
Doctor!" says she, horribly frightened, fearing it was a madhouse; "what has the 
Doctor to do with me?" "To marry you to that gentleman. The Doctor has waited for 
you these three hours, and will be paid by you or that gentleman before you go!" 
"That gentleman," says she, recovering herself, "is worthy a better fortune than mine," 
and begged hard to be gone. But Doctor Wryneck swore she should be married, or if 
she would not, he would still have his fee, and register the marriage from that night. 
The lady, finding she could not escape without money or a pledge, told them she liked 
the gentleman so well she would certainly meet him to-morrow night, and gave them 
a ring as a pledge, which, says she, it was my mother's gift on her death-bed, 
enjoining that if ever I married it should be my wedding-ring." By which cunning 
contrivance she was delivered from the black doctor and his tawny crew. Some time 
after this I went with this lady and her brother in a coach to Ludgate Hill, in the 
daytime, to see the manner of their picking up people to be married. As soon as our 
coach stopped near Fleet Bridge, up comes one of the myrmidons. "Madam," says he, 
"you want a parson?" "Who are you?" says I. "I am the clerk and register of the Fleet." 
"Show me the chapel." At which comes a second, desiring me to go along with him. 
Says he: "That fellow will carry you to a pedling ale-house." Says a third: "Go with 
me; he will carry you to a brandy-shop." In the interim comes the Doctor. "Madam," 
says he, "I'll do your job for you presently!" "Well, gentlemen," says I, "since you 
can't agree, and I can't be married quietly, I'll put it off until another time," and so 
drove away. Learned sirs, I wrote this in regard to the honour and safety of my own 
sex; and if for our sakes you will be so good as to publish it, correcting the errors of a 
woman's pen, you will oblige our whole sex, and none more than, Sir, your constant 
reader and admirer, 
	VIRTUOUS.
	Such were but a few of the iniquities practised by the ministers of the Fleet. 
Similar transactions were carried on at the Chapel in Mayfair, the Mint in the 
Borough, the Savoy, and other places about London; until the public scandal became 
so great, especially in consequence of the marriage at the Fleet of the Hon. Henry Fox 
with Georgiana Caroline, eldest daughter of the Duke of Richmond, that at length–
not, however, without much and zealous opposition–a Marriage Bill was passed, 
enacting that any person solemnising matrimony in any other than a church or public 
chapel, without banns or licence, should, on conviction, be adjudged guilty of felony, 
and be transported for fourteen years, and that all such marriages should be void. This 
Act was to take effect from the 25th of March, 1754.
	Upon the passing of this law, Keith, the parson who has already been alluded 
to, published a pamphlet entitled, Observations on the Act for Preventing Clandestine 
Marriages. To this he prefixed his portrait. The following passages are highly 
characteristic of the man:--
	"'Happy is the wooing that is not long a-doing' is an old proverb, and a very 
true one; but we shall have no occasion for it after the 25th day of March next, when 
we are commanded to read it backwards, and from that period (fatal indeed to Old 
England!) we must date the declension of the numbers of the inhabitants of England."
	"As I have married many thousands, and consequently have on those 
occasions seen the humour of the lower class of people, I have often asked the 
married pair how long they had been acquainted; they would reply, some more, some 
less, but the generality did not exceed the acquaintance of a week, some only of a day, 
half-a-day, etc."
	"Another inconvenience which will arise from this Act will be, that the 
expense of being married will be so great, that few of the lower class of people can 
afford; for I have often heard a Fleet parson say that many have come to be married 
when they have but had half-a-crown in their pockets, and sixpence to buy a pot of 
beer, and for which they have pawned some of their clothes."
	"I remember once on a time, I was at a public-house at Ratcliffe, which then 
was full of sailors and their girls; there was fiddling, piping, jigging and eating; at 
length, one of the tars starts up and says: 'D-n ye, Jack, I'll be married just now; I will 
have my partner, and . . .' The joke took, and in less than two hours ten couples set out 
for the Fleet; I stayed their return. They returned in coaches, five women in each 
coach, the tars, some running before, others riding on the coach-box, and others 
behind. The cavalcade being over, the couples went up into an upper room, where 
they concluded the evening with great jollity. The next time I went that way I called 
on my landlord and asked him concerning this marriage adventure. He at first stared at 
me, but recollecting, he said those things were so frequent that he hardly took any 
notice of them; for, added he, it is a common thing, when a fleet comes in, to have 
two or three hundred marriages in a week's time, among the sailors."
	He humorously concludes: "If the present Act in the form it now stands should 
(which I am sure is impossible) be of service to my country, I shall then have the 
satisfaction of having been the occasion of it, because the compilers thereof have done 
it with a pure design of suppressing my Chapel, which makes me the most celebrated 
man in this kingdom, though not the greatest."
	In a letter to George Montagu, Esq., from Horace Walpole, is the following 
notice of Keith:-- 
	STRAWBERRY HILL, 11th June, 1753, 
	I shall only tell you a bon mot of Keith's, the marriage-broker, and conclude; 
'G-d d-n the Bishops!' said he (I beg Miss Montagu's pardon), so they will hinder my 
marrying. Well, let 'em, but I'll be revenged: I'll buy two or three acres of ground, and 
by G-d I'll under-bury them all.'
	The passing of the Marriage Act put a stop to the marriages at Mayfair; but the 
day before the Act came into operation (Lady Day, 17541) sixty-one couples were 
married there. In a letter to George Montagu, Esq., dated 7th July, 1753, Horace 
Walpole says: "Lady Anne Paulett's daughter is eloped with a country clergyman. The 
Duchess of Argyle harangues against the Marriage Bill not taking place immediately, 
and is persuaded that all the girls will go off before next Lady Day."
	It would exceed the limits of this brief sketch were we to give the official 
history of the different scandalous ministers who thus disgraced themselves, and 
impiously trifled with one of our most sacred institutions. That some of these 
wretched adventurers merely pretended to be clergymen is certain; but it cannot be 
denied that many of them were actually in Holy Orders. Of this latter class were 
Grierson and Wilkinson, the subjects of our present notice; and, notwithstanding the 
heavy penalties imposed by the statute, they were not to be deterred from continuing 
the dangerous and unlawful traffic in which they had been engaged. Wilkinson, who 
was the brother of a celebrated comedian of the day, it would appear, was the owner 
of a chapel in the Savoy, and Grierson was his assistant; and, their proceedings having 
at length become too notorious to be passed over, proceedings were instituted against 
them. Grierson was first apprehended, and his employer sought safety in flight; but 
supposing that he could not be deemed guilty of any offence, as he had not actually 
performed the marriage ceremony–a duty which he left to his journeyman–he returned 
to his former haunts.
	It was not long before he was secured however, and, having been convicted 
with Grierson, they were shipped off as convicts together to the colonies, in the year 
1757.


APPENDIX VII.  
An account of the various modes of punishment for adultery, in distant 
nations.
	WE consider it a part of our duty to give our readers occasionally an account 
of the various modes of punishment, for the commission of crimes, in distant nations.
	No guilt is more frequent than adultery, and none, in its progress, more 
tending to fatal consequences, involving whole families in ruin, and driving others to 
seek revenge in the blood of the spoilers of their honour.
	That adultery is a crime which has been detested by all wise and good people, 
as scandalous in its nature, pernicious to society, and destructive of religion, appears 
by the various severe laws and punishments by which legislators and magistrates have 
endeavoured to restrain it.
	The histories of the ancient heathens tell us that they thought it a crime so very 
black and abominable, that they have compared it to sacrilege, or to robbing of 
temples; and their philosophers judged it to be worse than perjury. The old Ethiopians 
ranked it with treason, as a crime of the like nature and guilt; and the Egyptians had a 
law that the man guilty of it should have a thousand stripes, and that a woman should 
lose her nose, as a mark of perpetual infamy.
	The ancient Athenians punished all adulterers with death, and even those who 
were only suspected with some less penalty. It was the custom of the Persians to 
throw the adulteress down headlong into a deep well; for, as adultery was, at one time, 
a common crime among the nobility and gentry in the court of ancient Persia, it 
became the frequent cause of rebellions, murders, and other dreadful calamities, in 
that empire.
	The tragedy of Mejistes and his whole family, occasioned by the adultery of 
his wife with Xerxes the emperor, is most horrible to relate; and the punishment of 
Appodines the physician, for debauching Amytis, the widow of Megabyzus, is also 
most shocking and terrible.
	The old lawgivers of Greece punished this crime with death. Among the 
Lybians it was the custom to treat married women guilty of adultery in the most 
severe manner, without mercy and without pardon.
	In a certain city of Crete, when an adulterer was caught in the fact, and 
judicially convicted, he was first adjudged to be covered with a crown of wool, in 
derision of his soft and effeminate nature, signified by that material and the animal 
from whence it was taken, then publicly to pay a heavy fine, and to be rendered 
incapable of bearing any office in the government.
	The King of the Tenideans made a law that the adulterer should be beheaded 
with an axe; and commanded his own son, found guilty of this fact, to be put to death 
in that manner.
	The Lepreans made a law that the men should be led round the city for three 
days together, and then burnt in the face with a brand of indelible infamy; and that the 
women should stand in the market-place for eleven successive days, clothed only with 
a thin transparent garment, which should hang loose and untied, in order to expose 
them more to public shame, contempt, and laughter.
	Hippomines, one of the kings of Athens, having caught an adulterer with his 
daughter Limona, ordered him to be tied to the wheel of a chariot, and her to one of 
the horses, and to be dragged about the streets till they died; a shameful and horrid 
spectacle to the whole city, but a public example of the most severe and impartial 
justice.
	Dio the consul, the first King of the Romans, made a law that the faulty wife 
should be put to death after what manner her husband or relations thought fit; which 
law was afterwards confirmed, and continued in force for many years. But the rigidly 
virtuous Cato allowed the husband to dispatch his wife immediately on finding her 
guilty, without staying for the forms of justice. Many also of the Roman emperors 
punished this crime with present death; though it must be confessed, indeed, that 
many others of them, with their empresses and daughters, and ladies of the highest 
quality, when Rome was declining, were notoriously guilty.
	We read of many Julias and Messalinas in the reign of the twelve Caesars, and 
so downwards, for a great length of time.
	This vice soon became very common among them in the days of their 
conquests, national influence, and prosperity; and yet, such diligence and labour had 
there been used to bring offenders to condign punishment, that Tacitus says, when he 
was a chief officer of Rome, he found in the public records the names of three 
thousand who had been put to death for committing adultery. Even the heathen 
Romans always punished malefactors convicted of this crime by banishment, and, in 
cases of the highest degree, with death.
	The Hungarians, in those days when virtue was in more esteem than at present, 
made death the punishment, with dreadful infliction. The father was compelled to 
conduct and force his own daughter to the place of execution, the husband his wife, 
and the brother his sister.
	In Old Saxony a woman convicted of this crime was punished precisely as the 
English law punished the murderer of her husband–strangled, and then burnt to ashes. 
The adulterer was then hung up over her grave; or else the chaste matrons of the town 
where the fact was committed had liberty to scourge him with whips and rods, from 
one village to another, until he died.
	The Turks adopted the Levitical law, and stoned such offenders to death; 
though, before the law of Moses, the adulteress, when condemned, was burnt alive.
	In holy writ, the prophet Jeremiah intimates that the King of Babylon was 
more cruel than any other monarch, for he roasted to death Zedekiah, the son of 
Maaseiah, and Ahad, the son of Kolaiah, because they had committed adultery with 
their neighbours' wives.
	At this day, in Turkey, adulteries are often punished by drowning the guilty 
woman, and castrating the man.
	The Spaniards and the Italians, by nature jealous and severe, wherever they 
suspect a man guilty with their wives, wait an opportunity of plunging a dagger 
secretly in his heart.
	In France, five hundred years ago, two gentlemen of Normandy, who were 
brothers, were flayed alive, and hung upon gibbets, for adultery.
	Modern writers have stigmatized this crime with the name it deserves–a most 
execrable villainy. Some of the old fathers of the Church have declared their minds 
with such sharpness and vehemence, as to pronounce it, in many cases, unpardonable.
	If we look into the old books of the civil and canon laws we shall find that the 
several punishments made and ordained by them were either death by the sword or the 
loss of their noses, or some singular brand of infamy, or some large pecuniary mulct, 
or banishment; as we find by the old statutes of the Belgians and Hollanders. If a 
father caught his daughter in the fact, he might kill her and her gallant upon the spot; 
but a husband was empowered, in the like cases, to put the latter only to death, but the 
wife was reserved to the judgment of the law.
	Adultery, from being more immediately an offence against the Church, has 
been generally excepted out of the acts of pardon and indemnity, as an evil in itself, or 
of that nature which kings themselves cannot or will not pardon.
	It would be endless to recount the many kingdoms and republics, with all their 
different laws and customs, where this abominable crime hath been, and still is, 
chastised and exposed with very signal, infamous, painful, and terrible punishments. 
In England, we are sorry to say, its commission now too often goes unpunished, 
whether in the prince or the pickpocket.
	Let, however, this short extract from eminent authors, contrasted with its 
barefaced commission in our own country, give the immoral and incontinent a 
specimen of the opinion of the wise and sober part of mankind; and let them dread the 
examples of the downfall of mighty empires from profligacy, lest its general adoption 
hurl their country into the like fate.


APPENDIX VIII  
The Jail Fever

	THIS malignant distemper was fatal and frequent in old Newgate and other 
county jails in different parts of England.
	The assize held at Oxford in the year 1577, called the "Black Assize," was a 
dreadful instance of the deadly effects of the jail fever. The judges, jury, witnesses, 
nay, in fact every person, except the prisoners, women and chiLdren, in court were 
killed by a foul air, which at first was thought to have arisen out of the bowels of the 
earth; but that great philosopher, Lord Bacon, proved it to have come from the 
prisoners taken out of a noisome jail and brought into court to take their trials; and 
they alone, inhaling foul air, were not injured by it.
	Baker's Chronicle, a work of the highest authenticity, thus speaks of the Black 
Assize:
	"The Court were surprised with a pestilent savour, whether arising from the 
noisome smell of the prisoners, or from the damp of the ground, is uncertain; but all 
that were present, within forty hours died, except the prisoners, and the women and 
children; and the contagion went no farther. There died Robert Bell, Lord Chief 
Baron, Robert De Olie, Sir William Babington, the High Sheriff of Oxfordshire, some 
of the most eminent Lawyers, the Jurors, and three hundred others, more or less."
	In the year 1730 the Lord Chief Baron Pengelly, with several of his officers 
and servants; Sir James Sheppard, Serjeant-at-Law; John Pigot, Esq., High Sheriff for 
Somersetshire, died at Blandford, on the Western Circuit of the Lent Assize, from the 
infected stench brought with the prisoners from Ilchester Jail to their trials at Taunton, 
in which town the infection afterwards spread and carried off some hundred persons.
	In 1754 and 1755 this distemper prevailed in Newgate to a degree which 
carried off more than one-fifth of the prisoners.
	Others attributed the cause of this sudden mortality at Oxford to witchcraft, the 
people in those times being very superstitious. In Webster's Display of Witchcraft we 
find the following account of the Black Assize:--
	"The 4th and 5th days of July, 1559, were holden the assizes at Oxford, where 
was arraigned and condemned, one Rowland Jenkes, for his seditious tongue, at which 
time there arose such a damp, that almost all were smothered. Very few escaped that 
were not thken at that instant. The jurors died presently–shortly after died Sir Robert 
Bell, Lord Chief Baron, Sir Robert De Olie, Sir Wm. Babington, Mr Weneman, Mr 
De Olie, High Sheriff, Mr Davers, Mr Harcourt, Mr Kirle, Mr Pheteplace, Mr 
Greenwood, Mr Foster, Serjeant Baram, Mr Stevens, etc. There died in Oxford 300 
persons, and sickened there, but died in other places, 200 and odd, from the 6th of 
July to the 12th of August, after which day died not one of that sickness, for one of 
them infected not another, nor any one woman or child died thereof. This is the 
punctual relation, according to our English annals which relate nothing of what should 
be the cause of the arising of such a damp. Just at the conjuncture of time when 
Jenkes was condemned, there being none before, and so it could not be a prison 
infection; for that would have manifested itself by smell, or operating sooner. But to 
take away all scruple, and to assign the true cause, it was thus: It fortuned that a 
manuscript fell into my hands, collected by an ancient gentleman of York, who was a 
great observer and gatherer of strange things and facts, who lived about the time of 
this accident happening at Oxford, wherein it is related thus: 'That Rowland Jenkes, 
being imprisoned for treasonable words, spoken against the queen, and being a popish 
recusant, had, notwithstanding, during the time of his restraint, liberty some time to 
walk abroad with a keeper; and that one day he came to an apothecary, and showed 
him a receipt which he desired him to make up; but the apothecary, upon view of it, 
told him, that it was a strong and dangerous receipt, and required some time to prepare 
it; but also asked him to what use he would apply it. He answered, to kill the rats, that, 
since his imprisonment, spoiled his books; so being satisfied, he promised to make it 
ready. After a certain time he cometh to know if it were ready; but the apothecary 
said, the ingredients were so hard to procure, that he had not done it, and so gave him 
the receipt again, of which he had taken a copy, which mine author had there precisely 
written down, but did seem so horribly poisonous, that I cut it forth, lest it might fall 
into the hands of wicked persons. But after, it seems, he had it prepared, and, against 
the day of his trial, had made a wick of it (for so is the word, that is, so fitted, that like 
a candle it might be fired) which, as soon as ever he was condemned, he lighted, 
having provided himself a tinder-box, and steel to strike fire. And whosoever should 
know the ingredients of that wick, or candle, and the manner of the composition, will 
easily be persuaded of the virulency and venomous effect of it.'"
	Sir Stephen Theodore Jansen, one of the most philanthropic magistrates of the 
City of London, took great interest on behalf of the regulation of prisons, and the 
amelioration of the miseries of unfortunate prisoners.
	When Chamberlain of London, in the year 1767, he published a pamphlet 
addressed to the Lord Mayor, in the cause of jail fevers. He was Sheriff of London in 
the year 1750, when the putrid fever, the consequence of filth and foul air, made such 
dreadful havoc in the Old Bailey Sessions.
	Sir Theodore strongly recommended a plan similar to that of York Castle, 
which, he said, covered no less than two acres and a rood of ground, with great plenty 
of water and other conveniences.
	He warmly remonstrated against the spot then proposed for the reboilding of 
Newgate. He said it did not occupy more than three-quarters of an acre, and that the 
number of convicts in that prison was more than treble those of York Castle.
	In the year 1772 the assizes for the Summer Circuit were adjourned for 
Hampshire from the 17th of July to the 2nd of September, on account of an infectious 
distemper in Winchester Jail.
	An expositor on this subject, who wrote under the signature of "A 
Philanthropist," during that rage of the jail fever, says:
	"The public may be rather concerned than surprised, at the deplorable 
consequences of gaol distempers, and at the fatal instances of their contagion. Several 
judges, sheriffs, magistrates, juries, and whole courts of judicature, have been infected 
by those contagious diseases, which caused the loss of many valuable lives, 
particularly at the Old Bailey, and formerly at the assizes at Oxford, all owing to the 
horrid neglect of gaolers, and even of the sheriffs and magistrates, whose office it is to 
compel the gaolers, to the most rigorous repeated orders and attention to their duty, 
without the least indulgence or remission; as the gaolers are (some excepted) 
frequently low bred, mercenary and oppressive barbarous fellows, who think of 
nothing but enriching themselves by the most cruel extortion; and who have less 
regard for the life of a poor prisoner than for the life of a brute.
	"The felons of this kingdom lie worse than dogs or swine, and are kept much 
more uncleanly than those animals are in kennels and sties, according to all accounts 
from clergymen, who are obliged to go to the gaols. From them I have been assured, 
that the stench and nastiness are so nauseous, that the very atmosphere is pestiferous, 
and that no persons enter therein, without the risque of their health or lives, which 
prevents even many clergymen and physicians from going there, and assisting their 
sick and dying fellow-creatures; so that they live and die like brutes, even worse than 
many beasts, to the disgrace of human nature.
	"Every person endowed with the least principle of real humanity, and of true 
policy, must be affected with such barbarities, neglects, uncleanliness, and dangers. A 
contagion of that kind may spread over a whole country and kingdom; the greatest 
precaution ought therefore to be taken in time.
	"The gaolers ought to be forced to have all the rooms sprinkled and fumigated 
with vinegar every day: as should all the felons, before their appearance in a court of 
judicature; for some hundred prisoners, particularly criminals, are early killed by a 
sort of pestilence and vermin among them, occasioned by filth and nastiness, and a 
corrupted air.
	"All hospitals, prisons, and workhouses, should have bathing-places, for the 
sake of cleanliness and health, as in Asia."


APPENDIX IX  
Torture

	IN former times such prisoners as contumaciously refused to plead to their 
indictments underwent torture until they complied with the law as it then regarded 
their case. This punishment is, however, no longer deemed compatible with freedom; 
and it was therefore abrogated in the year 1772. Yet, as the inhuman practice still 
prevails in some of the English settlements abroad, and as many nations continue to 
torture criminals, we shall offer some observations thereon.
	In order to extort confession, torture is not peculiar to Roman Catholic 
countries, but is even a custom in China. The instrument of barbarity called the rack is 
composed of a thick strong plank, having a contrivance at one end to secure the hands, 
and at the other a sort of double wooden vice. The vice is formed of three stout 
uprights, two of which are moveable, but steadied by a block that is fastened on each 
side. The ankles of the culprit being placed in the machine, a cord is passed round the 
uprights, and held fast by two men. The chief tormentor then gradually introduces a 
wedge into the intervals, alternately changing sides. The method of forcing an 
expansion at the upper part causes the lower ends to draw towards the central upright, 
which is fixed unto the plank, and thereby compresses the ankles of the wretched 
sufferer; who, provided he be fortified by innocence or resolution, endures the 
advances of the wedge, until his bones are reduced to a jelly.
	Stedman, in his account of Surinam, relates the following horrid scene, to 
which he was an eye-witness:
	'There was a negro whose name was Neptune, no slave, but his own master, 
and a carpenter by trade: he was young and handsome, but, having killed the overseer 
of the estate of Altona, in the Para Creek, in consequence of some dispute, he justly 
forfeited his life. The particulars, however, are worth relating:
	'This man having stolen a sheep to entertain a favourite young woman, the 
overseer, who burned with jealousy, had determined to see him hanged; to prevent 
which, the negro shot him dead among the sugar-canes. For these offences, of course, 
he was sentenced to be broken alive upon the rack, without the benefit of the coup de 
grace, or mercy-stroke. Informed of the dreadful sentence, he composedly laid himself 
down upon his back on a strong cross, on which, with his arms and legs extended, he 
was fastened by ropes. The executioner, also a black man, having now with a hatchet 
chopped off his left hand, next took up a heavy iron bar, with which, by repeated 
blows, he broke his bones to shivers, till the marrow, blood, and splinters, flew about 
the field; but the prisoner never uttered a groan nor a sigh! The ropes being next 
unlashed, I imagined him dead, and felt happy; till the magistrates stirring to depart, 
he writhed himself from the cross, when he fell on the grass, and damned them all as a 
set of barbarous rascals. At the same time, removing his right hand by the help of his 
teeth, he rested his head on part of the timber, and asked the by-standers for a pipe of 
tobacco, which was infamously answered by kicking and spitting on him, till I, with 
some American seamen, thought proper to prevent it. He then begged his head might 
be chopped off; but to no purpose. At last, seeing no end to his misery, he declared, 
"that though he had deserved death, he had not expected to die so many deaths; 
however, (said he,) you Christians have missed your aim at last, and I now care not 
were I to remain thus one month longer." After which he sung two extempore songs 
with a clear voice; the subjects of which were to bid adieu to his living friends, and to 
acquaint his deceased relations that in a very little time be should be with them, to 
enjoy their company for ever in a better place. This done, he calmly entered into 
conversation with some gentlemen concerning his trial, relating every particular with 
uncommon tranquillity. "But (said he abruptly), by the sun it must be eight o'clock, 
and by any longer discourse I should be sorry to be the cause of your losing your 
breakfast." Then, casting his eyes on a Jew, whose name was De Vries, "Apropos, Sir 
(said he), won't you please to pay me the ten shillings you owe me?" "For what to 
do?" "To buy meat and drink, to be sure–don't you perceive I'm to be kept alive?" 
Which speech, on seeing the Jew stare like a fool, this mangled wretch accompanied 
with a loud and hearty laugh. Next observing the soldier that stood sentinel over him 
biting occasionally a piece of dry bread, he asked him how it came to pass that be, a 
white man, should have no meat to eat along with it? " Because I am not so rich," 
answered the soldier, "Then I will make you a present, Sir (said the negro). First pick 
my hand that was chopped off, clean to the bones; next begin to devour my body till 
you are glutted; when you will have both bread and meat, as best becomes you:" 
which piece of humour was followed by a second laugh. And thus he continued until I 
left him, which was about three hours after the dreadful execution.
	'Wonderful it is, indeed, that human nature should be able to endure so much 
torture! which assuredly could only he supported by a mixture of rage, contempt, 
pride, and the glory of braving his tormentors, from whom he was so soon to escape.
	'I never recall to my remembrance without the most painful sensation this 
horrid scene, which must revolt the feelings of all who have one spark of humanity. If 
the reader, however, should be offended with my dwelling so long on this unpleasant 
subject, let it be some relief to his reflection to consider this punishment not inflicted 
as a wanton and unprovoked act of cruelty, but as the extreme severity of the Surinam 
laws on a desperate wretch, suffering, as an example to others, for complicated 
crimes; while, at the same time, it cannot but give me, and I hope many others, some 
consolation to reflect that the above barbarous mode of punishment was hitherto never 
put in practice in the British colonies. I must now relate an incident which, as it had a 
momentary effect on my imagination, might have had a lasting one on some who had 
not investigated the real cause of it, and which it gave me no small satisfaction to 
discover.
	'About three in the afternoon, walking towards the place of execution, with my 
thoughts full of the affecting scene, and the image of the sufferer fresh in my mind, 
the first object I saw was his head, at some distance, placed on a stake, nodding to me 
backwards and forwards, as if he had been really alive, I instantly stopped short, and, 
seeing no person in the Savannah, nor a breath of wind sufficient to move a leaf or a 
feather, I acknowledge that I was rivetted to the ground where I stood, without having 
the resolution of advancing one step for some time; till, reflecting that I must be weak 
indeed not to approach this dead skull, and find out the wonderful phenomenon if 
possible, I boldly walked up, and instantly discovered the natural case, by the return 
of a vulture to the gallows, who perched upon it as if he meant to dispute with me this 
feast of carrion; which bird, having already picked out one of the eyes, had fled at my 
first approach, and, striking the skull with his talons, as be took his sudden flight, 
occasioned the motion already described. I shall now only add, that this poor wretch, 
after living more than six hours, had been knocked on the head by the commiserating 
sentinel, the marks of whose musket were perfectly visible by a large open fracture in 
the skull.'
	The torture of a criminal during the course of his trial is a cruelty consecrated 
by custom in most nations. It is used with an intent either to make him confess his 
crime, or explain some contradictions into which he had been led during his 
examination; or to discover his accomplices; or for some kind of metaphysical and 
incomprehensible purgation of infamy; or, finally, in order to discover other crimes, 
of which he is not accused, but of which he may be guilty.
	No man can be judged a criminal until he be found guilty; nor can society take 
from him the public protection until it have been proved that he has violated the 
conditions on which it was granted. What right, then, but that of power, can authorize 
the punishment of a citizen, so long as there remains any doubt of his guilt? This 
dilemma is frequent. Either he is guilty or not guilty. If guilty, he should only suffer 
the punishment ordained by the laws, and torture becomes useless, as his confession is 
unnecessary. If he be not guilty, you torture the innocent; for, in the eye of the law, 
every man is innocent whose crime has not been proved. Besides, it is confounding all 
relations to expect that a man should be both the accuser and the accused; and that 
pain should be the test of truth, as if truth resided in the muscles and fibres of a wretch 
in torture. By this method the robust will escape and the feeble be condemned. These 
are the inconveniences of this pretended test of truth, worthy only of a cannibal, and 
which the Romans, in many respects barbarous, and whose savage virtue has been too 
much admired, reserved for the slaves alone.
	What is the political intention of punishments?–To terrify, and be an example 
to others. Is this intention answered by thus privately torturing the guilty and the 
innocent? It is doubtless of importance that no crime should remain unpunished: but it 
is useless to make a public example of the author of a crime bid in darkness. A crime 
already committed, and for which there can be no remedy, can only be punished by a 
political society with an intention that no hopes of impunity should induce others to 
commit the same. If it be true that the number of those who from fear or virtue respect 
the laws is greater than of those by whom they are violated, the risk of torturing an 
Innocent person is greater, as there is a greater probability that, ceteris paribus, an 
individual hath observed than he hath infringed the laws.
	There is another ridiculous motive for torture–namely, to purge a man from 
infamy. Ought such an abuse to be tolerated in the nineteenth century? Can pain, 
which is a sensation, have any connexion with a moral sentiment, a matter of opinion? 
Perhaps the rack may be considered as the refiner's furnace.
	It is not difficult to trace this senseless law to its origin; for an absurdity 
adopted by a whole nation must have some affinity with other ideas established and 
respected by the same nation. This custom seems to be the offspring of religion, by 
which mankind, in all nations, and in all ages, are so generally influenced. We are 
taught by our infallible Church that those stains of sin contracted through human 
frailty, and which have not deserved the eternal anger of the Almighty, are to be 
purged away in another life by an incomprehensible fire. Now infamy is a stain; and, 
if the punishments and fire of purgatory can take away all spiritual stains, why should 
not the pain of torture take away those of a civil nature? I imagine that the confession 
of a criminal, which in some tribunals is required as being essential to his 
condemnation, has a similar origin, and has been taken from the mysterious tribunal 
of penitence, where the confession of sins is a necessary part of the sacrament. Thus 
have men abused the unerring light of revelation; and, in the times of tractable 
ignorance, having no other, they naturally had recourse to it on every occasion, 
making the most remote and absurd applications. Moreover, infamy is a sentiment 
regulated neither by the laws nor by reason, but entirely by opinion; but torture 
renders the victim infamous, and therefore cannot take infamy away.
	Another intention of torture is to oblige the supposed criminal to reconcile the 
contradictions into which he may have fallen during his examinations; as if the dread 
of punishment, the uncertainty of his fate, the solemnity of the Court, the majesty of 
the judge, and the ignorance of the accused, were not abundantly sufficient to account 
for contradictions, which are so common to men even in a state of tranquillity, and 
which must necessarily be multiplied by the perturbation of the mind of a man 
entirely engaged in the thoughts of saving himself from imminent danger.
	This infamous test of truth is a remaining monument of that ancient and 
savage legislation in which trials by fire, by boiling water, or the uncertainty of 
combats, were called judgments of God; as if the links of that eternal chain whose 
beginning is in the breast of the First Cause of all things could ever be disunited by 
the institutions of men. The only difference between torture and trials by fire and 
boiling water is, that the event of the first depends on the will of the accused, and of 
the second on a fact entirely physical and external; but this difference is apparent 
only, not real. A man on the rack, in the convulsions of torture, has it as little in his 
power to declare the truth as, in former times, to prevent, without fraud, the effects of 
fire or boiling water.
	Every act of the will is invariably in proportion to the force of the impression 
on our senses. The impression of pain, then, may increase to such a degree, that, 
occupying the mind entirely, it will compel the sufferer to use the shortest method of 
freeing himself from torment. His answer, therefore, will be an effect as necessary as 
that of fire or boiling water, and he will accuse himself of crimes of which he is 
innocent; so that the very means employed to distinguish the innocent from the guilty 
will most effectually destroy all difference between them.
	It would be superfluous to confirm these reflections by examples of innocent 
persons who, from the agony of torture, have confessed themselves guilty: 
innumerable instances may be found in all nations and in every age. How amazing 
that mankind have always neglected to draw the natural conclusion! Lives there a man 
who, if he has carried his thoughts ever so little beyond the necessities of life, when 
he reflects on such cruelty, is not tempted to fly from society, and return to his natural 
state of independence?
	The result of torture, then, is a matter of calculation, and depends on the 
constitution, which differs in every individual, and is in proportion to his strength and 
sensibility; so that to discover truth by this method is a problem which may be better 
resolved by a mathematician than a judge, and may be thus stated. The force of the 
muscles and the sensibility of the nerves of an innocent person being given, it is 
required to find the degree of pain necessary to make him confess himself guilty of a 
given crime.
	The examination of the accused is intended to find out the truth; but if this be 
discovered with so much difficulty in the air, gesture, and countenance of a man at 
ease, how can it appear in a countenance distorted by the convulsions of torture? 
Every violent action destroys those small alterations in the features which sometimes 
disclose the sentiments of the heart.
	These truths were known to the Roman legislators, amongst whom slaves 
only, who were not considered as citizens, were tortured. They are known to the 
English, a nation in which the progress of science, superiority in commerce, riches, 
and power, its natural consequences, together with the numerous examples of virtue 
and courage, leave no doubt of the excellence of its laws. They have been 
acknowledged in Sweden, where torture has been abolished. They are known to one 
of the wisest monarchs in Europe, who, having seated philosophy on the throne, by 
his beneficent legislation has made his subjects free, though dependent on the laws; 
the only freedom that reasonable men can desire in the present state of things. In 
short, torture has not been thought necessary in the laws of armies, composed chiefly 
of the dregs of mankind, where its use should seem most necessary. Strange 
phenomenon, that a set of men, hardened by slaughter and familiar with blood, should 
teach humanity to the sons of peace!
	A very strange but necessary consequence of the use of torture is, that the case 
of the innocent is worse than that of the guilty. With regard to the first, either he 
confesses the crime which he has not committed, and is condemned; or he is 
acquitted, and has suffered a punishment he did not deserve. On the contrary, the 
person who is really guilty has the most favourable side of the question; for, if he 
supports the torture with firmness and resolution, be is acquitted, and has gained, 
having exchanged a greater punishment for a less.
	The law by which torture is authorized says–'Men, be insensible to pain. 
Nature has indeed given you an irresistible self-love, and an unalienable right of self-
preservation; but I create in you a contrary sentiment, an heroical hatred of 
yourselves. I command you to accuse yourselves, amid to declare the truth, amidst the 
tearing of your flesh and the dislocation of your bones.'
	Torture is used to discover whether the criminal be guilty of other crimes 
besides those of which he is accused, which is equivalent to the following reasoning–
'Thou art guilty of one crime, therefore it is possible that thou mayest have committed 
a thousand others; but the affair being doubtful, I must try it by my criterion of truth. 
The laws order thee to be tormented because thou art guilty, because thou mayest be 
guilty, and because I choose thou shouldest be guilty.'
	Torture is used to make the criminal discover his accomplices; but, if it has 
demonstrated that it is not a proper means of discovering truth, how can it serve to 
discover the accomplices, which is one of the truths required? Will not the man who 
accuses himself yet more readily accuse others? Besides, is it just to torment one man 
for the crime of another? May not the accomplices be found out by the examination of 
the witnesses, or of the criminal–from the evidence, or from the nature of the crime 
itself–in short, by all the means that have been used to prove the guilt of the prisoner? 
The accomplices commonly fly when their comrade is taken.
	All man kind, being exposed to the attempts of violence or perfidy, detest the 
crimes of which they may possibly be the victims; all desire that the principal 
offender and his accomplices may be punished; nevertheless, there is a natural 
compassion in the human heart, which makes all men detest the cruelty of torturing 
the accused, in order to extort confession. The law has not condemned them; and yet, 
though uncertain of their crime, you inflict a punishment more horrible than that 
which they are to suffer when their guilt is confirmed. 'Possibly thou mayest be 
innocent; but I will torture thee that I may be satisfied: not that I intend to make thee 
any recompense for the thousand deaths which I have made thee suffer, in lieu of that 
which is preparing for thee.' Who does not shudder at the idea? St. Augustin opposed 
such cruelty; the Romans tortured their slaves only; and Quintilian, recollecting that 
they were men, reproved the Romans for such want of humanity.
	If there were but one nation in the world which had abolished the use of 
torture–if in that nation crimes were no more frequent than in others–and if that nation 
be more enlightened and more flourishing since the abolition–its example surely were 
sufficient for the rest of the world. England alone might instruct all other nations in 
this particular, hut England is not the only nation. Torture hath been abolished in other 
countries, and with success; the question, therefore, is decided. Shall not a people who 
pique themselves on their politeness pride themselves also on their humanity? shall 
they obstinately persist in their inhumanity, merely because it is an ancient custom? 
Reserve, at least, such cruelty for the punishment of those hardened wretches who 
shall have assassinated the father of a family, or the father of his country; but that a 
young person who commits a fault which leaves no traces behind it should suffer 
equally with a parricide, is not this an useless piece of barbarity?


APPENDIX X 
Swindling

  
Card-sharpers

	THOUGH our descriptions of the variety of thieves constantly prowling, like 
the beasts of the forest, for plunder, have been numerous, and, unless we had 
accompanied them with proof, would almost exceed the belief of our country readers, 
yet have we still to add other species of robbery. Among the finished villains of 
London are a gang who extort money from gentlemen, charging them with pretended 
crimes. These fellows are generally well dressed, and accost elegant young men, 
demanding money; and, on refusal, threaten to reveal a pretended abominable 
intercourse. Others there are who have debauched innocent girls, and, when the 
effects of the illicit commerce is evident, further seduce the unhappy creatures to 
swear some wealthy married man as the seducer, and, in case of his resisting the false 
accusations, to swear that he is the father, thus at once rendering a numerous family 
unhappy.
	Other profligate wretches, as indeed we have already shown, swear robberies 
against innocent men, in order to obtain the reward for the apprehension of felons. 
Other frauds are practised, which we shall hereafter notice, of dropping counterfeit 
gold articles and diamonds, and picking the parcel up in the presence of some 
innocent unsuspicious countryman, whom they acknowledge to be entitled to one half 
of the pretended prize, and thus cheat him out of whatever property he may have 
about him, on depositing the spurious article with him, to be valued hereafter.
	Instances of some of these artful villainies we have already adduced; but the 
following has, on perusing the case, drawn from us these additional observations. In 
truth, they cannot be too often repeated, to guard countrymen against the numerous 
deceptions practised in the metropolis.
	Mr William Hird, of the village of Leyburne, in the North Riding of the county 
of York, about forty years ago, came on business to London. One day the countryman 
was caught in a heavy shower of rain, and sought shelter under a gateway on Holborn 
Hill, where others were for the same reason assembled. There he was accosted by a 
well-dressed man, who observed that the storm was not likely to abate, and proposed 
to the innocent countryman to retire to an adjoining public house, and wait for fair 
weather over a pot of porter. The invitation was readily accepted, and they went to the 
house, where they found three or four more, who declared that they came on the same 
errand.
	The porter being drank, a bowl of punch was proposed; and the countryman, 
on such an occasion, determined not to be outdone in acts of courtesy, assented. While 
the intoxicating liquor passed quickly round, one of the strangers observed that, as the 
rain increased, a game at cards would pass the heavy time unnoticed; and cards were 
immediately placed upon the table.
	Mr Hird was, in his village club-room, thought to be expert at this amusement; 
and, confident of his abilities, he scrupled not to take a hand. But what are the best 
players, who play fairly, among London sharpers?–Mere dupes.
	The game began, when Mr Hird and his partner were for some time successful. 
The bets, at first small, were doubled, until the stakes became high, when the poor 
countryman not only lost his gainings, but all his cash soon followed.
	This failure being evident, a kind friend in the company advanced him money 
on his watch, then upon his silver buckles, and in fact every valuable article about him 
was thus pawned. Entirely stripped, one of the company went out to observe the 
weather, another disappeared on another pretence, until the countryman was left 
alone. Then came in the landlord, with his demand for the liquor drank, and payment 
for the fatal cards.
	In vain did poor Mr Hird plead his misfortune; the host insisted on being paid, 
alleging that the company were all strangers to him, and he must look to the last. 
References for payment were refused, and the poor countryman was obliged to part 
with his coat and hat, and, the rain still continuing, to return to his inn, wet to the skin. 
	Swindling has of late years become so common a practice in the metropolis 
that writers for diurnal papers frequently amuse themselves in relating adroit 
performances of this nature in burlesque, pun and hyperbole. One of these scribbling 
wits thus made merry with a silly tradesman on being fiddled out of his money:
"SWINDLING SET TO MUSIC."
	A country-looking man lately called at a haberdasher's shop with a fiddle 
under his arm, and after purchasing and paying for some trifling articles, which he 
pretended to want, asked to be allowed to leave his purchase and his fiddle till He did 
some other business through the town. He had scarcely gone out when in comes an 
accomplice (as it turned out), who, observing the fiddle, takes it up and tries it, and is 
quite charmed with it. 'This is the most charming fiddle I have ever met with; is it for 
sale?–I'd give fifty guineas for that fiddle.' He was told it was not for sale, but 
belonged to a countryman who had just left it there till he should make some other 
calls. 'When he comes back for it, try and buy it from him–make the best bargain with 
him you can for yourself; but whatever you buy it at, I promise to give you fifty 
guineas for it, and I will call again by and by.' By and by back comes the countryman 
for his fiddle. ' Will you part with that fiddle?' says the haberdasher; 'I have taken a 
fancy for it.' The man answered he had no intention of parting with his fiddle, for he 
knew it to be a very good one, and did not know if he could get such another. 'I'll give 
you fifty shillings for it,' said the haberdasher. 'No, no.' 'Five guineas for it,' said the 
haberdasher. 'I'll not take twenty,' said the countryman. In short, after a great deal of 
chapmanship, the haberdasher got the fiddle at forty guineas; and a happy man was 
he, thinking he had made ten guineas by the bargain. But he has been allowed to keep 
the fiddle, to solace himself for the loss of his money. The fifty-guinea merchant 
never returned."
	On the 13th of October, 1809, a most infamous act of swindling was practised 
on eight poor infirm widows in the Almshouses, near the New Grove Road, Mile End 
Road, by a well-dressed man, about five feet two inches high, stoutish made, hair tied, 
and light green coat. He went to one of the poor pensioners' houses and thus addressed 
them: 'You are all widows–a lady has left you eight pounds'; he then took their names 
down, and inquired who would go with him, saying the minister and gentlemen were 
waiting for them, that they must bring twenty-three shillings in silver to give change, 
or they could not be paid. One of the poor women borrowed the money at a 
neighbouring public-house, and a young woman went with him to Stepney Church. 
He told her to wait at the porch while he went and spoke to the clerk, which she saw 
him do, and supposed all was right; but he told the clerk he wanted to put up the banns 
of marriage, and the clerk desired him to come when the service was over. He came 
out, told the girl all was right, and she must go with him. He then asked the 
unsuspecting girl for the twenty-three shillings and decamped with the money. The 
girl went back to the clerk, where she was soon informed of her mistake, to the no 
small grief of the poor disappointed pensioners.


APPENDIX XI  
An Exposée of the whole system of GAMBLING, as practised in the most 
notorious LONDON HELLS

CHAPTER ONE
	OF all the disgraceful scenes which deform the metropolis, the most vicious 
and ruinous is that of the fashionable hells, or rouge et noir gambling; and it is matter 
of astonishment and reproach, that they have yet remained undisturbed by the law, 
and hitherto unnoticed by the public press. At this time a large number of these sinks 
of iniquity are open for the purposes of fraud and seduction in noon-day, and not a 
few profane the Sabbath by their diabolical and sinful practices.
	Although the metropolis has been time out of mind infested with the imps of 
play, it has only been within the last ten years that they have dared thus openly to 
pursue the practice in the broad face of day. It may be impossible to entirely suppress 
the vice of gambling, but surely some legislative enactment might be found which 
would destroy the bands of well-organized gamblers who now spread their nets for the 
unwary, and pursue their infamous courses in the very centre of British society, and in 
the neighbourhood of the throne and the two houses of parliament.
	In exposing the vice we shall, however, cautiously avoid giving additional 
pain to the agonized feelings of those who, from the force of example and the 
seductive influence of fashion, may have been incautiously made the dupes of wily 
and experienced sharpers.
	Our object is only to attack the incorrigible and the acknowledged professor; 
the hunter who starts the game, and pursues his victim till he has, for his own base 
purpose, plunged him, and with him, wife, children, kindred, friend, into the gulf of 
misery, penury, and destruction. To unravel the mystic web of secrecy with which 
these sharpers hive surrounded themselves, was a work of no mean exertion or 
enterprise. That we have succeeded (beyond even our most sanguine wishes) will be 
of little gratification to us, if we should fail in producing what we most desire, the 
interference of the legislature in suppressing these schools of infamy. To this end we 
labour, and to effect this purpose we shall give a history of the different gambling-
houses, the proprietors, the frequenters, the game, hours of play, stakes played for; 
with such anecdotes as will tend to illustrate and expose the baneful and pernicious 
effects of gambling.
	The gambling-house displays a heterogeneous mass of human character, 
weakness, folly, and duplicity, that is not to be met with in any other situation. We 
shall endeavour to place an impartial picture before the eyes of our readers, and it will 
be the fault of those who are addicted to play, if they do not profit by the exposure.
	The following is a list of the principal gambling-houses:-- The G-- H--, in P-- 
M--, formerly conducted by a Clergyman of the Church of England, (lately 
abolished). In addition to which, there are--
	Five Houses in Pall Mall 
	One House in Jermyn-street 
	Two in St. James's-street 
	One in Cleveland-row 
	One in Bennett-street 
	One in Piccadilly 
	Two in King-street 
	One in Leicester-square 
	Four in Bury-street
	To which might be added a long list of minor Hells, in and about the same 
neighbourhood.
	Some of the Principal Black Legs are known among their own fraternity by the 
following nick-names:--
	The Leviathan 
	The Mathematician 
	The Black Dwarf 
	The Hebrew Star 
	The Calculator 
	Boniface 
	The Neptune 
	The Four German Barons 
	Jack Spiggot 
	Coaxing Tom 
	Captain Whimper 
	The Pill Gilder 
	Mother Bunch 
	Count Bluster 
	Ella Rosenberg 
	Old Square Toes 
	Portugal John
	To these might be added a very numerous list of persons of the very highest 
rank in the state, not excepting some of orthodox habits, from the top of nobility down 
to the very lowest of the low, the scum and outcast of society, all commingled and 
identified in one ruinous vice; all following the same criminal pursuits, and each one 
endeavouring, by every means in his power, to ruin his fellow.
	These dens have the appearance of private dwellings, with the exception, that 
the hall door of each is left ajar, during the hours of play, like those of trap-cages, to 
catch the passing pigeons, and to obviate the delay which might be occasioned by 
knocking; a delay that might expose the customers to a glance of an unsuspecting 
creditor, a confiding father, or a starving wife. It is generally understood that a 
stranger must be what they term "introduced" before he can get admission, or 
permission, to lose his money; and this is to obviate the danger of being surprised by 
the officers of the law: but it is, alas! too easy to break through that rule; and any 
gentleman, whom the door-keeper has sufficient reason to think is not a constable, 
finds the avenues of these labyrinths too ready to his foot.
	On passing the outer door the visitor is impeded by another in the centre of the 
hall, in which is constructed a small spy-hole, exhibiting the fixed ball of a ruffian's 
eyes, intently examining his figure. If the visitor is a fair pigeon or an old crow, he is 
at once admitted by this Cyclops, and politely bowed upstairs; at the top of which 
another gate unbars its power. To this succeeds the last of these barriers, a massy iron 
door, which on opening presents the visitors of the house with a scene of dazzling 
astonishment. Around an oblong table, covered with green cloth, assemble the 
votaries of gaming on each side: while in the centre sit the priests of the ceremony: 
one to deal the cards and decide events, the other to assist him in collecting the 
plunder following these events. Behind the company are seen two or three or the 
proprietors, with eagle-eye, watching the progress of their gains: remorseless, 
avaricious, and happy, unmarked with the lines of care which contract and deform the 
faces of their victims,–"they smile, and smile, and murder while they smile."
	Their attention is always directed to the Punters, (or Players) and they talk and 
take snuff with them, not forgetting to explain the fairness of the game, and the great 
losses they have sustained! While the stranger's eye is delighted, and his avarice 
stimulated by a profusion of money flying about the table, and heaped in the centre, 
his senses become harmonized with his hopes through the influence of strong wines, 
liquors, &c., with which he is unceasingly plied by the obliging waiters; and, 
believing that his Midas touch must turn anything into gold, he boldly adventures.
	In nine cases out of ten he is successful on his first night's play; and in the 
glare of his imaginary good fortune, he loses sight of all that proper value which he 
had before been accustomed to bestow upon his money; be becomes profuse in his 
expenditure, believing that half an hour at Rouge et Noir will make up for all, and he 
blesses the inventor of a system which ensures him all the happiness of unlimited 
fortune. A few days, or weeks at the most, convince him of his chimerical castles; and 
poverty, contempt, and destruction, tumble in upon him with all their horrors. It is not 
unfrequently the case, that men who one day stood beside the proprietors of these 
tables, not only independently, but looked down upon them, the next day they have 
been obliged to entreat their pecuniary assistance, and to receive the mortification of a 
refusal.
DESCRIPTION OF A GAMBLER AT ROUGE ET NOIR
	It is heart-rending to observe the progress of the unfortunate votaries to this 
destructive game, as they gradually sink into the various stages of misery and want. A 
young man of fortune is first seen playing high stakes, with hundreds, and even 
thousands of pounds before him; he has alternate success, until losses throw him off 
his guard: desperation then seizes him, and he loses all. The following day he appears 
with a new capital; and again is unsuccessful. Thus he goes on, day after day, until his 
resources are exhausted; his credit gone, and his character blasted; he can now only 
play occasionally, and, when he does play, his stake is a crown, or less, as the 
gambling house he frequents, admits.
	His appearance, which was at first fashionable and gay, and his clothes, new 
and well-made, are now sadly changed. He is haggard and pale, pining under distress 
and care; has passed the preceding night at the Rouge Table, and afterwards lingered 
the time away at Hazard, until five or six in the morning, and finished all by a futile 
attempt at borrowing a crown, probably from the waiter at the table; his fine spirit is 
gone; he shuns the companions of his brighter days, he is himself avoided, and styled 
a Gambler, or Black Leg. Look at him–where is the Man of Fashion? This cannot be 
him, this young man has a rusty hat and thread-bare coat on: he wears patched boots, 
and dirty linen; his pantaloons are in holes, and he is detected sneaking through lanes 
and courts to avoid his creditors, for he owes money to every person who would trust 
him.
	Such is the career of the Rouge et Noir Gambler.
	
CHAPTER TWO
	THE first in order, and in consequence, of these Temples of Iniquity, (which 
has lately been closed,) was known by the name of the G-- H--. This spacious building 
was fitted up in the most extravagant style of modern elegance, a profusion of 
chandeliers and candelabras were tastefully arranged to light the victims to the altar of 
seduction. The furniture was of the most splendid description, and in the ante-room 
were arranged a collection of the most fragrant shrubs and choice exotics, forming a 
grove through which the dupes of these demons were led to destruction.
	This house was opened by a joint stock company of the most experienced 
gamblers, and was intended by its sumptuous fittings, and extravagant arrangements, 
to have been exclusively used for the purpose of easing young noblemen and men of 
fortune of their superfluous cash, and the unnecessary incumbrance of a good estate, 
or the more weighty difficulty of a large funded property.
	The project originated with, and was carried into execution by, a Reverend 
Divine, who officiated as the high-priest of this Temple of Vice.
	As there are some curious circumstances connected with the origin of this 
house, it would not be doing justice to the parties or the public to pass them by 
unnoticed, particularly as the history abounds with some curious characteristic 
anecdotes of this class of persons.
	A banker had become enamoured of a celebrated courtesan, over whose 
confidence the Reverend Professor of the Black Art had a most unlimited control. 
This lady lived in a very splendid style, kept her carriage and her establishment in 
elegant liveries, gave splendid parties to a few choice friends, and was in fact the gaze 
of fashion, and the great orb of attraction among the licentious and the giddy, who 
buzz around the unfathomable whirlpool of destructive folly. Many were the attempts 
of the Banker to obtain an interview with this adorable, but all his efforts proved 
abortive, till he had made certain arrangements with the high-priest of her presence, 
her orthodox confessor.
	Acceptances upon the Banking house were given for a sum of Five Thousand 
Pounds, and to this was added a bonus of Two Thousand more in ready rhino, such 
was the infatuation of this deluded man for a notorious Cyprian, who, but a short time 
before was a nightly attendant in the lobbies of the theatres.
	Up to this period, the Parson had been a constant visitor at the most notorious 
play-houses, occasionally picking up a crown or guinea as the pigeons were knocked 
down by the more wealthy and successful players. Tired of his dependence upon this 
precarious revenue, and elated with the success of his late negotiation (which far 
exceeded his former exploits with a French chere amie,) the Reverend determined to 
form a society of congenial worthies for the humane and moral purpose of opening a 
superior Gambling House. The abilities of the Parson were too generally 
acknowledged not to be highly appreciated, and accordingly eight other depredators 
embarked with the Parson in the New Gambling Scheme.
	The house was opened with great éclat, but the success was by no means equal 
to the anticipated gains of the parties; in short, the thing was badly managed; the 
entrance through seven different doors before you gained the Sanctum Sanctorum was 
rather calculated to create suspicion in the minds of the most volatile or thoughtless; 
in fact, the object was too notorious, and young men of fashion, although quite foolish 
enough generally speaking, were not to be duped out of their money quite so 
glaringly.
	A separation of partnership was the consequence, but the Parson being quite as 
well versed in the common as the canon law, and being withal in possession of the 
premises, determined to remain in statu quo. This was a gambling transaction, and 
such subjects are always viewed with a suspicious eye, both by judge and jury; the 
Parson was therefore under no great apprehensions of legal reprisal, and being thus 
firmly seated in a new and elegant establishment, determined to stand his ground, set 
his partners at defiance, and keep possession of the property.
	Some of the associated robbers brought actions for their One Thousand Five 
Hundred Pounds each, but the Parson managed to justify the bail, and the plaintiffs 
were too wise to proceed.
	Ultimately the house was let by the Parson to a company of Foreigners, at the 
head of whom was a person calling himself a Baron. The rent was thirty guineas per 
day, and thirteen guineas more were paid for house expenses, for which the Parson 
supplied the company with wine, sandwiches, tea, coffee, and refreshments. The 
sums, thus paid, will give some idea of the enormous gains of these houses, and to 
this is to be added the sums paid to the dealers and room-porters, door-keepers, &c., 
some of whom have their five pounds per day, and all are very liberally rewarded.
	The play at this house was from five shillings to nominally one hundred 
pounds; but, in fact, for any sum you pleased, by its being previously mentioned to the 
banker.
	The chances in Rouge et Noir are about two per cent against the player upon 
every stake arising from the apres, which, occur twice out of three deals, or about 
twice in eighty coups or events. Hazard was also played here to a very great extent, 
and it was no unusual circumstance to see one thousand pounds upon the table at a 
time.
	Some short time after the Parson had opened his Saloon, he found out that 
some forgeries had been committed upon his bank, with respect to the introduction of 
ivory counters which were then in use. He laid a wager with one of his partners, that 
before twenty-four hours, he would detect the person who brought them to the house. 
A gentleman who had been in the daily habit of playing at his table, happened to be 
sent for by a friend, with whom he had made an appointment, and as it was in the 
middle of a deal he did not wish to disturb the game by getting change for sixteen 
counters be had left, and told the croupier he would take them away, and return and 
play them in the evening. During his absence, a set of silver counters were substituted 
in lieu of the ivory, and when he came in the evening, be found to his astonishment, 
that be was not permitted to stake them; they were alleged to be forgeries. The 
gentleman protested against such usage, and said he had received them at the table in 
the morning, and appealed to one of the croupiers, who confirmed his statements, but 
said that nothing could be done until the Parson made his appearance. When he came 
he examined the tokens, and declared eight out of sixteen to be false, charged the 
gentleman with having had them made, and said he had a person in the house who 
was ready to swear he had given him an order to make fourteen pounds worth. The 
gentleman demanded to be confronted with him, and upon questioning the man 
whether he had ever employed him, he declared he had never seen him in his life, nor 
was he like the person he had given a description of. Upon which his reverence got in 
a great passion, and swore with many oaths they were both a set of swindlers, and that 
his opinion was not in the least altered respecting the transaction, and that he had now 
won his wager.
	The Parson could bully in safety as he knew the gentleman could not resent 
any insult he might offer, being bound over by his friends not to play; and if it were 
known he was in the habit of so doing he would lose a considerable annuity. Of this 
person the Parson made selection as an instrument to win his wager.
	
CHAPTER THREE
	THE house at the corner of B-- Street, St. James's, is generally denominated 
the dandy house. Here the most elegant suppers are gratuitously given to the 
infatuated punters, as an inducement to play; the most intoxicating wines are freely 
distributed, and every luxury provided that can lull suspicion, and promote the views 
of the experienced sharper. The stakes here are from five shillings to one hundred 
pounds, but for any sum the punter pleases, by its being previously named to the 
banker. Many of the young officers of the guards, and some clerical associates, will 
remember their reverses in this house while they live.
	It was here that one young man was first initiated into this dreadful vice, and 
afterwards ruined of all the property bequeathed to him by his lamented father; yet, 
such is his infatuation, that he still continues a constant visitant at all the notorious 
hells, being by nature far more attentive to the study of rouge et noir than to the 
honourable and lucrative profession which rendered his father one of the brightest 
ornaments of society.
	As a proof of the destructive effects of such associations, we shall here relate 
an anecdote of this young man, which, we are sorry to say, is by no means a singular 
occurrence among the dissipated and thoughtless, who, driven to desperation, seize on 
any circumstance to recover some portion of their losses. This young sprig of fashion, 
and student of Lincoln's Inn, after losing in one night upwards of seven hundred 
pounds, went to a pawn-broker's in Jermyn-street, disrobed himself of his shirt, 
pledged it for the paltry sum of eight shillings, then buttoned up sans linen, and 
returned to the table, where he won about one hundred pounds of his money back 
again; and, will, it be believed, made his boast of the degrading circumstance which 
had enabled him to resume the same.
	Next in destructive consequence to the Hell we last described is one in K-- 
Street, St. James. The proprietors of this den of infamy have assisted in no small 
degree for some years to people the King's Bench prison. The public cannot fail to be 
benefited by a full view of the internal mechanism by which, this diabolical engine is 
kept in daily motion.
	There are four croupiers, who alternately deal the cards. One was formerly a 
commissariat clerk; and one a brother to the proprietor (and of slight-of-hand 
notoriety, having always at command a thirty-one apres, whenever the stakes are 
high).
	These gentry are in perfect training, and move as regular as clock-work, 
receiving a stipend of from three to four pounds per week, and a percentage upon the 
winnings, or rather plunder. This is done with a view to keep them upon the alert, and 
to extinguish any spark of pity that might kindle in their bosom: in a few weeks they 
become as callous and hard-hearted as their employers.
	There are also in the constant pay of the concern, a number of ruined 
gamesters, who are employed in the capacity of recruiting officers, who frequent the 
fashionable coffee-houses at the West-end, insinuate themselves into the society of 
young men of fashion, introduce them to the houses, and are paid a bonus by the 
proprietors, great, in proportion to the sum their victim has been robbed of.
	When the company musters thick, and there is much play, two of them take 
their seats at the table opposite to each other, and deal the cards by turns. Their fame 
for slight of hand is too well known to require any comment; suffice it to say, that 
when they preside, the colour on which the most money is staked is sure to lose, or if 
stakes are nearly equal on both, a thirty-one apres is made, which gives them the half 
of both the stakes.
	This is playing a sure game, and numberless are the victims whom these all-
devouring monsters have thus destroyed; many are the instances of men, who after 
having been ruined by them, have been brought to the gallows. They have caused 
more ruin than plague, pestilence, or famine, could have done; their system of play is 
founded on deceit of all sorts, and by such means they rise like mushrooms, become 
suddenly rich, owing their wealth to no qualities but such as are most despicable, and 
holding in utter contempt those who strive to gain an independence by slow and 
honest means. Fraud and villainy are the deities worshipped by them, and at the shrine 
of their insatiate avarice, is immolated the victim, who, had he not been decoyed to 
this den of thieves, might still have continued to be happy.
	To illustrate this, let us cite the example of one of the first brokers upon 
'Change, who, a few years ago, rolled in wealth, whom they have actually stripped of 
incalculable sums, and now reduced next door to beggary. Of all the Hells about St. 
James's, this is the most infamous (the parson's excepted) and its proprietors ought to 
be held up to public execration.
	Two gallants, brothers, officers in the army, who, after having escaped the 
dangers and perils of the peninsular war, returned home to enjoy in the bosoms of 
their families that peace and comfort which their patrimony, of which they had lately 
become possessed, promised them the enjoyment, became the prey of the recruiting 
serjeants belonging to this establishment, in three years were fleeced of a very large 
sum of money, and very speedily both were confined in prison.
	Let us next take a peep a few doors lower in the same street, kept by the elder, 
and Dick–of E. O. table, and false dice notoriety. This Hell is less in rank, though not 
least in villainy, to the foregoing; the aiders and abettors are Bill, son to the 
aforementioned, who bids fair to rival his sire in the arts of false play; Tommy, ci-
devant conductor of stores to the army, a complete Greek, always ready at hand, to 
second the motion of Dick when a Johnny Newcome is to be fleeced; and last, not 
least, behold the Squire, who, under the most meek and sanctified outward 
appearance, conceals all the tricks and devices of an experienced black-leg, a perfect 
Iago.
	Of such materials is composed the staff of this establishment, besides a good 
corps de reserve, always at hand.
	They profess to place on the table a bank of three hundred pounds, but it 
scarce ever exceeds one hundred and fifty pounds, and with this trifling sum, they 
contrive to win from four hundred to five hundred pounds daily, and 'tis not rare to 
see an individual lose from eight hundred to twelve hundred pounds at a sitting. The 
stakes are from two shillings and six-pence to twenty-five pounds; one shilling and 
six-pence and two shillings are frequently put down by the broken punter, and the 
smallest donations are thankfully received by the bank.
	You may daily behold at the table individuals who constantly win; they are in 
the secrets of the cabinet, and play for the bank in order to delude the young and 
unsuspecting punter into a belief there is a possibility of winning, although experience 
proves that certain ruin is sure to overtake him who is so infatuated as to persist in 
following up this destructive game.
	They seldom, at this house, give the broken-down player the opportunity of 
resorting to the pawnbroker to recruit his finances; if the victim has about his person a 
valuable watch, seals, chain, diamond broach, or ring, from the moment of his 
entering this den of thieves, Tommy has already calculated its probable value, and 
steps forward and generously offers to lend about half its worth, on this security, 
encouraging the poor fellow again to try his luck, and he has always at his elbow one 
of the recruiting squad to recount some unaccountable story of Mr Such-a-one, who 
borrowed a few pounds on the security of his watch, and won all the money on the 
table. The poor fellow is credulous, again ventures, and, in a few moments, loses his 
last stake. When it is considered that his means are exhausted, and he neglects to 
redeem his pledges, in a few days, he is deemed completely plucked, and is refused 
admittance, unless he is base enough to consent to introduce some candidate who is 
flush (to use the cant words), in which case he is enrolled on the recruiting service, 
and is paid in proportion to the ruin he entails on those who may be weak enough to 
be deluded by him.
	The bank can at first sight detect a forged note, being adepts in that science; 
yet 'tis very strange how many forged notes are received by the punters, and if they 
attempt to return them they are threatened with exposure. These practices, strange as it 
may appear, are carried on in the open face of day, and in defiance of the wise laws 
which have been enacted to prevent excessive and destructive gaming.
	
CHAPTER FOUR
	PROCEED we next to a description of one of the Hells in B-- Street, St. 
James's. The door is decorated with a brass plate, bearing the name of a pretended 
merchant. The hours of destruction in this place are from one to four in the forenoon, 
and from seven to eleven or twelve at night.
	This hell is an immense gulf, in which many have been totally swallowed up, 
many very much shattered and damaged, some quite disjointed and broken to pieces; 
some, perhaps, may have escaped the common wreck, but the number of the last is 
very small.
	The proprietors and setters-up of the game of Rouge et Noir, at this place, are, 
first, a notorious black-leg, who has realized a good fortune at the trade, and is said to 
be the proprietor of a large estate at Sydenham in Kent. Second, one called Vulcan, 
from his being lame; if report speaks true, 'tis said he was hurled (not from heaven), 
but from a second-floor window, by a son of Mars, some years since, for some little 
irregularity in casting the bones. His present occupation is that of catching Pigeons, 
with a net of his own construction, the meshes of which are so artfully woven as to be 
imperceptible, and very few, who have the misfortune to be, caught, escape complete 
plucking from the fangs of this Polyphemus. Third, Captain --. He may never have 
distinguished himself in that capacity, but it must be allowed that the trade he has 
been following up, for some years past, has disgraced him as an officer and a 
gentleman. He is a character devoid of moral feeling, who did not scruple to initiate 
his son in the mysteries of the Pandemonium, and made him his locum tenens, while 
forced to secrete himself, in consequence of writs being issued against him. Men, 
however depraved, generally wish to keep their offspring free from depravity; but 
with him 'tis quite the reverse, lucre is his god, and at its shrine he does not scruple to 
sacrifice parental duty and affection, and without compassion or remorse, converts 
into deadly poison the food he administers. Fourth, Jemmy, who goes by many 
names, and is as complete a master of the art of legerdemain as any professor at 
present exhibiting within the precincts of St. James's; famous for the undeviating and 
continued assiduity with which he has pursued his gambling career from year to year–
whose depth of calculating villainy is only exceeded by his power of assuming the 
semblance of modesty, a saint in appearance, but a demon in reality!!!
	These are the proprietors of this Hell–a quartetto of fit associates who have 
formed an odious and abominable conspiracy to effect the ruin of all who have the 
misfortune to come within their vortex.
	A notice, framed and glazed, to the following purport, is exhibited most 
conspicuously opposite each entrance of the rooms:-"The bank will be on the table 
precisely at one o'clock in the forenoon till four o'clock, and in the evening at seven 
till eleven; the stakes are from two shillings and sixpence to twenty pounds."
	The staff of this establishment is not so numerous, but equally, if not better, 
organized than that of their neighbours. There are three croupiers in daily attendance. 
One, a ci-devant dealer in cattle, from Yorkshire, who, in an unlucky moment was 
induced to play, lost his all, and became a Pigeon, and, as a dernier resort, was forced 
to take service under the banners of the Captain. He, however, to speak the truth, is a 
good sort of a fellow, merely a dealer, and not initiated in the mysteries of the black 
art, and is possessed of more feeling than could be supposed to be left to one of his 
employ.
	Next comes a knight of the needle, who, feeling himself above his calling, and 
"malicious fate having given him high notions and a small estate," threw cabbage to 
the dogs (it was not profitable enough), slept all day and diced all night; being raw 
and inexperienced found himself deficient of the quelque chose, joined a band of 
strolling players–paid his footing, and was admitted a member of the association, and 
from that time permitted to vend his quaint saying, ply his nostrums, and physic the 
flats. Such were his natural abilities, that from an entered apprentice he was raised to a 
fellow craft, and with hasty strides soon acquired the rank of a free and accepted 
blackleg. Scorning to be a satellite, he was not tardy in eclipsing his teachers, and 
blazed forth upon the horizon a fixed star of the first magnitude. Nothing could escape 
him, every passing meteor being obliged to pay tribute; those who, previous to his 
appearance, conceived themselves in the ascendency, were soon proved to be in the 
decline. He was a good judge, for he always backed the caster out; he could read the 
book of fate, foretell events, and was even gifted with second sight!!! His being no 
borrowed light, he felt assured he could work in the open face of day as well as by 
night. He sold his knowledge to the proprietors of this house; and it is here this 
worthy officiates at the game of Rouge et Noir, having always ready a quaint saying, 
or an obscene jest (for he is disgustingly foul-mouthed), to divert the attention of his 
punters from the tricks he is playing them. He assumes the most careless manner of 
dealing the cards, and an observer would draw the conclusion, that he is naturally 
awkward; in fact, he appears everything but a professor. How many have been 
deceived by him, how many have reason to curse the day they came in contact with 
him!
	Seated opposite to him may be seen the golden knight, commonly known by 
the name of Porpoise, from the unwieldy bulk of his stinking carcass, for it "hath an 
ancient and fish-like smell."
	This hero is not so barefaced, yet not a whit less rogue than the knight of the 
needle. He is a good dealer, and surprisingly active at his trade; he can handle the 
cards with such ease, that the punters very soon find themselves eased of the weight 
of their cash. Should he hear any complain of ill luck, he gives them some consolatory 
speech, coupled with the assurance that if they will but "call again to-morrow," it is 
more than probable they shall retrieve their loss; for, says he, (while he is shuffling, or 
rather packing the cards,) 'tis very singular to be for ever hearing gentlemen 
complaining they always lose; I can assure them (drawing himself up in his chair, and 
looking big), we have, I mean the bank has, been losing for the last eight months:" – 
"Tis true, so help me Bob," echoes the tailor; his deluded audience, for the most part, 
take this for granted, and keep at the game as long as there is a shot in the locker, but 
alas! their eyes are only open to conviction when 'tis too late.
	In fact, to those who are not in the secret of the Pandemonium, it would appear 
the bank did not win; for the moment any punter has been fleeced by the confederated 
black-legs present, in comes one of their squad, and, after exchanging a few winks 
and significant nods with the dealers, plays the highest stakes, and soon clears the 
bank of the winnings, makes his exit, and as soon as strangers have withdrawn, 
returns, and pays back the money, receiving his percentage for the job.
	It is impossible to have any suspicion of these gentry, as they are dressed in 
the very height of fashion, and come to the door either in their gig or on horseback, 
attended by a servant. The Captain keeps a gig for that very purpose; some of these 
gentry are styled captains, colonels, and baronets. Having played their part for a term, 
they are relieved by other actors; they are in perfect training; and a very lucrative 
employment it is.
	Let us now take a cursory view of the company frequenting this hell. A 
bullying, thrice-bankrupted horse-dealer, and a pawn-broker from the Strand, are in 
daily attendance, the first a rogue in grain, and a sharp; the second a flat, who, if he 
has but for a while longer the run of the house, will be forced to take refuge up his 
own spout; they both act as supporters to an elegant, accomplished, and facetious A-- 
of F--, who, though a severe sufferer, swears, he will die game, "and cock-a-oodle-
doo crow whilst he can." Many of his acquaintance have wondered why he put down 
his curricle; had they known he played rouge et noir, and French hazard, they would 
have been able to account satisfactorily for the circumstance.
	Among the numerous visitors, behold, also a city broker, a German lieutenant, 
a hatter from Oxford-street, a collector of poor rates, an army agent, and the little 
whipper-snapper measurer of miles, near Charing Cross, formerly a partner in the firm 
of this hell. The little Tom-tit, or Lady-killer, and the brave major and learned doctor 
of the same regiment. The latter swears it gives him the jaundice to be so fleeced, and 
declares he will leave it off, yet is sure to be the first at play the next day.
	Two Roulette Banks are daily and nightly open, in St. James's of which 
Monsieur–is the principal manager; the other in–Place, St James's under the auspices 
of Monsieur–and Mynheer --, well known by the name of the Hebrew Star. This 
concern is reaping a golden harvest, they have contrived to fleece Colonel–of some 
very heavy sums.
	This game of Roulette, Anglice Roly-poly, seems to have taken deep root, and 
the number of its dupes seem to be daily increasing. Other tables have found their way 
across the channel, together with a set of French croupiers. It is wonderful how they 
continue to get these roulette tables to this country: they surely are too bulky to be 
smuggled as a parcel of French lace. Do the Custom-house officers allow them to pass 
on paying duty? The natural supposition would be, that the use of such articles being 
strictly prohibited in the country, they would be considered as contraband, and the 
individuals attempting to introduce them liable to be prosecuted.
	This Mons. B. is concerned with all the roulette banks in London,–to him we 
owe the introduction of this pestilence, and we sincerely hope that the retributive arm 
of justice will reach this delinquent before he has time to secure his unlawful gains 
and depart from this country. Let the police-officers be on the alert.
	One of the principal Hells is a house at the corner of–Row, Piccadilly, where 
Hazard and Rouge et Noire are played for the benefit of a company of six black legs. 
As two of the proprietors are so notorious for every description of foul play, it was 
thought prudent their names had better be kept a secret. A-- of Sloane Street, was a 
groom-porter to a person that kept a Hazard table at the corner of St. James's Street, 
some few years back. He then went to a coffee house in the same Street. C. was a 
fishmonger's man in the Strand, but was all ways amongst low Greeks, at the inferior 
Hells, till he became what they call a good workman, at card and dice. Another 
proprietor was originally a lighterman, tugging at the oar on the Thames, and being 
considered a good ruffian, he was employed by P-- of lottery fame, (who kept a 
gaming-house in Pall Mall,) also as croupier, or groom-porter, as he might be wanted. 
A circumstance one night, when he was dealing the cards at faro, fixed his fortune. Sir 
C-- was playing, and having won a large sum of money at Hazard, and being elated 
with his success, said to a gentleman that was with him, "If I win this stake, I will give 
it to the croupier," which was C--. The baronet won, and as he did not play any more 
that night, he gave it to C--. The sum was fifteen or seventeen hundred pounds. C--has 
been known to say, that he has never wanted money since. He after this attended 
Newmarket–got concerned with the training grooms and jockeys, and now is a great 
man in his own estimation; he is a little hurt at his old acquaintance calling him by the 
name of Happy Jerry.
	There is a new firm of Greeks established at Cheltenham, who think 
themselves very snug. The proprietors of this firm are, a person of the name of K--, 
master of the rooms, a son of K--, who kept a Hazard table, in Jermyn-street, and Pall 
Mall: also a Mr B--, who was a Billiard sharp in London for years. This B--, was 
considered the best packer of cards at Rouge et Noir of any of them, and cogger of a 
dice on dice, so you may judge how the people are fleeced here. The other partner's 
name is --, a broken down lawyer; this gentleman is considered clever at all games; he 
can hand, reef, and steer with anyone of them; he has a wife that is reported as clever 
as himself, and can cog a dice, or pack the cards at Whist, or any other game, as well 
or better than her spouse. This gentleman has a cottage, where he gives elegant supper 
parties, or dinner, as it may suit. They are carrying on a roaring trade. The last 
mentioned hero keeps his hunter and dogs, and picks up a number of flats in the 
winter, with the assistance of a certain Colonel --, a sprig of fashion in the 
neighbourhood.
	
CHAPTER FIVE
	ROUGE ET NOIR, or, as the French call it, Trente et Quarante, was 
introduced into this country some twenty-five or thirty years ago, and took the place 
of FARO, which has not been publicly played for many years; indeed, the odds at that 
game, and the fraudulent tricks practised by the bankers, soon rendered the game 
obsolete. Rouge et Noir is daily and nightly played at all the Hells, about thirty in 
number, in St. James's.
	The company take their seats at an oblong table, about six yards long, and two 
and a half broad; on each side, at the centre, sits a croupier (i. e. dealer) with bank 
notes and gold before him, and in turn one of these worthies deal the cards, that is 
three deals each in succession. At about eighteen inches from each extremity of the 
table, which is covered with green cloth after the fashion of a Billiard table, there are 
two patches, one red and the other black, about three feet and a half long by two feet 
and a half broad; above these there are two spaces marked by a yellow line. The 
punters, for so the persons who play are called, place upon the patches, either on the 
red or black patches as they may fancy, the sum of money they wish to stake. The 
cards are then shuffled, which consist of six packs, and tell as follow. Court cards are 
valued at ten pips, and aces for one; other cards as they are marked. The dealer, taking 
up a handful of cards goes on dealing the first row, which is always for the black, and 
stops as soon as the pips exceed thirty; thus, if he deals out three court cards, or three 
tens, which make thirty, he must go on with another card, which we will suppose to be 
an ace, it makes thirty-one, the lowest number. He then stops and cries ONE, deals out 
another row for the red, and if the pips exceed thirty-one the red loses. Thus an eight, 
two tens, and a five, which make thirty-three pips, he cries three, red loses, and goes 
on in this manner, taking the lowest number between thirty and forty. The money 
staked on the losing colour is drawn by the croupiers with a rake of the shape of a 
garden hoe, and an equal sum paid to what has been staked upon the winning colour.
	The odds at this game in favour of the bank, if no fraud is practised, may be 
reckoned at about two and a half per cent.
	When both colours turn up thirty-one, which is called a one apres, the money 
staked on both colours is drawn within the two spaces mentioned, and the players 
have the option of halving their stake with the bank, or trusting to the chance of the 
next event: he who is then upon the winning colour receives back his original stake 
only, and the croupiers draw the money on the losing side; so that every time a thirty-
one apres occurs, the bank wins half the money staked upon the table. The average is, 
that three thirty-one apres takes place in two deals, or nineteen events; each deal 
consists of never less than twenty-eight coups or events.
	To give an idea of the profits accruing to the keepers of these Hells, let us 
select the one kept by J-- D-- and R-- D-- in K-- Street, St. James's, one of the minor 
Hells, where to a certainty ten pounds may be averaged to be staked through the year 
upon every event. They play at this Hell full eight hours per day, three deals take 
place every hour, which makes twenty-four deals per day. Consequently thirty-six one 
apres takes place, on each of which they win five pounds, making L.180 per day, 
L.1,080 per week, and L.56,160 per annum. In this estimate the stakes are averaged 
very low, for frequently may be seen from L.50 to L.300 staked upon a coup or event.
	Those who are infatuated or silly enough to follow this destructive game for 
any length of time, are sure to be fleeced of their last farthing; and the foregoing 
calculation has clearly proved, that a person playing every day at Rouge et Noir, and 
staking only one pound on each event, is sure to be loser at the end of the year, to the 
amount of L.5,616. Suppose a person stakes only half-a-crown on each event, he must 
pay to the bank for thirty-six apres four pounds ten shillings in the course of a day's 
play, twenty-seven pounds per week, and in a year, fifty-two weeks, L.1,404.
	That it is impossible for anyone to be a winner for any length of time, was 
proved by a wager laid some time since by a gentleman and Mr T-- L-- of Roundhead 
notoriety, who betted that beginning play with twenty pounds every day, at anyone 
time of the day he should be a winner of half-a-crown, and this was to be done for 
thirty days, which if he accomplished Tommy–was to pay him twenty pounds. He 
went on for some few days winning his half-a-crown, but the twentieth day lost his 
capital of twenty pounds, without being at anytime that day half-a-crown ahead; of 
course he lost his wager. Does not this circumstance prove, clear as day, that however 
great your capital may be at starting, your loss in the end will be great in proportion.
	Enormous as the profits are to the bankers or setters up of, this game, still 
greater is their desire of satisfying their insatiate avarice; it is almost impossible to 
detect their ingenious villainy, or to check their art of multiplying deceit, which they 
practise with unblushing impunity. They can at any time when it is worth their while, 
and play is high, command a thirty-one apres. The young inexperienced player is 
generally permitted to win for the first two or three times, and when his appetite is a 
little whetted, they proceed secundem artem, to phlebotomise, or, to use their slang 
language, to flea bottomise their patient. To make use of a simile quite applicable to 
the worthy Tommy --, he may be considered as the Hyena, who begins by a private 
snap, goes on to a morsel among friends, proceeds to a meal, advances to a surfeit, 
and at last sucks blood like a vampire.

DESCRIPTION OF THE NEWLY-INTRODUCED FRENCH GAME OF 
ROULETTE, OR ROLY-POLY
	ROULETTE is played upon a round table composed of thirty-eight 
compartments regularly numbered, thirty-six of which are for the players, and two for 
the bankers. The compartments (les cases) or receiving boxes, are numbered from one 
to thirty-six, half red and half black, the two remaining compartments, are marked 
one, by a single nought or zero, which is black; the other by a double zero, which is 
red. When the ball is delivered, it must, of inevitable necessity, fall into one of the 
compartments, which number is the decided winner on the six chances marked upon 
the cloth; the chance paid is equal to the stake put down, for the number thirty-five 
times the stake (la mise) is paid. Upon the columns, (as they are called) which is 
composed of thirty-six square compartments, ten in length divided by four, nine of 
which contain the thirty-six figures and four blanks; the double and single zeros being 
placed at the opposite end. At the sides are three elliptics, embracing three divisions 
of the figures, in which is written, Out, Red, Odd, on the one side; and In, Black, 
Even, on the other. Only eight times is paid, though it may be said thirty-six times is 
paid, taking the stake into consideration. When a simple or single Zero takes place, 
the banker calls out simple Zero, black or odds and in this case, he does not pay any 
chances, but sweeps up all the stakes both in the numbers and on the columns. It is 
precisely the same when the double Zero takes place.
	The most villainous deceptions are practiced, at this game. The tables are 
made to act with a spring, which is managed with the foot, and by which means, the 
director can make a zero whenever he pleases. Of all the infamous games ever 
introduced in this country for the purpose of fraud and robbery, this is decidedly the 
most abominable. It is disgraceful to the police of the metropolis, that these gangs of 
French sharpers are allowed to pursue their destructive plans with impunity. Above 
twelve of these tables are now in play, both day and night, in the neighbourhood of St. 
James's alone. Can such things be, and escape the vigilance of the magistrates?

CHAPTER SIX
	THAT gaming leads to every vice is so true, that the most humane persons, 
urged on by cards, have been known to commit the most detestable crimes. The 
following true tale will illustrate the above.
	Antonio, the only son and heir of the Count C--, was brought up under the 
eyes of virtuous parents, and became himself a faultless being. His form was noble 
and commanding. In his open countenance you could read the slightest thought that 
was passing in his well-stored mind. His temper was gentle and humane. In fact, at the 
age of twenty, he was what every man should be, but few are. No one, however 
virtuous, but possesses a vice. No one, however vicious, but possesses a virtue. If 
Antonio did possess a vice, it was his adoration of beauty. And how excusable. What 
man that has not, at one time of his life, felt his heart palpitate with rapture at the 
approach of the fairest part of the creation? Oh! lost, indeed, is that man, whose 
careless breast is dead to every soft emotion. But even virtue, when it rises to a 
passion, descends to a vice.
	Antonio became acquainted with a lovely female (Mademoiselle Louisa), who, 
under the garb of modesty, could throw out lures to catch the unsuspicious and 
innocent. Indeed, so great an adept she was in deception, that a painter would have 
chosen her outward form to portray Prudence: no wonder, then, that our hero, who 
was wont to look at beauty as the paragon of bliss, was easily deceived. For hours 
would he stand behind her chair, and listen to the fascinating tone of her harmonized 
voice; or, while she hung upon his arm, he would, with the greatest attention, hearken, 
as she conversed of that she knew alone by name–virtue. Who would have thought, 
when they beheld her lovely blue eyes gazing with animation on the sky above her, 
while from her lips flowed pious praises to the Most High, that she was a hypocrite. In 
a countenance like hers, even Lavater could not have traced the dark recesses of her 
bosom. From the moment Antonio became acquainted with Louisa, he forgot all 
beside. At day he was her constant companion, at night her image floated before his 
eyes to bless his dreams. To oblige her, he would frequently sit down with some of 
her friends to a game of cards. And, although he generally got up minus twenty or 
thirty Louis, he did not heed the trifle, because he was placed next to Louisa, and he 
would have bought that bliss at a much higher price. Louisa's companions became his; 
and, by degrees, he grew so fond of cards, that his nights were spent in gaming. For 
Louisa would converse with him while her friends fleeced him of his money.
	One night, in the absence of Louisa, he played higher than usual. Fortune 
against him, he became so frantic at his ill-luck, that he doubled the stakes at each 
time, till he found himself a ruined man, having lost every farthing he possessed. 
Distractedly he started up from the table, and rushed from the apartment into another 
that joined it, when, oh! horror, stretched on a sofa, lay Louisa locked in the arms of 
Henry de Virville, the man he thought his dearest friend, and to whom be had 
intrusted his love for Louisa. He felt his brain burn like flames of fire, and, drawing 
his sword, he flew towards them, and stretched them both lifeless at his feet.
	Disturbed by a rustling noise, the servants entered the apartment, and found 
their mistress and M. de Virville laying weltering in their blood, while Antonio, with 
his still reeking sword, stood exultingly over them, "See, see!" he madly exclaimed, 
"Go, proclaim it to the world, Antonio is a ruined gamester and a murderer. She swore 
love to me (pointing to the dead body of Louisa)--I found her in the arms of De 
Virville–I have punished them.–One thing alone remains undone, and thus, then, ends 
Antonio's woes, and Antonio's crimes." Thus saying, before he could be prevented, he 
fell upon his sword, and, with a frantic shriek, expired.
	Thus ended the life of one who, before he became acquainted with cards, was 
generally admired and courted. True he was seduced to play; but cards became first 
his passion, and then his ruin.
	It is grievous to behold how much that detestable vice changes the nature, the 
conduct, the feeling, the countenance, of a human being.
	"I have seen," says an indignant moralist, "and I relate it with horror, the 
countenance of beauty–ay, of female beauty, so much distorted, that she appeared a 
complete fury; her eyes started from her head, her teeth gnashed with rage, and her 
passion was so great, that she could not speak for ten minutes, and all because her 
partner played a wrong card."
	Lieutenant Carelly, a half-pay officer, quite upon the town, called upon his 
friend Juan for the loan of a sum of money, which the latter was unable to lend him. 
The Lieutenant observed, that there was no occasion for a spirited fellow to want 
money, while there was a gambling-house in St. James's, and accordingly proposed 
that they should go to one that very night. Juan had before heard that many men of 
fashion lived by frequenting these houses; and that some were so skilful or so 
fortunate in the line, as to pocket considerable sums every night, as regularly as if it 
were the income arising from the exercise of a trade or profession. He therefore dosed 
with the proposal, and, calling a coach, proceeded with the Lieutenant to No.--, St. 
James's Street.
	The gambling-houses, or, as they have been very properly designated, Hells, 
are generally elegantly furnished houses, abounding in all parts of London, but 
particularly in and about the neighbourhood of St. James's; many of them are 
supported by the subscriptions of the visitors, and others are the private property of 
unprincipled individual speculators. To the extensive and destructive system of 
gambling carried on therein, may be traced too many of those afflicting instances of 
raving madness, of self-destruction, and the beggary of respectable families, which so 
frequently occur in the metropolis. Herds of black-legs and sharpers, without any 
other means of support than their illicit income from the gaming-table, frequent all 
those houses, where, by continual practice and collusion with the keeper of the house, 
they contrive to fleece their short-sighted dupes out of sums of money so 
considerable, as to enable them to live in all the pomp and state of independent 
fortune. When once an inexperienced person becomes introduced to this diabolical 
connexion, it rarely happens that he can shake it off before his present means, and 
even his future prospects in life, are entirely destroyed; for so completely does be 
become enveloped in their serpentine folds, that in the moment of frenzy produced by 
the loss of his ready cash, he suffers himself to be persuaded to sign promissory notes, 
or powers of attorney, transferring to the holder the growing rents of his estates, or the 
profits of his business; and instances have been known, wherein, on the death of a 
man who had lived in comfort and affluence upon an independent property, his whole 
estate has been claimed, to the ruin of his family, by virtue of post-obit bonds extorted 
from him under the irritation of loss, and the dread of exposure. Clerks and 
confidential servants having the chargé of their employer's money, are also frequently 
involved in infamy and ruin through their unfortunate visits to the gaming-table, 
where they are regularly fleeced out of everything they stake, and are at last induced 
to risk the property intrusted to their care, in the vain hope of recovering their losses, 
and preserving their characters.
	The room was crowded to excess with anxious groups, some playing at the 
E.O. tables–some at Faro–others at Rouge et Noir, and several, in the true spirit of 
gambling, staking enormous sums on what suit would next turn up. Several young 
men, whom the Lieutenant noticed, were lounging about, apparently with no other 
object than that of partaking of the refreshments; but the scene was new to Juan, and 
his active observation soon passed from the mere lookers-on, to the actual performers 
of the important drama in progress; and he found an ample field for reflection in the 
countenances of a party seated round a table appropriated to the game of Hazard.
	It was a mixed and piebald association, composed of clerks, tradesmen, half-
pay officers, broken-down gentlemen, and professed gamblers, all intent on the turn of 
a card which would either consign to their grasp a considerable sum of money, or 
promote by another grade the destined ruin of themselves and families. Countenances 
that bore the stamp of youth, were distorted by internal emotions; cheeks seemed 
burning with rage, bosoms panting with disappointment; eyes darting forth the 
lightnings of despair; and pallid lips quivering with the apprehension of impending 
ruin. One individual alone seemed indifferent to the progress of the game, and 
altogether unmoved either by personal feelings or contagion from the atmosphere of 
agitation by which he was surrounded, This was a hoary-headed gambler–a man 
grown old, and withering in the service of vice–in whose veins the "milk of human 
kindness" had never circulated, and whose iron heart was impervious to every 
sensation of humanity. Whether by accident or fraud Juan could not discover, but so it 
was, that the card upon which the game depended turned up in favour of the hoary 
gamester, who eagerly cleared the table of the stakes, and coolly looking round upon 
his penniless and suffering victims, announced his triumph in a mixed farrago of oaths 
and blasphemies, and, for the first and only time, relaxed his frigid countenance into a 
Sardonic grin, while the rest of the party left the table with visible signs of desperation 
and despair!
	"Well," thought Juan, "this is indeed a lesson of human infirmity and short-
sightedness! The traveller who encounters the highway-robber–the libertine who 
commits his life and fortune to the conduct of the wanton–the mariner who launches 
his boat in a tempest–or the aeronaut who consigns his flimsy car to the mercy of the 
hurricane–all, all are less exposed to peril than the dupe who commits himself to the 
destructive vortex of a gaming-table! And yet the scene I now behold is one of no 
extraordinary occurrence, but the common every-day routine of a London gaming-
house!"
	The experienced Lieutenant Carelly was in luck that evening, and after having 
won a considerable sum, had the prudence to leave off, while Juan whose volatile and 
inconstant nature soon suppressed his moral reflections, becoming familiar with the 
scene, and recollecting the lowness of his finances, joined the table, and at two 
ventures lost all the money be had.
	He was, however, so stimulated, both by the success of his companions and 
their sneers at his want of spirit, that he had already staked a considerable sum, which, 
if he had lost, he possessed no means of paying, when an unexpected circumstance 
relieved him from the probable consequences of such a proceeding. A whispering 
occurred at one end of the room–a noise was heard on the stairs–angry voices, and a 
scuffle! One of the company threw the cards which he was about to deal into the fire–
another hurled the dice through the window, and a third was about to follow the 
example by throwing himself after the dice, when the door was burst open, and a party 
of police officers entering, commanded all present to surrender at discretion.
	A scene of infinite confusion ensued. Some attempted to break through the 
mass–some overturned the tables, and others put out the lights. Juan made a dart at a 
window, and opened it with the intention of descending, when three or four legal 
intruders sprung from an ambush on the opposite side, and barred all egress. 
Meanwhile a regular battle-royal was going on in the dark–some good blows were 
apparently put in on both sides, though the hands that dealt them were unseen. 
Through this mass our hero contrived, however, to fight his way, knocking some of 
the interlopers down, and walking over others; and, having groped his way to the 
door, made a rush downstairs, and thus succeeded in effecting his escape.
	The interior economy of these schools of licentiousness and nurseries of vice, 
the utter hopelessness of anything like a rational chance of advantage to the casual 
player, and the immense profits made by the keepers of the tables, have of late been 
exposed in the following valuable observations, published in a daily journal:–"There 
are, within ten minutes walk of one another in the neighbourhood of St. James's, 
upwards of thirty Gaming-houses, opening every day at different hours, from one in 
the day till two, three, and four in the morning; at some of which you may stake as 
low as two shillings, at others as high as two thousand pounds in one sum; and the 
tables are constantly filled with players. The profits of these tables, leaving out of the 
question unfair play, are immense. The banker's point, at the game universally played, 
Rouge et Noir, is termed a thirty-one apres, which is calculated to occur once in a deal 
of about twenty-eight coups. Upon this occasion all the money on the table is 
impounded, and the next deal decides which colour wins: the happy winner in this 
case gets back his stake only; the loser, of course, gets back nothing. This course is 
exactly equivalent to taking half the money staked on the table at the time the apres 
happens, and at many of the higher class of houses L.300 is staked every coup. Thus, 
then, we arrive at the means of ascertaining the profits of some of these concerns–
twelve deals in a night is a usual quantity, in these twelve deals, on an average, 
happen twelve apres, each giving the banker L.150; thus one day's profit amounts to 
no less than L.1,800, making a total of L.563,400, per annum, giving them credit for 
shutting Hell up on the Sabbath, which is seldom done.
	"Well may these men afford to receive their guests in magnificent apartments, 
to spread out gratuitous feasts, with a profusion of wine, &c.! amply are they enabled 
to bribe (if such things can be) the Police; no wonder that, in defiance of law, these 
places are kept open, and that any man with the appearance of a gentleman, may be 
accommodated, to complete his ruin, with money upon his own cheque! let us wonder 
only at the infatuation of the players.
	"That no one may doubt the immensity of the profits, it may be stated, that the 
sum paid to the French government for the licences for gaming, amounts to between 
two and three millions sterling per annum, and yet the contractor is generally the 
richest man in the kingdom; what then, must be his profits, and the profits of those 
who, by taking under-licences, make his fortune and their own? This ruinous game is 
carried on here to the same extent as it is in France, with this only difference, that here 
the bankers take all the profit. A player going in with five pounds, may imagine that 
he only pays his two per cent, (the lowest average profit of the banker) on five 
pounds; but if he has the usual fluctuation of luck, the fact is, that his five pounds will 
be staked twenty or thirty, perhaps fifty times, in the course of a day's play; thus, 
supposing, for the sake of example, this little sum shall have been staked twenty times 
backwards and forwards, he will have paid two pounds to the table. This calculation 
applied to L.100, of course gives L.40 as the sum paid for the opportunity of playing 
while the hundred pounds last." The encouragement which of late years has been 
given in this country to the professor of gaming, or, more properly speaking, of the 
black art, is truly wonderful;-- not content with those of our own growth, exotics 
coming from abroad receive every encouragement; here they strike root as soon as 
imported, and the parish of St. James's may be compared to a vast dunghill, which 
receives, and supplies them with that nutriment which their own vernacular soil denies 
them. They have made strange ravages there, and their depredations have spread with 
pestilential rapidity, infecting almost every rank, from the peer to the haberdasher's 
apprentice; while the vile miscreants, who are the abettors of this infernal system, 
fatten upon the very vitals of the victims they have immolated on the altar of 
destruction, enjoy perfect security, and continue their nefarious practices with 
unblushing, impudent audacity, under the very walls of a royal palace.
	Formerly, men of the lowest stamp, sprung from the very dregs of the people, 
the vilest of the vile, were seen to embark in this trade of villainy and deceit, such has 
had forfeited every claim on society; but now we behold captains and colonels, 
holding his majesty's commission, coming forward and unblushingly announcing 
themselves as principal agents in this abominable traffic;-- but, "oh, shame! where is 
thy blush!" most conspicuous among this herd appears a clergyman of the Church of 
England, (holding a considerable living, stated at L.1,500 per annum) setting aside his 
sacred calling, presiding, officiating as high-priest at one of the most noted of these 
temples of iniquity! To this man we are indebted for the introduction of those 
foreigners who have of late infested this metropolis, and set up French hazard and 
roulette, or roly-poly, described in Chapter One.
	It was under the patronage and fostering care of the Holy Saint that the 
notorious Monsieur B-- and his gang were introduced to this country; who, after 
having initiated his reverend patron and colleagues in all the mystery of the black art, 
for which, by-the-bye, the police of Paris, more on the alert than ours, forced him to 
emigrate, took his reverence completely in, who paid dear for his initiation fee, is now 
figuring away on his own account, leagued on the one hand with Colonel M--, and 
Monsieur B--, in C-- R--; and on the other with Mr--, alias the Hebrew Star; and, if 
report speak true, another establishment has been opened under the auspices of this 
worthy Monsieur B--, in M-- street, Manchester-square.
	Honest Dick having, out of pure charity, taken his reverence in tow, has, in 
these days of trouble and tribulation, been named leader of the band, and he has now 
taken the field in earnest. He has lately been seen, like "Solomon in all his glory," 
surrounded by all his staff, and supported by certain auxiliaries on the retired list, take 
his station in the avenues of the King's Bench, Westminster. Nay, in the very sight of 
the Judge, attempting to intimidate, with threats and abusive language, a gentleman 
who manfully stepped forward and attacked this whole gang of depredators, and 
spread fear and dismay in the very sanctum sanctorum of the Pandemonium. Thanks 
to the exertions and perseverance of the gentleman alluded to, the retributive arm of 
justice has reached some of the principal members of the gang, and we trust soon to 
see the best part of this nefarious crew annihilated;-- they are all links of one chain, 
they have dug a pit for themselves, and which ever way they move, backward or 
forward, to the right or the left, it is ready to swallow them up. They now appear the 
picture of "petty larceny personified;" every step they take brings them a point nearer 
to the final catastrophe. Let these miscreant reptiles begone, and cease to contend with 
insurmountable power. The visitation will be dreadful, and we may now look with 
confidence to the day when the whole system of fraud and villainy will meet a total 
overthrow. Thoughtless mortals, let them "go build houses, plant orchards, purchase 
estates, for to-morrow they die."
	It will be no small satisfaction to the public to know that the Rev.--, keeper of 
the gaming-house in Pall-Mall, has been taken up upon a warrant, and held to bail to 
appear and take his trial; that indictments are to be preferred against others, and that a 
number of fashionable and distinguished punters are to be brought forward as 
evidence upon the occasion; also, some haberdashers' apprentices, and clerks from the 
vicinity of Cheapside, who have been enticed by the parson's good wine and suppers, 
and have left on his rouge et noir and hazard tables their master's money. His 
reverence has had the assurance to affirm, that none but the first nobility in the land 
were admitted into the precincts of his hell; but we shall make it apparent to his 
reverence, though he fleeces the Nobility, he is not above doing the like to the 
Mobility.
	To return, however, to the French professors of the black art;-- they opened 
their conclave, and promised to eclipse and out-do, in fraud and false play, every other 
establishment of the kind; they employed none but light-fingered Frenchmen well 
versed in the art of legerdemain. The proprietors of the English Hells took the alarm, 
as well they might; the craft scarce knew how to proceed. Were they to suffer the 
French intruders to poach with impunity on a manor which, for many years, they had 
been in the habit of considering as their own exclusive property? Many were the 
consultations which took place upon the subject, and they all agreed upon one point: 
viz, that this French gang ought to be annihilated. A general meeting was accordingly 
held, and honest old Dick --, veteran London Black-leg, argued thus:–"This, my 
worthy friends and fellow-sufferers, is the fruit of Parson A--'s French importation; 
'twas he who opened the road for these French fouters; without him they would never 
have found their way over here; 'twas a deuced unlucky hit. It appears to me there are 
but two ways of putting these gentry to the rout; the first, to proceed boldly against 
these intruders by information and indictment; but this, my friends, is a path we must 
tread with the greatest caution, if we pursue it; for you will all agree, 'tis dangerous to 
bring such matters before a Jury: it serves to establish precedents, which, sooner or 
later, may be brought to bear against us. The second is to tip them a taste of the alien 
act; this might be done snugly; and the coast once clear of these French vagabonds, 
we might take our measures accordingly, and carry on our operations as heretofore. 
This Hebrew vagabond, who is a German Jew, was the first who made a serious attack 
upon our system; 'twas he who taught the enemy our weak point; he made the first 
breach in our ramparts. Why did you initiate him in our mysteries? You know how 
strenuously I set my face against the countenance afforded him by that stupid 
blockhead jack A--, who bribed him, with ready money and fair promises, to destroy 
old S--'s establishment: it has turned out as I predicted; you have given him stones to 
break your head with, and he now sets you at defiance; he has unfurled the tri-
coloured flag; which now floats triumphantly under your very noses; and what none 
of us were bold enough to attempt, he has effected. Has he not transplanted from 
France the game of roulette? and see how soon it has taken root in this soil. It has 
attracted every punter which we had spared and were reserving for a bonne bouche. 
We are visited by none but plucked pigeons, who merely call in to take a glass of our 
wine, and be damned to them."
	At length the French gang experienced a material falling off in their play. 
Their sterling customers were drawn away to the other decoys in the neighbourhood. 
In order to remedy this evil, they sent round a polite circular, inviting the punters to 
return, and grace by their presence, the United Club, as they styled themselves; and 
partake of the amusements of the Rouge et Noir, French Hazard, and Roulette; and 
pledging themselves that no expense and trouble should be wanted, which might 
conduce to the ease and comfort of the punters; the plain meaning of which is–the 
comfort of their being eased of their cash, by every trick, stratagem, and cheat, which 
human ingenuity is capable of devising.
	These swindling miscreants, base as they are deceitful, everything that is at 
once despicable and wicked, sacrifice victim after victim, by every foul and nefarious 
practice; and are, incessantly, bellowing out lies about the fairness of their play; but 
"the balances of deceit are in their hands."
	Much about the same time, another Hell was established under the immediate 
direction and superintendence of the Jew --, and of the notorious Monsieur, a new 
curse to the metropolis, and a nuisance to the neighbourhood; from which men ought 
to flee as from a pestilence that walketh by night.
	Very lately, on the morning between Saturday and Sunday, a tremendous 
affray took place, between this gang of ruffians and their customers, after a great deal 
of bow-wowing and quarrelling and much altercation about fair play and cheating. 
From words and threats they came to blows, missile weapons of all sorts were used, 
candlesticks were thrown at the heads of the punters, who were not backward in 
returning the compliment with interest; such was the raging of the storm and uproar in 
this den of thieves, that it could be heard half way down Pall Mall; and this on a 
Sunday morning!!!
	How long will the legislature suffer these Sabbath-breaking ruffians to carry 
on their nefarious system with impunity?
	On the following day this Hell presented a new scene of riot; a gentleman 
having detected the croupiers at some of their tricks, bluntly taxed them with the facts; 
he was taken to task by one of the gang, who not finding himself of sufficient weight 
to support the credit of the firm vi et armis, summoned up to his assistance a strong 
and athletic ruffian, the door-keeper. This Cerberus fastened upon the gentleman, and 
gave him a most unmerciful milling, the marks of which upon his face bore ample 
testimony of his having good cause to remember this visit to the infernal regions of 
gambling.
	These foreign gamblers have, by acts of fraud, wholly without a parallel, and 
by a long string of contrivances, each of which merit a halter, ruined hundreds of 
families; they ought not only to be made to disgorge, but to undergo the most rigorous 
punishments the law can inflict, in order that their fate may be a warning to all 
fraudulent gamblers and common cheats, in time to come.
	It is come to a pretty pass, when such vagabonds as these, not contenting 
themselves with the enormous profits accruing to them from the infamous game of 
Roulette, or Roly Poly, have recourse to foul play, and enforce such cheating by 
assault and battery, and keep in their own house hired ruffians to bully and insult the 
victims they have plundered. Every hour such vagabonds are permitted to carry on 
these depredations, is a disgrace to a civilized country. Why does not the Secretary of 
State at once put a stop to this abominable system, and send these miscreants out of 
the country, by enforcing the alien act against them. A statement of this infamous 
system ought to be presented to the House of Commons.
	Another set of these French gamblers are carrying on their depredations under 
the very walls of St. James's Palace. A noble colonel, brother to a peer of the realm is 
at the head of this establishment, and daily superintends their machinations. The 
principals in this concern are a French soi-disant colonel M--, Monsieur B--, 
Monsieur L-- C--, and Monsieur de S-- F--, who is the son of the man who invented 
the game of Rouge et Noir. All these fellows are adepts at the system; and no doubt 
have come to this country for more purposes than one.
	It is really surprising that English gentlemen are such silly beings as to suffer 
themselves to be duped, and, in the end, ruined by these French cormorants. Why do 
they associate with such blackguards; surely, if gamble they must, there are English 
club-houses where they may be sure not to be cheated.
	Lately, these Frenchmen withdrew their capital from one of these tables, and 
left only sixty pounds, with the determination, if they lost that sum, to shut up shop 
for a time; but so skilfully did they manage their cards and roulette, that this trifling 
sum increased like a snow-ball, and they determined to continue their depredatory 
warfare, and not break into their former winnings, which are immense. Some of the 
gang who had gone back to France to secure their plunder, and who have a strange 
longing after our English money, are about to despatch from Paris a well regulated 
company of sharpers, to set up in opposition to their countrymen in this town.
CHAPTER SEVEN
	HAVING in our former Chapter lifted aside the veil of mystery under cover of 
which the unholy rites of the modern hells were celebrated, we now proceed to detail 
the means by which justice has at length overtaken some portion of the worthless 
crew.
	Numerous prosecutions have at different periods been commenced against the 
keepers of common gaming houses, and in some instances convictions have followed, 
but the defendants escaped being brought up to receive the judgement of the Court; 
for it unfortunately happened that the prosecutors were men, whose fortunes had been 
lost at the gaming-table, and who were either intimidated by threats and persecutions 
to drop proceedings, or from the necessity of their circumstances were unable to 
withstand a bribe, and were thus induced to compromise their public duty.
	Such have been the means by which the gaming house keepers, have for so 
great a length of time baffled the ends of justice, and been enabled to continue their 
profitable, but iniquitous and ruinous system of plunder, in open defiance of the laws.
	It remained for a Mr Woodroffe and a Mr Grant, (the prosecutors in the trials 
which we are now about to record) to perform the important and beneficial duty of 
dragging to the Bar of Justice some of the most notorious of the delinquents, there to 
receive that just punishment, which the highly criminal and demoralising nature of 
their offences had so long and so richly deserved.
	To the firm and manly exertions of these prosecutors the public are indebted 
for the first effectual check which the gaming-house system has received. In the 
performance of these duties they have been assailed by every species of obloquy and 
slander which the pen of miserable and hireling calumniators could invent. They 
rejected with scorn the offered bribe; and steadily pursued that course which a sense 
of public duty pointed out. Their exertions have been crowned with success: and there 
can be no doubt that the severity of the sentence passed upon such of the proprietors 
of the Hells as have at present been brought to justice, will effectually deter others 
from the commission of similar offences. The sufficiency of the laws to repress 
Gaming is herein demonstrated; and the public will surely no longer behold with 
indifference the continuance of that system which has brought thousands to ruin, 
suicide, and the scaffold!
	We now proceed to give a digested report of some of the trials which have 
taken place on indictments against persons for keeping common gaming-houses. The 
strictest attention which the reader can bestow, on the evidence by which these 
indictments have been supported, will be amply repaid by the very curious light which 
it throws on the tricks and frauds of the master black-legs.

IN THE COURT OF KING'S BENCH
The King, on the Prosecution of John Woodroffe, Esq., against Richard Bennett, 
Frederick Oldfield, John Philips, and Thomas Carlos, for a Misdemeanour in keeping 
a Common Gaming House at No. 75, St. James's-Street.
	MR C. PHILLIPS and Mr Talford conducted the prosecutor's case, and Mr 
Curwood and Mr Platt were for the defendants.
	Mr TALFORD opened the proceedings by stating the nature of the indictment 
against the defendants, which was for keeping a common gaming-house. The specific 
acts were variously laid in four counts.
	Mr CHARLES PHILLIPS stated the case to the Jury. The offence charged 
against the defendants, he said, was that of keeping a common gaming house. In a 
criminal proceeding of so serious a nature, he deemed it unjustifiable to introduce any 
observations which might tend to prejudice or inflame the case against the defendants, 
and would therefore confine himself to a simple and naked statements of the facts, and 
to laying them before the jury. The question was whether or not No. 75, St. James's 
Street, was a house where unlawful games were played, and whether the defendants 
were the masters of it? He hoped to be able to establish this proposition to the entire 
satisfaction of the jury. He would not at present pass any strong comments upon the 
defendants being persons of the description charged in the indictment, because if they 
were convicted of the offence, there would be another occasion better fitted for the 
introduction of such remarks. This indictment was preferred by a gentleman of the 
name of Woodroffe, a student of the Inner Temple. From this gentleman, who, like 
too many others, had been seduced to visit these receptacles of vice, the jury would 
learn that sums of an unlawful amount were played for there. It was Mr Woodroffe's 
misfortune to lose considerable sums at play, and he was acquainted with the persons 
of the four defendants. Upon the question of its being a gaming-house, however, there 
could be little doubt; and the only remaining question was, whether the four 
defendants were the proprietors? Mr Woodroffe would speak to seeing the four 
defendants present whilst the games were playing, and that they acted as masters, 
being distinguished from the visitors by their not wearing their hats, whilst all other 
persons in the room were generally covered.
	He would also tell the jury that he saw them dividing the spoil after the play 
was done; and that upon one night particularly when he came in late, he was informed 
by one of the defendants that the game was over, but that they would be glad to see 
him another time. Another witness would be called to confirm Mr Woodroffe's 
testimony; and from him the jury would learn a circumstance which would be 
important against one of the defendants. This witness, having the too common 
misfortune to be involved in a personal quarrel with another gentleman whom he met 
at a house of this description, in obedience to the dictates of false honour, if there 
could be any honour in such a place, requested that one of the defendants to lend him 
a pair of pistols, he having been informed that the defendant possessed an excellent 
pair: the defendant, however, refused to accommodate him, observing, "You know I 
must not. If anything unfortunate should occur, I should get into a pretty scrape." So 
much for the proof of proprietorship against this house. With one observation, then, 
he should leave the case in the hands of the jury. An attempt might be made on the 
other side to impeach the credit of the witnesses, on the ground of their being 
disappointed gamesters. He (Mr Phillips) was convinced the jury would find them 
honourable men. He did not however wish to bespeak them any indulgence for them, 
for he wished the jury to deal with them as they saw them. That they had gamed at 
this house there could be no doubt, but it should be recollected, that if credit was not 
to be given to the testimony of such witnesses, the keepers of these dens of iniquity 
could never be brought to justice, as no other persons would be good evidence but 
such as were present. When he had laid this evidence before the jury, he had no doubt 
of their verdict.
	JOHN WOODROFFE, the prosecutor, was then called and examined: "I know 
the house No. 75 St. James's-street. I first frequented it in the latter end of July, 1821. 
I was introduced by a gentleman whom I met at a coffee-house. There seemed to be 
great difficulty in getting in; and we had to pass through several doors strongly 
barricaded before we came to the gambling room, which was in a front room upstairs. 
The furniture of the room was of a gorgeous description, the curtains damask, and 
everything tended to captivate the senses. There were about thirty persons present; 
they played at a French game called Rouge et Noir. They all played against the bank. 
The game is played upon a large oblong table, covered with green cloth, upon which 
there are four compartments or divisions, coloured red and black alternately, and the 
players may stake their money upon either colour as suits their fancy. The bank is 
placed on the middle of the table, and the croupiers or dealers sit opposite each other, 
having the bank before them. There were six packs of cards used in the play, and each 
event or stake is decided in half a minute. Whenever a thirty-one aprés occurs, which 
is calculated to take place three times in every two deals of twenty-eight events, the 
keepers of the bank win half the money staked on the table, without the possibility of 
losing anything. The chances of winning are vastly in favour of the bank. I have been 
to the house seven or eight times, and have invariably been a loser. I have played at 
hazard there also. I have seen all the defendants there, acting as masters or managers. 
The visitors generally kept their hats on, but the defendants used always to be 
uncovered, as if they were at home. I have heard them giving directions to their 
servants about the refreshments. These, consisting of the choicest wines, spirits, &C., 
were handed about, gratis, and in profusion, and the visitors partook of them till many 
became drunk. I recollect going in one night, after the game was over, when the four 
defendants were sitting round the table counting the money in the bank. Carlos told 
me the play was over, but they would be glad to see me another night. I have always 
seen the defendants there when I went. Upon one occasion I interfered in the case of a 
gentleman who was drunk, and whose money I thought they were taking unfairly, 
when Phillips said, 'We know how to rectify mistakes without your interference.' The 
defendants were always sober, but many of the players were often intoxicated."
	Cross-examined by Mr CURWOOD: "I have played in defendants' house 
several times. I am a student of the Inner Temple, and expect to be called to the bar. I 
have unfortunately lost too much time at these houses. I have brought civil actions for 
the recovery of money I have lost against these same defendants, and have preferred 
an indictment against another gaming-house in Pall Mall. I am not concerned in any 
other indictment. I was not much alarmed when I was first introduced into this 
gaming-house. I had lost a great deal of money, and by the advice of my friends 
preferred this indictment. I have never been in the Fleet Prison, nor have I ever taken 
the benefit of the Insolvent Act. I have been arrested more than once by a sheriff's 
officer; but always paid debt and costs. I have repeatedly refused to compromise this 
proceeding against the defendants."
	WILLIAM SMITH, a lieutenant in the army, who had accompanied Mr 
Woodroffe: "Refreshments, consisting of wine, spirits, fruit, sandwiches, &c, were 
provided for the players, and distributed gratis. I have occasionally seen persons in the 
room who were not quite sober. The defendants were generally sober. All the 
defendants, except Oldfield, were constantly in the room, and took an active part in 
the management of the concern. Oldfield was not always there; he generally came in 
late. I once applied to Bennett to lend me a pair of pistols, but he refused, with an 
observation upon the impropriety of his lending me his pistols. I was in the house on 
the 2nd of August, and saw Mr Woodroffe there. The stakes played for at this house 
are from 10s. to L.100."
	Cross-examined by Mr CURWOOD: "I have been indicted. The keepers of the 
gaming-houses indicted me after I had taken proceedings against them. I have never 
taken the benefit of the Insolvent Act. I am now in the rules of the King's Bench, but 
should not be there had I not been arrested by the gaming-house keepers; and two of 
my detaining creditors at this moment are keepers of gaming-houses."
	Re-examined by Mr PHILLIPS: "I have lost very large sums of money. I do 
not think I lost more than L.100 at 75, St. James's Street. I have lost upwards of 
L.2,000 at 32, Pall Mall. I have been a great loser at other houses."
	JOHN TOMLINSON, the collector of taxes, proved that the house was in the 
parish of St. James's.
	Mr PHILLIPS. This is my case.
	Mr CURWOOD addressed the Jury for the defendants. He contended that the 
witnesses were disappointed gamblers, who had commenced these prosecutions for 
the purpose of extorting money, and that consequently their testimony was not worthy 
of credit. They did not come into Court with clean hands; they accused others of the 
very crime of which they themselves had been guilty. Upon the whole, he trusted the 
Jury would look with great suspicion upon their evidence, and disappoint the motives 
which had induced this prosecution.
	The Lord CHIEF JUSTICE reviewed the case, and said, there was not even a 
shadow which could impeach the credit of the witnesses. The Jury could not expect to 
get evidence in such cases, if they did not receive the testimony of persons who 
frequented these houses; and for his own part he saw no reason to disbelieve the 
evidence which had been laid before them.
	The Jury instantly found all four defendants, GUILTY.
	
IN THE COURT OF KING'S BENCH
The King, on the Prosecution of John Woodroffe, Esq., against Charles Edward 
Rogier and William Southwell Humphries, for a Misdemeanour in keeping a Common 
Gaming House, at No. 32, late 40, Pall Mall.
	Mr TALFORD opened the pleadings in this case. The indictment was in all 
respects similar to the one in the preceding trial, with the exception of the change of 
names.
	The LORD CHIEF JUSTICE recapitulated the evidence, and addressed a few 
words to the Jury, who instantly found the defendants GUILTY.
	On the following day, as soon as the court was full, the prisoners, Rogier, 
Humphries, Bennett, Oldfield, and Carlos, were brought into court, in the custody of 
Mr Gibons the tipstaff.
	Mr CHARLES PHILLIPS then moved the judgment of the court upon Richard 
Bennett, Frederick Oldfield, and Thomas Carlos. John Phillips, who was also found 
guilty with them, did not appear on account of illness, and a certificate from his 
physicians to that effect, was read in court.
	An affidavit in mitigation, on the part of Frederick Oldfield was read. He 
stated that he withdrew from all concern and interest in the house, No. 75, St. James's-
street, in June, 1821, and that in the September of the same year the nuisance was 
abated. Since that period he had embarked his capital in trade, on which he now 
depended for the support of his family. He had a wife and nine children dependant 
upon him, who would be reduced to poverty if any heavy fine should be inflicted; and 
he was subject to a disease in his head, arising from a determination of blood to that 
part, which protracted imprisonment would dangerously heighten. Under these 
circumstances, he threw himself upon the mercy of the court.
	Bennett's affidavit set forth that the house in question was shut up in 
September 1821; that he then retired with his family to the New Road, where he now 
resided; that he had a wife and seven children, and was in indigent circumstances; and 
that he was subject to periodical attacks of the gout, which would endanger his life if 
he should be detained long in prison.
	The statements of Oldfield and Bennett respecting their health, were 
confirmed by the affidavits of their medical attendants.
	Thomas Carlos, in his affidavit of mitigation, deposed, that had a wife and 
seven children. His wife was in a delicate state of health, and he believed any severe 
sentence upon him would produce an effect on her extremely dangerous. He had 
served as a lieutenant in his majesty's service for nearly thirty years, and had been 
employed in various parts of the world, particularly in the West Indies, and during the 
rebellion in Ireland: but on the peace he was thrown on the world destitute of money 
and resources, and at the present moment he believed the whole of this property was 
barely sufficient to pay his creditors. He further stated, that he had never been 
concerned in a house of this description before, nor had he ever before been indicted. 
He concluded by throwing himself upon the mercy of the court.
	Mr WOODROFFE, the prosecutor, put in an affidavit in aggravation. He 
described the strong fastenings which secured the approaches to the rooms; the 
furniture was of the most splendid kind, and wines, spirits and refreshments were 
plentifully supplied free of expense. Some of the visitors every night were in a state of 
intoxication, and hazarded their money while in that condition. On one occasion, a 
very young man was playing in a state of high inebriation for large sums, and the 
defendant Phillips, took up his money, as if he had lost on the event, whereas he had 
in reality won; upon this Mr Woodroffe remonstrated, and Phillips paid the young 
man, saying that it was a mistake, which they could rectify without the interference of 
a stranger. Play was carried on in three rooms to a great extent, and was shared by 
young men and lads, apparently the clerks of merchants and tradesmen. Mr 
Woodroffe remembered one of them stung to madness, by his losses, declaring that 
the money he had lost, was the property of his employers. He believed the defendants 
had been engaged for many years in the management of gaming-houses–that they had 
"branch establishments" in various parts of the country, at Brighton, Bath, Preston 
Guild, and many other places–that many actions bad been brought against them for 
money won at play–and that Oldfield and Bennett had been convicted on one 
indictment, but judgment had never been prayed against them.
	Mr CURWOOD here interposed, and said this ought not to be stated, as it was 
only on belief.
	The LORD CHIEF JUSTICE. It will have no effect on us; what ever a party in 
such an affidavit states on mere information and belief, will always be entirely futile.
	The affidavit of the prosecutor further stated that Oldfield and Bennett were 
possessed of enormous wealth, and lived in a costly style.
	Mr CURWOOD addressed the Court on behalf of Bennett and Oldfield. The 
character of the prosecutor was disclosed by the affidavits which he had put in, which 
manifested a savage desire to press down the prisoners with aggravated sufferings. 
But he was sure the Court would divest their minds from every kind of prejudice, 
which those affidavits might for the moment have created. His learned friend (Mr 
Phillips) had eloquence and the popular feeling on his side; he had topics which came 
home to every heart; in fact, he carried the whole torrent of public indignation against 
his unfortunate clients. He (Mr Curwood) would not repeat those general observations 
which he had urged yesterday; but he would beg the Court to remember that in the 
opinion of some, gambling-houses were not totally without defence, for it must not be 
forgotten that private ruin was not always unmixed with public good, and some 
political writers of eminence have thought that much benefit was conferred upon 
society, by the breaking up of large capitals, which could only be effectually 
distributed at the gaming table. (Much laughter.) The learned counsel then urged the 
bodily infirmities to which his clients were subject, and expressed his hope, that the 
Court would remember, that to these persons, imprisonment would be so severe while 
it lasted, that they might reasonably shorten the duration, for upon them it would fall 
with accumulated severity.
	Mr E. LAWES addressed the Court on the part of Thomas Carlos. The Court 
would he trusted attend to his expressions of contrition, and to his determination never 
again to be engaged in such an occupation. He was unfortunately entrapped into an 
employment which he now sincerely regretted; but having been for thirty years an 
officer in his Majesty's service, he was, perhaps, from his situation in life, the more 
liable to temptation; his offence, therefore, was entitled to lenient sentence.
	LORD CHIEF JUSTICE. It does not appear upon the affidavit of the prisoner 
Carlos, that he has abandoned the concern, or that this house has been abated. I have 
looked anxiously into the affidavits, and to see if they contained any statements that 
this party had entirely ceased from his occupation, but there is nothing of the kind in 
any of them, except that of Rogier, one of the defendants who was before us 
yesterday.
	Mr C. PHILLIPS then addressed the Court in aggravation, as follows:
	"I should ill repay the indulgence which I experienced yesterday, if I occupied 
much of your Lordships' time upon the present occasion. But I cannot refrain from 
remarking upon the strange explanation given by my friend (Mr Lawes) of the 
situation of his client. He says that he was in his Majesty's service thirty years, and 
that his situation qualified him, as it were, for his new situation as a gaining-house 
keeper. In what a very pleasant condition would the country be placed, if in case we 
ever went to war again, that on the return of peace all the half-pay officers were to set 
up gambling-houses, a situation for which (my learned friend says) their previous 
occupations had so eminently qualified them! (A laugh.) There has been a remark 
made by my friend, Mr Curwood, that I have on my side all the popular topics, and 
that the observations which have been made upon the conduct of the defendants came 
home to every heart. But unfortunately the defendants formed an exception to this 
rule, for although they now talked of the feelings of their families, they have evinced 
all their lives a total disregard to the feelings and families of others. There is one more 
topic to which I wish allude, I mean the censure which has been cast upon the 
prosecutor; the Court has had a specimen of what a man has to endure who comes into 
Court to prosecute persons of this description. Every topic of calumny which 
ingenuity could devise, my learned friends have been advised to resort to, with a view 
to injure his character and prospects in life. Mr Woodroffe is a very young man; he 
has been trepanned into a line of conduct which he now sincerely regrets, not on 
account of any losses he has sustained, for if he had consented to have foregone this 
prosecution these would have been repaid ten-fold, but on account of the exposure of 
his character, to which, by a sense of public duty be is impelled, in calling up the 
defendants to receive the judgment of this Court upon their offences. I will detain 
your Lordships no longer than merely to state a communication which I have just 
received from the prosecutor; he states that he has made anxious inquiries, and that he 
is convinced the defendant Rogier has entirely ceased to be connected with the trade 
of gaming-houses; but not so the other defendants, as might be inferred by their 
affidavits being silent on that part of the subject.
	The Court having conferred together for a considerable time, Mr Justice 
BAILEY addressed the prisoners as follows:–
	"Charles Edward Rogier, William Southwell Humphries, Richard Jennert, 
Frederick Oldfield, and Thomas Carlos, you appear here to receive the sentence of the 
Court. You have been found guilty upon indictments preferred against you for 
keeping common gaming-houses. Much has been said by counsel, and stated in 
affidavits, respecting the motives of the prosecutors; but this Court looks at the 
offence of which you have been convicted, without paying any regard to the motives 
of those by whom you have been brought to justice. Nor can it fail to remark that 
whatever may be the motive of the prosecutor, when a man brings forward into a 
Court of Justice, a public delinquent, he is a great well-doer to the public; and for this 
reason the Court did not think themselves bound to examine the motives of the 
prosecutors. The offence is one of a very high nature, and highly prejudicial to the 
interests of the public. Houses of this description bring ruin not only upon the 
individuals actually engaged in gaming, but upon their families and connexions–blast 
their prospects, and too frequently produce irretrievable ruin. You were charged with 
keeping common gaming-houses, and it was urged yesterday by your counsel that 
keeping a common gaming-house was not an offence at common law; but if your 
counsel had inquired more minutely into the law of the case, he would have found, 
that, upwards of a century ago, keeping a common gaming-house was held to be an 
offence at common law. It is also sworn in the affidavit of Rogier, that the game of 
Rouge et Noir is not an unlawful game. The Court is not called upon to give any 
opinion upon that point, because you are not charged with playing at Rouge et Noir, 
and thereby committing an offence; but you are charged with keeping common 
gaming-houses, and playing for large sums at the game of Rouge et Noir. A common 
gaming-house is a nuisance of the worst description. It has a tendency to make 
persons lose not only the property belonging to themselves and their families, but in 
many instances it holds out a temptation to persons intrusted with the property of 
others, to hazard that property. You have submitted to the Court that this was not 
unlawful gaming; but it is quite clear that you did not feel that you were acting 
legally. The manner in which the houses were conducted proved what your conviction 
was. The doors were secured, and admittance refused to the officers of justice. Why 
was this extraordinary course resorted to, unless you had a consciousness of 
extraordinary danger? If bad practices were not going on, why should you have been 
anxious to keep out strangers? It appears that there were refreshments, foreign wines 
and spirits, provided gratis for the persons engaged at play; and if also appears that 
those persons were in many instances intoxicated, whilst you, the keepers of these 
houses, were invariably sober. It has been stated in the affidavits put in on the part of 
the prosecutors, that Rogier had said he had large funds, out of which would be 
advanced the sums necessary for paying any pecuniary fines which might be imposed 
by the Court, and for defending all prosecutions, and in the affidavit of Rogier that is 
not denied. It has been urged on behalf of Bennett and Oldfield, that their 
imprisonment would bring extreme distress upon their wives and children. The Court 
cannot avoid feeling that these defendants having wives and children, should have 
been securities for the wives and children of others, who frequented these houses, 
many of whom doubt less have been involved in unutterable ruin. The Court has 
attended to that part of the affidavits in which it is stated that a heavy imprisonment 
might prove fatal to two of the defendants; and the Court has also attended to the 
affidavit of Rogier, which states, that he has not, during a considerable time past, been 
engaged in gaming, and that he is not now engaged in any gaming practices; but the 
Court is sorry to observe that no such declaration is made in the affidavits of any of 
the other defendants. The Court, therefore, taking all the circumstances of the case 
into consideration, and feeling that in the discharge of their duty they owe it to the 
public to put down such practices, doth order and adjudge,
	That you, CHARLES EDWARD ROGIER, do pay to the King a fine of 
L.5,000, and be imprisoned in his Majesty's House of Correction, Cold Bath-fields, 
for the term of twelve calendar months.
	That you, WILLIAM SOUTHWELL HUMPHRIES, do pay to the King a fine 
of L.200, and be imprisoned in the same prison for the term of two years.
	That you, FREDERICK OLDFIELD, do pay to the King a fine of L.1,000, and 
be imprisoned in the prison of this Court for one year.
	That you, RICHARD BENNETT, do pay to the King a fine of L.l,000, and be 
imprisoned in the same prison for one year.
	That you, THOMAS CARLOS, do pay to the King a fine of L.500, and be 
imprisoned in his Majesty's House of Correction, Cold Bath-fields, for the term of 
eighteen calendar months.
	That each of you, at the expiration of your several periods of imprisonment, do 
enter into recognizances for your good behaviour for five years, yourselves in L.2,000 
each, and two sufficient sureties in L.1,000 each; and further, that you be imprisoned 
in the said prisons until such fines be paid, and such recognizances entered into.
	Mr Justice BAYLEY farther observed, that in this instance the Court did not, 
under the provisions of a late act of parliament, feel themselves bound to order that 
the defendants during their several periods of imprisonment should be kept to HARD 
LABOUR, because the offences of which they had been found guilty were committed 
prior to the passing of that act of parliament. Let it, however, be understood, that the 
Court would in future punish with hard labour persons convicted of offences similar 
to those for which the defendants had received the judgment of the Court.
	The defendants were then taken out of Court in the custody of the tipstaff.


APPENDIX XII  
Coining

	The mischief arising from the counterfeiting the current coin of the realm 
reaches to every door. A poor man, cheated by a single base shilling often finds a loss, 
great as a forgery upon paper, to the wealthy merchant.
	Coining, or uttering base money, is high-treason in the second degree. To rob 
all the people is to be a traitor to the state. Yet death is a severe punishment. A lawyer 
was of opinion that such a criminal should be condemned, as a useful hand, to work in 
the royal mint with irons to his legs.
	The extensive circulation of counterfeit money, particularly of late years, is 
too obvious not to have attracted the notice of all ranks. It has become an enormous 
evil in the melancholy catalogue of crimes which the laws of the country are called 
upon to assist the police in suppressing. Its extent almost exceeds credibility; and the 
dexterity and ingenuity of these counterfeits have, after considerable practice, enabled 
them to finish the different kinds of base money, in so masterly a manner, that it has 
become extremely difficult for a common observer to distinguish their spurious 
manufacture from the worn-out silver of the mint. So systematic, indeed, has this 
nefarious traffic become of late, that the great dealers, who, in most instances, are the 
employers of the coiners, execute orders for the town and country, with the same 
regularity as manufacturers in fair branches of trade.
	Scarcely a waggon or coach departs from the metropolis, which does not carry 
boxes and parcels of base coin to the camps, sea-ports, and manufacturing towns. In 
London, regular markets, in various public and private houses, are held by the 
principal dealers; where hawkers, pedlars, fraudulent bone-dealers, unlicensed lottery-
office keepers, gamblers at fairs, itinerant Jews, Irish labourers, servants of toll-
gatherers, and hackney-coach owners, fraudulent publicans, market-women, rabbit-
sellers, fish-criers, barrow-women, and many who would not be suspected, are 
regularly supplied with counterfeit copper and silver, with the advantage of near 
100L. per cent in their favour; and thus it happens, that through these various 
channels, the country is deluged with immense quantities of base money, which get 
into circulation; while an evident diminution of the mint coinage is apparent to every 
common observer.
	Nor has the mischief been confined to the counterfeiting the coin of the realm. 
The avarice and ingenuity of man is constantly finding out new sources of fraud; 
insomuch that in London, and in Birmingham, and its neighbourhood, louis d'or, half 
Johannas, French half-crowns and shillings, as well as several coins of Flanders and 
Germany, and dollars of excellent workmanship, in exact imitation of the Spanish 
dollars issued from the Bank, in 1797, have been from time to time counterfeited; 
apparently without suspicion, that under the Act of the 14th Elizabeth (cap. 3) the 
offenders were guilty of misprision of high-treason.
	These ingenious miscreants have also extended their iniquitous manufacture to 
the coins of India: and a coinage of the star pagoda of Arcot was established in 
London for years, by one person. These counterfeits, being made wholly of blanched 
copper, tempered in such a manner, as to exhibit, when stamped, the cracks in the 
edges, which are always to be found on the real pagoda, cost the maker only three-
halfpence each, after being double gilt. When finished, they were generally sold to 
Jews at five shillings a dozen, who disposed of them afterwards at two shillings, three 
shillings and even five shillings each: and through this medium, they have been 
introduced by a variety of channels into India, where they were mixed with the real 
pagodas of the country, and passed at their full denominated value of eight shillings 
sterling.
	The sequins of Turkey, another gold coin, worth about five or six shillings, 
have in like manner been counterfeited in London. Thus the national character is 
wounded, and the disgrace of the British name proclaimed in Asia, and even in the 
most distant nations of India. Nor can it be sufficiently lamented, that persons who 
consider themselves as ranking in superior stations of life, with some pretensions to 
honour and integrity, have suffered their avarice so far to get the better of their 
honesty, as to be concerned in this iniquitous traffic.
	It has been recently discovered that there are at least a hundred and twenty 
persons in the metropolis and the country, employed principally in coining and selling 
base money! and this independent of the numerous horde of utterers, who chiefly 
support themselves by passing it at its full value.
	It will scarcely be credited, that of criminals of this latter class, who have 
either been detected, prosecuted, or convicted, within the last seven years, there stand 
upon the register of the solicitor of the mint, more than six hundred and fifty names! 
And yet the mischief is not diminished. When the reader is informed, that two persons 
can finish from 200L. to 300L.(nominal value) in base silver, in six days; and that 
three people within the same period, will stamp the like amount in copper, and takes 
into the calculation the number of known coiners, the aggregate amount in the course 
of a year will be found to be immense.
	On the circulation of Spanish dollars in 1804, a Jew was apprehended for 
uttering base ones, and also suspected of being the coiner thereof but there being no 
provision in the Act against counterfeiting this coin, though it had been called in 
before (1797), on that account the offender escaped with impunity.
	So dexterous and skilful have coiners now become, that by mixing a certain 
proportion of pure gold with a compound of base metal, they can fabricate guineas 
that shall be full weight, and of such perfect workmanship, as to elude a discovery, 
except by persons of skill; while the intrinsic value does not exceed thirteen or 
fourteen shillings, and in some instances is not more than eight or nine, Of this 
coinage, considerable quantities were circulated some years since, bearing the 
impression of George II. and another coinage of counterfeit guineas of the year 1793, 
bearing the impression of his present Majesty, has been for some years in circulation, 
finished in a masterly manner, for nearly full weight, although the intrinsic value is 
not above eight shillings; half guineas are also in circulation, of the same coinage; and 
lately a good imitation of the seven shilling pieces. But as the fabrication of such coin 
requires a greater degree of skill and ingenuity than generally prevails, and also a 
greater capital than most coiners are able to command; it is to be hoped it has gone to 
no great extent, for amidst all the abuses which have prevailed of late years, it is 
unquestionably true, that the guineas and half guineas which have been counterfeited 
in a style to elude detection, have borne no proportion in point of extent, to the 
coinage of base silver. Of this latter there are five different kinds at present 
counterfeited, and which we shall proceed to enumerate.
	The first of these are denominated flats, from the circumstance of this species 
of money being cut out of flatted plates, composed of a mixture of silver and blanched 
copper. The proportion of silver runs from one fourth to one third, and in some 
instances even to one-half: the metals are mixed by a chemical preparation, and 
afterwards rolled by flatting-mills into the thickness of shillings, half-crowns, or 
crowns, according to the desire of the parties who bring the copper and silver, which 
last is generally stolen plate. It is not known, that there are at present above one or two 
rolling-mills in London, although there are several in the country, where all the 
dealers and coiners of this species of base money resort, for the purpose of having 
these plates prepared; from which, when finished, blanks, or round pieces, are cut out, 
of the sizes of the money meant to he counterfeited.
	The artisans who stamp or coin these blanks into base money, are seldom 
interested themselves. They generally work as mechanics for the large dealers, who 
employ a capital in the trade, and who furnish the plates, and pay about eight per cent 
for the coinage, being at the rate of one penny for each shilling, and two-pence 
halfpenny for each half-crown.
	This operation consists first in turning the blanks in a lathe; then stamping 
them by means of a press, with dies with the exact impression of the coin intended to 
be imitated; they are afterwards rubbed with sandpaper and cork; then put in aqua 
fortis, to bring the silver to the surface; then rubbed with common salt; then with 
cream of tartar; then warmed in a shovel, or similar machine, before the fire; and last 
of all rubbed with blacking, to give the money the appearance of having been in 
circulation.
	All these operations are so quickly performed, that two persons (a man and his 
wife for instance) can completely finish to the nominal amount of fifty pounds in 
shillings and half crowns in two days, by which they will earn each two guineas a day.
	A shilling of this species, which exhibits nearly the appearance of what has 
been usually called a Birmingham shilling, is intrinsically worth from two pence to 
four pence; and crowns and half-crowns are in the same proportion. The quantity 
made of this sort of counterfeit coinage is very considerable; it requires less ingenuity 
than any of the other methods of coinage, though at the same time it is the most 
expensive, and of course the least profitable to the dealer; who for the most part 
disposes of it to the utterers, vulgarly called smashers, at from twenty-eight to forty 
shillings for a guinea, according to the quality; while these smashers generally 
manage to utter it again to the full import value.
	The second species of counterfeit silver money passes among the dealers by 
the denomination of plated goods; from the circumstances of the shillings and half-
crowns being made of copper of a reduced size, and afterwards plated with silver, so 
extended as to form a rim round the edge. This coin is afterwards stamped with dies, 
so as to resemble the real coin; and from the circumstance of the surface being pure 
silver, is not easily discovered, except by ringing the money on the table; but as this 
species of base money requires a knowledge of plating, as well as a great deal of 
ingenuity, it is of course confined to few hands. It is, however, extremely profitable to 
those who carried it on, as it can generally be uttered without detection, at its full 
import value.
	The third species of base silver money is called plain goods and is totally 
confined to shillings. These are made of copper blanks turned in a lathe, of the exact 
size of a Birmingham shilling, afterwards silvered over by a particular operation used 
in colouring metal buttons; they are then rubbed over with cream of tartar and 
blacking, after which, they are fit for circulation. These shillings do not cost the 
makers above five halfpenny each; they are sold very low to the smashers or utterers, 
who pass them where they can, at the full nominal value; and then when the silver 
wears off, which is very soon the case, they are sold to the Jews, as bad shillings, who 
generally re-sell them at a small profit to customers, by whom they are re-coloured, 
and thus soon brought again into circulation. The profit is immense, owing to the 
trifling value of the materials; but the circulation, on account of the danger of 
discovery, it is to be hoped, is not yet very extensive. It is, however, to be remarked, 
that it is a species of coinage not of a long standing.
	The fourth class of counterfeit silver money is known by the name of castings, 
or cast goods. This species of work requires great skill and ingenuity, and is therefore 
confined to few hands; for none but excellent artists can attempt it, with any prospect 
of great success.
	The process is to melt blanched copper, and to cast it in moulds, having the 
impression, and being of the size of a crown, a half-crown, a shilling, or a sixpence, as 
the case may be; after being removed from the moulds, the money thus formed is 
cleaned off, and afterwards neatly silvered over by an operation similar to that which 
takes place in the manufacture of buttons.
	The counterfeit money made in imitation of shillings by this process, is 
generally cast so as to have a crooked appearance; and the deception is so admirable, 
that although intrinsically not worth one halfpenny, by exhibiting the appearance of a 
thick crooked shilling, they enter into circulation without suspicion, and are seldom 
refused while the surface exhibits no part of the copper; and even after this the 
itinerant Jews will purchase them at three-pence each, though six times their intrinsic 
value, well knowing that they can again he recoloured at the expense of half a 
farthing, so as to pass without difficulty for their nominal value of twelve pence. A 
vast number of the sixpences now in circulation are of this species of coinage.
	The profit in every view, whether to the original maker, or to the subsequent 
purchasers, after having lost their colour, is immense.
	In fabricating cast money, the workmen are always more secure than where 
presses and dies are used; because upon the least alarm, and before any officer of 
justice can have admission, the counterfeits are thrown into the crucible; the moulds 
are destroyed; and nothing is to be found that can convict, or even criminate, the 
offender; on this account the present makers of cast money have reigned long, and 
were they careful and frugal, they might have become extremely rich; but prudence 
rarely falls to the lot of men who live by acts of criminality.
	The fifth and last species of base coin made in imitation of the silver money of 
the realm is called figs, or fig things. It is a very inferior sort of counterfeit money, of 
which composition, however, a great part of the sixpences now in circulation are 
made. The proportion of silver is not, generally speaking, of the value of one farthing 
in half a crown; although there are certainly some exceptions, as counterfeit sixpences 
have been lately discovered, some with a mixture, and some wholly silver; but even 
these did not yield the maker less than from fifty to eighty per cent while the profit on 
the former is no less than from five hundred to one thousand per cent and sometimes 
more.
	It is impossible to estimate the amount of this base money which has entered 
into the circulation of the country during the last twenty years; but it must be very 
great, since one of the principal coiners of stamped money, who some time since left 
off business, and made some important discoveries, acknowledged to the author, that 
he had coined to the extent of two hundred thousand pounds sterling in counterfeit 
half-crowns, and other base silver money, in a period of seven years. This is the less 
surprising, as two persons can stamp and finish to the amount of from 200L. to 300L. 
a week.
	Of the copper money made in imitation of the current coin of the realm, there 
are many different sorts sold at various prices, according to the size and weight; but in 
general they may be divided into two sorts, namely, the stamped and the plain 
halfpence, of both which kind immense quantities have been made in London: and 
also in Birmingham, Wedgbury, Bilston, and Wolverhampton, &c.
	The plain halfpence are generally made at Birmingham; and from their 
thickness afford a wonderful deception. They are sold, however, by the coiners, to the 
large dealers, at about a farthing each, or 100 per cent. profit to the tale or aggregate 
number. These dealers are not the utterers, but sell them again by retail in pieces, or 
five shilling papers, at the rate of from 28s. to 31s. for a guinea; not only to the 
smashers, but also to persons in different trades, as well in the metropolis as in the 
country towns, who pass them in the course of their business at the full import value.
	Farthings are also made in considerable quantities, chiefly in London, but so 
very thin, that the profit upon this specie of coinage is much greater than on the 
halfpence, though these counterfeits are not now, as formerly made of base metal. The 
copper of which they are made is generally pure. The advantage lies in the weight 
alone, where the coiners, sellers, and utterers, do not obtain less than 200 per cent. A 
well-known coiner has been said to finish from sixty to eighty pounds sterling a week. 
Of halfpence, two or three persons can stamp and finish to the nominal amount of at 
least two hundred pounds in six days.
	A species of counterfeit halfpence made wholly of lead has been circulated in 
considerable quantities, coloured in such a manner, as even to deceive the best judges. 
They are generally of the reign of George II and have the exact appearance of old 
mint halfpence.
	The same kind of counterfeit penny-pieces are also in circulation; and as six or 
twelve penny pieces are often taken in a lump, the leaden ones, on account of their 
exact size and similitude, are seldom or never noticed. The colouring, however, is 
very apt to wear off at the edges.
	But those are not the only criminal devices to which the coiners and dealers, as 
well as the utterers of base money, have had recourse, for answering their iniquitous 
purposes.
	Previous to the Act of the 37th George III cap. 126, counterfeit French crowns, 
half-crowns, and shillings, of excellent workmanship, were introduced with a view to 
elude the punishment of the then deficient laws relative to foreign coin.
	Fraudulent die sinkers are to be found both in the metropolis and in 
Birmingham, who are excellent artists; able and willing to copy the exact similitude of 
any coin, from the British guinea to the sequin of Turkey, or to the star pagoda of 
Arcot. The delinquents have therefore every opportunity and assistance they can wish 
for; while their accurate knowledge of the deficiency of the laws (particularly relative 
to British coin), and where the point of danger lies, joined to the extreme difficulty of 
detection, operates as a great encouragement to this species of treason, felony, and 
fraud; and affords the most forcible reason why these pests of society still continued 
to afflict the honest part of the community.
	When it is considered that there are seldom less than between forty and fifty 
coinages or private mints, almost constantly employed in London and in different 
country towns, in stamping and fabricating base silver and copper money, the evil 
may justly be said to have arrived at an enormous height. It is indeed true, that these 
people have been a good deal interrupted and embarrassed, from time to time, by 
detections and convictions; but while the laws are so inapplicable to the new tricks 
and devices they have resorted to, these convictions are only a drop in the bucket: 
while such encouragements are held out, the execution of one rogue only makes room 
for another to take up his customers; and indeed as the offence of selling is only a 
misdemeanour, it is no unusual thing for the wife and family of a culprit, or convicted 
seller of base money, to carry on the business, and to support him luxuriously in 
Newgate, until the expiration of the year and a day's imprisonment, which is generally 
the punishment inflicted for this species of offence.
	It has not been an unusual thing for several of these dealers to hold a kind of 
market, every morning, where from forty to fifty of the German Jew boys are 
regularly supplied with counterfeit halfpence, which they dispose of in the course of 
the day in different streets and lanes of the metropolis, for bad shillings, at about 
threepence each. Care is always taken that the person who cries bad shillings shall 
have a companion near him, who carries the halfpence, and takes charge of the 
purchased shillings (which are not cut) so as to elude the detection of the officers of 
the police, in the event of being searched.
	The bad shillings thus purchased, are received in payment by the employers of 
the boys, for the bad halfpence supplied by them, at the rate of four shillings a dozen; 
and are generally resold to smashers, at a profit of two shillings a dozen; who speedily 
re-colour them, and introduce them again into circulation, at their full nominal value.
	These boys will generally clear from five to seven shillings a day by this 
fraudulent business, which they almost uniformly spend, during the evening, in riot 
and debauchery; returning penniless in the morning to their old trade.
	These dealers are also assisted by fruit women, who are always ready to give 
change to ladies (particularly when no gentleman is in company,) when perhaps not 
one shilling in the change is good; and should the purchaser of the fruit object to any, 
abusive words ensue.–An instance of this happened not long ago in Cranbourn Alley. 
Rabbit and fowl hawkers are likewise very dexterous in passing bad money: they call 
in at shops, and propose bargains of fowls, apparently fine looking, but generally old; 
when they receive payment, they have a mode of changing the silver, and telling the 
purchaser that he has given a bad shilling, or half-a-crown, producing accordingly a 
most notorious base one: by their peremptory, and afterwards abusive manner, they 
force the master or mistress of the house (for who would have a mob about their 
door?) to give them good money for their counterfeit. A person of this description has 
imposed lately upon some very respectable people in Chelsea, but was fortunately 
stopped in his career.
	Thus it is that the frauds upon the public multiply beyond all possible 
conception, while the tradesman, who, unwarily at least if not improperly, sells his 
counterfeit shillings to Jew boys at threepence each, little suspects, that it is for the 
purpose of being returned upon him again at the rate of twelve-pence; or three 
hundred per cent profit to the purchasers and utterers.
	An opinion prevails, founded on information obtained through the medium of 
the most intelligent of these coiners and dealers, that of the counterfeit money now in 
circulation, not above one third part is of the species of flats or composition money, 
which has been mentioned as the most intrinsically valuable of counterfeit silver; and 
contains from one-fourth to one-third silver: the remainder being blanched copper. 
The other two-thirds of the counterfeit money being cast or washed, and intrinsically 
worth little or nothing, the imposition is obvious. Taking the whole upon an average, 
the amount of the injury may be fairly calculated at within 10 per cent of a total loss 
upon the mass of the base silver now in circulation; which, if a conclusion may be 
drawn from what passes under the review of any person who has occasion to receive 
silver in exchange, must considerably exceed one million sterling! To this we have the 
miserable prospect of an accession every year, until sonic effectual steps shall be 
taken to remedy the evil.
	Of the copper coinage, the quantity of counterfeits at one time in circulation 
might be truly said to equal three-fourth parts of the whole, and nothing is more 
certain than that a very great proportion of the actual counterfeits passed as mint 
halfpence, from their size and appearance, although they yielded the coiners a vast 
profit.
	Even at present the state both of the silver and copper coinage of this kingdom 
(the copper pence only excepted) deserves very particular attention, for at no time can 
any person minutely examine either the one coin or the other, which may come into 
his possession, without finding a considerable portion counterfeit.


APPENDIX XIII 
Pretended Ghosts
	We take this opportunity of referring to other cases of pretended ghosts, which 
in their time attracted no inconsiderable portion of public attention, and excited no 
small degree of alarm. The most famous of these was known by the name of the " 
Cock Lane Ghost," and the circumstances connected with the case are so curious, and 
afford so fair a specimen of the easy credulity even of well-informed and otherwise 
sensible people, that we feel little hesitation in placing an account of them before our 
readers.
	The Cock Lane Ghost kept London in a state of commotion for no short time, 
and was the universal theme of conversation among the learned and the illiterate, and 
in every circle of society, "from the prince to the peasant." It appears that at the 
commencement of the year 1760, there resided in Cock Lane, near West Smithfield, 
in the house of one Parsons, the parish clerk of St Sepulchre's, a stockbroker, named 
Kent. The wife of this gentle man had died in child-bed during the previous year and 
his sister-in-law, Miss Fanny, had arrived from Norfolk to keep his house for him. 
They soon conceived a mutual affection, and each of them made a will in the other's 
favour. They lived for some months in the house of Parsons, who, being a needy man, 
borrowed money of his lodger. Some differences arose betwixt them, and Mr Kent left 
the house, and instituted legal proceedings against the parish clerk for the recovery of 
his money.
	While this matter was yet pending, Miss Fanny was suddenly taken ill of the 
small-pox, and, not withstanding every care and attention, she died in a few days, and 
was buried in a vault under Clerkenwell church. Parsons now began to hint that the 
poor lady had come unfairly by her death, and that Mr Kent was accessory to it, from 
his too great eagerness to enter into possession of the property she had bequeathed 
him. Nothing further was said for nearly two years; but it would appear that Parsons 
was of so revengeful a character, that he had never forgotten or forgiven his 
differences with Mr Kent, and the indignity of having been sued for the borrowed 
money. The strong passions of pride and avarice were silently at work during all that 
interval, hatching schemes of revenge, but dismissing them one after the other as 
impracticable, until, at last, a notable one suggested itself. About the beginning of the 
year 1762, the alarm was spread over all the neighbourhood of Cock Lane, that the 
house of Parsons was haunted by the ghost of poor Fanny, and that the daughter of 
Parsons, a girl about twelve years of age, had several times seen and conversed with 
the spirit, who had, more over, informed her, that she had not died of the small-pox, as 
was currently reported, but of poisons administered by Mr Kent. Parsons, who 
originated, took good care to countenance these reports; and, in answer to numerous 
inquiries, said his house was every night, and had been for two years–in fact ever 
since the death of Fanny, troubled by a loud knocking at the doors and in the walls. 
Having thus prepared the ignorant and credulous neighbours to believe or exaggerate 
for themselves what he had told them, be sent for a gentleman of a higher class in life, 
to come and witness these extraordinary occurrences. The gentleman came 
accordingly, and found the daughter of Parsons, to whom the spirit alone appeared, 
and whom alone it answered, in bed, trembling violently, having just seen the ghost, 
and been again informed that she had died from poison. A loud knocking was also 
heard from every part of the chamber, which so mystified the not very clear 
understanding of the visitor, that he departed, afraid to doubt and ashamed to believe, 
but with a promise to bring the clergyman of the parish and several other gentlemen 
on the following day, to report upon the mystery.
	On the following night he returned, bringing with him three clergymen, and 
about twenty other persons, including two negroes, when, upon a consultation with 
Parsons, they resolved to sit up the whole night, and await the ghost's arrival. It was 
then explained by Parsons, that although the ghost would never render itself visible to 
anybody but his daughter, it had no objection to answer the questions that might be 
put to it by any person present, and that it expressed an affirmation by one knock, a 
negative by two, and its displeasure by a kind of scratching. The child was then put 
into bed along with her sister, and the clergymen examined the bed and bed-clothes to 
satisfy themselves that no trick was played, by knocking upon any substance 
concealed among the clothes, as, on the previous night, the bed was observed to shake 
violently.
	After some hours; during which they all waited with exemplary patience, the 
mysterious knocking was heard in the wall, and the child declared that she saw the 
ghost of poor Fanny. The following questions were then gravely put by the 
clergyman, through the medium of one Mary Frazer, the servant of Parsons, and to 
whom it was said the deceased lady bad been much attached. The answers were in the 
usual fashion, by a knock or knocks.
	"Do you make this disturbance on account of the ill usage you received from 
Mr Kent? "–"Yes,"
	"Were you brought to an untimely end by poison? "–"Yes."
	"How was the poison administered, in beer or in purl? "–"In purl."
	"How long was that before your death? "–"About three hours."
	"Can your former servant, Carrots, give any information about the poison?"–
"Yes."
	"Are you Kent's wife's sister?"–"Yes."
	"Were you married to Kent after your sister's death?"–"No."
	"Was anybody else, besides Kent, concerned in your murder? "–"No."
	"Can you, if you like, appear visibly to any one? Yes."
	"Will you do so? "–"Yes."
	"Can you go out of this house?"–"Yes,"
	"Is it your intention to follow this child about everywhere?"–-" Yes."
	"Are you pleased in being asked these questions?"–"Yes."
	"Does it ease your troubled soul?"–"Yes."
	[Here there was heard a mysterious noise, which some wiseacre present 
compared to the fluttering of wings.]
	" How long before your death did you tell your servant, Carrots, that you were 
poisoned?–An hour? "–"Yes."
	[Carrots, who was present, was appealed to; but she stated positively that such 
was not the fact, as the deceased was quite speechless an hour before her death, This 
shook the faith of some of the spectators, but the examination was allowed to 
continue.] 
	"How long did Carrots live with you?"–"Three or four days."
	[Carrots was again appealed to, and said that this was true.]
	"If Mr Kent is arrested for this murder; will he confess? "–"Yes."
	"Would your soul be at rest if he were hanged for it? "–"Yes."
	"Will he be hanged for it?"–"Yes."
	"How long a time first?"–"Three years."
	"How many clergymen are there in this room?"–"Three."
	"How many negroes?"–"Two."
	"Is this watch (held up by one of the clergymen) white? "–"No."
	" Is it yellow? "–"No."
	"Is it blue?"–"No."
	"Is it black? "–"Yes."
	[The watch was in a black shagreen case.]
	"At what time this morning will you take your departure?"
	The answer to this question was four knocks, very distinctly heard by every 
person present; and accordingly, at four o'clock precisely, the ghost took its departure 
to the Wheatsheaf public-house, close by, where it frightened mine host and his lady 
almost out of their wits by knocking in the ceiling right above their bed.
	The rumour of these occurrences very soon spread over London, and every 
day Cock-lane was rendered impassable by the crowds of people who assembled 
around the house of the parish clerk, in expectation of either seeing the ghost or of 
hearing the mysterious knocks. It was at last found necessary, so clamorous were they 
for admission within the haunted precincts, to admit those only who would pay a 
certain fee; an arrangement which was very convenient to the needy and money-
loving Mr Parsons. Indeed, things had taken a turn greatly to his satisfaction; he not 
only had his revenge, but he made a profit out of it. The ghost, in consequence, played 
its antics every night, to the great amusement of many hundreds of people, and the 
great perplexity of a still greater number. 
	Unhappily, however, for the parish clerk, the ghost was induced to make some 
promises which were the means of utterly destroying its reputation. It promised, in 
answer to the questions of the Reverend Mr Aldritch of Clerkenwell, that it would not 
only follow the little Miss Parsons wherever she went, but would also attend him, or 
any other gentleman, into the vault under St John's Church, where the body of the 
murdered woman was deposited, and would there give notice of its presence by a 
distinct knock upon the coffin. As a preliminary, the girl was conveyed to the house of 
Mr Aldritch near the church, where a large party of ladies and gentlemen, eminent for 
their acquirements, their rank, or their wealth, had assembled. About ten o'clock on 
the night of the 1st of February, the girl, having been brought from Cock-lane in a 
coach, was put to bed by several ladies in the house of Mr Aldritch, a strict 
examination having been previously made that nothing was hidden in the bedclothes. 
While the gentlemen, in an adjoining chamber, were deliberating whether they should 
proceed in a body to the vault, they were summoned into the bedroom by the ladies, 
who affirmed, in great alarm, that the ghost was come, and that they heard the knocks 
and scratches. The gentlemen entered accordingly, with a determination to suffer no 
deception. The little girl, on being asked whether she saw the ghost, replied, "No; but 
she felt it on her back like a mouse." She was then required to put her hands out of 
bed, and, these being held by some of the ladies, the spirit was summoned in the usual 
manner to answer, if it were in the room. The question was several times put with 
great solemnity; but the customary knock was not heard in reply in the walls, neither 
was there any scratching. The ghost was then asked to render itself visible, but it did 
not choose to grant the request. It was next solicited to give some token of its presence 
by a sound of any sort, or by touching the hand or cheek of any lady or gentleman in 
the room; but even with this request the ghost would not comply.
	There was now a considerable pause, and one of the clergymen went down-
stairs to interrogate the father of the girl, who was waiting the result of the 
experiment. He positively denied that there was any deception, and even went so far 
as to say that he himself, upon one occasion, had seen and conversed with the awful 
ghost. This having been communicated to the company, it was unanimously resolved 
to give the ghost another trial; and the clergyman called out in a loud voice to the 
supposed spirit that the gentleman to whom it had promised to appear in the vault was 
about to repair to that place, where he claimed the fulfilment of its promise. At one 
hour after midnight they all proceeded to the church, and the gentleman in question, 
with another, entered the vault alone, and took up their position alongside of the 
coffin of poor Fanny. The ghost was then summoned to appear, but it appeared not; it 
was summoned to knock, but it knocked not; it was summoned to scratch, but it 
scratched not; and the two retired from the vault, with the firm belief that the whole 
business was a deception practised by Parsons and his daughter. There were others, 
however, who did not wish to jump so hastily to a conclusion, and who suggested that 
they were, perhaps, trifling with this awful and supernatural being, which, being 
offended with them for their presumption, would not condescend to answer them. 
Again, after a serious consultation, it was agreed on all bands that, if the ghost 
answered anybody at all, it would answer Mr Kent. the supposed murderer; and he 
was accordingly requested to go down into the vault. He went with several others, and 
summoned the ghost to answer whether he had indeed poisoned her. There being no 
answer, the question was put by Mr Aldritch, who conjured it, if it were indeed a 
spirit, to end their doubts–make a sign of its presence, and point out the guilty person. 
There being still no answer for the space of half an hour, during which time all these 
boobies waited with the most praiseworthy perseverance, they returned to the house of 
Mr Aldritch, and ordered the girl to get up and dress herself. She was strictly 
examined, but persisted in her statement that she used no deception, and that the ghost 
had really appeared to her. 
	So many persons had, by their openly expressed belief of the reality of the 
visitation, identified themselves with it, that Parsons and his family were far from 
being the only persons interested in the continuance of the delusion. The result of the 
experiment convinced most people; but these were not to be convinced by any 
evidence, however positive, and they therefore spread about the rumour, that the ghost 
had not appeared in the vault, because Mr Kent had taken care beforehand to have the 
coffin removed. That gentleman, whose position was a very painful one, immediately 
procured competent witnesses, in whose presence the vault was entered, and the 
coffin of poor Fanny opened. Their deposition was then published; and Mr Kent 
indicted Parsons and his wife, his daughter, Mary Frazer the servant, the Rev Mr 
Moor, and a tradesman, two of the most prominent patrons of the deception, for a 
conspiracy. The trial came on in the Court of King's Bench, on the 10th of July, 
before Lord Chief-Justice Mansfield, when, after an investigation which lasted twelve 
hours, the whole of the conspirators were found guilty. The Rev Mr Moor and his 
friend were severely reprimanded in open court, and recommended to make some 
pecuniary compensation to the prosecutor for the aspersions they had been 
instrumental in throwing upon his character. Parsons was sentenced to stand three 
times in the pillory, and to be imprisoned for two years: his wife to one year's, and his 
servant to six mouths' imprisonment in the Bridewell. A printer, who had been 
employed by them to publish an account of the proceedings for their profit, was also 
fined fifty pounds, and discharged.
	The precise manner in which the deception was carried on has never been 
explained. The knocking in the wall appears to have been the work of Parsons' wife, 
while the scratching part of the business was left to the little girl. That any contrivance 
so clumsy could have deceived anybody, cannot fail to excite our wonder. But thus it 
always is. If two or three persons can only be found to take the lead in any absurdity, 
however great, there is sure to be plenty of imitators. Like sheep in a field, if one 
clears the stile, the rest will follow. 
	About ten years afterwards, London was again alarmed by the story of a 
haunted house. Stockwell, near Vauxhall, the scene of the antics of this new ghost, 
became almost as celebrated in the annals of superstition as Cock Lane. Mrs Golding, 
an elderly lady, who resided alone with her servant, Anne Robinson, was sorely 
surprised on the evening ,of Twelfth-day, 1772, to observe a most extraordinary 
commotion among her crockery. Cups and saucers rattled down the chimney–pots and 
pans were whirled down-stairs, or through the windows; and hams, cheeses, and 
loaves of bread disported themselves upon the floor as if the devil were in them. This, 
at least, was the conclusion that Mrs Golding came to; and being greatly alarmed, she 
invited some of her neighbours to stay with, her, and protect her from the, evil one. 
Their presence, however, did not put a stop to the insurrection of china and every 
room in the house was in a short time strewed with the fragments. The chairs and 
tables joined, at last, in the tumult, and things looked altogether so serious, and 
inexplicable, that the neighbours, dreading that the house itself would next be seized 
with a fit of motion; and tumble about their ears, left poor Mrs Golding to bear the 
brunt of it by herself. The ghost in this case was solemnly remonstrated with, and 
urged to take its departure; but the demolition continuing as great as before, Mrs 
Golding finally made up her mind to quit the house altogether. She took refuge with 
Anne Robinson in the house of a neighbour; but his glass and crockery being 
immediately subjected to the same persecution, he was reluctantly compelled to give 
her notice to quit. The old lady, thus forced back to her own house, endured the 
disturbance for some days longer, when suspecting that Anne Robinson was the cause 
of all the mischief, she dismissed her from her service. The extraordinary appearances 
immediately ceased, and were never afterwards renewed; a fact which is of itself 
sufficient to point out the real disturber. A long time afterwards, Anne Robinson 
confessed the whole matter to the Rev Mr Brayfield. This gentleman confided the 
story to Mr Hone, who has published an explanation of the mystery. Anne, it appears, 
was anxious to have a clear house, to carry on an intrigue with her lover, and resorted 
to this trick to effect her purpose. She placed the china on the shelves in such a 
manner that it fell on the slightest motion, and attached horse-hairs to other articles, so 
that she could jerk them down from an adjoining room without being perceived by 
any one. She was exceedingly dextrous at this sort of work, and would have proved a 
formidable rival to many a juggler by profession. 
	In later days, the alarming vagaries of "Swing," and "Spring-heeled Jack," 
have occasioned scarcely less alarm. Their claims to supernatural powers have not 
been supported by such plausible evidence as those of any of the ghosts which we 
have yet named, but their proceedings have been no less troublesome and mischievous 
to the well-disposed of the subjects of this realm.
	One or two anecdotes with regard to haunted houses, though rather beside the 
immediate object of this work, may yet prove interesting, as illustrative of the general 
subject of ghosts, and the degree of belief to be put in such supernatural visitors.
	One of the best stories which we recollect to have heard of a haunted house, is 
that which is related of the Royal Palace at Woodstock, in the year 1649, when the 
commissioners went down from London by the Long Parliament to take possession of 
it, and efface all the emblems of royalty about it, were fairly driven out by their fear of 
the devil, and the annoyances they suffered from a roguish cavalier, who played the 
imp to admiration. The commissioners, dreading at that time no devil, arrived at 
Woodstock on the 13th of October 1649. They took up their lodgings in the late 
King's apartments–turned the beautiful bed rooms and withdrawing-rooms into 
kitchens and sculleries–the council-hall into a brew-house, and made the dining-room 
a place to keep firewood in. They pulled down all the insignia of royal state, and 
treated with the utmost indignity everything that recalled to their memory the name or 
the majesty of Charles Stuart. One Giles Sharp accompanied them in the capacity of 
clerk, and seconded their efforts apparently with the greatest zeal. He aided them to 
uproot a noble old tree, merely because it was called the King's Oak, and tossed the 
fragments into the dining-room to make cheerful fires for the commissioners. During 
the first two days they heard some strange noises about the house, but they paid no 
great attention to them. On the third, however, they began to suspect they bad got into 
bad company; for they heard, as they thought, a supernatural dog under their bed, 
which gnawed their bedclothes. On the next day the chairs and tables began to dance, 
apparently of their own accord. On the fifth day, something came into the bedchamber 
and walked up and down, and fetching the warming-pan out of the withdrawing-room, 
made so much noise with it that they thought five church bells were ringing in their 
ears. On the sixth day, the plates and dishes were thrown up and down the dining-
room. On the seventh, they penetrated into the bed-room in company with several logs 
of wood, and usurped the soft pillows intended for the commissioners. On the eighth 
and ninth nights, there was a cessation of hostilities; but on the tenth the bricks in the 
chimneys became locomotive, and rattled and danced about the floors, and round the 
heads of the commissioners all the night long. On the eleventh, the demon ran away 
with their breeches; and on the twelfth filled their beds so full of pewter platters that 
they could not get into them. On the thirteenth night, the glass became unaccountably 
seized with a fit of cracking, and fell into shivers in all parts of the house. On the 
fourteenth, there was a noise as if forty pieces of artillery had been fired off, and a 
shower of pebble-stones, which so alarmed the commissioners, that, "struck with great 
horror, they cried out to one another for help."
	They first of all tried the efficacy of prayers to drive away the evil spirits; but 
these proving unavailing, they began seriously to reflect whether it would not be 
much better to leave the place altogether to the devil that inhabited it. They ultimately 
resolved, however, to try it a little longer: and having craved forgiveness of all their 
sins, betook themselves to bed. That night they slept in tolerable comfort, but it was 
merely a trick of their tormentor to lull them into false security. When, on the 
succeeding night, they heard no noises, they began to flatter themselves that the devil 
was driven out, and prepared accordingly to take up their quarters for the whole 
winter in the palace. These symptoms on their part became the signal for renewed 
uproar among the fiends. On the 1st of November, they heard something walking with 
a slow and solemn pace up and down the with drawing-room, and immediately 
afterwards a shower of stones, bricks, mortar, and broken glass pelted about their ears. 
On the 2nd the steps were again heard in the withdrawing-room, sounding to their 
fancy very much like the treading of an enormous bear, which continued for about a 
quarter of an hour. This noise having ceased, a large warming-pan was thrown 
violently upon the table, followed by a number of stones, and the jawbone of a horse. 
Some of the boldest walked valiantly into the withdrawing-room, armed with swords 
and pistols, but could discover nothing. They were afraid that night to go to sleep, and 
sat up, making fires in every room, and burning candles and lamps in great 
abundance; thinking that, as the fiends loved darkness, they would not disturb a 
company surrounded with so much light. They were deceived, however: buckets of 
water came down the chimneys and extinguished the fires, and the candles were 
blown out, they knew not how. Some of the servants who had betaken themselves to 
bed were drenched with putrid ditch-water as they lay; and arose in great fright, 
muttering incoherent prayers, and exposing to the wondering eyes of the 
commissioners their linen all dripping with green moisture, and their knuckles red 
with the blows they had at the same time received from some invisible tormentors. 
While they were still speaking, there was a noise like the loudest thunder, or the firing 
of a whole park of artillery; upon which they all fell down upon their knees and 
implored the protection of the Almighty. One of the commissioners then arose, the 
others still kneeling, and asked in a courageous voice, and in the name of God, who 
was there, and what they had done that they should be troubled in that manner. No 
answer was returned, and the noises ceased for a while. At length, however, as the 
commissioners said, "the devil came again, and brought with it seven devils worse 
than itself," Being again in darkness, they lighted a candle and placed it in the 
doorway that it might throw a light upon the two chambers at once; but it was 
suddenly blown out, and one commissioner said that he bad "seen the similitude of a 
horse's hoof striking the candle and candlestick into the middle of the chamber, and 
afterwards making three escapes on the snuff to put it out." Upon this, the same 
person was so bold as to draw his sword; but he asserted positively that he had hardly 
withdrawn it from the scabbard before an invisible hand seized hold of it and tugged 
with him for it, and prevailing, struck him so violent a blow with the pommel that he 
was quite stunned. Then the noises began again; upon which, with one accord, they all 
retired into the presence-chamber, where they passed the night, praying and singing 
psalms.
	They were by this time convinced that it was useless to struggle any longer 
with the powers of evil, that seemed determined to make Woodstock their own. These 
things happened on the Saturday night; and, being repeated on the Sunday, they 
determined to leave the place immediately, and return to London. By Tuesday 
morning early, all their preparations were completed; and shaking the dust off their 
feet, and devoting Woodstock and all its inhabitants to the infernal gods, they finally 
took their departure, 
	Many years elapsed before the true cane of these disturbances was discovered. 
It was ascertained, at the Restoration, that the whole was the work of Giles Sharp, the 
trusty clerk of the commissioners. This man, whose real name was Joseph Collins, 
was a concealed royalist, and had passed his early life within the bowers of 
Woodstock; so that he knew every hole and corner of the place, and the numerous 
trap-doors and secret passages that abounded in the building; The commissioners, 
never suspecting the true state of his opinions, but believing him to be revolutionary 
to the back-bone, placed the utmost reliance upon him; a confidence which he abused 
in the manner above detailed, to his own great amusement, and that of the few 
cavaliers whom he let into the secret.
	Quite as extraordinary and as cleverly managed was the trick played off at 
Tedworth, in 1661, at the house of Mr Mompesson, and which is so circumstantially 
narrated by the Rev Joseph Glanvil, under the title of "The Demon of Tedworth," and 
appended, among other proofs of witchcraft, to his noted work, called "Sadducismus 
Triumphatus." About the middle of April, in the year above mentioned, Mr 
Mompesson, having returned to his house at Tedworth, from a journey he had taken to 
London, was informed by his wife that during his absence they bad been troubled with 
the most extraordinary noises. Three nights afterwards be heard the noise himself; and 
it appeared to him to be that of "a great knocking at his doors, and on the outside of 
his walls," He immediately arose, dressed himself, took down a pair of pistols, and 
walked valiantly forth to discover the disturber, under the impression that it must be a 
robber; but, as he went, the noise seemed to travel before or behind him; and, when he 
arrived at the door from which be thought it proceeded, he saw nothing, but still heard 
"a strange hollow sound." He puzzled his brains for a long time, and searched every 
corner of the house; but, discovering nothing, he went to bed again. He was no sooner 
snug under the clothes, than the noise began again more furiously than ever, sounding 
very much like a "thumping and drumming on the top of his house, and then by 
degrees going off into the air."
	These things continued for several nights, when it came to the recollection of 
Mr Mompesson that, some time before, be bad given orders for the arrest and 
imprisonment of a wandering drummer, who went about the country with a large 
drum, disturbing quiet people and soliciting alms, and that he had detained the man's 
drum, and that, probably, the drummer was a wizard, and had sent evil spirits to haunt 
his house, to be revenged of him. He be came strengthened in his opinion every day, 
especially when the noises assumed, to his fancy, a resemblance to the beating of a 
drum, "like that at the breaking up of a guard." Mrs Mompesson being brought to bed, 
the devil, or the drummer, very kindly and considerately refrained from making the 
usual riot; but, as soon as she recovered strength, began again, "in a ruder manner than 
before, following and vexing the young children, and beating their bedsteads with so 
much violence that every one expected they would fall in pieces." For an hour 
together, as the worthy Mr Mompesson repeated to his wondering neighbours, this 
infernal drummer would beat 'Roundheads and Cuckolds,' the 'Tattoo,' and several 
other points of war, as cleverly as any soldier." When this had lasted long enough, he 
changed his tactics, and scratched with his iron talons under the children's bed. "On 
the 5th of November," says the Rev Joseph Glanvil, "it made a mighty noise; and a 
servant, observing two boards in the children's room seeming to move, he bid it give 
him one of them. Upon which the board came (nothing moving it, that he saw) within 
a yard of him. The man added, 'Nay, let me have it in my hand;' upon which the spirit, 
devil, or drummer, pushed it towards him so close, that he might touch it. This," 
continues Glanvil, "was in the day-time, and was seen by a whole room-full of people. 
That morning it left a sulphurous smell behind it, which was very offensive. At night 
the minister, one Mr Cragg, and several of the neighbours, came to the house on a 
visit. Mr Cragg went to prayers with them, kneeling at the children's bedside, where it 
then became very troublesome and loud. During prayer-time, the spirit withdrew into 
the cock-loft, but returned as soon as prayers were done; and then, in sight of the 
company, the chairs walked about the room of themselves, the children's shoes were 
hurled over their beads, and every loose thing moved about the chamber. At the same 
time, a bed-staff was thrown at the minister, which hit him on the leg, but so 
favourably, that a lock of wool could not have fallen more softly." On another 
occasion, the blacksmith of the village, a fellow who cared neither for ghost nor devil, 
slept with John the footman, that he also might hear the disturbance, and be cured of 
his incredulity, when there "came a noise in the room, as if one had been shoeing a 
horse, and somewhat came, as it were, with a pair of pinchers," snipping and snapping 
at the poor blacksmith's nose the greater part of the night. Next day it came, panting 
like a dog out of breath; upon which some woman present took a bed-staff to knock at 
it, "which was caught suddenly out of her band, and thrown away; and company 
coming up, the room was presently filled with a bloomy noisome smell, and was very 
hot, though without fire, in a very sharp and severe winter. It continued in the bed, 
panting and scratching for an hour and a half, and then went into the next room, where 
it knocked a little, and seemed to rattle a chain."
	The rumour of these wonderful occurrences soon spread all over the country, 
and people from far and near flocked to the haunted house of Tedworth, to believe or 
doubt, as their natures led them, but all filled with intense curiosity. It appears, too, 
that the fame of these events reached the royal ear, and that some gentlemen were sent 
by the King to investigate the circumstances, and draw up a report of what they saw or 
heard. Whether the royal commissioners were more sensible men than the neighbours 
of Mr Mompesson, and required more clear and positive evidence than they, or 
whether the powers with which they were armed to punish anybody who might be 
found carrying on this deception frightened the evil-doers, is not certain; but Glanvil 
himself confesses, that all the time they were in the house the noises ceased, and 
nothing was beard or seen. "However," says he, "as to the quiet of the house when the 
courtiers were there, the intermission may have been accidental, or perhaps the demon 
was not willing to give so public a testimony of those transactions which might 
possibly convince those whom he had rather should continue in unbelief of his 
existence."
	As soon as the royal commissioners took their departure, the infernal drummer 
re-commenced his antics, and hundreds of persons were daily present to hear and 
wonder. Mr Mompesson's servant was so fortunate as not only to hear, but to see this 
pertinacious demon; for it came and stood at the foot of his bed. The exact shape and 
proportion of it he could not discover; but "he saw a great body, with two red and 
glaring eyes, which, for some time, were fixed steadily on him, and at length 
disappeared." Innumerable were the antics it played. Once it purred like a cat; beat the 
children's legs black and blue; put a long spike into Mr Mompesson's bed, and a knife 
into his mother's; filled the porringers with ashes; hid a Bible under the grate; and 
turned the money black in people's pockets. "One night," says Mr Mompesson, "there 
were seven or eight of these devils in the shape of men, who, as soon as a gun was 
fired, would shuffle away into an arbour;" a circumstance which might have 
convinced Mr Mompesson of the mortal nature of his persecutors, if he had not been 
of the number of those worse than blind, who shut their eyes, and refuse to see.
	In the mean time, the drummer, the supposed cause of all the mischief, passed 
his time in Gloucester gaol, whither he had been committed as a rogue and a 
vagabond. Being visited one day by some person from the neighbourhood of 
Tedworth he asked what was the news in Wiltshire, and whether people did not talk a 
great deal about a drumming in a gentleman's house there? The visitor replied, that he 
heard of nothing else; upon which the drummer observed, "I have done it; I have thus 
plagued him! and he shall never be quiet until he hath made me satisfaction for taking 
away my drum." No doubt the fellow, who seems to have been a gipsy, spoke the 
truth, and that the gang of which he was a member knew more about the noises at Mr 
Mompesson's house than anybody else. Upon these words, however, he was brought 
to trial at Salisbury for witchcraft; and, being found guilty, was sentenced to 
transportation; a sentence which, for its leniency, excited no little wonder in that age, 
when such an accusation, whether proved or not, generally insured the stake or the 
gibbet. Glanvil says, that the noises ceased immediately the drummer was sent beyond 
the seas; but that, somehow or other, he managed to return from transportation,–"by 
raising storms and affrighting the seamen, it was said;" when the disturbances were 
forthwith renewed, and continued at intervals for several years. It was believed by 
many at the time, that Mr Mompesson himself was privy to the whole matter, and 
permitted and encouraged these tricks in his house for the sake of notoriety, but it 
seems more probable that the gipsies were the real delinquents, and that Mr 
Mompesson was as much alarmed and bewildered as his credulous neighbours, whose 
excited imaginations conjured up no small portion of these stories, --
"Which roll'd, and, as they roll'd, grew larger every hour."
	Many instances of a similar kind, during the seventeenth century, might be 
gleaned from Glanvil and other writers of that period; but they do not differ 
sufficiently from these to justify a detail of them.


APPENDIX XIV 
Witchcraft

	A few anecdotes upon the subject of the belief in witchcraft, in former days, 
we trust will not prove uninteresting to our readers.
	The reign of James the Sixth of Scotland, and First of England, may be said to 
have been the witchcraft age of Great Britain. Scotland had always been a sort of fairy 
land; but it remained for that sagacious prince, at a time when knowledge was 
beginning to dispel the mists of superstition, to contribute, by his authority and 
writings, to resolve a prejudice of education into an article of religious belief amongst 
the Scottish people. He wrote and published a "Treatise on Daemnologie;" the 
purpose of which was, to "resolve the doubting hearts of many, as to the fearful 
abounding of those detestable slaves of the Devil, witches, or enchanters." The 
authority of Scripture was perverted, to show, not only the possibility, but certainty, 
that such "detestable scenes" do exist; and many most ridiculous stories of evil 
enchantment were added, to establish their "fearful abounding." The treatise, which is 
in the form of a dialogue, treats also of the punishment which such crimes deserve; 
concluding, that "no sex, age, nor rank, should be excused from the punishment of 
death, according to the law of God, the civil and imperial law, and the municipal law 
of all Christian nations." In answer to the question, "What to judge of deathe, I pray 
you?" The answer is, "It is commonlie used by fyre, but there is an indifferent thing to 
be used in every country, according to the law or custume thereof."
	Such, in fact, was the cruel and barbarous law of James's native country; and 
such became the law also of England, when he succeeded to the sceptre of Elizabeth. 
Many hundreds of unfortunate creatures, in both countries, became its victims, 
suffering death ignominiously, for an impossible offence: neither sex, nor age, nor 
rank, as James had sternly enjoined, was spared; and it was the most hapless and 
inoffensive, such as aged and lone women, who were most exposed to its malignant 
operation.
	There were persons regularly employed in hunting out, and bringing to 
punishment, those unfortunate beings suspected of witchcraft. 
	Matthew Hopkins resided at Manningtree, in Essex, and was witchfinder for 
the associated counties of Essex, Suffolk, Norfolk, and Huntingdonshire. In the years 
1644, 1645, and 1646, accompanied by one John Stern, he brought many to the fatal 
tree as reputed witches. He hanged, in one year, no less than sixty reputed witches of 
his own county of Essex. The old, the ignorant, and the indigent, such as could neither 
plead their own cause nor hire an advocate, were the miserable victims of this 
wretch's credulity, spleen, and avarice. He pretended to be a great critic in special 
marks, which were only moles, scorbutic spots, or warts, that frequently grow large 
and pendulous in old age; but were absurdly supposed to be teats to suckle imps. His 
ultimate method of proof was by tying together the thumbs and toes of the suspected 
person, about whose waist was fastened a cord, the ends of which were held on the 
banks of the river by two men, in whose power it was to strain or slacken it. 
Swimming, upon this experiment, was deemed a sufficient proof of guilt; for which 
King James (who is said to have recommended, if he did not invent it) assigned a 
ridiculous reason, that, "as some persons had renounced their baptism by water, so the 
water refuses to receive them." Sometimes those who were accused of diabolical 
practices were tied neck and heels, and tossed into a pond: if they floated or swam, 
they were consequently guilty, and were therefore taken out and burned; but if they 
were innocent, they were only drowned. The experiment of swimming was at length 
tried upon Hopkins himself, in his own way, and he was upon the event condemned, 
and, as it seems, executed as a wizard. In a letter from Serjeant Widrinton to Lord 
Whitelocke, mention is made of another fellow of the same profession as Hopkins. 
This fellow received twenty shillings a-head for every witch he discovered, and 
thereby obtained rewards amounting to thirty pounds.
	In an old print of this execrable character, he is represented with two witches. 
One of them, named Holt, is supposed to say, "My Impes are, i. Ile-mauzyr; 2. 
Pyewackett; 3. Pecke in the Crown; 4. Griezell Griediegutt." Four animals attend: 
Jarmara, a black dog; Sacke and Sugar, a hare; Newes, a ferret; Vinegar Tom, a bull-
headed grey hound. This print is in the Pepysian library.
	Amongst a number of women (as many as sixteen) whom Hopkins, in the year 
1644, accused at Yarmouth, was one, of whom the following account is given. It 
appears that she used to work for Mr Moulton (a stocking merchant, and alderman of 
the town), and upon a certain day went to his house for work; but he being from 
home, his man refused to let her have any till his master returned; where upon, being 
exasperated against the man, she applied herself to the maid, and desired some 
knitting-work of her; and when she returned the like answer, she went home in great 
discontent against them both. That night, when she was in bed, she heard a knock at 
her door, and going to her window, she saw (it being moon-light) a tall black man 
there: and asked what he would have? He told her that she was discontented, because 
she could not get work; and that he would put her into a way that she should never 
want anything. On this, she let him in, and asked him what be had to say to her? He 
told her he must first see her hands; and taking out something like a penknife, he gave 
it a little scratch, so that a little blood followed, a scar being still visible when she told 
the story; then he took some of the blood in a pen, and pulling a book out of his 
pocket, bid her write her name; and when she said she could not, be said he would 
guide her hand. When this was done, be bid her now ask what she would have. And 
when she desired first to be revenged on the man, he promised to give her an account 
of it next night, and so leaving her some money went away. The next night be came to 
her again, and told her he could do nothing against the man, for he went constantly to 
church, and said his prayers morning and evening. Then she desired him to revenge 
her on the maid: but he said the same of the maid, and that therefore he could not hurt 
her. But she said that there was a young child in the house, which was more easy to be 
dealt with. Whereupon she desired him to do what he could against it. The next night 
he came again, and brought with him an image of wax, and told her they must go and 
bury that in the church-yard, and then the child, which he had put in great pain 
already, should waste away as that image wasted. Where upon they went together and 
buried it. The child having lain in a languishing condition for about fifteen months, 
and being very near death, the minister sent this woman with this account to the 
magistrates, who thereupon sent her to Mr Moulton's, where, in the same room that 
the child lay, almost dead, she was examined concerning the particulars aforesaid; all 
which she confessed, and had no sooner done, but the child, who was three years old, 
and was thought to be dead or dying, laughed, and began to stir and raise up itself: and 
from that instant began to recover. The woman was convicted upon her own 
confession, and was executed accordingly.
	A more melancholy tale does not occur in the annals of necromancy, than that 
of the Lancashire Witches, in 1612. The scene of the story is in Penderbury Forest, 
four or five miles from Manchester, remarkable for its picturesque and gloomy 
situation. It had long been of ill repute, as a consecrated haunt of diabolical 
intercourse, when a country magistrate, Roger Nowel by name, took it into his head 
that he should perform a great public service by routing out a nest of witches, who had 
rendered the place a terror to all the neighbouring vulgar. The first persons he seized 
on were Elizabeth Demdike and Ann Chattox. The former was eighty years of age, 
and had for some years been blind, and principally subsisted by begging, though she 
had a miserable hovel on the spot, which she called her own. Ann Chattox was of the 
same age, and had for some time been threatened with the calamity of blindness. 
Demdike was held to be so hardened a witch that she had trained all her family to the 
mystery: namely, Elizabeth Device, her daughter, and James and Alison Device, her 
great-grand children. These, together with John Balcock, and Jane his mother, Alice 
Natter, Catherine Hewitt, and Isabel Roby, were successively apprehended by the 
diligence of Nowel, and one or two neighbouring magistrates, and were all of them by 
some means induced, some to make a more liberal, and others a more restricted 
confession of their misdeeds in witchcraft, and were afterwards hurried away to 
Lancaster Castle, fifty miles off, to prison. Their crimes were said to have universally 
proceeded from malignity and resentment; and it was reported to have repeatedly 
happened for poor old Demdike to be led by night from her habitation into the open 
air, by some member of her family, where she was left alone for an hour to curse her 
victim, and pursue her unholy incantations, and was then sought and brought back 
again to her hovel, her curses never failing to produce the desired effect.
	The poor wretches had been but a short time in prison, when information was 
given that a meeting of witches was held on Good-Friday, at Malkin's Tower, the 
habitation of Elizabeth Device, to the number of twenty persons, to consult how, by 
infernal machinations, to kill one Lovel, an officer, to blow up Lancaster Castle, 
deliver the prisoners, and to kill another man, of the name of Lister. The last object 
was effected; the other plans, by some means, which are not related, were prevented.
	The prisoners were kept in jail till the summer assizes; but in the mean time, 
the poor blind Demdike died in confinement.
	The other prisoners were severally indicted for killing by witchcraft certain 
persons who were named, and were all found guilty. The principal witnesses against 
Elizabeth Device were James Device and Jennet Device, her grandchildren, the latter 
only nine years of age. When this girl was put into the witness-box, the grandmother, 
on seeing her, set up so dreadful a yell, intermixed with dreadful curses, that the child 
declared that she could not go on with her evidence, unless the prisoner was removed. 
This was agreed to, and both brother and sister swore that they had been present, 
when the Devil came to their grandmother, in the shape of a black dog, and asked her 
what she desired. She said the death of John Robinson; when the dog told her to make 
an image of Robinson in clay, and after crumble it into dust, and as fast as the image 
perished, the life of the victim should waste away, and in conclusion the man should 
die. This testimony was received; and upon the conviction, which followed, ten 
persons were led to the gallows, on the twentieth of August, Ann Chattox, of eighty 
years of age, among the rest, the day after the trials, which lasted two days, were 
finished.
	The judges who presided on these trials were Sir James Altham and Sir 
Edward Bromley, barons of the exchequer.
	Guluim, who gives the most simple and interesting account of this melancholy 
case, conjectures, with much reason, that the old women had played at the game of 
commerce with the Devil, in order to make their simpler neighbours afraid of them; 
and that they played the game so long, that in an imperfect degree they deceived 
themselves. But when one of them actually saw her grandchild of nine years old 
placed in the witness-box, with the intention of consigning her to a public and 
ignominious death, then the reveries of the imagination vanished, and she deeply felt 
the reality, that, when she had been somewhat imposing on the child, in devilish sport, 
she had been whetting the dagger that was to take her own life. It was then no wonder 
that she uttered a supernatural yell, and poured curses from her heart.
	Such was the first case of the Lancashire Witches. In that which follows, the 
accusation was clearly traced to be founded on a most villainous conspiracy.
	About the year 1634, a boy named Edmund Robinson, whose father, a very 
poor man, dwelt in Pendle Forest, the scene of the alleged witching, declared that, 
while gathering wild-flowers in one of the glades of the forest, be saw two 
greyhounds, which he supposed to belong to a gentleman in the neighbourhood. 
Seeing nobody following them, the boy alleged that he proposed to have a course; but 
though a hare was started, the dogs refused to run. Young Robinson was about to 
punish them with a switch, when one Dame Dickenson, a neighbour's wife, started up 
instead of the one grey hound; and a little boy instead of the other. The witness 
averred that Mother Dickenson offered him money to conceal what he had seen, 
which he refused, saying, 'Nay; thou art a witch!' Apparently, she was determined he 
should have full evidence of the truth of what be said, for she pulled out of her pocket 
a bridle, and shot it over the head of the boy, who had so lately represented the other 
greyhound. He was then directly changed into a horse; Mother Dickenson mounted, 
and took Robinson before her. They made to a large house or barn, called Hourstown, 
into which the boy entered with the others. He there saw six or seven persons pulling 
at halters, from which, as they pulled them, meat ready-dressed came flying in 
quantities, together with lumps of butter, porringers of milk, and whatever else might, 
in his fancy, complete a rustic feast. He declared that, while engaged in the charm, 
they made such ugly faces and looked so fiendish, that he was frightened.
	This story succeeded so well, that the father of the boy took him round to the 
neighbouring churches, where he placed him standing on a bench after service, and 
bade him look round and see what he could observe. The device, however clumsy, 
succeeded; and no less than seventeen persons were apprehended at the boy's election, 
and conducted, as witches, to Lancaster Castle. These seventeen persons were tried at 
the assizes and found guilty; but the judge, whose name has unfortunately been lost, 
unlike Sir James Altham and Sir Edward Bromley, saw something in the case that 
excited his suspicion, and, though the juries had not hesitated in any one instance, 
respited the convicts, and sent up a report of the affair to the Government. Twenty-
two years had not elapsed since the former case, in vain. Four of the prisoners were, 
by the judge's recommendation, sent for to the metropolis, and were examined, first 
by the king's physician, and then by Charles the First, in person. The boy's story was 
strictly scrutinised, and in the end, he confessed that it was all an imposture, in which 
lie had been instructed by his lather; and the whole seventeen prisoners received the 
royal pardon.
	So late as the year 1679, several unfortunate persons were tried and executed 
at Borrostowness in Scotland, for witchcraft, four of them being poor widows, The 
following is a literal copy of the indictment upon which they were arraigned
	"Annaple Thompsone, widow in Borrostowness, Margaret Pringle, relict of the 
deceast John Camphell, seivewright there, &c. &c.
	"Aye, and ilk ane of you, are indighted and accused, that, whereas, 
notwithstanding the law of God particularlie sett down in the 20th chapter of 
Leveticus and the 18th chapter of Deuteronomy, and by the lawes and actes of 
parliament of this kingdome and constant practis thereof, particularlie to the 27 act, 29 
parliament Q. Marie, the cryme of witchcraft is declaired to be one horreid, 
abominable, and capitall cryme, punishable with the pains of death and confiscatioiwn 
of moveables;-- nevertheless it is of veritie, that you have comitted and are gwyltie of 
the said crime of witchcraft, in awa far ye have entered in practicion with the devile, 
the enemie of your salvatiown, and have renownced our blessed Lord and Savior, and 
your baptizme, and have given yoursellfes, both soulles and bodies, to the devile, and 
swyndrie wyth witches, in divers places. And particularlie ye, the said Annaple 
Thompsone, had a metting with the devile the time of your weidowhood, before you 
were married to your last husband, in your coming betwixt Linlithgow and 
Borrostowness, where the devile, in the lykeness of one black man, told you, that you 
was one poor puddled bodie, and had one lyiff and difficulties to win throu the world; 
and promesed if ye wald followe him, and go alongst with him, you should never 
want, but have one better lyiff; and about fyve wekes thereafter the devile appeared to 
you, when you was going to the coal-hill, abowt sevin a-clock in the morning. Having 
renewed his former temtatiown, you did condeshend thereto and declared yourself 
content to follow him and become his servant; whereupon the devile * * * and ye and 
each persone of you wis at several metting with the devile, in the linkes of 
Borrostowness, and in the house of you, Bessie Vicker; and ye did eate and drink with 
the devile, and with one another, and with witches in her howss in the night tyme; and 
the said Wm. Crow bought the ale, which ye drank, extending about sevin gallons, 
from the howss of Elizabeth Hamilton; and you, the said Annaple, had another 
metting about fyve wekes ago, when you wis goeing to the coal-hill of Grange, and he 
inveitted you to go alongst and drink with him in the Grange farmes; and you, the said 
Margaret Pringle, have bein one witch this many yeeres by gone, hath renownced 
your baptizme and becum the devile's servant, and promeis to follow him; and the 
devile took you by the right hand, whereby it was for eight days greivowslie pained, 
but, having it twitched new again, it immedeatelie became haul; and you, the said 
Margaret Hamilton has bein the devile's servant these eight or nine years by gone, and 
he appeared and conversed with you at the town well of Borrostowness, and several 
times at your owin howss, and drank several choppens of ale with you. * * and the 
devile gave you ane fyne merk piece of gold, which a lyttle after becam ane skleite 
stone; and you, the said Margaret Hamilton, relict of James Pullevart, has been ane 
witch, and the devile's servant, thertie yeres since, bath renounced your baptisme, as 
said is 
* * * * * * * 
And ye, and ilk of you, was at a meeting with the devile and other witches, at the 
croce of Murestain, above Renneil, upon the threttein of October last, where you all 
danced, and the devile acted the piper, and where you endeavoured to have destroyed 
Androw Mitchell, sone to John Mitchell, elder in dean of Kenneil."
	The charges thus made against the "poor puddled bodies," Annaple 
Thompsone and her associates, however ludicrous they may seem, were substantiated 
to the satisfaction of a jury; and for so meeting, and dancing, and drinking, and 
frolicking with his satanic majesty (who condescended to act the piper), the 
unfortunate defendants were solemnly condemned, "to be taken to the west end of 
Borrostowness, the ordinary place of execution there, upon Tuesday, the 23rd day of 
December current, betwixt two and four in the afternoon, and then to be wirried at a 
steack [that is, like a bull or a badger, by dogs in human shape] till they be dead, and 
thereafter to have their bodies burned to ashes."
	The strange and eventful history of the Witches of New England is, perhaps, 
generally known to the educated and informed; still there must be many who are not 
aware of all its melancholy details. As a story of witchcraft, without any poetry in it, 
with out anything to amuse the imagination, or interest the fancy, it, perhaps, 
surpasses everything upon record. The prosecutions for witchcraft in New England 
were numerous, and they continued, with little intermission, principally at Salem, 
during the greater part of the year 1692. The accusations were of the most vulgar and 
contemptible sort–invisible pinchings and blows, fits, with the blastings and mortality 
of cattle, and wains stuck fast in the ground, or losing their wheels. A conspicuous 
feature in nearly the whole of these stories, was what they named "the spectral sight," 
or, in other worth, that the profligate accusers first feigned, for the most part, the 
injuries they received, and next saw the figures and action of the persons who inflicted 
them, when they were invisible to every one else. Hence the miserable prosecutors 
gained the power of gratifying the wantonness of their malice, by pretending that they 
suffered by the hand of any one against whom they had an ill will. The persons so 
charged, though unseen by any one but the accuser, and who in their corporal 
presence were at a distance of miles, and were doubtless wholly unconscious of the 
mischief that was hatching against them, were immediately taken up, and cast into 
prison. And what was more monstrous and incredible, there stood the prisoner on trial 
for his life, while the witnesses were permitted to swear that his spectre had haunted 
them, and afflicted them with all manner of injuries!
	The first specimen of this sort of accusation was given by one Paris, a minister 
of a church at Salem, in the end of the year 1691, who had two daughters, one nine 
years old, the other eleven who were afflicted with fits and convulsions. The first 
person fixed on as the mysterious author of these evils, was Tituba, a female slave in 
the family, and she was harassed by her master into a confession of unlawful practices 
and spells. The girls then fixed on Sarah Good, a female, known to be the victim of a 
morbid melancholy, and Osborne, a poor man who had for a considerable time been 
bed-ridden, as persons whose spectres had perpetually haunted and tormented them, 
and Good was, twelve months after wards, hanged on this accusation.
	A person, who was one of the first to fall under the imputation, was one 
George Burroughs, also a minister of Salem. He had, it seems, buried two wives, both 
of whom the busy gossips said he had used ill in their life-time, and, consequently, it 
was whispered that he had murdered them. He was accustomed, foolishly, to vaunt 
that he knew what people said of him in his absence, and this was brought as a proof 
that he dealt with the devil. 
	The following copy of the indictment, furnished us by a friend who took it 
from the American Court record, must prove a matter of curiosity to the reader at the 
present enlightened era:–'Essex, ss. (a town in the colony of Massachusets Bay, in 
New England.)
	'The jurors of our sovereign lord and lady, the king and queen (King William 
and Queen Mary), present, that George Burroughs, late of Palmouth, in the province 
of Massachusets Bay, clerk (a Presbyterian minister of the Gospel), the ninth day of 
May, and divers other days and times, as well before as after, certain detestable arts, 
called witchcraft and sorceries, wickedly and feloniously hath used, practised, and 
exercised, at and in the town of Salem, in the county aforesaid, upon and against one 
Mary Walkot, single woman, by which said wicked arts the said Mary, on the day 
aforesaid, and divers other days and times, as well before as after, was, and is, 
tortured, afflicted, pined, consumed, wasted, and tormented, against the peace, &c.'
	A witness, by name Ann Putnam, deposed as follows: 'On the 8th of May, 
1692, I saw the apparition of George Burroughs, who grievously tormented me, and 
urged me to write in his book, which I refused. He then told me that his two first 
wives would appear to me presently, and tell me a great many lies, but I must not 
believe them. Then immediately appeared to me the forms of two women in winding-
sheets, and napkins about their heads; at which I was greatly affrighted. They turned 
their faces towards Mr. Burroughs, and looked red and angry, and told him that he had 
been very cruel to them, and that their blood called for vengeance against him; and 
they also told him that they should be clothed with white robes in Heaven when he 
should be cast down into hell; and he immediately vanished away. And as soon as he 
was gone the women turned their faces towards me, and looked as pale as a white 
wall; and told me they were Mr. Burroughs's two wives, and that he had murdered 
them. And one told me she was his first wife, and he stabbed her under the left breast, 
and put a piece of sealing-wax in the wound; and she pulled aside the winding-sheet, 
and showed me the place: she also told me that she was in the house where Mr. Daris, 
the minister of Danvers, then lived, when it was done. And the other told me that Mr. 
Burroughs, and a wife that he hath now, killed her in the vessel as she was coming to 
see her friends from the eastward, because they would have one another. And they 
both charged me to tell these things to the magistrates before Mr. Burroughs's face; 
and, if he did not own them, they did not know but they should appear this morning. 
This morning, also, appeared to me another woman in a winding-sheet, and told me 
that she was Goodman Fuller's first wife, and Mr. Burroughs killed her, because there 
was a difference between her husband and him. Also, the ninth day of May, during his 
examination, be did most grievously torture Mary Walkot, Mercy Lewis, Elizabeth 
Hubbard, and Abigail Williams, by pinching, pricking, and choking them.'
	Upon the above, and some other such evidence, was this unfortunate man 
condemned; and, horrible to relate, executed! Burroughs conducted himself in a very 
injudicious way on his trial; but, when he came to be hanged, made so impressive a 
speech on the ladder, with fervent protestations of innocence, as melted many of the 
spectators into tears.
	The accusations, founded upon such stories as these, spread, with wonderful 
rapidity. In Salem, many were seized with fits, exhibited frightful contortions of their 
limbs and features, and became a fearful spectacle to the bystanders. They were asked 
to assign the cause of all this; and pretended to suppose, that they saw some 
neighbour, already solitary and afflicted, and on that account in ill odour with the 
townspeople, scowling upon, threatening, and tormenting them. Presently persons, 
specially gifted with the 'spectral sight,' formed a class by themselves, and were sent 
about at the public expense from place to place, that they might see what no one else 
could see. The prisons were filled with the persons accused, and the utmost horror 
was entertained, as of a calamity which in such a degree had never before visited that 
part of the world. It happened, most unfortunately, that Baxter's "Certainty of the 
World of Spirits" had been published but the year before, and a number of copies had 
been sent out to New England. There seemed a strange coincidence and sympathy 
between vital Christianity in its most honourable sense, and the fear of the devil, who 
appeared to be "come down unto them, with great wrath." Mr Increase Mather, and 
Mr Cotton Mather, his son, two clergymen of the highest reputation in the 
neighbourhood, by the solemnity and awe with which they treated the subject, and the 
earnestness and zeal which they displayed, gave a sanction to the lowest superstition 
and virulence of the ignorant. All the forms of justice were brought forward on this 
occasion. There was no lack of judges, and grand juries, and petty juries, and 
executioners, and still less of prosecutors and witnesses. The first person that was 
hanged was on the 10th of June, five more on the 19th of July, five on the 19th of 
August, and eight on the 22nd of September. Multitudes confessed that they were 
witches; for this appeared the only way for the accused to save their lives. Husbands 
and children fell down on their knees, and implored their wives and mothers to own 
their guilt. Many were tortured by being tied neck and heels together, till they 
confessed whatever was suggested to them. It is remarkable, however, that not one 
persisted in her confession at the place of execution.
	The most interesting story that occurred in this affair, was of Giles Cory, and 
Martha, his wife. The woman was tried on the 9th of September, and hanged on the 
22nd. In the interval, on the 16th, the husband was brought up for trial; He said he 
was not guilty; but being asked how he would be tried, he refused to go through the 
customary form, and say, "By God and my country." He observed that, of all that had 
been tried, not one had as yet been pronounced not guilty; and he resolutely refused in 
that mode to undergo a trial. The judge directed, therefore, that according to the 
barbarous mode prescribed in the mother country, he should be laid on his back, and 
pressed to death with weights gradually accumulated on the upper surface of his body, 
a proceeding which had never yet been resorted to by the English in North America. 
The man persisted in his resolution, and remained mute till he expired.
	The whole of this dreadful tragedy, says Mr Godwin, in his "Lives of the 
Necromancers," was kept together by a thread. The spectre-seers, for a considerable 
time, prudently restricted their accusations to persons of ill repute, or otherwise of no 
consequence in the community. By-and-bye, however, they lost sight of this caution, 
and pretended they saw the figures of some persons well connected, and of 
unquestioned honour and reputation, engaged in acts of witchcraft. Immediately the 
whole fell through in a moment. The leading inhabitants presently saw how unsafe it 
would be to trust their reputations and their lives to the mercy of these profligate 
accusers. Of fifty-six bills of indictment that were offered to the grand jury on the 3rd 
of January, 1693, twenty-six only were found true bills, and thirty thrown out, On the 
twenty-six bills that were found, three persons only were pronounced guilty by the 
petty jury, and these three received their pardon from the Government. The prisons 
were thrown open; fifty confessed witches, together with two hundred persons 
imprisoned on suspicion, were set at liberty, and no more accusations were heard of. 
The "afflicted," as they were technically termed, recovered their health; the "spectral 
sight" was universally scouted; and men began to wonder bow they could ever have 
been the victims of so horrible a delusion.
	Dr Cook, in his "General and Historical Review of Christianity," gives a 
melancholy description of the condemnation of a woman for witchcraft, by a tribunal 
at Geneva, about the middle of the seventeenth century. An enumeration of some of 
the particulars of this case will afford a tolerably correct notion of the horrible cruelty, 
which, in almost all proceedings against witchcraft, was practised in different parts of 
Europe. The woman was accused of having sent devils into two young women, and of 
having brought distempers upon several others–a charge sufficiently vague. To 
substantiate the accusation, the members of the tribunal availed themselves of an 
opinion, that the devil imprinted certain marks upon his chosen disciples, the effect of 
which was, that no pain could be produced by any application to the parts of the body 
where these marks were. They sent two surgeons to examine whether such marks 
could be discovered in the accused; who reported, not much to the credit of their 
medical skill and philosophy, that they had found a mark, and that, having thrust a 
needle into it, the length of a finger, she had felt no pain, and that no blood had issued 
from the wound. Being brought to the bar, the prisoner denied the statement of the 
surgeons; upon which she was examined by three more, with whom were joined two 
physicians. It might have been expected that a body of men, who had received a 
liberal education, and who must have bad some acquaintance with the nature and 
construction of the human frame, would have presented a report, showing the 
absurdity of the examination upon which they were employed. This, however, did not 
occur to them; for they gravely proceeded to thrust sharp instruments into the mark 
already mentioned, and into others which they thought they had found out; but, as the 
miserable patient gave plain indication that she suffered from their operations, they 
were staggered, and satisfied themselves with declaring, that there was something 
extraordinary in the marks, and that they were not perfectly like those commonly to be 
seen in witches. She was, notwithstanding, doomed to another investigation, the result 
of which was, that after some barbarous experiments, she felt no pain, and hence it 
was inferred that the marks were satanical. She bad, previously to this last inquiry, 
been actually put to the rack; but she retained her fortitude and presence of mind, 
firmly maintaining that she had sent no devils into the persons whom it was alleged 
she had thus injured. She was again threatened with the torture; and, from dread of 
undergoing it, made a confession, which it is painful to think was not at once 
discerned to be the raving of insanity. Similar proceedings were continued; and the 
conclusion of the whole was, that she was condemned to be hanged and burned, for 
giving up herself to the devil, and for bewitching two girls!
	In the year 1748, in the bishopric of Wurtsburg, an old woman was convicted 
of witchcraft, and burnt. This was an extraordinary phenomenon in the eighteenth 
century, particularly among a people who boasted of having trampled superstition 
under their feet, and flattered themselves that they had brought their reason to 
perfection.
	We conclude this article by the well-known case of the trial and acquittal of 
Lady Fowlis.
	Catherine Ross, Lady Fowlis, was the daughter of Ross of Balnagown, and 
second wife of the fifteenth Baron of Fowlis. The object of her crimes was to destroy 
her step-sons, Robert and Hector Monro, with about thirty of their principal kinsmen, 
in order that her own children might succeed to the possessions of their father, which 
were considerable, and lay in the counties of Ross, Sutherland, and Inverness. Her 
brother, George Ross, seems to have been in league with her for the accomplishment 
of this diabolical purpose, and his wife, the young Lady Balnagown, was marked out 
as a victim, whose removal, with that of the rest of the family, might pave the way for 
his marriage with the wife of Robert Monro, the young laird. Their schemes were 
brought into active operation in the summer of 1577. Towards the end of that year, 
four of their accomplices, Agnes Roy, Christian Ross, of Canorth, William 
M'Gillievoricdam, and Thomas M'Kane More M'Allan M'Evoch, were arraigned in a 
justice court, held in the Cathedral Kirk of Ross, convicted, and burnt. One of the 
judges who presided at this trial was Robert Monro, the husband of the principal 
instigator of the crimes, and father of the family whose lives were practised against. 
Lady Fowlis, upon the discovery of her wickedness, fled into the county of Caithness, 
and, after remaining there for the space of three quarters of a year, her husband was 
persuaded to receive her home again; and she seems to have lived unmolested during 
the rest of the life of the old baron; and even the young laird, for whose destruction 
she had perseveringly laboured, made no exertion to bring her to justice. His brother 
Hector, however, on succeeding him in 1590, procured a commission for the 
punishment of certain witches and sorcerers, which was understood to be aimed at his 
step-mother; but before he had time to act upon the power thus granted, she had 
influence enough to obtain a suspension of the commission; and it was not till July, 
1591, that she was brought to trial. The evidence mainly rested upon, was that of the 
notoriety of the facts, and the confession of the accomplices; each count of the 
indictment closed with a reference to the record of the process before the provincial 
court, with the occasional addition of "as is notour," "as is manifest be the haill 
countie of Roiss," or words to that effect. The verdict was favourable to the accused, 
but Mr Pitcairn is of opinion that her escape was owing to her powerful influence, 
"The inquest," he says, "bears all the appearance of a selected or packed jury, being 
very inferior in rank and station of life, contrary to the usual custom." The dittory or 
indictment is the only part of the proceedings that is preserved; indeed, the reading of 
it seems to have constituted the whole case of the prosecutor, and the simple denial of 
the "samin and the hail poyntis thereof," the whole case for the accused; after which 
the jury retired to consider their verdict.
	The first method adopted to compass the deaths of the persons who stood in 
the way of her ambition, was to form figures to represent the young Laird of Fowlis 
and the young Lady Balnagown, which were to be shot at with elf-arrows, in 
conformity with the belief, that, if these charmed weapons struck the typical bodies, 
the wounds would be felt in the real bodies, and produce invisibly the desired effect. 
For the performance of the necessary rites, a meeting of three witches took place in 
the house of Christian Ross, at Canorth, Christian herself being one of them, Lady 
Fowlis another, and Marjory M'Allester, a hag of peculiar eminence, distinguished 
also by the name of Loskie Loncart, the third. Having constructed two images of clay, 
they placed them on the north side of the western chamber, and Loskie, producing two 
elf-arrows, delivered one to Christian Ross, who stood by with it in her hand, while, 
with the other, Lady Fowlis shot twice at the figure of Lady Balnagown, and Loskie 
three times at that of Robert Monro, without success. In the mean time, the images not 
having been properly compacted, crumbled to pieces; and their purpose being thus 
thwarted for the present, the unhallowed convocation broke up, Loskie having 
engaged, at the command of Lady Fowlis, to make two other figures. 
M'Gillievoricdam seems now to have been taken into their counsels; and by his 
advice, an image in butter of the young Laird of Fowlis was placed by the side of the 
wall in the same western chamber of Canorth, and shot at eight times with an elf-
arrow by Loskie, without effect. This was on the 2nd of July, 1577; and nothing 
discouraged by repeated failures, a clay figure of the same person was constructed on 
the 6th, when the indefatigable Loskie discharged the elf-arrow twelve times, some 
times reaching the image, but never wounding it. The other two hags stood by, 
anxiously watching for a successful shot, Christian Ross having provided three 
quarters of fine linen cloth, to be bound about the typical corpse, which was to be 
interred opposite the gate of the Stank of Fowlis, in order to complete the enactment 
by a full representation of every circumstance which they were desirous of producing 
as its consequence. The main part of the rite, however, consisted in the infliction of a 
wound; and this not having been accomplished, they desisted from the vain labour.
	The more secret arts of witchcraft having failed to effect the desired ends, 
Lady Fowlis next had recourse to poison; and numerous were the consultations held to 
concoct drugs and devise means for administering them. The same assistants figured 
as the chief agents in this equally abominable work. A stoup full of poisoned ale was 
first mixed in the barn of Drumnyer, but opportunity not serving for its immediate 
use, it was kept three nights in the kiln, and the stoup being leaky, the liquor was lost, 
all but a very small quantity; to prove the strength of which, Lady Fowlis caused her 
servant lad, Donald Mackay, to swallow it. The three confederates were assembled on 
this occasion, and as the draught did not kill the boy, but only threw him into a state 
of stupor, Loskie Loncart was dismissed, with an injunction to make "ane pig-full of 
ranker poysoune." The obedient hag prepared the potion, and sent it to her patroness, 
by whom it was delivered to her nurse, Mary More, to be conveyed to Angus Leith's 
house, where the young laird then was, that it might be employed for his destruction. 
Night was the time chosen for despatching her, on this errand: she broke the vessel by 
the way, spilt the liquor, and, wishing probably to ascertain the nature of what had 
been intrusted to her under such circumstances of mystery, tasted it, and paid the 
forfeit of her curiosity with her life; and what helps to show the deadly qualities of, 
their preparation, the indictment adds, that "the place quhair the said pig brak, the gers 
that grew upon the samin wes so hirch by (beyond) the natur of other gers, that nather 
cow nor scheip evir preavit (tasted) thairof." It were endless to detail all the 
traffickings and messengers kept scouring the country to collect the required quantity 
of poison. Loskie Loncart was lodged and maintained a whole summer in Christian 
Ross's house, for the greater convenience of assisting to drug drinks, and devise 
means of administering them. M'Gillievoricdam was sent to consult the gipsies about 
the most effectual way of poisoning the young laird. He also purchased a quantity of 
the powder used to destroy rats, of a merchant in Elgin, and another portion in Tam, 
and was strictly questioned by Lady Fowlis whether it would suit best to mix the 
ingredient with egg, brose, or kail. No fitting opportunity seems to have occurred for 
administering any of the portions to Robert Monro: but, after three interviews, John 
M'Farquhar, Lady Balnagown's cook, was prevailed upon by the present of two ells of 
grey cloth, a shirt, and twelve and fourpence (Scots), to lend them his aid in 
accomplishing their purpose on his mistress. That young lady being to entertain a 
party of friends one night at her house at Ardmore, a witch, named Catherine Mynday, 
carried poison thither to M'Farquhar, who poured it on the principal dish, which was 
kidneys. This woman remained to witness the effects, and after wards declared that 
she "skunnerit," or revolted at the sight, which was "the sarest and maist cruell that 
evir scho saw, seeing the vomit and vexacioun that was on the young Lady 
Balnagown and her company." The victim of these horrible practices did not die 
immediately, but contracted a deadly sickness, "quhairin," says the indictment, "scho 
remains yet (that is twelve years after taking the poison) incurable."
	The persons named as privy to the designs of Lady Fowlis were numerous, 
and included the daughter of a baronet of her own name, whose interest in the matter 
seems to have been merely that of a connection, or, at most, a clanswoman; and the 
bribes with which she purchased assistance and secrecy were of the paltriest kind. She 
provided lodgings in the houses of her adherents, for some whom she wished to have 
near her, for the better maturing of her schemes. The cook of young Lady Balnagown 
was bribed, as we have seen, with little more than a shirt and a shilling sterling! The 
fidelity of Christian Ross was bespoken, by reminding her that she ought not to reveal 
anything against one who was her lady and mistress. Another of the gang was paid 
with 'ane-haif furlett of meill.' M'Gillievoricdam got four ells of linen for his trouble, 
but, besides, appropriated six and eightpence (Scots) of the money given to him to be 
expended for poison; at other times, however, this person was conciliated with 20s., a 
firlot of meal, five ells of linen, and 16s. The brother of Lady Fowls is also said to 
have promised to Thomas M'Kane More M'Allan M'Evoch 'ane garmounthe of dais' 
(suit of clothes) for his services in the same base plot.
	From a review of this whole case, with others of the same date, it will appear 
that the crimes of former times were distinguished from those of the present day, not 
so much by the greater atrocity of any single act, as by the length of time for which 
they were meditated, and the number of persons admitted to a knowledge of them, 
without any fear of disclosure. They were the offspring of habitual thought rather than 
the effect of sudden starts of passion.
	Immediately after the acquittal of Lady Fowlis, her step-son and prosecutor, 
the seventeenth Baron of Fowlis, was presented at the bar on an accusation in some 
respects similar, of which be also was found not guilty, by a jury, the majority of 
whom had sat on the preceding trial. In January, 1588-9, this gentleman being taken 
ill, sent a servant with his own horse, to bring to his assistance Marion M'Ingarach, 
who is characterised as being 'ane of the maist notorious and rank wichis in all this 
realme,' and who, as soon as she entered the house where he lay sick, gave him three 
drinks of water from three stones (probably rude stone cups). After a long 
consultation, she declared there was no hope of recovery, unless the principal man of 
the patient's house should suffer death for him; and it was determined, after some 
discussion, that this substitute should be George Monro, eldest son of Catharine 
Monro, Lady Fowlis. A plan was next devised for transferring the onus moriendi, for 
the present, to George; according to which, in the first place, no person was to have 
admittance to the house in which Hector lay, until his half-brother came; and on his 
arrival, the sick man, with his left hand, was to take his visitor by the right, and not to 
speak until spoken to by him. In conformity with these injunctions, several friends, 
who called to inquire for the patient, were excluded, and messengers were despatched, 
both to George Monro's house and to other parts of the country, where he was thought 
to be engaged in the sports of the chase. Before he could be found, seven expresses 
had been sent after him, and five days expired. On the intelligence that his brother 
earnestly desired to see him, he repaired to the place, and was received in the form 
prescribed by the witch, Hector with his left hand grasping George's right, and 
abstaining from speaking until asked "how he did," to which he replied, "the better 
that you have come to visit me," and he uttered not a word more, notwithstanding his 
urgency to obtain an interview. The younger Monro having, in this manner, been 
brought fairly within the compass of the witch's spells she that night mustered certain 
of her accomplices and having provided spades, repaired to a spot where two laird's 
lands met, and, at 'ane after midnycht,' digged a grave of the exact length of Hector 
Monro, and laid the turf of it carefully aside. They then came home, and M'Ingarach 
gave her assistants instructions concerning the part that each was to perform in the 
remaining ceremonies. The object–namely, the preservation of Hector's life and the 
death of George in his stead–being now openly stated, some of those present objected, 
that if the latter should be cut off suddenly, the hue and cry would be raised, and all 
their lives would be in danger. They therefore pressed the presiding witch not to make 
the sacrifice immediately, but to cause it to follow after such an interval as might 
obviate suspicion, which she accordingly engaged to accomplish, and warranted him 
to live till the 17th day of the ensuing April, at least. This being arranged to the 
satisfaction of the persons assembled, the sick man was laid on a pair of blankets, and 
carried out to the place where the grave had been prepared. The party were strictly 
enjoined to be silent, and only M'Ingarach and Christian Neil, Hector's foster-mother, 
were to utter the necessary incantations. Being come to the spot, their living burden 
was deposited in the grave, the turf being spread over him, and held down by staves. 
M'lngarach stood by the side of the grave, and Neill, holding a boy, a son of Hector 
Leith, by the band, ran the breadth of nine rings, then returned, and demanded, 'which 
is your choice?' Thereupon the other replied, 'Mr Hector, I choose you to live, and 
your brother George to die for you.' This form of conjuration was twice gone through 
that night; and, on its completion, the sick man was lifted, carried home–not one of 
the company uttering a word further–and replaced in bed.
	To the efficacy of this spell was attributed not only the recovery of Hector, but 
the death of George. Monro, though the latter continued in perfect health not only for 
the time warranted by the witch, but for a year longer. He was taken ill in April, 1590, 
and died on the 3rd of June following. M'ingarach was highly favoured by the 
gentleman who supposed he owed to her his life. As soon as his health was restored, 
'be the dewilisch moyan foir said,' he carried her to the house of his uncle at 
Kilurmmody, where she was entertained with as much obsequious attention as if she 
had been his spouse, and obtained such pre-eminence in the country that no one durst 
offend her, though her ostensible character was only that of keeper to his sheep. Upon 
the information of Lady Fowlis, the protector of M'Ingarach was compelled to present 
her at Aberdeen, where she was examined before the king, and produced the stones 
out of which she had made the baron drink. These enchanted cups were delivered to 
the keeping of the justice clerk; but we are not informed as to the fate of the witch 
herself.
	The indictment charged the prisoner that 'ye gat yowr health be the develisch 
means foirsaid,' And further, it said, 'ye are indicted for art and part of the cruel, 
odious, and shameful slaughter of the said George Monro, your brother, by the 
enchantments and witchcrafts used upon him by you and of your devise, by speaking 
to him within youre bed, taking of him by the right hand, conform to the injunctions 
given to you by the said Marian Ingarach, in the said month of January, 1589 years; 
throw the which inchantmentis he tuke ane deidlie seikness in the moneth of Apryle, 
1590 yetris, and continew and thairin until Junii thairafter, diceissit in the said moneth 
of Junii, being the third day of that instant!'
	It is astonishing that any persons could be so stupid as to believe in the 
ridiculous doctrine of witchcraft. How absurd to suppose that the power of Heaven is 
delegated to a weak and frail mortal; and, of all mortals, to a poor decrepit old 
woman! for we never hear of a young witch, but through the fascination of the eyes. 
Just when a woman has been poor and old enough to obtain the pity and compassion 
of every one; when nothing has remained to her but her innocence, her piety, and her 
tabby cat; then has she, by the voice of superstition, been dignified with the presumed 
possession of a power which the God of Heaven alone could exert!


APPENDIX XV. 
Voluntary punishment of Gentoo widows on the death of their 
husbands
	IT has been our painful duty to record so many dreadful instances of women 
murdering, and otherwise ill-treating their husbands, that our readers will almost be 
inclined to doubt the fact, that there are parts of this habitable globe, where females, 
so far from lifting a hand against, will not even survive the loss of their partner in this 
life; but offer themselves voluntary sacrifices on his funeral pile.
	To relate the mode of punishment in different parts of the world, is a 
prominent feature in the proposals for the publication of this work; and though it may 
be observed, that the law of the East itself inflicts no penalty in such cases, yet 
custom, from time immemorial, has devoted the widowed victim to the flames. A 
description, therefore, of a punishment self-inflicted, will not, we presume, prove the 
least acceptable part of our volumes. This we have been able to accomplish, from 
meeting with a valuable work on the historical events relative to the provinces of 
Bengal, and the empire of Hindostan,, by the late J. Z. Holwell who resided in that 
country.
	Among other historical facts, Mr. Holwell gives the following circumstantial 
account of the burning of a Gentoo lady, with her husband's body, of which, with 
several other English officers, he was an eye-witness.
	"At five of the clock in the morning, of the 4th of February, 1742-3, died 
Rhaam Chund Pundit, of the Mahahrattar tribe, aged twenty-eight years; his widow, 
aged between seventeen and eighteen, as soon as he expired, disdaining to wait the 
term allowed her for reflection, immediately declared to the Bramins and witnesses 
present, her resolution to burn; as the family was of no small consideration, all the 
merchants of Cossimbuzaar, and her relations, left no arguments unassayed to 
dissuade her from it. Lady Russel, with the tenderest humanity, sent her several 
messages to the same purpose; the infant state of her children (two girls and a boy, the 
eldest not four years of age) and the terrors and pain of the death she sought, were 
painted to her in the strongest and most lively colours;–she was deaf to all–she 
gratefully thanked Lady Russel, and sent her word, "She had now nothing to live for," 
but recommended her children to her protection. 
	When the torments of burning were urged in terrorem to her, she, with a 
resolved and calm countenance, put her finger into the fire, and held it there a 
considerable time; she then, with one hand, put fire into the palm of the other, 
sprinkled incense on it, and fumigated the Bramins.
	The consideration of her children, left destitute of a parent, was again urged to 
her. She replied, "He that made them would take care of them." She was then given to 
understand, she should not be permitted to burn; this, for a short space, seemed to give 
her deep affliction, but soon recollecting herself, she told them, "death was in her 
power, and that if she was not allowed to burn, according to the principles of her cast, 
she would starve herself."-- Her friends finding her peremptory and resolved, were 
obliged at last to assent.
	The body of the deceased was carried down to the water side, early the 
following morning; the widow followed about ten o'clock, accompanied by three very 
principal Bramins, her children, parents, and relations, and a numerous concourse of 
people, The order of leave for her burning did not arrive from Hosseyn Khan 
Fouzdaar of Morshadabad, until after one, and it was then brought by one of the 
Soubah's own officers, who had orders to see that she burnt voluntary.
	[Note: The Gentoos are not permitted to burn, without an order from the 
Mahometan government, and this permission is commonly made a perquisite of.]
	The time they waited for the order was employed in praying with the Bramins, 
and washing in the Ganges. As soon as it arrived, she retired, and stayed for the space 
of half an hour in the midst of her female relations, amongst whom was her mother; 
she then divested herself of her bracelets and other ornaments, and tied them in a 
cloth, which hung like an apron before her, and was conducted by her female relations 
to one corner of the pile. On the pile was an arched arbour, formed of dry sticks, 
boughs, and leaves, open only at one end, to admit her entrance. In this the body of 
the deceased was deposited, his head at the end opposite to the opening. At the corner 
of the pile, to which she had been conducted, the Bramin had made a small fire, round 
which she and the three Bramins sat for some minutes, one of them gave into her hand 
a leaf of the bale tree (the wood commonly consecrated to form part of the funeral 
pile) with sundry things on it, which she threw into the fire; one of the others gave her 
a second leaf, which she held over the flame, whilst he dropped three times some ghee 
on it, which melted and fell into the fire, (these two operations were preparatory 
symbols of her approaching dissolution by fire) and whilst they were performing this, 
the third Bramin read to her some portions of the Aughtorrah Bhade (a periphrastic 
comment on the Shasta), and asked her some questions, on which she answered with a 
steady and serene countenance; but the noise was so great, we could not understand 
what she said, although we were within a yard of her. These over, she was led with 
great solemnity three times round the pile, the Bramins reading before her; when she 
came the third time to the small fire, she stopped, took the rings off her toes and 
fingers, and put them to her other ornaments; here she took a solemn majestic leave of 
her children, parents, and relations; after which, one of the Bramins dipt a large wick 
of cotton in some ghee, and gave it, ready lighted, into her hand, and led her to the 
open side of the arbour; there all the Bramins fell at her feet: after she had blessed 
them, they retired, weeping; by two steps she ascended the pile, and entered the 
arbour. On her entrance she. made a profound reverence at the feet of the deceased; 
and advanced and seated herself by his head; she looked, in silent meditation, on his 
face, for the space of a minute, then set fire to the arbour in three places; observing 
that she had set fire to leeward, and that the flames blew from her, instantly seeing her 
error, she rose and set fire to windward, and resumed her station. Ensign Daniel with 
his cane separated the grass and leaves on the windward side, by which means we had 
a distinct view of her as she sat. With what dignity and undaunted a countenance she 
set fire to the pile the last time, and assumed her seat, can only be conceived, for 
words cannot convey a just idea of her. The pile being of combustible matters, the 
supporters of the roof were presently consumed, and it fell in upon her."
	In a short account of the execution of Elizabeth Herring, on the 13th of 
September, 1773, for the murder of her husband, by stabbing him in the throat with a 
knife, we find a minute description of the mode of punishment for the commission of 
this horrid crime.
	"Mrs Herring was placed on a stool, something more than two feet high; and a 
chain being placed under her arms, the rope round her neck was made fast to two 
spikes, which being driven through a post against-which she stood; when her 
devotions were ended, the stool was taken from under her, and she was strangled. 
When she had hung about fifteen minutes, the rope was burnt, and she sunk until the 
chain supported her, forcing her hands up to a level with her face, and the flame being 
furious, her body was soon consumed. The crowd of spectators was so immensely 
great, that it was a long time before the faggots could be placed for the execution."


APPENDIX XVI 
Trial by ordeal of the Hindoos in the East
(By Ali Ibrahim Khan, and communicated by Warren Hastings, Esq. late Governor 
General of Bengal)
	THIS kind of trial, described at large in the Comment on the Dhetma Sastra, 
consists of nine forms:
	The Balance, in which the accused party, after fasting a day, is weighed twice 
in six minutes; and if he weighs more, or the balance breaks down, is pronounced 
guilty; if less, innocent; if exactly the same, he must be weighed a third time,
	By fire, walking through a hole under ground, filled with burning wood.
	By water, in which the party stands up to the navel, and diving, remains under 
it, holding the foot of a Bramin, till two arrows, shot to the greatest distance, can be 
gathered up.
	By swallowing poison, or by taking a ring out of a pot, in which is the hooded 
snake called Nago.
	By drinking Cosha, a water in which the images of the gods have been 
washed, and remaining unaffected with sickness fourteen days.
	By chewing dry rice, and spitting it out dry, or stained with blood, both which 
are signs of guilt.
	By thrusting the hand into hot oil, or handling hot iron.
	By dipping into a pot for the figure of Justice in silver or clay, and bringing 
out either. Then follow crimes or cases requiring these ordeals. The author of this 
memoir saw a man tried at Benares, by the hot iron, unhurt; but another man, tried by 
the hot oil, was burned and mulcted.
	


APPENDIX XVII 
Chinese punishments

	The Chinese code of penal laws is compiled in such a manner as to have a 
punishment appropriated for every crime.
	The wisdom of the Chinese Legislature is nowhere more conspicuous than in 
its treatment of robbers, no person being doomed to suffer death for having merely 
deprived another of some temporal property, provided he neither uses nor carries any 
offensive weapon. This sagacious edict renders robbery unfrequent; the daring 
violator of the laws hesitating to take with him those means which might preserve his 
own life, or affect that of the plundered, in the event of resistance, he generally 
confines his depredations to acts of private pilfering, and a robbery attended with 
murder is, of course, very rarely perpetrated. This instance of justice, moderation, and 
wisdom in the laws of China, receives an unfavourable contrast, in the decree which 
pronounces the wearing of a particular ornament to be a capital crime, and in the 
custom of attending to the fallacious information extorted by the rack.
	By the laws of China, treason and rebellion are punished with a rigor even 
beyond the severity of our judgments, for the criminals are ordained to be cut in ten 
thousand pieces.
	Children cursing or striking their parents was considered as next in atrocity to 
treason and rebellion, and in like manner punished by cutting the delinquent in one 
thousand pieces.
	The usual capital punishments in China are strangling and beheading. The 
former is more common, and is decreed against those who are found guilty of crimes, 
which, however capital, are only held in the second act of atrocity. For instance; all 
acts of homicide, whether intentional or accidental; every species of fraud committed 
upon government; the seduction of a woman, whether married or single; giving 
abusive language to a parent; plundering or defacing a burying place; and robbing on 
the highway.
	The punishment inflicted on disorderly women in China, is effected by placing 
small pieces of wood betwixt their fingers, and then drawing them very forcibly 
together with cords.
	There are no people existing who pay so sacred an attention to the laws of 
decency as the Chinese. Habituated in preserving the constant appearance of modesty 
and self-control, nothing is more uncommon amongst them than deleterious examples 
of unblushing vice; and if there be truth in the old maxim, that want of decency, either 
in action or word, betrays a deficiency of understanding, they certainly indicate more 
sense than some other nations, who affect to excel them in education and refinement. 
The general manners of people of every condition in China wear as modest a habit as 
their persons. They discover no gratification in wresting their proper language into 
impure meanings; and grossly offensive phrases are only to be heard amongst the very 
dregs of the community, and at the risk of immediate and severe judicial correction.
	For certain offences, the Chinese fasten a man to a large block of wood, by 
passing a strong ring of iron through one corner of it. From this ring a weighty chain 
is continued round the neck of the man, and fastened by a padlock upon his breast.
	Wooden cage in China.–For other crimes a malefactor is farther secured by a 
chain from his neck to his ankle, whence another chain proceeds round one of the 
corner posts of his wooden cage, the entrance to which is through two moveable bars: 
these bars fastened by an iron bolt, that passes through some staples, and is prevented 
from sliding by a padlock. A plank serves the prisoner for a seat and for a bed.
	Another severe punishment in China, and which we have alluded to in another 
part of our work, is the wooden collar, which is deemed very disgraceful. The collar is 
formed of heavy pieces of wood closed together, and having a hole in the centre, 
which fits the neck of the offender, who, when this machine is upon him, can neither 
see his own feet, nor put his hands to his mouth. He is not permitted to reside in any 
habitation, nor even to take rest for any considerable length of time, an inferior officer 
of justice constantly attending to prevent him. By night and by day he carries this 
collar, which is rendered heavier or lighter according to the nature of the crime and 
the strength of the offender. The weight of the common sort of these wooden collars is 
only fifty or sixty pounds, but there are those which weigh two hundred, and which 
are so grievous to the bearers, that sometimes through shame, pain, want of proper 
nourishment, or of natural rest, they have been known to expire under them. The 
criminals find various methods, however, of mitigating their punishment, by walking 
in company with their relations and friends, who support the corners of the collar, and 
prevent it from pressing upon the shoulders; by resting it upon a table, a bench, or 
against a tree; or by having a chair constructed for the purpose, with four posts of 
equal height, to, support the machine. When this ponderous encumbrance is fixed 
upon an offender, it is always before the magistrate who has decreed it, and upon each 
side, over the places where the wood is joined, long slips of paper are pasted, upon 
which the name of the person, the crime which he bas committed, and the duration of 
his punishment are written in very distinct characters; a seal is likewise stamped upon 
the paper, to prevent his instrument from being opened. Three months is the usual 
time appointed for those to bear about this collar for those who have been convicted 
of robbery; for defamation, gambling, or breaches of the peace, it is carried a few 
weeks; and insolvent debtors are sometimes ordered to bear it till they have satisfied 
their creditors.
	When the offender is liberated from the collar, it must be in the presence of the 
magistrate who imposed it. He then generally orders him a few blows of the pan-tsee, 
and dismisses him, with an exhortation to comport himself more regularly in future.
	Persons in this situation are supplied with food by a particular kind of basins 
and spoons.
	The punishment of the wooden tube.–A piece of bamboo cane is provided, 
which nearly corresponds with the height of the criminal, and is of considerable 
circumference. This bamboo being perfectly hollow, admits the passage of a large 
iron chain, one end of which is rivetted round a stake, the other encircles his neck, and 
is confined there by a padlock: his legs are fettered by a few links of chain.
	


APPENDIX XVIII 
Turkish Punishments inflicted on knavish butchers and bakers.

	ONE very great cause of the extreme poverty which has so long prevailed in 
this country among a numerous class of its inhabitants, is created by our land owners, 
who, for a series of years have, as it were, confederated in the monopoly of farms. Mr. 
Pratt, that elegant and philanthropic writer, has traced this oppression to it source.
	"Unless the system of domestic monopoly be vigorously restrained," says Mr. 
Pratt, "and particularly the monopolizers of land, a system which has been going on in 
wicked progression from bad to worse, till terms are at last wanting to express its 
corruption, or its complexity. When this many-headed monster, with the Hydra in its 
train, shall be under control, when not till then, when ruined cottages shall be rebuilt, 
agriculture encouraged as the first object of industry, and farms more equalized, 
horrible as has been the devastation, incredible as has been the destruction, the human 
species may begin to breathe. We may then hope to see our credit regained, our 
strength replenished, our reputation increased, the arts prevented from taking wing, 
the exhausted remnants of the land gain time and energy to recover; exertions keep 
pace with encouragement, and the song of comfort and content become more heard 
from the ploughshare and the loom. In a word, thus may the country be renewed–thus 
may we boast again of the vigour and name of Old England. But if the corrupt system 
of diversified monopoly above-mentioned, with all that follows the hideous train of 
rapacity and fraud be not broken link by link, even the grand desideratum of 
exhausted and harassed nations, and harassed nature–peace itself must be inadequate 
to private happiness and public honour."
Yet, wanton locusts of a foodful isle, 
Where upon Freedom, Plenty us'd to smile;  
Where Plenty still supplies her utmost store,  
Broad, deep, and vast, to all but to the poor. 
If ev'ry blessing now beneath the sky, 
Be doom'd to sate thy selfish gluttony, 
Let thy own pamper'd hand the harvest reap, 
And thy own flinty breast the toil-drops steep; 
Let thy own bloated limbs, by vice embrac'd,  
Or by a miser, or a spendthrift's waste. 
Take from thy vassal hinds the useless trade, 
The fork, the rake, the ploughshare, and the spade; 
Yes, let them starve;–or, if thy luxury  
Demands the fiend-like joy to see them die; 
Pronounce their fate, when they have dress'd thy grain, 
Each sink a corpse upon the fertile plain. 
	Pratt's Cottage Pictures.
	Now that the reader has had a true sketch of the real cause of the nation's 
distress, and consequently of the enormous price of provisions, what punishment, in 
such times, do the butcher and baker deserve, who, not content with their profits, 
often give short weights.
	In Turkey, among a race of what we call Mahometans and barbarians, the 
police is so very attentive to the people's rights, that such villains are punished in the 
following manner, while ours generally escape by simply losing their weights, for few 
care to go to the trouble and expense of prosecuting them.
	In the dominions of the Grand Signior, if a butcher sells short weight, or 
stinking meat, for the first offence his meat is all given to the poor; he is then tied to a 
post all day in the sun, and a piece of the stinking meat is hung close to his nose. This 
done, he is sentenced to pay a sum of money to the poor. For a second offence he is 
bastinadoed, or receives some other kind of whipping, and his fine is then heavy. For 
the third offence he suffers death.
	The baker convicted in Turkey of selling short weight, or bad bread, for the 
first offence, as with the butcher, his bread is seized, and he is nailed to the post of the 
door, by an ear, and sometimes by both, for the space of twenty-four hours. For a 
second offence, his bread is in like manner seized for the use of the poor, and he 
suffers from two to three hundred bastinadoes on the soles of his feet, or on his back. 
Then his head is put through a hole in a large board, loaded with lead, and made to 
walk through the streets, until he is almost exhausted. If he survives this, and commits 
a third similar offence, he is beheaded.
	We have not read of Turkish bakers base enough to, mix alum in their bread, 
and give short weight into the bargain; as is practised in the face of the law, in 
London. Such villains, for the very first offence, should be hung up to the nearest 
lamp-post.
	Punishment of the mortar in Turkey.
	The celebrated Baron De Tott, an ambassador to the Turkish Emperor, 
mentions this singularly cruel mode of punishment.
	He says, "That the ulemats, (the body of lawyers, of which the mufti is the 
head) were to be exempted from the confiscation of goods, nor were they to be put to 
death, but by being bruised in a mortar."
	He then adds, "That the Sultan Osman was irritated to that degree by the 
haughtiness and insolence of the mufti, that he ordered the mortar to be replaced, 
which, having been long neglected, was thrown down, and almost covered with earth. 
This order alone produced a most surprising effect, the body of the ulemats, justly 
terrified, submitted."
	From this circumstance, the passage in the Bible which mentions this 
punishment, naturally recurs to the mind: in Proverbs, xxvii. 22. " Though thou 
shouldst bray a fool in a mortar among wheat, with a pestel, yet will not his 
foolishness depart from him."
	In this sense, the word FOOL means a transgressor, a violator of the law. 
Now, as it is well known, that customs which prevail in the oriental nations, have, in 
all ages remained invariable, the, question is, whether Solomon, in the passage 
quoted, does not refer to a kind of punishment which was inflicted somewhere in his 
days, similar to that which is mentioned by the Baron de Tott. To us it strikes 
conviction, but we shall be glad to find the passage expounded by some of our 
studious divines.


APPENDIX XIX. 
Benefit of clergy.

	This is a legal phrase, or technical term, which is necessarily often repeated in 
criminal reports, while numbers are not apprized of its full meaning, or its origin.
	The dark clouds of barbarism, which succeeded the downfall of the Roman 
empire, having deeply effaced literary pursuits, the regular and secular clergy, with 
few exceptions, became the sole depositaries of books and learning. Ignorance is the 
footstool of ambition and tyranny; and thus the priest ruled the ignorant mass of the 
people with a rod of iron; but as learning was slowly disseminated, the people's eyes 
opened to their sordid delusions.
	As it is natural to respect what we do not understand, the monks turned this 
advantage to good account, and it gradually became a principle of common law, that 
no clerk, that is to say, no priest, should be tried by the civil power; a privilege which 
was enjoyed and abused for several hundred years, until the council or parliament of 
Clarendon, provoked by murder, and other abominable crimes, set bounds to 
ecclesiastical enormities, by a salutary relation of the subject.
	But a law, so necessary, was evaded by the insolence and artifice of the proud 
à Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury, who, for his turbulence, was assassinated before 
his own altar, and the base pusillanimity of King John and his successors to the 
English throne, during a long period, equally disgraceful to monarch as to clergy.
	A law was about this time made (kings being then nearly arbitrary) by which 
any person convicted of felony was exempt from punishment, "if he could read and 
write as a priest."
	From this finesse, the artful monks, (for priests, from the time of Aaron down 
to Dr. Dodd, have ever been watchful of their own interest,) derived considerable 
riches by teaching prisoners to read and write, which acquirement, however odious 
and bloody their offences, rescued them from the penalty of the law, and the 
contrivers of this artful measure derived another advantage from it.
	Every desperate adventurer, every bold man, became a ready and submissive 
tool to the church. This abominable imposition upon the people was continued until 
the reign of Edward VI. when priestcraft received some check.
	But during the unnatural and bloody wars between the houses of York and 
Lancaster, the root of the noxious weed sprouted up in the ignorance and confusion of 
those distracted times. A t length it was enacted, that no person convicted of 
manslaughter should claim the benefit of clergy, unless he be a peer of the realm, or 
actually in Priest's orders; but by the 9th of James I. this partial and injurious 
exemption was entirely abolished.
	It is a common opinion with numbers, that the words "Without benefit of 
clergy," mean, that no spiritual assistance shall be given, or a priest suffered to exhort 
the dying malefactor to confession of sin. The meaning simply is, that even should a 
criminal be able to read and. write, it shall not, in any degree, diminish his 
punishment, and that he shall not now be entitled to any of those privileges he 
formerly enjoyed by the clergy.
	Thus in our preface we have said, "Such persons as have had no opportunity of 
inquiring into the subject, will hardly credit the assertion, that there are above one 
hundred and sixty offences punished by death, or as it is denominated, Without 
benefit of clergy."–that is, for capital offences which the priest's art, once taught to the 
accused, of reading and writing, would exempt them from.


CONCLUDING NOTE  
by the Editors.

	THUS have we endeavoured, and we hope not unsuccessfully, to complete this 
work, in conformity to the proposals originally offered to the public. We trust we have 
not omitted any trials of great importance, nor inserted many of a trifling nature.
	Those who wish well to Society will be pleased to see vice exposed in every 
shape, and reprobated under all the variety of forms it may assume. Too much cannot 
be said to discountenance its propagation, or to enhance the charms of true religion 
and virtue.
	To advance these important purposes should be the aim and end of every 
publication. The book that does not tend to make people wiser and better is a nuisance 
to society, and a disgrace to the press.
	As the reformation of prisoners, rather than the punishment of them, should be 
the great aim of our legislators, we beg leave to submit to our readers some extracts 
from letters written by a gentleman to a Member of Parliament, both of them of the 
most amiable private characters, and both of them zealous promoters of every public 
good.
	Jonas Hanway, Esq; in a letter to Sir Charles Bunbury, says, 'In the general 
view of our prisons, I beg leave to make a few remarks, which to those who have not 
considered the subject may carry some degree of information. Of all the abuses which 
ever crept into civil society, professing Christianity, considering the evil propensities 
of the common run of our malefactors, the tap-house seems to stand in a distinguished 
rank. What reformation can be expected, where it is the interest of the keeper of a 
prison to promote inebriety and dissipation of thought? If he is suffered to sell strong 
liquors for his own emolument, he will be tempted to shut his gates against every one 
who would relieve the real crying wants of those who are in need, and open them 
wide to all such as will supply the means of drunkenness. There can be no good 
reason for an indulgence, which, scattering the thoughts, will create a desperate 
repugnance to the calls of heaven. When the foul ought to tremble, as being on the 
verge of eternity, such a conduct is abominable beyond all expression.
	'Doth not the magistrate prostitute his authority, in granting licences, on the 
puerile presumption that he shall increase the revenue? Or is it that knowing how 
scanty the allowance is to the keepers of prisons, he gives them a liberty which he 
knows cannot be used without the most deadly consequences, even that of promoting 
the very temper and disposition which encouraged the malefactor to commit the crime 
for which he is imprisoned! This conduct is reproachable in the highest degree. The 
magistrate ought rather to refuse the licence, and represent the necessity of allowing 
keepers of prisons salaries suitable to the importance of their office.
	'The conversion of a house, which ought to be a scene of sorrow and 
repentance, into jollity, and carelessness to all events, is one of the chief causes of the 
evil with which we are so sorely afflicted. If this is not remedied, can any expedient 
restore good discipline and true economy in prisons? If some prisoners should be thus 
deprived of a comfort they might be entitled to, it would be far better than granting an 
indulgence, so pregnant with mischief to the generality.
	'By an act of the third of his present majesty, no jailer in Ireland is to sell ale, 
beer, or any other liquor, by himself or any other person, under the penalty of L.5 for 
every offence; and I am assured it operates happily in preventing the ordinary bad 
effects. With us the case is different; for every capital prison is a public-house; and 
though spirituous liquors, commonly so called, are prohibited, yet, under the name of 
cordials, I am told they pass; or at least that by the force of wine, and malt liquor, all 
the bad effects of intoxication are continued.
	'Among the several grievances which rise in judgment against us, are the fees 
demanded of malefactors, now softened, but not abolished. The want of medical 
assistance–the deficiency of baths–inattention to cleanliness–foul air for want of 
ventilation–want of a change of clean washed and well-dried garments, with a regular 
change of linen–where these are wanting, death must be a familiar guest to a prisoner. 
Even the regular washing of hands and feet is of consequence. A proper regard to diet, 
according to the apparent wants of prisoners, is necessary to the preservation of life in 
prisons, more than in other places; and the defect often operates like a plague.'
	That a reform in the management of our prisons is necessary, no man of 
common sense can doubt; and it remains with the wisdom of legislature to provide a 
remedy for the evil.
	Perhaps the keeping prisoners separate from each other, and totally denying all 
the means of intemperance, would go far towards effecting that reformation which is 
so much wanted. As matters now stand, the man charged with felony is repeatedly 
visited by the most abandoned of his acquaintance, and they mutually harden each 
other in vice. These visits should be very unfrequent, and never permitted but in the 
presence of the keeper or his deputy, who should be people of the most 
unexceptionable character, and take care that not an improper word is uttered.
	To drop, however, this subject, let us conclude this volume by a fervent wish 
that the readers of it may carefully and steadily avoid every vice therein recorded, 
every folly therein exposed. Let honesty be the prevailing, the ruling, principle among 
us; let us be humbly content in the situation which Providence hath allotted us; not 
seeking to possess ourselves of the property of others; and paying a devout reverence 
to that divine command, the authority of which no one will deny:
	'Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's house, thou shalt not covet thy 
neighbour's wife, nor his man-servant, nor his maid-servant, nor his ox, nor his ass, 
nor ANYTHING that is his.'
Previous   



THE END


 
 
 
 
THE NEWGATE CALENDAR
-2-
-369-
VOLUME 6
-368-
