Of that which happened to a King and Three Impostors.
by
Prince Don Juan Manuel (1282-1347)

From Count Lucanor, or the Fifty Pleasant Stories of Patronio.
Translated by James York M.D. Gibbings & Co., London, 1889


COUNT LUCANOR, conversing at another time with Patronio, his
adviser, said:-

"Patronio, a man came to me and told me something, giving me to
understand it would be of great advantage to me if I followed his
suggestions; but he said no man must be informed of the secret that I
must trust in him, and, more than this, affirmed that if I should
confide it to any man in the world I should place not only my property
but my life in danger. And as I know no man able to detect a fraud so
quickly as yourself I pray you give me your opinion in this case."

"My lord," said Patronio, "in order that you may know how to act
under these circumstances, it would please me to be permitted to inform
you what happened to a King and three impostors."

The Count requested to know what that was.

"My lord," said Patronio, "three impostors came to a King, and told
him they were cloth-weavers, and could fabricate a cloth of so peculiar
a nature that a legitimate son of his father could see the cloth; but if
he were illegitimate, though believed to be legitimate, he could not see
it.

"Now the King was much pleased at this, thinking that by this means
he would be able to distinguish the men in his kingdom who were
legitimate sons of their supposed fathers from those who were not, and
so be enabled to increase his treasures, for among the Moors only
legitimate children inherit their father's property; and for this end he
ordered a palace to be appropriated to the manufacture of this cloth.
And these men, in order to convince him that they had no intention of
deceiving him, agreed to be shut up in this palace until the cloth was
manufactured, which satisfied the King.

"When they were supplied with a large quantity of gold, silver,
silk, and many other things, they entered the palace, and, putting their
looms in order, gave it to be understood that they were working all day
at the cloth.

"After some days, one of them came to the King and told him the
cloth was commenced, that it was the most curious thing in the world,
describing the design and construction; he then prayed the King to
favour them with a visit, but begged he would come alone. The King was
much pleased, but wishing to have the opinion of some one first, sent
the Lord Chamberlain to see it, in order to know if they were deceiving
him. When the Lord Chamberlain saw the workmen, and heard all they had
to say, he dared not admit he could not see the cloth, and when he
returned to the King he stated that he had seen it; the King sent yet
another, who gave the same report. When they whom he had sent declared
that they had seen the cloth he determined to go himself.

"On entering the palace and seeing the men at work, who began to
describe the texture and relate the origin of the invention as also the
design and colour, in which they all appeared to agree, although in
reality they were not working; when the King saw how they appeared to
work, and heard the character of the cloth so minutely described, and
yet could not see it, although those he had sent had seen it, he began
to feel very uneasy, fearing he might not be the son of the King, who
was supposed to be his father, and that if he acknowledged he could not
see the cloth he might lose his kingdom; under this impression he
commenced praising the fabric, describing its peculiarities after the
manner of the workmen.

"On the return to his palace he related to his people how good and
marvellous was the cloth, yet at the same time suspected something
wrong.

"At the end of two or three days the King requested his Alguacil
(or officer of justice) to go and see the cloth. When the Alguacil
entered and saw the workmen, who, as before, described the figures and
pattern of the cloth, knowing that the King had been to see it, and yet
could not see it himself, he thought he certainly could not be the
legitimate son of his father, and therefore could not see it. He,
however, feared if he was to declare that he could not see it he would
lose his honourable position; to avoid this mischance he commenced
praising the cloth even more vehemently than the others.

"When the Alguacil returned to the King and told him that he had
seen the cloth, and that it was the most extraordinary production in the
world, the King was much disconcerted; for he thought that if the
Alguacil had seen the cloth, which he was unable to see, there could no
longer be a doubt that he was not the legitimate son of the King, as was
generally supposed, he therefore did not hesitate to praise the
excellency of the cloth and the skill of the workmen who were able to
make it.

"On another day he sent one of his Councillors, and it happened to
him as to the King and the others of whom I have spoken; and in this
manner and for this reason they deceived the King and many others, for
no one dared to say he could not see the cloth.

"Things went on thus until there came a great feast, when all
requested the King to be dressed in some of the cloth; so the workmen,
being ordered, brought some rolled up in a very fine linen and inquired
of the King how much of it he wished them to cut off; so the King gave
orders how much and how to make it up.

"Now when the clothes were made and the feast day had arrived the
weavers brought them to the King, informing his Majesty that his dress
was made of the cloth as he had directed, the King all this time not
daring to say he could not see it.

"When the King had professed to dress himself in this suit he
mounted on horseback and rode into the city; but fortunately for him it
was summer time. The people seeing his Majesty come in this manner were
much surprised; but knowing that those who could not see this cloth
would be considered illegitimate sons of their fathers, kept their
surprise to themselves, fearing the dishonour consequent upon such a
declaration. Not so, however, with a negro, who happened to notice the
King thus equipped; for he, having nothing to lose, came to him and
said, 'Sire, to me it matters not whose son I am, therefore I tell you
that you are riding without any clothes.' On this the King commenced
beating him, saying that he was not the legitimate son of his supposed
father, and therefore it was that he could not see the cloth. But no
sooner had the negro said this, than others were convinced of its truth,
and said the same; until, at last, the King and all with him lost their
fear of declaring the truth, and saw through the trick of which these
impostors had made them the victims. When the weavers were sought for
they were found to have fled, taking with them all they had received
from the King by their imposition.

"Now you, Count Lucanor, since that man of whom you speak forbids
your trusting to any one, and demands your entire confidence, be careful
you are not deceived; for, you ought to know very well that he can have
no reason for seeking your advantage more than his own; nor has he more
reason to serve you than have those who are indebted to you and are
already in your service."

Count Lucanor found this to be good advice, so adopted it.

And Don Juan, also seeing that it was a good example, wrote it in
this book and made these lines, which say as follows:-
Who counsels thee to secrecy with friends
Seeks to entrap thee for his own base ends.

NOTE.

This story, so quaintly and graphically written, stands alone in
the interest of its details, neither the Short Mantle, which figures
under the title of the "Manteau mal Taillé," in the Fabliaux of the
thirteenth century, nor the "Enchanted Bowl" of Ariosto, nor indeed any
of the romance writers of that age contain any subject wherein the
various passions and interests which move mankind are so well
delineated.

The false promises made by the impostors, arising out of want and
desperation, recall to mind the old Spanish proverb, "Cuando el Corsario
promete misas y cera, con mal anda la galera; (The galley is in a bad
way when the Corsair promises masses and candles)."
