The Life of John Buncle
By
Thomas Amory, Gent.
Published by the Ex-Classics Foundation, 2019.
www.exclassics.com
Public Domain

Bibliographic and editorial note. 

THE Life of John Buncle, Esq.; containing various Observations and 
Reflections made in several parts of the World, and many 
Extraordinary Relations," was published in two volumes in 1756 and 
1766 respectively. It was republished several times in the 18th and 
19th Centuries. A Dutch translation Het leven, de aanmerkingen en 
gevoelens van Johan Bonkel was published in 1778 and was promptly 
banned by the Dutch authorities as heretical. An abridged edition 
was published in 1823 under the title The Spirit of Buncle. John 
Buncle, Junior, Gentleman, a kind of sequel "in the same universe," 
as SF fans say, was published (anonymously, but is known to be the 
work of one Thomas Cogan) in 1776. 

This Ex-Classics version has been taken from the edition by Septimus 
Prowett, 3. Vols., 1825. Spelling and punctuation have been 
standardised. Additional notes and translations from Latin and Greek 
are the work of the Ex-Classics Foundation.a
INTRODUCTION 
From Gossip in a Library, by Edmund Gosse.

In the year 1756, there resided in the Barbican, where the great 
John Milton had lived before him, a funny elderly personage called 
Mr. Thomas Amory, of whom not nearly so much is recorded as the 
lovers of literary anecdote would like to possess. He was sixty-five 
years of age; he was an Irish gentleman of means, and he was an 
ardent Unitarian. Some unkind people have suggested that he was out 
of his mind, and he had, it is certain, many peculiarities. One was, 
that he never left his house, or ventured into the streets, save 
"like a bat, in the dusk of the evening." He was, in short, what is 
called a "crank," and he gloried in his eccentricity. He desired 
that it might be written on his tombstone, "Here lies an Odd Man." 
For sixty years he had made no effort to attract popular attention, 
but in 1755 he had published a sort of romance, called Memoirs of 
Several Ladies of Great Britain, and now he succeeded it by the 
truly extraordinary work, the name of which stands at the head of 
this article. Ten years later there would appear another volume of 
John Buncle, and then Amory disappeared again. All we know is, that 
he died in 1788, at the very respectable age of ninety-seven. So 
little is known about him, so successfully did he hide "like a bat" 
through the dusk of nearly a century, that we may be glad to eke out 
the scanty information given above by a passage of autobiography 
from the preface of the book before us:

"I was born in London, and carried an infant to Ireland, where 
I learned the Irish language, and became intimately acquainted 
with its original inhabitants. I was not only a lover of books 
from the time I could spell them to this hour, but read with 
an extraordinary pleasure, before I was twenty, the works of 
several of the Fathers, and all the old romances; which tinged 
my ideas with a certain piety and extravagance that rendered 
my virtues as well as my imperfections particularly mine.... 
The dull, the formal, and the visionary, the hard-honest man, 
and the poor-liver, are a people I have had no connection 
with; but have always kept company with the polite, the 
generous, the lively, the rational, and the brightest 
freethinkers of this age. Besides all this, I was in the days 
of my youth, one of the most active men in the world at every 
exercise; and to a degree of rashness, often venturesome, when 
there was no necessity for running any hazards; in diebus 
illis, I have descended headforemost, from a high cliff into 
the ocean, to swim, when I could, and ought, to have gone off 
a rock not a yard from the surface of the deep. I have swam 
near a mile and a half out in the sea to a ship that lay off, 
gone on board, got clothes from the mate of the vessel, and 
proceeded with them to the next port; while my companion I 
left on the beach concluded me drowned, and related my sad 
fate in the town. I have taken a cool thrust over a bottle, 
without the least animosity on either side, but both of us 
depending on our skill in the small sword for preservation 
from mischief. Such things as these I now call wrong."

If this is not a person of whom we would like to know more, I know 
not what the romance of biography is. Thomas Amory's life must have 
been a streak of crimson on the grey surface of the eighteenth 
century. It is really a misfortune that the red is almost all washed 
off.

No odder book than John Buncle was published in England throughout 
the long life of Amory. Romances there were, like Gulliver's Travels 
and Peter Wilkins, in which the incidents were much more incredible, 
but there was no supposition that these would be treated as real 
history. The curious feature of John Buncle is that the story is 
told with the strictest attention to realism and detail, and yet is 
embroidered all over with the impossible. There can be no doubt that 
Amory, who belonged to an older school, was affected by the form of 
the new novels which were the fashion in 1756. He wished to be as 
particular as Mr. Richardson, as manly as Captain Fielding, as 
breezy and vigorous as Dr. Smollett, the three new writers who were 
all the talk of the town. But there was a twist in his brain which 
made his pictures of real life appear like scenes looked at through 
flawed glass.

The memoirs of John Buncle take the form of an autobiography, and 
there has been much discussion as to how much is, and how much is 
not, the personal history of Amory. I confess I cannot see why we 
should not suppose all of it to be invented, although it certainly 
is odd to relate anecdotes and impressions of Dr. Swift, à propos of 
nothing at all, unless they formed part of the author's experience. 
For one thing, the hero is represented as being born about thirteen 
years later than Amory was–if, indeed, we possess the true date of 
our worthy's birth. Buncle goes to college and becomes an earnest 
Unitarian. The incidents of his life are all intellectual, until one 
"glorious first of August," when he sallies forth from college with 
his gun and dog, and after four hours' walk discovers that he has 
lost his way. He is in the midst of splendid mountain scenery–which 
leads us to wonder at which English University he was studying–and 
descends through woody ravines and cliffs that overhang torrents, 
till he suddenly comes in sight of a "little harmonic building that 
had every charm and proportion architecture could give it." Finding 
one of the garden doors open, and being very hungry, the adventurous 
Buncle strolls in, and finds himself in "a grotto or shell-house, in 
which a politeness of fancy had produced and blended the greatest 
beauties of nature and decoration." (There are more grottoes in the 
pages of Amory than exist in the whole of the British Islands.) This 
shell-house opened into a library, and in the library a beauteous 
object was sitting and reading. She was studying a Hebrew Bible, and 
making philological notes on a small desk. She raised her eyes and 
approached the stranger, "to know who I wanted" (for Buncle's style, 
though picturesque, is not always grammatically irreproachable.)

Before he could answer, a venerable gentleman was at his side, to 
whom the young sportsman confessed that he was dying of hunger and 
had lost his way. Mr. Noel, a patriarchal widower of vast wealth, 
was inhabiting this mansion in the sole company of his only 
daughter, the lovely being just referred to. Mr. Buncle was 
immediately "stiffened by enchantment" at the beauty of Miss Harriot 
Noel, and could not be induced to leave when he had eaten his 
breakfast. This difficulty was removed by the old gentleman asking 
him to stay to dinner, until the time of which meal Miss Noel should 
entertain him. At about 10 A.M. Mr. Buncle offers his hand to the 
astonished Miss Noel, who, with great propriety, bids him recollect 
that he is an entire stranger to her. They then have a long 
conversation about the Chaldeans, and the "primaevity" of the Hebrew 
language, and the extraordinary longevity of the Antediluvians; at 
the close of which (circa 11.15 A.M.) Buncle proposes again. "You 
force me to smile (the illustrious Miss Noel replied), and oblige me 
to call you an odd compound of a man," and to distract his thoughts, 
she takes him round her famous grotto. The conversation, all 
repeated at length, turns on conchology and on the philosophy of 
Epictetus until it is time for dinner, when Mr. Noel and young 
Buncle drink a bottle of old Alicant, and discuss the gallery of 
Verres and the poetry of Catullus. Left alone at last, Buncle still 
does not go away, but at 5 P.M. proposes for the third time, "over a 
pot of tea." Miss Noel says that the conversation will have to take 
some other turn, or she must leave the room. They therefore 
immediately "consider the miracle at Babel," and the argument of 
Hutchinson on the Hebrew word Shephah, until, while Miss Noel is in 
the very act of explaining that "the Aramitish was the customary 
language of the line of Shem," young Buncle (circa 7.30) "could not 
help snatching this beauty to my arms, and without thinking what I 
did, impressed on her balmy mouth half a dozen kisses. This was 
wrong, and gave offence," but then papa returning, the trio sat down 
peacefully to cribbage and a little music. Of course Miss Noel is 
ultimately won, and this is a very fair specimen of the conduct of 
the book.

A fortnight before the marriage, however, "the small-pox steps in, 
and in seven days' time reduced the finest human frame in the 
universe to the most hideous and offensive block," and Miss Harriot 
Noel dies. If this dismal occurrence is rather abruptly introduced, 
it is because Buncle has to be betrothed, in succession, to six 
other lively and delicious young females, all of them beautiful, all 
of them learned, and all of them earnestly convinced Unitarians. If 
they did not rapidly die off, how could they be seven? Buncle mourns 
the decease of each, and then hastily forms an equally violent 
attachment to another. It must be admitted that he is a sad wife-
waster. Azora is one of the most delightful of these deciduous 
loves. She "had an amazing collection of the most rational 
philosophical ideas, and she delivered them in the most pleasing 
dress." She resided in a grotto within a romantic dale in Yorkshire, 
in a "little female republic" of one hundred souls, all of them 
"straight, clean, handsome girls." In this glen there is only one 
man, and he a fossil. Miss Melmoth, who would discuss the paulo-post 
futurum of a Greek verb with the utmost care and politeness, and had 
studied "the Minerva of Sanctius and Hickes' Northern Thesaurus," 
was another nice young lady, though rather free in her manner with 
gentlemen. But they all die, sacrificed to the insatiable fate of 
Buncle.

Here the reader may like to enjoy a sample of Buncle as a 
philosopher. It is a characteristic passage:

"Such was the soliloquy I spoke, as I gazed on the skeleton of 
John Orton; and just as I had ended, the boys brought in the 
wild turkey, which they had very ingeniously roasted, and with 
some of Mrs. Burcot's fine ale and bread, I had an excellent 
supper. The bones of the penitent Orton I removed to a hole I 
had ordered my lad to dig for them; the skull excepted, which 
I kept, and still keep on my table for a memento mori; and 
that I may never forget the good lesson which the percipient 
who once resided in it had given. It is often the subject of 
my meditation. When I am alone of an evening, in my closet, 
which is often my case, I have the skull of John Orton before 
me, and as I smoke a philosophic pipe, with my eyes fastened 
on it, I learn more from the solemn object than I could from 
the most philosophical and laboured speculations. What a wild 
and hot head once–how cold and still now; poor skull, I say: 
and what was the end of all thy daring, frolics and gambols–
thy licentiousness and impiety–a severe and bitter repentance. 
In piety and goodness John Orton found at last that happiness 
the world could not give him."

Hazlitt has said that "the soul of Rabelais passed into John Amory." 
His name was Thomas, not John, and there is very little that is 
Rabelaisian in his spirit. One sees what Hazlitt meant–the voluble 
and diffuse learning, the desultory thread of narration, the mixture 
of religion and animalism. But the resemblance is very superficial, 
and the parallel too complimentary to Amory. It is difficult to 
think of the soul of Rabelais in connection with a pedantic and 
uxorious Unitarian. To lovers of odd books, John Buncle will always 
have a genuine attraction. Its learning would have dazzled Dr. 
Primrose, and is put on in glittering spars and shells, like the 
ornaments of the many grottoes that it describes. It is diversified 
by descriptions of natural scenery, which are often exceedingly 
felicitous and original, and it is quickened by the human warmth and 
flush of the love passages, which, with all their quaintness, are 
extremely human. It is essentially a "healthy" book, as Charles 
Lamb, with such a startling result, assured the Scotchman. Amory was 
a fervid admirer of womankind, and he favoured a rare type, the 
learned lady who bears her learning lightly and can discuss "the 
quadrations of curvilinear spaces" without ceasing to be "a 
bouncing, dear, delightful girl," and adroit in the preparation of 
toast and chocolate. The style of the book is very careless and 
irregular, but rises in its best pages to an admirable 
picturesqueness.



REVIEW 
From A Book for a Corner, by Leigh Hunt. 

"THE Life of John Buncle, Esq.; containing various Observations and 
Reflections made in several parts of the World, and many 
Extraordinary Relations," is a book unlike any other in the 
language, perhaps in the world. John's Life is not a classic: it 
contains no passage which is a general favourite: no extract could 
be made from it of any length, to which readers of good taste would 
not find objections. Yet there is so curious an interest in all its 
absurdities; its jumble of the gayest and gravest considerations is 
so founded in the actual state of things; it draws now and then such 
excellent portraits from life; and above all, its animal spirits are 
at once so excessive and so real, that we defy the best readers not 
to be entertained with it, and having had one or two specimens, not 
to desire more. Buncle would say, that there is "cut and come again" 
in him, like one of his luncheons of cold beef and a foaming 
tankard. John Buncle, Esq., is the representative of his author, 
Thomas Amory; of whom little is known, except that he was a 
gentleman of singular habits and appearance, who led a retired life, 
was married, was a vehement Unitarian, wrote another extraordinary 
book professing to be "Lives of Several Ladies" (in which there is a 
link with John), and died, to the glory of animal spirits, and of 
rounds of bread and butter (into which his good cheer seems latterly 
to have merged), at the ripe old age of ninety-seven. He is supposed 
to have been bred a physician. His father was a barrister, and is 
understood to have acquired considerable property in Ireland, in 
consequence of becoming secretary to the forfeited estates.

John Buncle is evidently Amory himself. This is apparent from the 
bits of real autobiography which are mixed with the fictitious, and 
which constitute one of the strange jumbles in his book. Hazlitt has 
called him the "English Rabelais;" and in point of animal spirits, 
love of good cheer, and something of a mixture of scholarship, 
theology, and profane reading, he may be held to deserve the title; 
but he has no claim to the Frenchman's greatness of genius, freedom 
from bigotry, and profoundness of wit and humour. He might have done 
very well for a clerk to Rabelais; and his master would have laughed 
quite as much at, as with him. John is a kind of innocent Henry the 
Eighth of private life, without the other's fat, fury, and 
solemnity. He is a prodigious hand at matrimony, at divinity, at a 
song, at a loud "hem," and at turkey and chine. He breaks with the 
Trinitarians as confidently and with as much scorn as Henry did with 
the Pope; and he marries seven wives, whom he disposes of by the 
lawful process of fever and smallpox. His book is made up of 
history, mathematics (literally), songs, polemics, landscapes, 
eating and drinking, and characters of singular men, all bound 
together by his introductions to and marriages with these seven 
successive ladies, every one of whom is a charmer, a Unitarian, and 
cut off in the flower of her youth. Buncle does not know how to 
endure her loss; he shuts his eyes "for three days;" is stupefied; 
is in despair; till suddenly he recollects that Heaven does not like 
such conduct; that it is a mourner's business ,to bow to its 
decrees; to be devout; to be philosophic; in short, to be jolly, and 
look out for another dear, bewitching partner "on Christian 
principles." This is, literally, a fair account of his book; and our 
readers are now qualified to understand the passages we proceed to 
extract.

The "Lives of Several Ladies," which preceded Buncle's 
autobiography, professed to be genuine lives, and were equally 
manifest fiction; mixed with a portion of truth. The ladies, like 
the wives, were all Unitarian; and all charming; and the writer, 
after a certain spiritual mode, fell in love with them. They partook 
of his zest for all the pleasures of life; had a great objection to 
ugly, as well as to Athanasian husband; and none in the world to a 
good supper. The lives are addressed to a friend of the name of 
Jewks—a name which is often apostrophized with an abrupt joviality 
of the most amusing kind, in the midst of theological disquisitions. 
As the opening of this work is no unfavourable specimen of the 
author, and furnishes a pretty thorough foretaste of his spirit, the 
reader is presented with a few pages of it.

Your letter, dear Jewks, I had the pleasure of receiving; and, 
that you should not suspect me of neglecting you, I postpone 
my journey to Chadson, to answer your questions. To the best 
of my power I will give you a monument of my friendship, 
though at present my condition is such, that I cannot subtract 
too much from the organs of the intellect, to give to those of 
'notion. You shall have all I know relating to the lady you 
inquire after. You shall have, by the way, a few occasional 
observations.

In the year 1739, I travelled many hundred miles to visit 
ancient monuments, and discover curious things; and as I 
wandered, to this purpose, among the vast hills of 
Northumberland, fortune conducted me one evening, in the month 
of June, when I knew not where to rest, to the sweetest 
retirement my eyes have ever beheld. This is Hali-farm. It is 
a beautiful vale surrounded with rocks, forest, and water. I 
found at the upper end of it the prettiest thatched house in 
the world, and a garden of the most artful confusion I had 
ever seen. The little mansion was covered on every side with 
the finest flowery greens. The streams, all round, were 
murmuring and falling a thousand ways. All the kinds of 
singing birds were here collected, and in high harmony on the 
sprays. The ruins of an abbey enhance the beauties of this 
place; they appear at the distance of four hundred yards from 
the house; and as some great trees are now grown up among the 
remains, and a river winds between the broken walls, the view 
is solemn, the picture fine.

When I came up to the house, the first figure I saw was the 
lady whose story I am going to relate. She had the charms of 
an angel, but her dress was quite plain and clean like a 
country maid. Her person appeared faultless, and of the middle 
size, between the disagreeable extremes; her face a sweet 
oval, and her complexion the brunette of the bright rich kind; 
her mouth, like a rose-bud that is just beginning to blow; and 
a fugitive dimple, by fits, would lighten and disappear. The 
finest passions were always passing in her face; and in her 
long, even, chestnut eyes there was a fluid fire sufficient 
for half-a-dozen pair.

She had a volume of Shakespeare in her hand as I came softly 
towards her, having left my horse at a distance with my 
servant; and her attention was so much engaged with the 
extremely poetical and fine lines which Titania speaks in the 
third act of the Midsummer Night's Dream, that she did not see 
me till I was quite near her. She seemed then in great 
amazement. She could not be much more surprised if I had 
dropped from the clouds. But this was soon over, upon my 
asking her if she was not the daughter of Mr. John Bruce, as I 
supposed from a similitude of faces, and informing her that 
her father, if I was right, was my near friend, and would be 
glad to see his chum in that part of the world. Marinda 
replied, 'You are not wrong;' and immediately asked me in. She 
conducted me to a parlour that was quite beautiful in the 
rural way, and welcomed me to Hali-farm, as her father would 
have done, she said, had I arrived before his removal to a 
better world. She then left me for a while, and I had time to 
look over the room I was in. The floor was covered with rushes 
wrought into the prettiest mat, and the walls decorated all 
round with the finest flowers and shells. Robins and 
nightingales, the finch and the linnet, were in the neatest 
red cages of her own making; and at the upper end of the 
chamber, in a charming little open grotto, was the finest 
strix capite aurito, corpore rufo, that I have seen, that is, 
the great eagle owl. This beautiful bird, in a niche like a 
ruin, looked vastly fine. As to the flowers which adorned this 
room, I thought they were all natural at my first coming in, 
but on inspection it appeared that several baskets of the 
finest kinds were inimitably painted on the walls by Marinda's 
hand.

These things afforded me a pleasing entertainment for about 
half an hour, and then Miss Bruce returned. One of the maids 
brought in a supper—such fare, she said, as her little cottage 
afforded; and the table was covered with green peas and 
pigeons, cream cheese, new bread and butter. Everything was 
excellent in its kind. The eider and ale were admirable. 
Discretion and dignity appeared in Marinda's behaviour; she 
talked with judgment; and, under the decencies of ignorance, 
was concealed a valuable knowledge.
This is the way in which Buncle meets with most of his ladies. They 
are discovered in lovely places reading books, and are always 
prepared for nice little suppers.  Their fathers or other companions 
are generally people to match. Jack Bruce, Marinda's father, was an 
excellent good fellow, disinherited by his own father for refusing 
to sign the thirty-nine articles. He disappears in a solitude, 
marries a farmer's daughter ("an extraordinary beauty" with an 
"uncommon understanding"), and becomes a farmer himself.

'Religion,' would Jack Bruce say, as we passed an evening over 
a little bowl of nectar—for he never taught in the dry, sober 
method—'religion,' &c.
Then follows a picture of philosophic Unitarianism.

This was a glorious faith, Jewks. People may substitute 
inventive pieces in the place of true religion, and multiply 
their fancies into endless volumes; such as Revelation 
examined with Candour, the most uncandid thing that ever was 
written; the Life of David, &c., by the same author; Rogers's 
Discourse of the Visible and Invisible Church; Waterland's 
Importance, and other writings; the execrable dialogues called 
Ophiomaches; Trapp, Webster, and Vernon; the miserable Answers 
to the Bishop of Clogher; Dodwell, Church, and Brooks, against 
Middleton; Knowles against the Argument a Priori; and cart-
loads of such religious lumber" (these italics are the 
author's);  but, my dear Jewks, true Christianity lies in 
repentance and amendment.

Miss Bruce wins a husband by painting pictures of "Arcadia" and the 
"Crucifixion," and "playing on the fiddle." Divers charming young 
ladies come to her house by accident, and form extempore never-dying 
friendships, in the manner of the people in the Rovers—

"Come to my arms, my slight acquaintance."

Among others are Mrs. Schomberg and Miss West.

They were riding to Crawford Dyke, near Dunglass, the place I 
intended for, and by a wrong turn in the road came to Mrs. 
Benlow's house, instead of going to Robin's Toad, where they 
designed to bait. It was between eight and nine at night when 
they got to her door; and as they appeared, by the richness of 
their riding-dress, their servants, and the beautiful horses 
they rid, to be women of distinction, Mrs. Benlow invited them 
in, and requested they would lie at her house that night, as 
the inn they were looking for was very bad. Nothing could be 
more grateful to the ladies than this proposal. They were on 
the ground in a moment; and we all sat down soon after, with 
the greatest cheerfulness, to a fine dish of trouts, roasted 
chickens, tarts, and asparagus. The strangers were quite 
charmed with everything they saw. The sweet rural room they 
were in, and the wild beauties of the garden in view, they 
could not enough admire; and they were so struck with Mrs. 
Benlow's goodness, and the lively happy manner She has of 
showing it, that they conceived immediately the greatest 
affection for her. Felicity could not rise higher than it did 
at this table. For a couple of hours we laughed most 
immoderately.

But to quit the lives of ladies who married other men, and come to 
John Buncle and his own. John quits his father, as Jack Bruce did, 
on account of a religious difference, and goes about the world, 
seeking whom he may marry. His first wife is a Miss Melmoth. He had 
known her some time, when having been led one day into some 
particularly serious reflections on life and death by the sight of a 
skeleton, he considered that it would be a good thing to "commence a 
matrimonial relation with some sensible, good-humoured, dear, 
delightful girl of the mountains, and persuade her to be the 
cheerful partner of his still life." He thought that "nature and 
reason" would then "create the highest scenes of felicity, and that 
he should live, as it were, in the suburbs of heaven." And he 
concludes, in an ecstasy:

This is fine. For once in my life I am fortunate. And suppose 
this partner I want in my solitude could be Miss Melmoth, one 
of the wisest and most discreet of women, thinking a bloom and 
good-humour itself in a human figure, then, indeed, I must be 
happy in this silent, romantic station. This spot of earth 
would then have all the felicities.—Resolved. Conclusum est 
contra Manichaeos<77>, said the great St. Austin; and with a 
thump of his fist, he (St. Austin) cracked the table."

Miss Melmoth, being one of the wisest as well as loveliest of women, 
accepts of course the hand that draws so convincing a conclusion 
from the fist of St. Austin. For two years they lead a life of 
bliss; but at the end of that time she dies of a fever, and John 
quits a solitude which he could not bear.

His second wife is the lovely Miss Statia Henley, "bright and 
charming as Aurora," daughter of John Henley, Esquire, of the Groves 
of Basil. She had some fugitive notions of celibacy, which our hero 
refutes on Christian principles; and, as in the former instance, 
they lead a life of bliss for two years. The "illustrious Statia" 
then dies of the smallpox, and is laid by Charlotte's side.

Thus did I again become a mourner. I sat with my eyes shut for 
three days; but at last called for my horse, to try what air, 
exercise, and variety of objects could do."

Air, exercise, and a variety of objects did very well; for Mr. 
Buncle misses his way into the house and grounds of the exquisite 
Miss Antonia Cramer, "a heaven-born maid" and "innocent beauty," 
whom he marries of course. But her, also, alas! he loses of the 
small-pox, at the end of two—no, three years. "Four" days, too, he 
sits with his eyes shut, which is a day more than he gave to Statia; 
and then he left the lodge once more, "to live, if he could, since 
his religion ordered him so to do, and see what he was next to meet 
with in the world."

Nota bene, (says our author at this place) as I mention 
nothing of any children by so many wives, some readers may 
perhaps wonder at this; and therefore, to give a general 
answer, once for all, I think it sufficient to observe, that I 
had a great many to carry on the succession; but as they never 
were concerned in any extraordinary affairs, nor ever did any 
remarkable things, that I ever heard of;—only rise and 
breakfast, read and saunter, drink and eat, it would not be 
fair, in my opinion, to make any one pay for their history.

This kind of progeny, by the way, hardly does credit to our hero's 
very exquisite marriages. But as extremes meet, and fair play must 
be seen to the mass of the community, we suppose the young Buncles 
were dull, in consideration of the vivacity of the parents.

Mr. Buncle having laid his beloved Antonia by the side of his 
Charlotte and his Statia, now goes to Harrogate; and while there, 
"it is his fortune to dance with a lady who had the head of an 
Aristotle, the heart of a primitive Christian, and the form of a 
Venus de Medicis." This was Miss Spence, of Westmoreland.

I was not many hours in her company, before I became most 
passionately in love with her. I did all I could to win her 
heart, and at last asked her the question. But before I inform 
my readers what the consequence of this was, I must take some 
notice of what I expect from the Critical Reviewers. These 
gentlemen will attempt to raise the laugh. Our moralist (they 
will say) has buried three wives running, and they are hardly 
cold in their graves before he is dancing like a buck at the 
Wells, and plighting vows to a fourth girl, the beauty Miss 
Spence. An honest fellow, this Suarez, as Pascal says of that 
Jesuit, in his Provincial Letters.

To this I reply, that I think it unreasonable and impious to 
grieve immoderately for the dead. A decent and proper tribute 
of tears and sorrow humanity requires; but when that duty has 
been paid, we must remember, that to lament a dead woman is 
not to lament a wife! A wife must be a living woman.

He argues furthermore, that it would be sinful to behave on such 
occasions as if Providence had been unjust. The lady has been lent 
but for a term; and we must bow to the limitation. Besides, she is 
in Heaven; and therefore it would be senseless to continue 
murmuring, and not make the most of the world that remains to us, 
while she is "breathing the balmy air of Paradise," and being 
"beyond description happy."

Miss Spence, however, is a little coy. She is a very learned as well 
as charming young lady. She quotes Virgil, discourses with her lover 
on fluxions and the Differential Calculus, and is not to be won 
quite so Cast as he wishes. Nevertheless, he wins her at last; loses 
her in six months of a malignant fever and four doctors; and in less 
than three months afterwards, marries the divine Miss Emilia Turner, 
of Skelsmore Vale—alas! for six weeks only. A chariot and four runs 
away with them, and his "charmer is killed." She lives about an 
hour, repeats some consolatory verses to him out of a Latin epitaph, 
and bids him adieu with "the spirit of an old Roman."

John's next "intended" (for the marriage did not take place in due 
order) was the enchanting Miss Dunk, famous for "exact regularity of 
beauty, and elegant softness of propriety." This elegant softness of 
propriety does not hinder the fair Agnes from running away with him 
from her father's house; but she has scarcely arrived at the village 
where they are to be married, when she falls sick, is laid out for 
dead, and is buried in the next churchyard. Not long afterwards the 
unhappy lover meets her, alive, laughing, and taking no notice, in 
the character of the wife of Dr. Stanvil, an amiable anatomist. The 
word will explain the accident that brought the charmer into the 
doctor's hands. Buncle, vexed as he owns himself to lose her, could 
not but see the reasonableness of the result and the folly of making 
an "uproar;" so he gallantly imitates the lady's behaviour, and 
rides off to fall in with that "fine creature" Julia Fitzgibbons, as 
charming for a bewitching negligence, as Miss Dunk was for a divine 
self-possession.

John studies physic under her father; marries her in the course of 
two years; and at the end of ten months loses her in a river while 
they are fishing. He sits with his eyes shut ten days (so highly do 
his wives increase in value); and then calls his man "to bring out 
the horses," and is off, on Christian principles, for wife the 
seventh.

Who should this be but Miss Dunk? His friend, Dr. Stanvil, her 
husband, drops down dead of an apoplexy on purpose to oblige him. 
The widow lets him know that her reserve had not proceeded a bit 
from dislike; quite the contrary. She marries him; they lead a 
blissful life for a year and a half, during which he is reconciled 
with his father, who has become a convert to Unitarianism; and then 
the lady goes the way of all Buncle's wives, dying of his favourite 
uxoricide, the smallpox; and John, after diverting himself at sea, 
retires to a "little flowery retreat," in the neighbourhood of 
London, to hear purling streams on the one hand, and news on the 
other, and write verses about going to Heaven.

The reader is to bear in mind, that all these marriages are 
interspersed with descriptions, characters, adventures of other 
sorts, natural history, and, above all, with polemics full of the 
most ridiculous begging of the question, and the most bigoted 
invectives against bigotry. A few specimens will show him what sort 
of reading he has missed:—
"The History of Miss Noel. 
"A Conversation in relation to the Primaevity of the Hebrew 
Tongue. 
"Of Mrs. O'Hara's and Mrs. Grafton's Grottoes. 
"Miss Noel's Notion of Hutchinson's Cherubim. 
"The Origin of Earthquakes—of the Abyss, &c. 
"An Account of Muscular Motion. 
"An Account of Ten Extraordinary Country Girls. 
"A Rule to Determine the Tangents of Curved Lines. " 
"What a Moral Shekinah is. 
"Of Mr. Macknight's Harmony (of the Gospels). 
"Description of a Society of Protestant Married Friars. 
"The Author removes to Oldfield Spaw, on account of 
Indisposition occasioned hy Hard Drinking; and his Reflections 
on Hard Drinking. 
"A Discourse on Fluxions between Miss Spence and the Author. 
"Of the Athanasian Creed. 
"What Phlogiston is. 
"Picture and. Character of Curl, the Bookseller." (He says he 
was " very tall, thin, ungainly, goggle-eyed, white-faced, 
splay-footed, and baker-kneed; very profligate, but not ill-
natured.")

It is impossible to be serious with John Buncle, Esquire, jolly dog, 
Unitarian, and Blue Beard; otherwise, if we were to take him at his 
word, we should pronounce him, besides being a jolly dog, to be one 
of a very selfish description, with too good a constitution to 
correct him, a prodigious vanity, no feeling whatever, and a 
provoking contempt for everything unfortunate, or opposed to his 
whims. He quarrels with bigotry, and is a bigot; with abuse, and 
riots in it. He hates the cruel opinions held by Athanasius, and 
sends people to the devil as an Arian. He kills off seven wives out 
of pure incontinence and love of change, yet cannot abide a rake or 
even the poorest victim of the rake, unless both happen to be his 
acquaintances. The way in which he tramples on the miserable 
wretches in the streets, is the very rage and triumph of hard-
heartedness, furious at seeing its own vices reflected on it, 
unredeemed by the privileges of law, divinity, and success. But the 
truth is, John is no more responsible for his opinions than health 
itself, or a high-mettled racer. He only "thinks he's thinking." He 
does, in reality, nothing at all but eat, drink, talk, and enjoy 
himself. Amory, Buncle's creator, was in all probability an honest 
man, or he would hardly have been innocent enough to put such 
extravagance on paper. What Mrs. Amory thought of the seven wives 
does not appear. Probably he invented them before he knew her; 
perhaps was not anxious to be reminded of them afterwards. When he 
was in the zenith of his health and spirits, he must have been a 
prodigious fellow over a bottle and beefsteak.

It is hardly necessary to say, that by the insertion of passages 
from this fantastical book no disrespect is intended to the 
respectable sect of Unitarians; who, probably, care as little for 
Buncle's friendship as the Trinitarians do for his enmity. There is 
apt to be too little real Christianity in polemics of any kind; and 
John is no exception to the remark. He contrives to be so absurd, 
even when most reasonable, that the charms of Nature herself and of 
animal spirits would suffer under his admiration and example, if 
readers could not easily discern the difference; and even the 
youngest need scarcely be warned against overlooking it. Our volumes 
are intended to include all the phases of humanity that can be set 
before them without injury; and among these were not to be omitted 
the eccentric.



PUBLISHER'S BLURB

'John Buncle is the ENGLISH RABELAIS.' The soul of Francis Rabelais 
passed into Thomas Amory, the author of the Life and Adventures of 
John Buncle; both were Physicians, and enemies of too much gravity. 
Their great business was to enjoy life. Rabelais indulges his spirit 
of sensuality in wine, in dried neat's tongues, in Bologna sausages, 
in botargos<1>. John Buncle shows the same symptoms of inordinate 
satisfaction in tea and bread and butter. While Rabelais roared with 
Friar John and the Monks, John Buncle gossiped with the ladies; and 
with equal and uncontrolled gaiety. These two authors possessed all 
the insolence of health, so that their works give a fillip to the 
Constitution; but they carried off the exuberance of their natural 
spirits in different ways. The title of one of Rabelais' chapters, 
and the contents answer to the title, is, 'How they chirped ever 
their cup.' The title of a corresponding chapter in John Buncle 
would run thus:—'The author is invited to spend the evening with the 
divine Miss Hawkins, and goes accordingly, with the delightful 
conversation that ensued.'



VOLUME 1.
Nec Vixit Male, qui Natus Moriensque fefellit. 
[Neither has he lived ill whose birth and death have passed 
unnoticed by the world – Horace, Letter 18. To Scaeva



CHAPTER I.

THAT the transactions of my life, and the observations and 
reflections I have made on men and things, by sea and land, in 
various parts of the world, might not be buried in oblivion, and by 
length of time, be blotted out of the memory of men, it has been my 
wont, from the days of my youth to this time, to write down 
memorandums of everything I thought worth noticing, as men and 
matters, books and circumstances, came in my way; and in hopes they 
may be of some service to my fellow-mortals I publish them. Some 
pleasing and some surprising things the reader will find in them. He 
will meet with miscellany thoughts upon several subjects. He will 
read, if he pleases, some a tender stories, But all the relations, 
the thoughts, the observations, are designed for the advancement of 
valuable learning, and to promote whatsoever things are true, 
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever 
things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are 
of good report.

About fifty years ago the midwife wheeled me in, and much sooner 
than half a century hence, in all human probability, death will 
wheel me out. When Heaven pleases, I am satisfied. Life and death 
are equally welcome, because equally parts of my way to eternity. My 
lot has been a swarthy one in this first state, and I am in hopes I 
shall exchange worlds to advantage. As God, without all 
peradventure, brought his moral creatures into being, in order to 
increase their virtue, and provide suitable happiness for the 
worthy, the most unfortunate here may expect immutable felicity at 
last, if they have endeavoured, in proportion to what power they 
had, to render themselves useful and valuable, by a sincerity and 
benevolence of temper, a disinterestedness, a communicativeness, and 
the practice of those duties, to which we are obliged by the frame 
of our nature, and by the relations we bear to God, and to the 
subjects of his government.

For my part, I confess that, many have been the failings of my life, 
and great the defects of my obedience. But in the midst of all my 
failings and imperfections, my soul hath always sympathised with the 
afflicted, and my heart hath ever ached for the miseries of others. 
My hand has often relieved when I wanted the shilling to comfort 
myself, and when it hath not been in my power to relieve, I have 
grieved for the scanty accommodations of others. Many troublesome 
and expensive offices I have undertaken to do good to men, and ever 
social and free have I been in my demeanour, easy and smooth in my 
address; and therefore I trust that, whenever I am removed from this 
horizon, it will be from a dark and cloudy state, to that of joy, 
light, and full revelation. This felicitates my every day, let what 
happen from without. This supports me under every affliction, and 
enables me to maintain a habit of satisfaction and joy in the 
general course of my life.

The things of my childhood are not worth setting down, and therefore 
I commence my life from the first month of the seventeenth year of 
my age, when I was sent to the university, in 1720, and entered a 
pensioner, though I had a larger yearly allowance than any fellow-
commoner of my college. I was resolved to read there, and determined 
to improve my natural faculties to the utmost of my power. Nature, I 
was sensible, had bestowed no genius on me. This, and understanding, 
are only the privilege of extraordinary persons, who receive from 
Heaven the happy conjunction of qualities, that they may execute 
great and noble designs, and acquire the highest pitch of excellence 
in the profession they turn to, if they will take the pains to 
perfect the united qualities by art, and carefully avoid running 
into caprice and paradox; the rocks on which many a genius has 
split. But then I had a tolerable share of natural understanding, 
and from my infancy was teachable, and always attentive to the 
directions of good sense. This I knew might rise with some labour, 
to a half merit, though it could never gain immortality upon any 
account: and this was enough for me. I wanted only to acquire such 
degrees of perfections as lay within the small sphere nature had 
chalked out for me.

To this purpose I devoted my college life to books, and for five 
years that I resided in the university, conversed so much with the 
dead that I had very little intercourse with the living. So totally 
had letters engaged my mind, that I was but little affected towards 
most other things. Walking and music were my favourite recreations, 
and almost the only ones I delighted in. I had hardly a thought at 
that time of the foolish choices and pursuits of men, those fatal 
choices and pursuits which are owing to false judgments, and to a 
habit of acting precipitately, without examining the fancies and 
appetites; and therefore very rarely went into the pleasures and 
diversions which men of fortune in a university too commonly indulge 
in. My relaxation after study was my German flute and the 
conversation of some ingenious, sober friend, generally my private 
tutor, Mr. JOHN BRUCE, who was a bright and excellent man, and of 
whom you will find a large account in the first volume of my Memoirs 
of several Ladies of Great Britain, 1755, 8vo. p. 7. If the weather 
permitted, I walked out into the country several miles. At this 
exercise I had often one or other with me; but for the most part was 
obliged to go alone. My dog and my gun however were diversion enough 
on the way, and they frequently led me into scenes of entertainment, 
which lasted longer than the day. Some of them you will find in this 
Journal. The history of the beautiful HARRIET NOEL you shall have by 
and by.

At present, my scheme requires me to set down the method I pursued 
in my readings, and let my reader know the issue of my studies. My 
time I devoted to philosophy, cosmography, mathematics, and the 
languages, for four years, and the fifth, I gave to history.

The first book I took into my hand, after receiving my note of 
admission, was the Essay of that fine genius, Mr. LOCKE, and I was 
so pleased with this clear and accurate writer, that I looked into 
nothing else, till, by reading it three times over, I had made a 
thorough acquaintance with my own understanding. He taught me to 
examine my abilities, and enabled me to see what objects my mind was 
fitted to deal with. He led me into the sanctuary of vanity and 
ignorance, and showed me how greatly true knowledge depended on a 
right meaning of words, and a just significancy of expression. In 
sum, from the Essay my understanding received very great benefits, 
and to it I owe what improvement I have made in the reason given me. 
If I could, I would persuade all young gentlemen to read it over and 
over with great attention, and I am sure they would find themselves 
very richly rewarded for their pains in reading it. They would 
acquire that justness and truth of understanding, which is the great 
perfection of rational beings.

When I had done, for a time, with this admirable Essay, I then began 
to study the first principles of things, the structure of the 
universe, the contexture of human bodies, the properties of beasts, 
the virtues of plants, and the qualities of metals, and was quite 
charmed with the contemplation of the beautiful order, and wise 
final causes of nature in all her laws and productions. The study 
had a delightful influence on the temper of my mind, and inspired 
into it a love of order in my heart, and in my outward manners. It 
likewise led me to the great first cause, and in repeated views of 
harmony, wisdom, and goodness, in all the works of nature, riveted 
upon my mind a fixed conviction, that all is under the 
administration of a general mind, as far remote from all malice as 
from all weakness, whether in respect of understanding, or of power. 
This gave me a due affection towards the infinitely perfect Parent 
of Nature; and as I contemplated his glorious works, I was obliged 
in transports to confess, that he deserved our love and admiration. 
This did also satisfy me, that whatever the order of the world 
produces, is in the main both just and good, and of consequence that 
we ought in the best manner to support whatever hardships are to be 
endured for virtue's sake: that acquiescence and complacency with 
respect to ill accidents, ill men and injuries, ought to be our part 
under a perfect administration; and with benignity and constancy we 
must ever act, if there be a settled persuasion that all things are 
framed and governed by an universal mind. Such was the effect the 
study of natural philosophy had upon my soul. It set beyond all 
doubt before me the moral perfection of the Creator and Governor of 
the universe. And if this Almighty God, I said, is perfect wisdom 
and virtue, does it not follow that he must approve and love those 
who are at due pains to improve in wisdom; and what he loves and 
delights in, must he not make happy? This is an evident truth. It 
renders the cause of virtue quite triumphant.

But upon ethics or moral philosophy I dwelt the longest. This is the 
proper food of the soul, and what perfects it in all the virtues and 
qualifications of a gentleman. This science I collected in the first 
place from the ancient sages and philosophers, and studied all the 
moral writers of Greece and Rome. With great pleasure I saw that 
these immortal authors had delineated, as far as human reason can 
go, that course of life which is most according to the intention of 
nature, and most happy; had shown that this universe, and human 
nature in particular, was formed by the wisdom and counsel of a 
Deity, and that from the constitution of our nature various duties 
arose: that since God is the original independent being, complete in 
all possible perfection, of boundless power, wisdom, and goodness; 
the Creator, Contriver, and Governor of this world, to whom mankind 
are indebted for innumerable benefits most gratuitously bestowed; we 
ought to manifest the most ardent love and veneration toward the 
Deity, and worship him with affections of soul suited to the pre-
eminence and infinite grandeur of the original cause of all; ought 
to obey him, as far as human weakness can go, and humbly submit and 
resign ourselves and all our interests to his will; continually 
confide in his goodness, and constantly imitate him, as far as our 
weak nature is capable. This is due to that original most gracious 
power who formed us, and with a liberal hand supplies us with all 
things conducive to such pleasure and happiness as our nature can 
receive. That in respect of mankind, our natural sense of right and 
wrong, points out to us the duties to be performed towards others, 
and the kind affections implanted by nature, excites us to the 
discharge of them: that by the law of our constitution and nature, 
justice and benevolence are prescribed; and aids and an intercourse 
of mutual offices required, not only to secure our pleasure and 
happiness, but to preserve ourselves in safety and in life: that the 
law of nature, or natural right, forbids every instance of 
injustice, a violation of life, liberty, health, property; and the 
exercise of our honourable, kind powers, are not only a spring of 
vigorous efforts to do good to others, and thereby secure the common 
happiness; hut they really procure us a joy and peace, an inward 
applause and external advantages; while injustice and malice, anger, 
hatred, envy, and revenge, are often matter of shame and remorse, 
and contain nothing joyful, nothing glorious: in the greatest 
affluence, the savage men are miserable; that as to ourselves, the 
voice of reason declares, that we ought to employ our abilities and 
opportunities in improving our minds to an extensive knowledge of 
nature in the sciences; and by diligent meditation and observation, 
acquire that prudence, justice, temperance, and fortitude, which 
should constantly govern our lives. That solid prudence, which 
abhors rashness, inconsiderateness, a foolish self-confidence, and 
craft, and under a high sense of moral excellence, considers and 
does what is really advantageous in life. That justice, which 
constantly regards the common interest, and in subservience to it, 
gives to each one whatever is due to him upon any natural claim. 
That temperance, which restrains and regulates the lower appetites, 
and displays the grace and beauty of manners. And that fortitude, 
which represses all vain and excessive fears, gives us a superiority 
to all the external accidents of our mortal state, and strengthens 
the soul against all toils or dangers we may be exposed to in 
discharge of our duty; as an early and painful death with virtue and 
honour, is highly preferable to the longest ignominious life, and no 
advantages can be compared, in point of happiness, with the 
approbation of God, and of our own hearts.

That if in this manner we live prepared for any honourable services 
to God, our fellows, and ourselves, and practice piety toward God, 
good-will toward men, and immediately aim at our own perfection, 
then we may expect, notwithstanding our being involved in manifold 
weaknesses and disorders of soul, that the divine goodness and 
clemency will have mercy on such as sincerely love him, and desire 
to serve him with duty and gratitude; will be propitious and 
placable to the penitents, and all who exert their utmost endeavours 
in the pursuit of virtue: and since the perfection of virtue must 
constitute the supreme felicity of man, our efforts to attain it 
must be effectual in obtaining complete felicity, or at least some 
lower degree of it.

This beautiful, moral philosophy, I found scattered in the writings 
of the old theist philosophers, and with great pains reduced the 
various lessons to a system of active and virtuous offices: but this 
1 knew was what the majority of mankind were incapable of doing; and 
if they could do it, I saw it was far inferior to revelation. Every 
Sunday I appropriated to the study of revealed religion, and 
perceived as I read the sacred records, that the works of Plato, and 
Cicero, and Epictetus, and all the uninspired sages of antiquity, 
were but weak rules in respect of the divine oracles. It is the 
mercy and power of God in the triumphs of grace, that restores 
mankind from the bondage and ignorance of idolatry. To this the 
sinner owes the conversion of his soul. It is the statutes of the 
Lord that rejoice the heart and enlighten the eyes. What are all the 
reasonings of the philosophers to the melody of that heavenly voice 
which cries continually "Come unto me all ye that travel and are 
heavy laden, and I will refresh you." And what could their lessons 
avail without those express promises of grace and spiritual 
assistance, which the blood of the new covenant confirms to mankind? 
The philosophy of Greece and Rome was admirable for the times and 
men: but it admits of no comparison with the divine lessons of our 
holy religion, and the charter of God's pardon granted to us by his 
blessed Son. Besides, the philosophers were in some degree dark and 
doubtful in respect of death and futurity; and in relation to this 
world, there is not a power in their discourses, to preserve us from 
being undone by allurements, in the midst of plenty, and to secure 
our peace against the casualties of fortune, and the torments of 
disappointments; to save us from the cares and solicitudes which 
attend upon large possessions, and give us a mind capable of 
relishing the good things before us; to make us easy and satisfied 
as to the present, and render us secure and void of fear as to the 
future. These things we learn from revelation, and are informed by 
the sacred records only, that if we are placed here in the midst of 
many fears and sorrows, and are often perplexed with evils in this 
world; they are so many warnings not to set up our rest here, but to 
keep a steadfast eye upon the things which God has prepared for 
those who love him. It is the gospel informs us, there is another 
scene prepared for the moral world, and that justice only waits to 
see the full proof of the righteousness, or unrighteousness of men: 
that that scene will open with the judgment seat of Christ, and we 
shall either receive glory and immortality, if we have obeyed the 
calls of grace to virtue and holiness; or, be doomed to the most 
dreadful miseries, if we reject the counsel of God, and live quite 
thoughtless of the great concerns of eternity. These considerations 
made me prefer revealed religion, in the beginning of my rational 
life. The morality of the ancient philosophers I admired. With 
delight I studied their writings, and received, I gratefully 
confess, much improvement from them. But religion of our blessed 
Lord I declared for, and look on the promised Messiah as the most 
consummate blessing God could bestow, or man receive. God having 
raised up his son Jesus, sent him to bless you, in turning every one 
of you from your iniquities. And would men but hear and obey this 
life-giving Redeemer, his gospel would restore reason and religion 
to their rightful authority over mankind; and make all virtue, and 
true goodness, flourish in the earth.

But I must observe that, by the religion of the New Testament, I do 
not mean any of those modern schemes of religion, which discover the 
evident marks and signatures of superstition and enthusiasm, or of 
knavery and imposture; those systems which even miracles cannot 
prove to be true, because the pieties are absurd, inconsistent, and 
contradictory. The notions that are not characterised by the reason 
of things, and the moral fitness of actions, I considered as 
repugnant to the veracity, wisdom and goodness of the Almighty, and 
concluded, that that only could he Christian religion, which bore 
the visible marks and signatures of benevolence, social happiness, 
and moral fitness, and was brought down from heaven to instruct 
mankind in the worship of one eternal mind, and bring them to 
repentance, and amendment of life. This was the religion I found in 
my Bible. I saw with pleasure, as I thoughtfully went through the 
divine pages, that natural religion is the foundation and support of 
revelation: supplies the defects of nature, but never attempts to 
overthrow the established principles of it, and casts new light upon 
the dictates of reason, but never overthrows them. Pure theism, and 
Christ the appointed Mediator, Advocate, and Judge, by a commission 
from God the Father, to me appeared to be the gospel; and the 
directions of the Holy Spirit, to believe in one supreme independent 
first cause, and worship in spirit and truth this one God and Father 
of all, in the name of Christ Jesus; as the disciples of the 
Messiah; to copy after the life of our blessed Saviour, and to the 
utmost of our abilities, obey all his commands. This was the 
religion I found in the writings of the apostles, and I then 
determined to regard only this gospel doctrine.

The manner of my studying cosmography and mathematics is not worth 
setting down, as there was nothing uncommon in it. In the one I only 
learned to distinguish climates, latitudes, and the four divisions 
of the world; the provinces, nations, kingdoms and republics 
comprised therein, and to be able to discourse upon them. And in the 
other, I went no further than to make myself a master of vulgar and 
decimal arithmetic, the doctrine of infinite series, and the 
application of algebra, to the higher geometry of curves. Algebra I 
was charmed with, and found so much pleasure in resolving its 
questions, that I have often sat till morning at the engaging work, 
without a notion of its being day till I opened the shutters of my 
closet. I recommend this study in particular to young gentlemen, and 
am satisfied, if they would but take some pains at first to 
understand it, they would have so great a relish for its operations, 
as to prefer them many an evening to clamorous pleasures; or, at 
least, not be uneasy for being alone now and then, since their 
algebra was with them.

In reading history, my last year's principal employment, during my 
residence in college, I began with the best writers of ancient 
history and ended with modern times, epochs, centuries, ages; the 
extent of empires, kingdoms, commonwealths; their progress, 
revolutions, changes and declensions; the number, order, and 
qualities of the princes that have reigned over those states and 
kingdoms, their actions military and civil; the characters and 
actions of the great men that flourished under them; and the laws, 
the arts, learning and manners, I carefully marked down, and 
observed not only how the first governments were formed, but what 
the progress was of industry and property, which may be called the 
generative principle of empire.

When I had done with ancient history, I sat down to the best modern 
stories I could get, and read of distant nations before I began to 
study my country's constitution, history and laws. When I had 
finished the histories of France, Spain, Italy, and Germany, and 
many more, then I turned to Great Britain, and in the first place 
took a view of the English constitution and government, in the 
ancient books of the common law, and some more modern writers, who 
out of them have given an account of this government. From thence I 
proceeded to our history, and with it joined in every king's reign 
the laws then made. This gave me an insight into the reason of our 
statutes, and showed me the true ground upon which they came to be 
made, and what weight they ought to have. By this means I read the 
history of my country with intelligence, and was able to examine 
into the excellence or defects of its government, and to judge of 
the fitness or unfitness of its orders and laws. By this method I 
likewise knew enough of the law for an English gentleman, though 
quite ignorant of the chicane, or wrangling and captious part, and 
was well acquainted with the true measure of right and wrong. The 
arts how to avoid doing right, and to secure one's-self in doing 
wrong, I never looked into.

Thus did I read history, and many noble lessons I learned from it; 
just notions of true worth, true greatness, and solid happiness. It 
taught me to place merit where it only lies, not in birth, not in 
beauty, not in riches, not in external show and magnificence, not in 
voluptuousness; but, in a firm adherence to truth and rectitude; in 
an untainted heart, that would not pollute or prostitute its 
integrity in any degree, to gain the highest worldly honours, or to 
ward off the greatest worldly misery. This is true magnanimity: and 
he alone can be truly happy, as well as truly great, who can look 
down with generous contempt upon everything that would tempt him to 
recede in the smallest degree from the paths of rigid honesty, 
candour and veracity.

Es modicus voti, presso lare, dulcis amicis; 
Jam nunc astringas; jam nunc granaria laxes; 
Inque lute fixum pessis transcendere nummum; 
Nec gluto sorbere salivam Mercurialem? 
Haec mea sunt, teneo, cum vere dixeris: Esto 
Liberque ac sapiens, praetoribus ac Jove dextro. 
Sin tu, cum fueris nostrae paulo ante farinae, 
Pelliculam veterem retines, et fronte pelitus 
Astutam vapido servas sub pectore vulpem; 
Quae dederam supra, repeto, funemque reduco. 
Nil tibi concessit ratio: digitum exere peccas, 
Et quid tam parvum est? Sed nullo thure litabis, 
Haereat in stultis brevis ut semuncia recti 
Haec miscere Nefas:— 
[Persius, Satire V, l. 109-120]

Are you moderate in your desires, frugal, and obliging to your 
friends? Do you know when to spare, and when to be liberal, as 
occasion requires? And can you give a check to your avarice, 
in spite of all temptations which are laid in your way? Can 
you refrain from being too greedy in your pursuit after 
riches? When you can sincerely affirm that you are master of 
yourself, and of all these good qualities, then you are free 
indeed, and wise, by the propitious power of Jove and the 
Praetor.

But if you retain the old habits of a slave, and harbour ill 
qualities, under the hypocritical appearance of virtue, you 
are as much a slave as ever, while thus enslaved to your 
vices. Philosophy gives no indulgence to vice, makes no 
allowance for any crime. If in wagging your finger, you acted 
against reason, you transgress, though the thing be of so 
trifling a nature. All the sacrifices you can offer will never 
pass for a drachm of rectitude, while your conduct is faulty. 
Wisdom is incompatible with folly. 

When to be bountiful, and when to spare, 
And never craving, or oppressed with care; 
The baits of gifts, and money to despise, 
And look on wealth with undesiring eyes; 
When thou can'st truly call these virtues thine, 
Be wise and free by Heav'n's consent and mine. 
But thou, who lately of the common strain, 
Wert one of us, if still thou dost retain 
The same ill habits, the same follies too, 
Glossed ever only with a saint-like show, 
Then I resume the freedom which I gave, 
Still thou art bound to vice, and still a slave. 
Thou canst not wag thy finger, or begin 
The least slight motion, but it tends to sin. 
How's this? Not wag my finger, he replies? 
No, friend; not fuming gums, nor sacrifice, 
Can ever make a madman free, or wise. 
Virtue and vice are never in one soul: 
A man is wholly wise, or wholly is a fool.

This is the great lesson, that virtue alone is true honour, true 
freedom, and solid, durable happiness. It is indeed its own reward. 
There are no satisfactions equal to, or comparable with virtuous, 
rational exercises; nor can virtuous dispositions, and well improved 
moral powers be rewarded, or receive happiness suited to their 
nature, but from their exercises and employments about proper 
objects. And as virtue gives pleasure here in proportion to the 
improvements it makes, far beyond all that mere sense can yield, in 
the most advantageous circumstances of outward enjoyment; so in a 
state to come, it shall be se placed as its improvements require, 
that is, be placed in circumstances that shall afford it business or 
employment proportioned to its capacity, and by means thereof the 
highest satisfaction. Such a basis for building moral instructions 
upon we find in history. We are warned in some pages to avoid the 
miseries and wretchedness which many have fallen into by departing 
from reason or virtue: and in others, we meet with such virtuous 
characters and actions, as set forth the charms of integrity in 
their full lustre, and prove that virtue is the supreme beauty, the 
supreme charm: that in keeping the precepts of moral rectitude, we 
secure a present felicity and reward; and have a presage of those 
higher rewards which await a steady course of right conduct in 
another world.—Glorious, natural virtue! Would mankind but hearken 
to its voice, and obey its dictates, there would be no such beings 
as invaders, delinquents, and traitors, in this lower world. The 
social inclinations and dispositions would for ever prevail over the 
selfish appetites and passions. The law of benevolence would he the 
rule of life. The advancement of the common good would be the work 
of every man.

The case however is, that the generality of mankind are too corrupt 
to be governed by the great universal law of social nature, and to 
gratify ambition, avarice, and the like, employ a cunning or power, 
to seize the natural rights and properties of others: and therefore, 
to natural virtue, grounded on the reason and fitness of things, in 
themselves, the first and principal mean of securing the peace and 
happiness of society, it was necessary to add two other grand 
principles, civil government and religion, and so have three 
conducible means to social happiness. These three are necessary to 
the being of a public, and of them, religion, as I take it, is of 
the first consequence; for the choice few only mind a natural 
virtue, or benevolence flowing from the reason, nature, and fitness 
of things; and civil government cannot always secure the happiness 
of mankind in particular cases: but religion, rightly understood, 
and fixed upon its true and proper foundation, might do the work, in 
conjunction with the other two principles, and secure the happiness 
of society. If mankind were brought to the belief and worship of one 
only true God, and to a sincere obedience to his will, as we have it 
discovered in revelation, I think, appetite and passion would cease 
to invade by violence or fraud, or set up for private interest in 
opposition to the public stock or common good. But, alas! Religion 
is so far from being rightly understood, that it is rendered by some 
explainers the most doubtful and disputable thing in the world. They 
have given it more phases than the moon, and made it everything and 
nothing, while they are screaming or forcing the people into their 
several factions. This destroys the moment of religion, and the 
multitude are thereby wandering into endless mazes and perplexities, 
and rendered a hairing, staring, wrathful rabble; instead of being 
transformed into such Christians as filled the first church at 
Jerusalem; Christians who acknowledged and worshipped God the Father 
Almighty, in the name of Christ, that is, under a belief of that 
authority and power which the Father of the universe has, for the 
good of mankind, conferred upon him; and in humility and meekness, 
in mortification and self-denial, in a renunciation of the spirit, 
wisdom, and honours of this world, in a love of God, and desire of 
doing God's will, and seeking only his honour, were, by the gospel, 
made like unto Christ. Golden religion! Golden age! The doctrine of 
Christianity was then a restoration of true religion: the practice 
of Christianity, a restoration of human nature. But now, alas! too 
many explainers are employed in darkening and making douhtful the 
revealed will of God, and by paraphrases, expositions, commentaries, 
notes, and glosses, have almost rendered revelation useless. What do 
we see in the vast territories of Popery, but a perfect diabolism in 
the place of the religion of our Lord? doctrines the most impious 
and absurd, the most inconsistent and contradictory in themselves, 
the most hurtful and mischievous in their consequences; the whole 
supported by persecution, by the sophistry of learned knaves, and 
the tricks of juggling priests. And if we turn our eyes from these 
regions of imposture and cruelty, to the realms of Protestants, do 
we not find some learned Christian critics and expositors reducing 
the inspired writings to a dark science? without regard to the 
nature and intrinsic character of their doctrines, do they not 
advance notions as true and divine, which have not one appearance of 
divine authority? but on the contrary, militate with the reason of 
things, and the moral fitness of actions; and are so far from being 
plain and clear, free from all doubtfulness, or ambiguity, and 
suited to the understandings and capacity of men, that the darkness 
of them renders such pretended revelations of little service; and 
impeaches the veracity, wisdom, and goodness of God! Alas! too many 
explainers are clamorous, under the infallible strength of their own 
persuasions, and exert every power to unman us into believers. How 
the Apostles argued for the great excellency and dignity of 
Christianity is not with them the question; se far as I am able to 
judge from their learned writings; but the fathers, and our 
spiritual superiors have put upon the sacred writings the proper 
explications; and we must receive the truth as they dispense it to 
us. This is not right, in my conception. I own it does not seem to 
answer the end of the Messiah's coming, which was to restore Reason 
and Religion to their rightful authority over mankind; and to make 
all virtue, and true goodness, flourish in the earth; the most 
perfect blessing to be sure that God could bestow on man, or man 
receive from God. This blessing we must miss, if human authority is 
to pin us down to what it pleases to call sense of scripture, and 
will set up the judgment of fallible men as the test of 
Christianity. The Christian laity are miserable indeed, if they be 
put under an obligation to find that to be truth which is taught by 
these leaders. In truth, we should be unhappy men, with a revelation 
in our churches and our closets, if the leaders had a right to make 
their own faith pass for the faith of the Apostles; or, if we 
refused it, might lance the weapons of this world at their people. 
What must we do then as true Christians? I think for myself, that we 
ought to form our judgment, in matters of faith, upon a strict, 
serious and impartial examination of the holy scriptures, without 
any regard to the judgment of others, or human authority whatever: 
that we ought to open the sacred records, without minding any 
systems, and from the revealed word of God learn that Christianity 
does not consist in a jingle of unintelligible sounds, and new 
fundamentals, hewn out by craft, enthusiasm, or bigotry, and 
maintained with an outrage of uncharitable zeal, which delivers 
Christians to the flames of an eternal hell: but, that the heavenly 
religion of our Lord consists in looking on the promised Messiah, as 
the most consummate blessing God could bestow, or man receive; and 
that Jesus is that Messiah; in acting according to the rules of the 
gospel, and in studying to imitate God, who is the most perfect 
understanding nature, in all his moral perfections; in becoming the 
children of God by being, according to our capacity, perfect as he 
is perfect, and holy as he is holy, and merciful as he is merciful; 
and in our whole moral behaviour as like to him as possible.

In a word, to flee injustice, oppression, intemperance, impurity, 
pride, unmercifulness and revenge: to practise justice, piety, 
temperance, chastity, humility, beneficence, and placability: to 
turn from our iniquities to the practice of all virtue: and through 
the alone mediation of the only-begotten Son of God, believe in and 
worship the eternal mind, the one supreme spirit, in hope of a 
glorious immortality, through the sanctification of the Holy Ghost. 
These are the things the Lord came down to teach mankind. For the 
New Testament itself then we must declare, and look upon it as the 
only guide, or rule of faith. It is now the only deliverer of the 
declarations of our Lord: and the rule in our enquiry is, that 
everything necessary to be believed by a Christian, is in those 
books not left to be gathered by consequences, or implications; but 
the things necessary to obtain the favour of God promised to 
Christians are expressly declared. If this was not the case—if 
things absolutely necessary were not expressly proclaimed to be so, 
the gospel revelation would be no rule at all.<2>



CHAPTER II.

But it is time to tell my reader the story of the beautiful HARRIOT 
NOEL, which I promised in a preceding page. On the glorious first of 
August, before the beasts were roused from their lodges, or the 
birds had soared upwards, to pour forth their morning harmony; while 
the mountains and the groves were overshadowed by a dun obscurity, 
and the dawn still dappled the drowsy east with spots of grey; in 
short, before the sun was up, or, with his auspicious presence, 
began to animate inferior nature, I left my chamber, and with my gun 
and dog, went out to wander over a pleasant country. The different 
aspects and the various points of view were charming, as the light 
in fleecy rings increased; and when the whole flood of day 
descended, the embellished early scene was a fine entertainment. 
Delighted with the beauties of this morning, I climbed up the 
mountains, and traversed through many a valley. The game was plenty, 
and for full five hours, I journeyed onward, without knowing where I 
was going, or thinking of a return to college.

About nine o'clock however I began to grow very hungry, and was 
looking round to see if I could discover any proper habitation to my 
purpose, when I observed in a valley, at some distance, something 
that looked like a mansion. That way therefore I moved, and with no 
little difficulty, as I had a precipice to descend, or must go a 
mile round, to arrive at the place I wanted: down therefore I 
marched, got a fall by the way that had like to have destroyed me, 
and after all, found it to be a shed for cattle. The bottom however 
was very beautiful, and the sides of the hills sweetly copsed with 
little woods. The valley is so divided, that:—

Veniens dextrum latus aspiciat Sol, 
Laevum discedens curru fugiente vaporet. 
Fons etiam rivo dare nomen idoneus, ut nec 
Frigidior Thracam nec purior ambiat Hebrus.

The rising sun gilds it on the right hand, and when declining, 
warms it on the left. A pretty brook here likewise babbles 
along, and even Hebrus strays not round Thrace with a purer 
and cooler stream. 
[Horace, Epistle 16. l. 6-7, 11-12] 

In this sweet and delicious solitude, I crept on for some time, by 
the side of the murmuring stream, and followed as it winded through 
the vale, till I came to a little harmonic building, that had every 
charm and proportion architecture could give it. It was situated on 
a rising ground in a broad part of the fruitful valley, and 
surrounded with a garden, that invited a pensive wanderer to roam in 
its delightful retreats, and walks amazingly beautiful. Every side 
of this fine spot was planted thick with underwood, and kept so low, 
as not to prevent a prospect to every pleasing remote object.

Finding one of the garden doors left open, I entered immediately, 
and to screen myself from the scorching beams of the sun, got into 
an embowered way, that led me to a large fountain, in a ring or 
circular opening, and from thence, by a gradual, easy, shady ascent, 
to a semi-circular amphitheatre of evergreens, that was quite 
charming. In this were several seats for ease, repast, or 
retirement; and at either end of it a rotunda or temple of the Ionic 
order. One of them was converted into a grotto or shell-house, in 
which a politeness of fancy had produced and blended the greatest 
beauties of nature and decoration. The other was a library, filled 
with the finest books, and a vast variety of mathematical 
instruments. Here I saw Miss NOEL sitting, and so intent at writing, 
that she did not take any notice of me, as I stood at the window, in 
astonishment, looking at the things before me, and especially at the 
amazing beauties of her face, and the splendour of her eyes; as she 
raised them now and then from the paper she was writing on, to look 
into a Hebrew Bible, that lay open upon a small desk before her. The 
whole scene was so very uncommon, and so vastly amazing, that I 
thought myself for a while on some spot of magic ground, and almost 
doubted the reality of what my eyes beheld; till Miss NOEL, by 
accident, looked full at me, and then came forward to the open 
window, to know who I wanted.

Before 1 could answer, I found a venerable old gentlemen standing by 
my side, and he seemed much more surprised at the sight of me than 
his daughter was; for, as this young lady told me afterward, she 
guessed at once the whole affair; seeing me with my gun and dog, in 
a shooting dress; and knew it was a natural curiosity brought me 
into the garden, and stopped me at the window, when I saw her in 
such an attitude, and in such a place. This I assured them was the 
truth of my case, with this small addition, however, that I was 
ready to perish for want of something to eat; having been from four 
in the morning at hard exercise, and had not yet broke my fast. If 
this be the case, says the good old man, you are welcome, Sir, to 
Eden Park, and you shall soon have the best breakfast our house 
affords.

Upon this Mr. NOEL brought me into his house, and the lovely HARRIOT 
made tea for me, and had such plenty of fine cream, and 
extraordinary bread and butter set before me, that I breakfasted 
with uncommon pleasure. The honour and happiness of her company 
rendered the repast quite delightful. There was a civility so very 
great in her manner, and a social goodness so charming in her talk 
and temper, that it was unspeakable delight to sit at table with 
her. She asked me a number of questions relating to things and 
books, and people, and there was so much good sense in every 
enquiry, so much good humour in her reflections and replications, 
that I was entirely charmed with her mind; and lost in admiration, 
when I contemplated the wonders of her face, and the beauties of her 
person.

When breakfast was over, it was time for me to depart, and I made 
half a dozen attempts to rise from my chair; but without her laying 
a rosy finger on me, this illustrious maid had so totally subdued my 
soul, and deprived me of all motive power, that I sat like the 
renowned Prince of the Massagetes, who was stiffened by enchantment 
in the apartment of the Princess Phedima, as we read in Amadis de 
Gaul. This Miss NOEL saw very plain, and in compassion to my 
misfortune, generously threw in a hint now and then, for a little 
farther conversation to colour my unreasonable delay. But this could 
not have been of service much longer, as the clock had struck 
twelve, if the old gentleman, her father, had not returned to us, 
and told me, he insisted on my staying to dine with him; for he 
loved to take a glass after dinner with a facetious companion, and 
would be obliged to me for my company. "At present," continued he, 
"you will excuse me, Sir, as business engages me till we dine; but 
my daughter will chat the hours away with you, and show you the 
curiosities of her library and grot. HARRIOT will supply my place."

This was a delightful invitation indeed, and after returning my 
hearty thanks to the old gentleman for the favour he did me, I 
addressed myself to Miss NOEL, when her father was gone, and we were 
walking back to the library in the garden, and told her ingenuously, 
that though I could not be positive as to the situation of my soul, 
whether I was in love with her or not, as I never had experienced 
the passion before, nor knew what it was to admire a woman, having 
lived till that morning in a state of indifference to her sex, yet I 
found very strange emotions within me, and I was sure I could not 
leave her without the most lively and afflicting inquietude. "You 
will pardon, I hope, madam, this effusion of my heart, and suffer me 
to demonstrate by a thousand and a thousand actions, that I honour 
you in a manner unutterable, and, from this time, can imagine no 
happiness but with you."

"Sir," this inimitable maid replied, "you are an entire stranger to 
me, and to declare a passion on a few hours' acquaintance, must be 
either to try my weakness, or because you think a young woman is 
incapable of relishing anything but such stuff, when alone in 
conversation with a gentleman. I beg then I may hear no more of 
this; and as I am sure you can talk upon many more rational 
subjects, request your favour to give me your opinion on some 
articles in this Hebrew Bible you see lying open on the table in 
this room. My father, sir, among other things, has taken great pains 
to instruct me, for several years that I have lived with him in a 
kind of solitary state, since the death of my mother, whom I lost 
when I was very young, and has taught me to read and understand this 
inspired Hebrew book; and says we must ascribe primaevity and sacred 
prerogatives to this language. For my part, I have some doubts as to 
this matter, which I dare not mention to my father. Tell me, if you 
please, what you think of the thing?"

"Miss NOEL," I answered, "since it is your command that I should be 
silent as to that flame your glorious eyes and understanding have 
lighted up in my soul, like some superior nature, before whom I am 
nothing, silent I will be, and tell you what I fancy on a subject I 
am certain you understand much better than I do. My knowledge of the 
Hebrew is but small, though I have learned to read and understand 
the Old Testament in the ante-Babel language.

"My opinion on your question is, that the Biblical Hebrew was the 
language of Paradise, and continued to be spoken by all men down to, 
and at the time of Moses writing the Pentateuch, and long after. 
Abraham, though bred in Chaldea, could converse freely with the 
Egyptians, the Sodomites, and the King of Gerar; nor do we find that 
any variety of speech interrupted the commerce of his son Isaac with 
the several nations around, or that it ever stopped Jacob in his 
travels. Nay, the Israelites, in their journey through the deserts 
of Arabia, after they had been some hundred years in Egypt, though 
joined by a mixed multitude, and meeting with divers kinds of 
people, had not corrupted their language, and were easily 
understood, because it was then the universal one. The simplicity 
and distinctness of the Hebrew tongue preserved its purity so long 
and so universally. It could not well be degenerate till the 
knowledge of nature was lost, as its words consist but of two or 
three letters, and are perfectly well suited to convey sensible and 
strong ideas. It was at the captivity<3>, in the space of seventy 
years, that the Jews by temporising with the ignorant victors, so 
far neglected the usage of their own tongue, that none but the 
scribes or learned men could understand Moses's books."

"This, I confess," said Miss NOEL, "is a plausible account of the 
primaevity and pre-eminence of the sacred Hebrew, but I think it is 
not necessary the account should be allowed as fact. As to its being 
the language in Paradise, this is not very probable, as a compass of 
eighteen hundred years must have changed the first language very 
greatly by an increase of words, and new inflections, applications, 
and constructions of them. The first few inhabitants of the earth 
were occupied in few things, and wanted not a variety of words; but 
when their descendants invented arts and improved sciences, they 
were obliged to coin new words and technical terms, and by extending 
and transferring their words to new subjects, and using them 
figuratively, were forced to multiply the senses of those already in 
use. The language was thus gradually cultivated, and every age 
improved it. All living languages are liable to such change. I 
therefore conclude, that the language which served the first pair 
would not do for succeeding generations. It became vastly more 
copious and extensive, when the numbers of mankind were great, and 
their language must serve conversation and the ends of life, and 
answer all the purposes of intelligence and correspondence. New 
words and new terms of speech, from time to time, were necessary, to 
give true ideas of the things, actions, offices, places, and times 
peculiar to the Hebrews. Even Hutchinson allows there was some 
coinage, some new words framed. We find in the latter prophets words 
not to be met with in the Pentateuch: and from thence we may 
suppose, that Moses used words unknown to Nimrod and Heber: and that 
the men at Shinaar<4> had words which the people before the flood 
were strangers to. Even in the seventeenth century, there must have 
been a great alteration in the language of Adam; and when the 
venerable Patriarch and his family came into a new world, that was a 
different state from the earth before the deluge, and saw a vast 
variety of things without precedent in the old world, the 
alterations in nature and diet, must introduce a multitude of new 
terms in things of common experience and usage; as, after that 
amazing revolution in the natural world, not only the clouds and 
meteors were different, and the souls that were saved had a new and 
astonishing view of the ruin and repair of the system; but Noah did 
then begin to be an husbandman; he planted a vineyard; he invented 
wine; and to him the first grant was given of eating flesh. All 
these things required as it were a new language, and the terms with 
mankind increased. The Noahical language must be quite another thing 
after the great events of the flood. Had Methuselah, who conversed 
many years with Adam; who received from his mouth the history of the 
creation and fall, and who lived six hundred years with Noah, to 
communicate to him all the knowledge he got from Adam; had this 
antediluvian wise man been raised from the dead to converse with the 
post-diluvian fathers, or even with Noah, the year he died, that is 
three hundred and fifty years after the flood; is it not credible 
from what I have said, that he would have heard a language very 
different from that tongue he used in his conversations with Adam, 
even in the nine hundred and thirtieth year of the first man?<5> I 
imagine, Methuselah would not have been able to have talked with 
Noah, at the time I have mentioned, of the circumstances that then 
made the case of mankind, and of the things of common experience and 
usage. He must have been unable to converse at his first 
appearance?"

"What you say, Madam," I replied, "is not only very probable, but 
affords a satisfaction unexpected in a subject on which we are 
obliged, for want of data, to use conjectures. I yield to your 
superior sense the notion, that the Scriptures were written in the 
language of Paradise. Most certain it is, that even in respect of 
our own language, for example, the subjects of Henry I., would find 
it as much out of their power to understand the English of George 
the First's reign, were they brought up again, as the ordinary 
people of our time are at a loss to make anything of the English, 
written in the first Henry's reign. But when I have granted this, 
you will be pleased to inform me, how Abraham and his sons conversed 
and commerced with the nations, if the Hebrew was not the universal 
language in their time? If the miracle at Babel was a confusion of 
tongues, as is generally supposed, how did the holy family talk and 
act with such distant kings and people? Illuminate me, thou glorious 
girl, in this dark article, and be my teacher in Hebrew learning, as 
I flatter myself you will be the guide and dirigent of all my 
notions and my days. Yes, charming HARRIOT, my fate is in your 
hands. Dispose of it as you will, and make me what you please."

"You force me to smile," the illustrious Miss NOEL replied, "and 
oblige me to call you an odd compound of a man. Pray, Sir, let me 
have no more of those romantic flights, and I will answer your 
question as well as I can; but it must be at some other time. There 
is more to be said on the miracle at Babel, and its effects, than I 
could dispatch between this and our hour of dining, and therefore, 
the remainder of our leisure till dinner, we will pass in a visit to 
my grotto, and in walking round the garden to the parlour we came 
from." To the grotto then we went, and to the best of my power I 
will give my reader a description of this splendid room.

In one of the fine rotundas I have mentioned, at one end of the 
green amphitheatre very lately described, the shining apartment was 
formed. Miss NOEL'S hand had covered the floor with the most 
beautiful mosaic my eyes have ever beheld, and filled the arched 
roof with the richest fossil gems. The mosaic painting on the ground 
was wrought with small coloured stones or pebbles, and sharp pointed 
bits of glass, measured and proportioned together, so as to imitate 
in their assemblage the strokes and colour of the objects, which 
they were intended to represent, and they represented by this lady's 
art, the Temple of Tranquillity, described by Volusenus<6> in his 
dream.

At some distance the fine temple looks like a beautiful painted 
picture, as do the birds, the beasts, the trees in the fields about 
it, and the river which murmurs at the bottom of the rising ground; 
Amnis lucidus et vadosus in quo cernere erat verii generis pisces 
colludere: "So wonderfully did this genius perform the piece, that 
fishes of many kinds seem to take their pastime in the bright 
stream."<7>

But above all, is the image of the philosopher, at the entrance of 
the temple, vastly fine. With pebbles and scraps of glass, all the 
beauties and graces are expressed, which the pencil of an able 
artist could bestow on the picture of Democritus. You see him as 
Diogenes Laertius has drawn him, with a philosophical joy in his 
countenance, that shows him superior to all events. Summum bonorum 
finem statuit esse laetitiam, non eam quae sit eadem voluptati, sed 
eam per quam animus degit perturbationis expers; and with a finger, 
he points to the following golden inscription on the portico of the 
temple:
"Flagrans sit studium bene merendi de seipso, 
Et seipsum perficiendi."

That is, "by a rectitude of mind and life, secure true happiness and 
the applause of your own heart, and let it be the labour of your 
every day, to come as near perfection as it is possible for human 
nature to get." This mosaic piece of painting is indeed an admirable 
thing. It has a fine effect in this grotto, and is a noble monument 
of the masterly hand of Miss NOEL.

Nor was her fine genius less visible in the striking appearance of 
the extremely beautiful shells and valuable curiosities, all round 
the apartment. Her father spared no cost to procure her the finest 
things of the ocean and rivers from all parts of the world, and 
pebbles, stones, and ores of the greatest curiosity and worth. These 
were all disposed in such a manner as not only shed a glorious 
lustre in the room, but showed the understanding of this young lady 
in natural knowledge.

In one part of the grot were collected and arranged the stony 
coverings of all the shell-fish in the sea, from the striated 
patella and its several species, to the pholades in all their 
species; and of those that live in the fresh streams, from the 
suboval limpet or umbonated patella and its species, to the 
triangular and deeply striated cardia. Even all the land shells were 
in this collection, from the pomatia to the round-mouthed turbo. The 
most beautiful genera of the sea-shells, intermixed with fossil 
corals of all the kinds; with animal substances become fossil; and 
with copper-ores, agates, pebbles, pieces of the finest marmora and 
alabastritae, and the most elegant and beautiful marcasites, and 
crystals, and spars. These filled the greatest part of the walls, 
and in classes, here and there, were scattered, as foils to raise 
the lustre of the others, the inferior shells.

Among the simple sea-shells, that is, those of one shell, without a 
hinge, I saw several rare ones, that were neither in Mrs. O'HARA's, 
nor in Mrs. CRAFTON'S grottos in Fingal, as I observed to those 
ladies.<8> The shells I mean are the following ones.

The SEA-TRUMPET, which is in its perfect state, nine inches long, an 
inch and half diameter at its mouth or irregular lip, and the 
opening at the small end about half an inch. The surface is a 
beautiful brown, prettily spotted with white, and the pipe has 
fourteen annular ridges that are a little elevated, and of a fine 
purple colour.

The ADMIRAL is vastly beautiful, a voluta two inches and a half 
long, and an inch in diameter at the head, from whence it decreases 
to a cone with an obtuse point. The ground colour is the brightest, 
elegant yellow, finer than that of Sienna marble, and this ground so 
variegated with the brightest colours, that a little more than a 
third part of the ground is seen. Broad fascia, the most charmingly 
varied, surround it, and the clavicle is the most elegant of objects 
in colours, brightness, and irregularities. There is a punctuated 
line of variations that runs in the centre of the yellow fascia, and 
is wonderfully pretty. This beautiful East-Indian sells at a great 
price.

The CROWN IMPERIAL is likewise extremely beautiful. This voluta is 
four inches long, two in diameter at the top, and its head adorned 
with a charming series of fine tubercles, pointed at the 
extremities. The ground is a clear pale, and near the head and 
extremity of the shell, two very beautiful zones run round. They are 
of the brightest yellow, and in a manner the most elegant, are 
variegated with black and white purple. It is also an East-Indian.

The HEBREW LETTER, another voluta, is a fine curiosity. It is two 
inches in length, and an inch and a quarter in diameter at the top. 
It is a regular conic figure, and its exerted clavicle has several 
volutions. The ground is like the white of a fine pearl, and the 
body all over variegated with irregular marks of black, which have a 
near resemblance of the Hebrew characters. This elegant shell is an 
East-Indian.

The WHITE VOLUTA, with brown and blue and purple spots. This very 
elegant shell, whose ground is a charming white, is found on the 
coast of Guinea, from five to six inches in length, and its diameter 
at the head often three inches. It tapers gradually, and at the 
extremity is a large obtuse. Its variegations in its spots are very 
beautiful, and its spots are principally disposed in many circles 
round the shell.

The BUTTERFLY is a voluta the most elegant of this beautiful genus. 
Its length is five inches in its perfection, and two and a half 
broad at the head. The body is an obtuse cone: the clavicle is 
pointed, and in several volutions. The ground is the finest yellow, 
and beautified all over with small brown spots, in regular and round 
series. These variegations are exceeding pretty, and as this rare 
East-Indian shell has beside these beauties three charming bands 
round the body, which are formed of large spots of a deep brown, a 
pale brown, and white, and resemble the spots on the wings of 
butterflies, it is a beautiful species indeed. The animal that 
inhabits this shell is a limax.

The TULIP CYLINDER is a very scarce and beautiful native of the 
East-Indies, and in its state of perfection and brightness of 
colour, of great value. Its form is cylindric, its length four 
inches, and its diameter two and a half, at its greatest increase. 
Its clavicle has many volutions, and terminates in an obtuse point. 
The ground colour is white, and its variegations blue and brown. 
They are thrown into irregular clouds in the most beautiful manner, 
and into some larger and smaller spots. The limax inhabits this fine 
shell.

I likewise saw in this grotto the finest species of the purpura, the 
dolia, and the porcellana. There was of the first genus the thorny 
woodcock: of the second the harp shell: and of the third, the argus 
shell.

The THORNY WOODCOCK is ventricose, and approaches to an oval figure. 
Its length, full grown, is five inches; the clavicle short, but in 
volutions distinct; and its rostrum from the mouth twice the length 
of the rest of the shell. This snout and the body have four series 
of spines, generally an inch and half long, pointed at the ends, and 
somewhat crooked. The spines lie in regular, longitudinal series. 
The mouth is almost round, but the opening is continued in the form 
of a slit up the rostrum. The colour of this American, and extremely 
elegant shell, is a tawny yellow, with a fine mixture of a lively 
brown, and by bleaching on the coasts, it gets many spots of white.

The BEAUTIFUL HARP is a Chinese; three inches and half long, and two 
and a half in diameter. The shell is tumid and inflated, and at the 
head largest. It has an oblong clavicle in several volutions, 
pointed at the extremity, and the other extreme is a short rostrum. 
The whole surface is ornamented with elevated ribs, that are about 
twice as thick as a straw, and as distant from each other as the 
thickness of four straws. The colour is a fine deep brown, 
variegated with white and a paler brown, in a manner surprisingly 
beautiful.

The extremely elegant ARGUS is from the coast of Africa, and is 
sometimes found in the East-Indies. Its length, in a state of 
perfection, is four inches and a half; its diameter three. It is 
oblong and gibbous, has a wide mouth, and lips so continued beyond 
the verge, as to form at each extremity a broad and short beak. The 
colour is a fine pale yellow, and over the body are three brown 
fasciae: but the whole surface, and those fascia are ornamented with 
multitudes of the most beautiful round spots, which resemble eyes in 
the wings of the finest butterflies. The limax inhabits this 
charming shell. This creature is the sea-snail.

The CONCHA OF VENUS was the next shell in this young lady's 
collection that engaged my attention. One of them was three inches 
long, and two and a half in diameter. The valves were convex, and in 
longitudinal direction deeply striated. The hinge at the prominent 
end was large and beautifully wrought, and the opening of the shell 
was covered with the most elegant wrinkled lips, of the most 
beautiful red colour, finely intermixed with white; these lips do 
not unite in the middle, but have slender and beautiful spines round 
about the truncated ends of the shell. This shell of Venus is an 
American, and valued by the collectors at a high rate.

But of all the curious shells in this wonderful collection, the 
HAMMER OYSTER was what I wondered at most; it is the most 
extraordinary shell in the world. It resembles a pick-axe, with a 
very short handle and a long head. The body of the shell is in the 
place of the handle of the instrument, and is four inches and a half 
long, and one inch and a half in diameter. What answered to the head 
of the pick-axe was seven inches long, and three quarters of an inch 
in diameter. This head terminates at each end in a narrow obtuse 
point, is uneven at the edges, irregular in its make, and lies 
crosswise to the body: yet the valves shut in the closest and most 
elegant manner. The edges are deeply furrowed and plaited, and the 
lines run in irregular directions. The colour without is a fine 
mixture of brown and purple; and within a pearly white, with a tinge 
of purple. This rare shell is an East-Indian, and whenever it 
appears at an auction is rated very high. I have known ten guineas 
given for a perfect one.

With a large quantity of these most beautiful shells, which are 
rarely seen in any collections, and with all the family of the 
pectens, the cardi, the solens, the cylindri, the Murexes, the 
turbines, the buccina, and every species of the finest genera of 
shells, Miss NOEL formed a grotto that exceeded everything of the 
kind I believe in the world; all I am sure that I have seen, except 
the late Mrs. HARCOURT'S in Richmondshire; which I shall give my 
reader a description of, when I travel him up those English Alps. It 
was not only, that Miss NOEL'S happy fancy had blended all these 
things in the wildest and most beautiful disposition over the walls 
of the rotunda; but her fine genius had produced a variety of grots 
within her grotto, and falling waters, and points of view. In one 
place was the famous Atalanta, and her delightful cave: and in 
another part, the Goddess and Ulysses's son appeared at the entrance 
of that grot, which under the appearance of a rural plainness had 
everything that could charm the eye: the roof was ornamented with 
shell-work; the tapestry was a tender vine; and limpid fountains 
sweetly purled round.

But what above all the finely fancied works in Miss NOEL'S grotto 
pleased me, was, a figure of the philosopher Epictetus, in the 
centre of the grot. He sat at the door of a cave, by the side of a 
falling water, and held a book of his philosophy in his hand, that 
was written in the manner of the ancients, that is, on parchment 
rolled up close together. He appeared in deep meditation, and as 
part of the book had been unfolded and gradually extended, from his 
knee on the ground, one could read very plain, in large Greek 
characters, about fifty lines. The English of the lesson was this-

"THE MASTER SCIENCE.

"All things have their nature, their make and form, by which they 
act, and by which they suffer. The vegetable proceeds with perfect 
insensibility. The brute possesses a sense of what is pleasurable 
and painful, but stops at mere sensation. The rational, like the 
brute, has all the powers of mere sensation, but enjoys a farther 
transcendent faculty. To him is imparted the master-science of what 
he is, where he is, and the end to which he is destined. He is 
directed by the canon of reason to reverence the dignity of his own 
superior character, and never wretchedly degrade himself into a 
nature to him subordinate. The master-science, he is told, consists 
in having just ideas of pleasures and pains, true notions of the 
moments and consequences of different actions and pursuits, whereby 
he may be able to measure, direct or control his desires or 
aversions, and never merge into miseries. Remember this Arrianus. 
Then only you are qualified for life, when you are able to oppose 
your appetites, and bravely dare to call your opinions to account; 
when you have established judgment or reason as the ruler in your 
mind, and by a patience of thinking, and a power of resisting, 
before you choose, can bring your fancy to the test of truth. By 
this means, furnished with the knowledge of the effects and 
consequences of actions, you will know how you ought to behave in 
every case. You will steer wisely through the various rocks and 
shelves of life. In short, Arrianus, the deliberate habit is the 
proper business of man; and his duty, to exert upon the first proper 
call, the virtues natural to his mind; that piety, that love, that 
justice, that veracity, that gratitude, and that benevolence, which 
are the glory of human kind. Whatever is fated in that order of 
incontrollable events, by which the divine power preserves and 
adorns the whole, meet the incidents with magnanimity, and cooperate 
with cheerfulness in whatever the supreme mind ordains. Let a 
fortitude be always exerted in enduring; a justice in distribution; 
a prudence in moral offices; and a temperance in your natural 
appetites and pursuits. This is the most perfect humanity. This do, 
and you will be a fit actor in the general drama; and the only end 
of your existence is the due performance of the part allotted you."

Such was Miss NOEL'S grotto, and with her, if it had been in my 
power to choose, I had rather have passed in it, the day in talking 
of the various fine subjects it contained, than go in to dinner; 
which a servant informed us was serving up, just as I had done 
reading the above recited philosophical lesson. Back then we 
returned to the parlour, and there found the old gentleman. We sat 
down immediately to two very good dishes, and when that was over, 
Mr. NOEL and I drank a bottle of old Alicant. Though this gentleman 
was upwards of eighty, yet years had not deprived him of reason and 
spirits. He was lively and sensible, and still a most agreeable 
companion. He talked of Greece and Rome, as if he had lived there 
before the era of Christianity. The Court of Augustus he was so far 
from being a stranger to, that he described the principal persons in 
it; their actions, their pleasures, and their caprices, as if he had 
been their contemporary. We talked of these great characters. We 
went into the gallery of Verres. We looked over the ancient 
theatres. Several of the most beautiful passages in the Roman poets 
this excellent old man repeated, and made very pleasant, but moral 
remarks upon them.

"The cry, "said he," still is as it was in the days of Horace:—

"O cives, cives, quaerenda pecunia primum, 
Virtus post nummos.— 
Unde habeas nemo quaerit, sed oportet habere. 
Quorum animis, a prima lanugine, non insedit illud:"
["O citizens, citizens, money you must seek first; 
Virtue comes after money -- Horace, Epistles I l. 53-4; 
No one asks where it came from, but you must have it. -- 
Juvenal, Satires XIV. l. 207; 
Whose soul does not fix upon it from his earliest childhood?" 
–- Florentius Volusenus, Of the Tranquil Mind.]

And what Catullus told his Lesbia, is it not approved to this day by 
the largest part of the great female world?

"Vivamus, mea Lesbia, atque amemus, 
Rumoresque Senium Severiorum, 
Omnes unius aestimemus assis 
Soles occidere et redire possunt, 
Nobis, cum semel occidit brevis lux, 
Nox est perpetua una dormiendo. 
Haec discunt omnes ante Alpha et Beta puellae."
["Let us live and love, my Lesbia, 
And regard the moralising of the old ones 
As not worth a penny. 
The sun may set and rise again, 
But for us, when our brief light goes out 
The night is a perpetual sleep." –- Catullus, Carminae, V. 
"All girls learn this before their ABC" -- Florentius 
Volusenus, Of the Tranquil Mind]


The girls all learn this lesson before their A. B. C.; and as to the 
opinion of the poet, it shows how sadly the Augustan age, with all 
its learning, and polite advantages, was corrupted: and as Virgil 
makes a jest of his own fine description of a paradise or the 
Elysian fields; as is evident from his dismissing his hero out of 
the ivory gate; which shows he was of the school of Epicurus; it is 
from these things manifest, that we can never be thankful enough for 
the principles and dictates of revealed religion: we can never 
sufficiently adore the goodness of the most glorious Eternal for the 
gospel of Jesus Christ; which opens the unbounded regions of eternal 
day to the virtuous and charitable, and promises them a rest from 
labour, and ever blooming joys; while it condemns the wicked to the 
regions of horror and solid darkness; that dreadful region, from 
whence the cries of misery for ever ascend, but can never reach the 
throne of mercy. O heavenly religion! designed to make men good, and 
forever happy; that preserves the dignity of human nature, guards 
and increases virtue, and brings us to the realms of perfect reason 
and excellent glory.

"But," continued this fine old gentleman, "Tibullus has ever pleased 
me in the description of his mistress:—
"Illam quicquid agit, quoquo vestigia flectit. 
Componit furtim subsequiturque decor; 
Seu solvit crines, fusis decet esse capillis; 
Seu compsit comptis est veneranda Comis. 
Urit seu Tyria voluit procedere pulla; 
Urit seu nivea candida veste venit. 
Talis in aeterno felix Vertumnus Olympo 
Mille habet ornatus, mille decenter habet."

["A secret grace her every act improves, 
And pleasing follows wheresoe'er she moves. 
If loose her hair upon her bosom plays, 
Unnumbered charms that negligence betrays; 
Or if 'tis plaited with a laboured care, 
Alike the laboured plaits become the fair. 
Whether rich Tyrian robes her charms invest, 
Or all in snowy white the nymph is dressed, 
A thousand dresses thus Vertumnus wears, 
And beauteous equally in each appears." 
Tibullus Poems of Sulpicia, I. l. 10-20. Tr. J. Grainger]

"These elegant lines contain an inimitably beautiful description of 
outward grace, and its charming effects upon all who see it. Such a 
grace, without thinking of it, everyone should strive to have, 
whatever they are doing. They should make it habitual to them. 
Quintilian seems to have had these fine lines in view, in his 
description of outward behaviour: 'Neque enim gestum componi ad 
similitudinem saltationis volo, sed subesse aliquid, in hac 
exercitatione puerili, unde nos non id agentes, furtim decor ille 
discentibus traditus subsequatur.' 'I am not for having the mien of 
a gentleman the same with that of a dancing-master; but that a boy 
while young should enter upon this exercise, that it may communicate 
a secret gracefulness to his manner ever after.' Quintilian, 
Institutes of Oratory Chap. 10."

In this manner did the old gentleman and I pass the time, till the 
clock struck five, when Miss NOEL came into the parlour again, and 
her father said he must retire, to take his evening nap, and would 
see me at supper; for with him I must stay that night. "HARRIOT, 
make tea for the gentleman. I am your servant, sir," and he 
withdrew. To HARRIOT, then, my life and my bliss, I turned; and, 
over a pot of tea, was as happy, I am sure, as ever with his Statira 
<9> sat the Conqueror of the World. I began to relate once more the 
story of a passion, that was to form one day, I hoped, my sole 
felicity in this world; and with vows and protestations affirmed 
that I loved from my soul. "Charming angel," I said, "the beauties 
of your mind have inspired me with a passion that must increase 
every time I behold the harmony of your face; and by the powers 
divine, I swear to love you as long as Heaven shall permit me to 
breathe the vital air. Bid me then either live or die, and while I 
do live, be assured that my life will be devoted to you only." But 
in vain was all this warmth. Miss NOEL sat as unmoved as Erycina<10> 
on a monument, and only answered, with a smile, "Since your days, 
sir, are in my disposal, I desire you will change to some other 
subject, and some article that is rational and useful; otherwise I 
must leave the room."

"To leave me," I replied, "would be insupportable; and, therefore, 
at once I have done. If you please then, madam, we will consider the 
Miracle at Babel, and enquire into the language of the world at that 
time. Allowing, as you have proved in our late conversation, that 
the language after the flood was quite another thing from that used 
in Paradise, and of consequence, that Moses did not write in that 
tongue which Adam and Eve conversed in: nor is Hebrew of that 
primaevity which some great men affirm; yet, if there was a 
confusion of tongues at Babel, and many languages were spoken in the 
earth in the days of Abraham, how did he and his sons converse so 
easily with the various nations they passed through, and had 
occasional connexions with? For my part, I think with Hutchinson, 
that the divine interposition at Babel was for quite another end, to 
wit, to confound their confession, and cast out of their minds the 
name or object of it, that a man might not listen to the lip or 
confession of his neighbour. They were made to lose their own lip, 
and to differ about the words of their atheistical confession."

"As to a confusion of confessions," replied Miss NOEL, "it appears 
to me to be a notion without any foundation to rest on. The argument 
of Hutchinson that the word shephah, the name for a lip, when used 
for the voice or speech, is never once in the Bible used in any 
other sense than for confession, is not good; because, though 
shephah is often generally used for religious discourse or 
confession, yet the phrases, 'other lips' and 'other tongues,' are 
also used for 'other languages, utterances, pronunciations, 
dialects.' St. Paul, 1. Corinthians, ch. 14. v. 21-22, applies 
shephah to language or dialect, in his quotation from the prophet 
Isaiah, ch. 28. v. 11-12. He says, in the law it is written, 'With 
men of other tongues and other lips will I speak unto this people, 
and yet for all that they will not hear me.'<11> And the words of 
the prophet are, speaking of Christ promised; 'with stammering lips, 
and another tongue will he speak to this people.' It is evident from 
this, that the Hebrew word shephah here signifies tongues or 
languages, and not confessions or discourse. So the apostle applies 
it, and explains the prophet: and by 'stammering lips,' Isaiah means 
the 'uncouth pronunciations of barbarous dialects,' or languages of 
the nations, which must produce in strangers to them ridiculous lips 
or mouths; and in this he refers undoubtedly to the stammering and 
strange sounds at the Babel confusion, when God, by a miracle and 
visible exhibition, distorted their organs of speech, and gave them 
a trembling, hesitation and precipitancy, as to vocal and other 
powers. In short, the miraculous gift of tongues would in some 
measure affect the saints, in respect of pronunciation, as the 
Miracle of Babel did the people of that place.<12> Nor is this the 
only place in Scripture where shephah, lip, signifies language, 
pronunciations, and dialects; and where there is reference to the 
confusion of tongues at Babel, Isaiah, speaking of the privileges of 
the godly, says, Thou shalt not see a fierce people, of a deeper 
speech than thou canst perceive, (of a deeper lip than thou canst 
hear, Heb.) of a stammering or ridiculous tongue, that thou canst 
not understand. This is enough in answer to Hutchinson and his 
fautors<13>, in respect of what they say on the confusion at Babel. 
This proves that the word shephah, lip, signifies language, 
utterance, dialect, as well as confession or discourse; and 
therefore, Moses, in his account of the Miracle at Babel, might have 
meant a confusion of languages. That he did mean this, is plain, not 
only from a tradition gone out into all the earth, which is a matter 
of greater regard than Hutchinson's fancy; but because the sacred 
oracles allude to this event. Beside St. Paul aforementioned, the 
royal prophet in Psalm lv. v. 9. refers to the means of the division 
of tongues, and denounces a curse in terms taken from that inflicted 
at Babel. 'Swallow up, O Lord, and divide their tongues.' This seems 
to describe the manner of that confusion; that the substance of the 
one language was sunk or swallowed up in a vast chaos of universal 
babble; and that out of that jargon it was again, by another act, 
divided or broken into many particular dissonant dialects, or 
tongues."

"All this," I said, "is very just, and gives me delight and 
satisfaction. I am now convinced, not only that Hebrew was not the 
language of Paradise, or that Adam did not speak the tongue the old 
world used immediately before the confusion at Babel; but likewise, 
that the division there was a division and confusion of the one 
language then spoken; and not a confusion of confessions, as 
Hutchinson affirms. Inform me, however, if you please, what you mean 
by that tradition you mentioned, which declared the Miracle of Babel 
to be a confusion of languages."

"The Jews' tradition," replied Miss NOEL, "is preserved in their 
Targum, and tells us, that the whole earth, after the flood, was of 
one speech, or sort of words, and when at their first remove from 
Ararat, they came to Shinar, they consulted to build them a city, 
and a tower for a house of adoration, whose head might reach to, or 
be towards the heavens, and to place an image of the host of heaven 
for an object of worship on the top of it; and to put a sword in his 
hand, that he might make war for them against the divine armies, to 
prevent their dispersion over the whole earth. Whereupon the word of 
the Lord was revealed from Heaven, to execute vengeance upon them, 
and the Lord corrupted their tongue, broke their speech into seventy 
languages, and scattered them over the face of the whole earth. No 
one knew what his fellow said; and they slew one another, and ceased 
from building the city. Therefore he called the name of it Babel; 
because there the Lord mingled together the tongues of all the 
inhabitants of the other. This you read in the Targum that was 
written before the days of Jesus Christ, as the Jews affirm; or, if 
not so early, yet it is a very ancient book, and the doctor who 
composed it must certainly know the meaning of the word shephah 
better than Hutchinson. It appears, upon the whole, that the 
argument of this famous modern is without foundation."

"It is, indeed," I answered, "but then I am not able to conceive how 
Abraham and his sons conversed with so many nations, or how the 
Hebrew that Moses wrote in was preserved. Illuminate me in these 
things, illustrious Harriot, and from your fine understanding, let 
me have the honour and happiness of receiving true Hebrew lessons. 
Proceed, I beseech you, and stop not till you have expounded to my 
understanding the true nature of Cherubim? What do you think of 
Hutchinson's Rub and Rubbim, and of his notions of Ezekiel's 
cherubic form."

"To talk of Cherubim and Elohim," resumed Miss NOEL, "and say all 
that ought to be said, to speak to any purpose; of the three heads 
and four visages, the bull, the man, the lion, and the eagle, 
mentioned in the prophet, requires more knowledge in Hebrew learning 
than I pretend to be mistress of, and must take up more time than 
there is now to spare. I may hereafter, however, if you should 
chance to come again to our house, let you know my fancies upon 
these grand subjects, and why I cannot accord with Hutchinson and my 
father, in their notion of the Cherubim's signifying the unity of 
the essence, the distinction of the persons, and man's being taken 
into the essence by his personal union with the second person, whose 
constant emblem was the lion. This, I confess, appears to my plain 
understanding very miserable stuff. I can see no text either in the 
Old Testament, or in the New, for a plurality of beings, co-ordinate 
and independent. The sacred pages declare there is one original 
perfect mind. The Lord shall be king over all the earth. 'In that 
day there shall be ONE LORD, and his name ONE,' says the prophet 
Zachariah, speaking of the prodigious revolution in the Gentile 
world, whence in process of time, by the gospel of Jesus Christ, the 
worship of one true God shall prevail all over the earth, as 
universally as polytheism had done before. This I dare not observe 
to my father, as he is an admirer of Hutchinson, and will not bear 
any contradiction; but my private judgment is, that Hutchinson on 
the Cherubim and Elohim or Eloim, is a mad commentator, as I may 
show you, if we ever happen to meet again.

"At present, all I can do more on the Hebrew subject, is to observe 
that, in respect of the preservation of the Hebrew tongue, I imagine 
the one prevailing language before the Miracle at Babel, which one 
language was afterwards called Hebrew, though divided and swallowed 
as it were at the tower, was kept without change in the line of 
Shem, and continued their tongue. This cannot be disputed, I 
believe. I likewise imagine, it must be allowed that this Hebrew 
continued the vernacular tongue of the old Canaanites. It is 
otherwise unaccountable how the Hebrew was found to be the language 
of the Canaanites, when the family of Abraham came among them again, 
after an absence of more than two hundred years. If they had had 
another tongue at the confusion, was it possible for Abraham, during 
his temporary sojournments among them, and in the necessities of his 
peregrination, to persuade so many tribes to quit their dialect, and 
learn his language; or, if his influence had been so amazing, can it 
be supposed, they would not return again to their old language, 
after he had left them, and his family was away from them more than 
two hundred years? No, sir; we cannot justly suppose such a thing. 
The language of the old Canaanites could not be a different one from 
the Hebrew. If you will look into Bochart,<14> you will find this 
was his opinion. That great man says, the ante-Babel language 
escaped the confusion two ways, viz., by the Canaanites, through 
God's providence preserving it in their colonies for the future use 
of the Hebrews, who were to possess the land; and by the patriarch 
Heber, as a sacred depositum for the use of his posterity, and of 
Abraham in particular.

This being the case: the Phoenician or Canaanitish tongue, being the 
same language that the line of Heber spoke, with this only 
difference, that by the latter it was retained in greater purity, 
being in the mouths of a few, and transmitted by instruction; it 
follows, that Abraham and his sons could talk with all these tribes 
and communities; and as to the other nations he had communication 
with, he might easily converse with them, as he was a Syrian by 
birth, and to be sure could talk the Aramitish dialect as well as 
Laban his brother. The Aramitish was the customary language of the 
line of Shem. It was their vulgar tongue. The language of the old 
world, that was spoken immediately before the confusion, was called 
Hebrew from Heber, which they reserved for sacred uses."

Here Miss NOEL ended, and my amazement was so great, and my passion 
had risen so high for such uncommon female intelligence, that I 
could not help snatching this beauty to my arms, and without 
thinking of what I did, impressed on her balmy lips half a dozen 
kisses. This was wrong, and gave very great offence, but she was too 
good to be implacable, and on my begging her pardon, and protesting 
it was not a wilful rudeness, but the magic of her glorious eyes, 
and the bright powers of her mind, that had transported me beside 
myself, she was reconciled, and asked me, if I would play a game at 
cards? "With delight," I replied, and immediately a pack was brought 
in. We sat down to cribbage, and had played a few games, when by 
accident Miss NOEL saw the head of my German flute, which I always 
brought out with me in my walks, and carried in a long pocket 
within-side my coat. "You play, Sir, I suppose, on that instrument," 
this lady said, "and as of all sorts of music this pleases me most, 
I request you will oblige me with anything you please." In a moment, 
I answered, and taking from my pocketbook the following lines, I 
reached them to her, and told her I had the day before set them to 
one of Lully's airs, and instantly began to breathe the softest 
harmony I could make—

A SONG.

ALMIGHTY love's resistless rage, 
No force can quell, no art assuage: 
While wit and beauty both conspire, 
To kindle in my breast the fire: 
The matchless shape, the charming grace, 
The easy air, and blooming face, 
Each charm that does in Flavia shine, 
To keep my captive heart combine.

I feel, I feel the raging fire! 
And my soul burns with fierce desire! 
Thy freedom, Reason, I disown, 
And beauty's pleasing chains put on; 
No art can set the captive free, 
Who scorns his offered liberty; 
Nor is confinement any pain, 
To him who hugs his pleasing chain.

Bright Venus! Offspring of the sea! 
Thy sovereign dictates I obey; 
Submissive own thy mighty reign, 
And feel thy power in every vein: 
I feel thy influence all-confessed, 
I feel thee triumph in my breast! 
'Tis there is fixed thy sacred court, 
'Tis there thy Cupids gaily sport.

Come, my Boy, the altar place, 
Add the blooming garland's grace; 
Gently pour the sacred wine, 
Hear me, Venus! Power divine! 
Grant the only boon I crave, 
Hear me, Venus! Hear thy slave! 
Bless my fond soul with beauty's charms, 
And give me Flavia to my arms.<15>

Just as I was finishing this piece of music, old Mr. Noel came into 
the parlour, in his wonted good humour, and seemed very greatly 
pleased with me and my instrument. He told me, I was the young man 
he wanted to be acquainted with, and that if it was no detriment to 
me, I should not leave him this month to come. "Come, Sir," 
continued this fine old gentleman, "let me hear another piece of 
your music—vocal or instrumental as you will, for I suppose you sing 
as well as you play." "Both you shall have, Sir," I replied, "to the 
best of my abilities, and by way of change, I will give you first a 
song, called

THE SOLITUDE.
YE lofty mountains, whose eternal snows 
Like Atlas seem to prop the distant skies; 
While sheltered by your high and ample brows 
All nature's beauties feast my ravished eyes: 
And far beneath me o'er the distant plain 
The thunders break, and rattling tempests reign.

Here, when Aurora with her cheerful beam 
And rosy blushes marks approaching day; 
Oft do I walk along the purling stream, 
And see the bleating flocks around me stray: 
The woods, the rocks, each charm that strikes my sight, 
Fills my whole breast with innocent delight.

Here gaily dancing on the flowery ground 
The cheerful shepherds join their flute and voice; 
While through the groves the woodland songs resound, 
And fill th' untroubled mind with peaceful joys 
 Music and love inspire the vocal plain, 
Alone the turtle tunes her plaintive strain.

Here the green turf invites my wearied head 
On nature's lap to undisturbed repose; 
Here gently laid to rest, each care is fled; 
Peace and content my happy eye-lids close. 
Ye golden flattering dreams of state adieu! 
As bright my slumbers are, more soft than you.

Here free from all the tempests of the great, 
Craft and ambition can deceive no more! 
Beneath these shades I find a blest retreat, 
From Envy's rage secure, and Fortune's pow'r: 
Here call the actions of past ages o'er, 
Or truth's immortal source alone explore.

Here far from all the busy world's alarms, 
I prove in peace the Muse's sacred leisure: 
No cares within, no distant sound of arms, 
Break my repose, or interrupt my pleasure. 
Fortune and Fame! Deceitful forms! Adieu! 
The world's a trifle far beneath my view.

This song delighted the old gentleman exceedingly. He told me, he 
was charmed with it, not only for the fine music I made of it, but 
the morality of it, and liked me so much, that I was most heartily 
welcome to make his solitary retreat my home, as often and as long 
as I pleased. And indeed I did so, and continued to behave in such a 
manner, that in two months' time, I gained so entirely his 
affections, and so totally the heart of his admirable daughter, that 
I might have her in wedlock when I pleased, after the expiration of 
that current year, which was the young lady's request, and be 
secured of his estate at his death; beside a large fortune to be 
immediately paid down; and this, though my father should refuse to 
settle anything on me, or Miss NOEL, my wife. This was generous and 
charming as my heart could desire. I thought myself the happiest of 
men. Every week I went to Eden-Park, one time or other, to see my 
dear Miss NOEL, and pay my respects to her worthy father. We were 
while I stayed a most happy family, and enjoyed such satisfactions 
as few I believe have experienced in this tempestuous hemisphere. 
Mr. NOEL was passionately fond of his daughter, and he could not 
regard me more if I had been his own son, I loved my Harriot with a 
fondness beyond description, and that glorious girl had all the 
esteem I could wish she had for me. Our mutual felicity could rise 
no higher till we gave our hands, as we had already plighted our 
hearts.

This world is a series of visionary scenes, and contains so little 
solid, lasting felicity, as I have found it, that I cannot call life 
more than a deception; and, as Swift says it, "He is the happiest 
man, who is best deceived." When I thought myself within a fortnight 
of being married to Miss NOEL, and thereby made as completely happy 
in every respect as it was possible for a mortal man to be, the 
smallpox stepped in, and in seven days' time, reduced the finest 
human frame in the universe to the most hideous and offensive block. 
The most amiable of human creatures mortified all over, and became a 
spectacle the most hideous and appalling. This broke her father's 
heart in a month's time, and the paradise I had in view, sunk into 
everlasting night.

My heart, upon this sad accident, bled and mourned to an extreme 
degree. All the tender passions were up in my soul, and with great 
difficulty could I keep my ruffled spirits in tolerable decorum. I 
lost what I valued more than my life; more than repeated millions of 
worlds, if it had been possible to get them in exchange. This 
engaged, beloved partner, was an honour to her sex, and an ornament 
to human kind. She was one of the wisest and most agreeable of 
women; and her life quite glorious for piety to God, compassion to 
the necessitous and miserable, benevolence and good will to all, 
with every other grace and virtue. These shone with a bright lustre 
in her whole deportment, and rendered her beloved, and the delight 
of all that knew her. Sense and genius were in her united, and by 
study, reflection, and application, she improved the talents, in the 
happiest manner. She had acquired a superiority in thinking, 
speaking, writing, and acting; and in manners, her behaviour, her 
language, her design and her understanding was inexpressibly 
charming. Miss NOEL died in the 24th year of her age, the 29th of 
December, in the year 1724.



CHAPTER III.

This dismal occurrence preyed powerfully on my spirits for some 
time, and for near two months, I scarcely spoke a word to anyone. I 
was silent, but not sullen. As my tears and lamentations could not 
save her, so I knew they could not fetch her back. Death and the 
grave have neither eyes nor ears. The thing to be done upon so 
melancholy an occasion, is to adore the Lord of infinite wisdom, as 
he has a right to strike our comforts dead; and so improve the awful 
event, by labouring to render our whole temper and deportment 
Christian and divine, that we may be able to live, while we do live, 
superior to the strokes of fortune, and the calamities of human 
life; and when God bids us die, in whatever manner, and at whatever 
time it may be, have nothing to do but to die, and so to enter into 
our master's joy. This is wisdom. This good we may extract from such 
doleful things. This was the effect my dear Miss NOEL'S death had on 
me, and when I saw myself deprived of so invaluable a thing in this 
world, I determined to double my diligence in so acting my part in 
it, that whenever I was to pass through the last extremity of 
nature, I might be dismissed with a blessing to another world, and 
by virtue of the sublime excellencies of our holy religion, proceed 
to the abodes of immortality and immutable felicity.

I wish I could persuade you, reader, to resolve in the same manner. 
If you are young, and have not yet experienced life, believe me, all 
is vanity, disappointment, weariness, and dissatisfaction, and in 
the midst of troubles and uncertainties, we are hastening to an 
unknown world, from whence we shall never again return. Whether our 
dissolution be near, we know not; but this is certain, that Death, 
that universal conqueror, is making after us apace, to seize us as 
his captives; and therefore, though a man live many years, and 
rejoice in them all, which is the case of very few, yet let him 
remember the days of darkness.

And when death does come, our lot may be the most racking pains and 
distempers, to fasten us down to our sick-beds, till we resign our 
spirits to some strange region, our breath to the common air, and 
our bodies to the dust from whence they were taken. Dismal 
situation! If in the days of our health, we did not make our 
happiness and moral worth correspond, did not labour, in the time of 
our strength, to escape from wrong opinion and bad habit, and to 
render our minds sincere and incorrupt; if we did not worship and 
love the supreme mind, and adore his divine administration, and all 
the secrets of his providence. If this was not our case, before 
corruption begins to lay hold of us, deplorable must we be, when 
torments come upon us, and we have only hopeless wishes that we had 
been wiser, as we descend in agonies to our solitary retreat: to 
proceed from thence to judgment. Language cannot paint the horrors 
of such a condition. The anguish of mind, and the torture of body, 
are a scene of misery beyond description.

Or, if without torment, we lie down in silence, and sink into the 
land of forgetfulness, yet, since the Lord Jesus is to raise us from 
the regions of darkness, and bring us to the sessions of 
righteousness, where all our actions are to be strictly tried and 
examined, and every one shall be judged according to the deeds done 
in the body, whether they have been good or evil; what can screen us 
from the wrath of that mighty power, which is to break off the 
strong fetters of death, and to throw open the iron gates of the 
grave, if injustice, cruelty, and oppression, have been our practice 
in this world; or if, in the neglect of the distressed and hungry, 
we have given up ourselves to chambering and wantonness, to gluttony 
and voluptuousness? It is virtue and obedience, acts of goodness and 
mercy, that only can deliver us. If we worship in spirit and in 
truth the most glorious of immortal beings, that God who is 
omnipotent in wisdom and action, and perform all the offices of love 
and friendship to every man, then will our Lord pronounce us the 
blessed of his Father. If we do evil, we shall come forth unto the 
resurrection of damnation. This merits your attention, reader, and I 
hope you will immediately begin to ponder, what it is to have a 
place assigned in inconceivable happiness or misery for ever.

Having thus lost Miss NOEL, and my good old friend, her worthy 
father, I left the university, and went down to the country, after 
five years and three months absence, to see how things were posited 
at home, and pay my respects to my father; but I found them very 
little to my liking, and in a short time, returned to Dublin again. 
He had lately married in his old age a young wife, who was one of 
the most artful, false, and insolent of women, and to gratify her to 
the utmost of his power, had not only brought her nephew into his 
house, but was ridiculously fond of him, and lavishly gratified all 
his desires. Whatever this little brute, the son of a drunken 
beggar, who had been a journey-man glover, was pleased, in 
wantonness, to call for, and that his years, then sixteen, could 
require, my father's fortune in an instant produced; while scarcely 
one of my rational demands could be answered. Money, clothes, 
servants, horses, dogs, and all things he could fancy, were given in 
abundance; and to please the basest of women, and the most cruel 
step-mother that ever the devil inspired to make the son of another 
woman miserable, I was denied almost everything. The liberal 
allowance I had at the university was taken from me. Even a horse to 
ride out to the neighbouring gentlemen, was refused me, though my 
father had three stables of extraordinary cattle; and till I 
purchased one, was forced to walk it, wherever I had a mind to 
visit. What is still more incredible, if anything of severity can be 
so, when a mother-in-law is sovereign, I was not allowed to keep my 
horse even at grass on the land, though five hundred acres of 
freehold estate surrounded the mansion, but obliged to graze it at a 
neighbouring farmer's. Nor was this all the hard treatment I 
received. I was ordered by my father to become the young man's 
preceptor; to spend my precious time in teaching this youngster, and 
in labouring to make the little despicable dunce a scholar. All this 
was more than I could bear. My life became insupportable, and I 
resolved to range even the wilds of Africa, if nothing better 
offered, rather than live a miserable slave under the cruel tyranny 
of those unrelenting oppressors.

My father, however, by the way, was as fine a gentleman as ever 
lived, a man of extraordinary understanding, and a scholar; likewise 
remarkably just and good to all the world, except myself, after I 
left the university: and to do him all the justice in my power, and 
vindicate him so far as I am able, I must not conceal, that great as 
the ascendancy was, which my mother-in-law had over him, and as much 
as he was henpecked by that low-bred woman, who had been his servant 
maid, yet it was not to her only that my sufferings were owing. 
Religion had a hand in my misery. False religion was the spring of 
that paternal resentment I suffered under.

It was my father's being wont to have prayers read every night and 
morning in his family, and the office was the litany of the common-
prayer hook. This work, on my coming home, was transferred from my 
sister to me, and for about one week I performed to the old 
gentleman's satisfaction, as my voice was good, and my reading 
distinct and clear; but this office was far from being grateful to 
me, as I was become a strict Unitarian, by the lessons I had 
received from my private tutor in college, and my own examinations 
of the vulgar faith. It went against my conscience to use the 
tritheistic form of prayer, and became at last so uneasy to me, that 
I altered the prayers the first Sunday morning, and made them more 
agreeable to Scripture as I conceived. My father at this was very 
highly enraged, and his passion arose to so great a height, upon my 
defending my confession, and refusing to read the established form, 
that he called me the most impious and execrable of wretches, and 
with violence drove me from his presence. Soon after however he sent 
me Lord Nottingham's Letter to Mr. Whiston, and desired I would come 
over to him when I had carefully read it over. I did so, and he 
asked me what I thought of the book. I answered, that I thought it a 
weak piece, and if he would hear me with patience, in relation to 
that in particular, and to the case in general, perhaps he might 
think my religion a little better than at present he supposed it to 
be. "I will hear you," he said, "proceed." I then immediately began, 
and for a full hour repeated an apology I had prepared<15>. He did 
not interrupt me once, and when I had done, all he replied was, "I 
see you are to be placed among the incurables. Begone," he said, 
with stern disdain; and I resolved to obey. Indeed it was impossible 
for me to stay, for my father took no farther notice of me, and my 
mother-in-law and the boy, did all they could invent to render my 
life miserable.

On the first day of May, 1725; early in the morning, as the clock 
struck one, I mounted my excellent mare, and with my boy O'FIN, 
began to journey as I had projected, on seeing how things went. I 
did not communicate my design to a soul, nor took my leave of 
anyone, but in the true spirit of adventure, abandoned my father's 
dwelling, and set out to try what fortune would produce in my 
favour. I had the world before me, and Providence my guide. As to my 
substance it consisted of a purse of gold, that contained fifty 
Spanish pistoles, and half a score moidores; and I had one bank note 
for five hundred pounds, which my dear Miss NOEL left me by her 
will, the morning she sickened; it was all she had of her own to 
leave to anyone. With this I set forward, and in five days time 
arrived from the Western extremity of Ireland at a village called 
Ring's-end, that lies on the Bay of Dublin. Three days I rested 
there, and at the Conniving-House,<17> and then got my horses on 
board a ship that was ready to sail, and bound for the land I was 
born in, I mean Old England.

The wind, in the afternoon, seemed good and fair, and we were in 
hopes of getting to Chester the next day; but at midnight a tempest 
arose, which held in all the horrors of hurricane, thunder and 
lightning, for two nights and a day, and left us no hope of escape. 
It was a dreadful scene indeed, and looked as if the last fatal 
assault was making on the globe. As we had many passengers, their 
cries were terrific, and affected me more than the flashing fires 
and the winds. For my part, I was well reconciled to the great 
change, but I confess that nature shrunk at the frightful manner of 
my going off, which on the second night, I expected every moment. At 
last, however, we got into Whitehaven. It pleased the great King of 
all the earth to bid the storm Have done.

 Four remarkable things I noticed while the tempest lasted. One was 
that the Dean of Derry, Dr. WHALEY, whom we had on board, who had 
nineteen hundred a year from the church, for teaching the people to 
be Christians, was vastly more afraid than one young lady of the 
company, who appeared quite serene. The Dean, though a fine orator 
at land, was ridiculous in his fears at sea. He screamed as loud as 
any of the people: but this young lady behaved, like an angel in a 
storm. She was calm and resigned, and sat with the mate and me 
during the second night, discoursing of the divine power, and the 
laws of nature in such uproars. By the way, neither mate, nor 
master, nor hand could keep the deck. The ship was left to the mercy 
of the winds and waves.

The second remarkable thing was that as this young lady went naked 
into bed in her cabin, the first night before the tempest began to 
stir, it was not many hours till a sea struck us upon the quarter, 
and drove in one of our quarter, and one of our stern dead lights, 
where we shipped great quantities of water, that put us under great 
apprehensions of foundering, and filled so suddenly the close wooden 
bed in which Miss MELMOTH lay, that had I not chanced to be then 
leaning against the partition, and snatched her out, the moment I 
found myself all over wet, and half covered with the breaking sea, 
she must inevitably have perished. I ran up on deck with her in my 
arms, and laid her almost senseless and naked there, and as there 
was no staying many minutes in that place, I threw my great coat 
over her, and then brought her down to my own berth, which I gave 
her, and got her dry clothes from her trunk, and made her drink a 
large glass of brandy, which saved her life. She got no cold, which 
I thought very strange, but was hurt a little in the remove. When 
all was over she protested she would never go naked into bed, on 
board ship, again.

The third particular was, that there were some officers on board, 
most monstrously wicked men, and when we were given over by the 
captain, and no hope he thought of being saved, these warriors 
lamented like young children, and were the most dismal disturbing 
howlers on board: yet, when we got on land, they had done with O 
Lord, O Lord, and began again their obscene talk, and to damn 
themselves at every word to the centre of hell.

The fourth thing was this. There was on board with us a young 
gentleman of my acquaintance, one PIERCE GAVAN, who had been a 
fellow-commoner in my time of Trinity, Dublin. The first day of the 
storm, he was carried over-board by a rolling sea, and fairly lodged 
in the ocean, at above twenty yards distance from the ship; but the 
next tumbling billow brought him back again. He was laid on the deck 
without any hurt. On the contrary, one CHARLES HENLEY, a young 
merchant, was beat over, and we never saw him more.

HENLEY was not only a man of sense and prudence, who had an honest 
mind, and a cultivated understanding, but by search and enquiries 
into the doctrines, institutions and motives of revealed religion, 
had the highest regard for the truths of genuine Christianity, and 
chose the best means in his power to make himself acceptable to God.

GAVAN, on the contrary, had no sense of religion, nor did he ever 
think of the power and goodness of God. He was a most profane 
swearer, drank excessively, and had the heart to debauch every 
pretty woman he saw, if it had been possible for him to do so much 
mischief. Yet this man, who never reformed that I heard, and whose 
impieties have even shocked young fellows who were no saints, was 
astonishingly preserved; and HENLEY, who had the most just natural 
notions, and listened to Revelation, perished miserably! How shall 
we account for such things? By saying, that the world that now is, 
and the world that is to come, are in the hands of God, and every 
transaction in them is quite right, though the reason of the 
procedure may be beyond our view. We cannot judge certainly of the 
ends and purposes of Providence, and therefore to pass judgment on 
the ways of God, is not only impious, but ridiculous to the last 
degree. This we know for certain, that whenever, or however, a good 
man falls, he falls into the hand of God, and since we must all die, 
the difference as to time and manner, signifies very little, when 
there is an infinite wisdom to distinguish every case, and an 
infinite goodness to compensate all our miseries. This is enough for 
a Christian. Happy is the man, and for ever safe, let what will 
happen, who acts a rational part, and has the fear and love of God 
in his thoughts. With pleasure he looks into all the scenes of 
futurity. When storms and earthquakes threaten calamity, distress, 
and death, he maintains an inward peace.

May l0th.—When we had obtained the wished for shore, the passengers 
all divided. The Dean and his lady, and some other ladies, went one 
way, to an inn recommended to them by a gentleman on board; the 
warriors and Gavan marched to another house; and the young lady, 
whose life was by me preserved, and I, went to the Talbot, which the 
mate informed me had the best things and lodging, though the 
smallest inn of the town. This mate, one WHITWELL, deserves to be 
particularly mentioned, as he was remarkable for polite breeding, 
good sense, and a considerable share of learning, though a sailor; 
as remarkable this way, as the captain of the ship was the other, 
that is for being the roughest and most brutal old tar that ever 
commanded a vessel.

WHITWELL the mate, about thirty-six years of age at this time, told 
me, he was the son of a man who once had a great fortune, and gave 
him an university education, but left an estate so encumbered with 
debts, and ruined with mortgages, that its income was almost 
nothing, and therefore the son sold the remains of it, and went to 
sea with an East-India captain, in the twenty-second year of his 
age, and was so fortunate abroad, that he not only acquired riches, 
in the four years time that he trafficked about, between Batavia and 
the Gulf of Persia, but married a young Indian lady, the daughter of 
a Rajah, or petty Prince in the Mogul Empire; who was rich, wise and 
beautiful, and made his life so very happy, for the three years she 
lived, that his state was a Paradise, and he seemed a little 
sovereign. But this fleeting scene was soon over, and on his return 
to England with all his wealth, their ship was taken by the pirates 
of Madagascar, who robbed him of all he had, and made him a 
miserable slave for more than two years, when he escaped from them 
to the tawny generation of Arabs, who lived on the mountains, the 
other side of this African island, who used him with great humanity; 
their chief being very fond of him, and entertaining him in his mud-
wall palace: he married there a pretty little yellow creature, niece 
to the poor ruler, and for twelve months was very far from being 
miserable with this partner, as they had a handsome cottage and some 
cattle, and this wife was good-humour itself, very sensible, and a 
religious woman; her religion being half Mahometanism and half 
Judaism. But she died at the year's end, and her uncle the Chief, 
not living a month after her, WHITWELL came down from the mountains 
to the next sea coast under the conduct of one of the Arabians, his 
friend, and meeting with a European ship there, got at last to 
London. A little money he had left behind him in England, by way of 
reserve, in case of accidents, if he should ever return to his own 
country, he regained, and with this dressed himself, got into 
business, and came at last to be mate of the ship called the Skinner 
and Jenkins. His destiny, he added, was untoward, but as he had 
thought, and read, and seen enough in his wide travels, to be 
convinced, the world, and every being, and every atom of it were 
directed and governed by unerring wisdom, he derived hopes and 
comforts from a due acknowledgement of God. There are more born to 
misery than to happiness, in this life; but all may die to be for 
ever glorious and blessed, if they please. This conclusion was just 
and beautiful, and a life and sentiments so uncommon I thought 
deserved a memorial.

Miss MELMOTH and I continued at the Talbot for three weeks, and 
during that time, breakfasted, dined, and supped together. Except 
the hours of sleep we were rarely from each other. We walked out 
together every day, for hours conversed, sometimes went to cards, 
and often she sung, delightfully sung, while on my flute I played. 
With the greatest civility, and the most exact good manners, we were 
as intimate as if we had been acquainted for ages, and we found a 
satisfaction in each other's company, as great as lovers generally 
experience; yet not so much as one syllable of the passion was 
mentioned: not the least hint of love on either side was given, 
while we stayed at Whitehaven: and I believe neither of us had a 
thought of it. It was a friendship the most pure and exalted, that 
commenced at my saving her life, in the manner I have related, and 
by some strange kind of magic, our notions and inclinations, tempers 
and sentiments, had acquired such a sameness in a few days, that we 
seemed as two spiritual socias, or duplicates of each other's mind. 
Body was quite out of the case, though this lady had an extravagance 
of beauty. My sole delight was that fine percipient, which shed a 
lustre on her outward charms. How long this state would have lasted, 
had we continued more time together, and had the image of the late 
Miss NOEL been more effaced, or worn out of the sensory of my head, 
I cannot say; but while it did last, there could be nothing more 
strange. To see two young people of different sexes, in the highest 
spirits and most confirmed health live together, for twenty-one 
days, perfectly pleased with each other, entirely at their own 
disposal, and as to fortune, having abundantly enough between them 
both for a comfortable life; and yet, never utter one word, nor give 
a look, that could be construed a declaration of the passion, or a 
tendency towards a more intimate union; to complete that connexion 
which nature and providence requires of beings circumstanced as we 
were: was very odd. We sat up till the clock struck twelve every 
night, and talked of a vast variety of things, from the Bible down 
to the Clouds of Aristophanes, and from the comedies and tragedies 
of Greece and Rome to the Minerva of Sanctius, and Hickes's Northern 
Thesaurus<18>. Instead of Venus or any of her court, our 
conversation would often be on the Morals of Cicero, his Academics, 
and De Finibus; on the English or the Roman History; Shakespeare's 
scenes of nature, or maps of life; whether the OEdipus or the 
Electra of Sophocles was the best tragedy; and the scenes in which 
Plautus and Terence most excelled. Like two critics, or two 
grammarians, antiquarians, historians, or philosophers, would we 
pass the evening with the greatest cheerfulness and delight.

Miss MELMOTH had an astonishing memory, and talked on every subject 
extremely well. She remembered all she had read. Her judgment was 
strong, and her reflections always good. She told me her mother was 
another Mrs. Dacier, and as her father was killed in a duel, when 
she was very young, the widow MELMOTH, instead of going into the 
world, continued to live at her country seat, and diverted herself 
with teaching her daughter the languages of Greece and Rome, and in 
educating her heart and mind. This made this young lady a master of 
the Latin tongue and Greek, and enabled her to acquire a knowledge 
so various and fine, that it was surprising to hear her expatiate 
and explain. She talked with so much ease and good humour, and had a 
manner so cheerful and polite, that her discourse was always 
entertaining, even though the subject happened to be, as it was one 
evening, the paulo post futurum tense of a Greek verb. These things, 
however, were not the only admirable ones in this character. So 
happily had her good mother formed and instructed her mind, that it 
appeared full of all the principles of rational honour, and devoted 
to that truly God-like religion, which exalts the soul to an 
affection rather than dread of the supreme Lord of all things, and 
to a conviction that his laws lead us both to happiness here and 
hereafter. She thoroughly understood the use and excellence of 
Revelation, and had extracted from the inspired volumes everlasting 
comfort and security under the apprehensions of the divine power and 
majesty: but she told me she could not think rites and outward 
performances were essential to real religion. She considered what 
was just and beautiful in these things as useful and assisting only 
to the devout mind. In a word, this young lady was wise and good, 
humble and charitable. I have seen but one of her sex superior to 
her in the powers of mind and the beauties of body, and that was 
Miss NOEL. Very few have I known that were equal.

The second day of June, Miss MELMOTH and I left Whitehaven, and 
proceeded from thence to Westmoreland. We travelled for five days 
together, till we came to Brugh under Stainmore, where we stayed a 
night at Lamb's, a house I recommend to the reader, if ever he goes 
that way; and the next morning we parted. Miss MELMOTH and her 
servants went right onwards to Yorkshire, and I turned to the left 
to look for one CHARLES TURNER, who had been my near friend in the 
university, and who lived in some part of the north-east extremity 
of Westmoreland, or Yorkshire. But before we separated on the edge 
of Stainmore, we stopped at the Bell to breakfast, which is a little 
lone house on a descent to a vast romantic glen, and all the public 
house there is in this wild silent road, till you come to JACK 
RAILTON, the Quaker's house at Bows. We had a pot of coffee and 
toast and butter for breakfast, and, as usual, we were very cheerful 
over it; but when we had done, and it was time to depart, a 
melancholy, like a black and dismal cloud, began to overspread the 
charming face of CHARLOTTE, and after some silence, the tears burst 
from her eyes. "What is the matter, Miss MELMOTH," I said: "what 
makes this amazing change?" "I will tell you, sir," this beauty 
replied. "To you I owe my life, and for three weeks past have lived 
with you in so very happy a way, that the end of such a scene, and 
the probability of my never seeing you more, is too much for me." 
"Miss MELMOTH," I answered, "you do me more honour than I deserve in 
shedding tears for me, and since you can think me worth seeing 
again, I promise you upon my sacred word, that as soon as I have 
found a beloved friend of mine I am going up the hills to look for, 
and have paid my respects to him for a while, if he is to be found 
in this desolate part of the world, I will travel with my face in 
the next place, if it be possible, towards the east-riding of 
Yorkshire, and be at Mrs. ASGIL's door, where you say you are to be 
found." This restored the glories to CHARLOTTE'S face again, and for 
the first time I gave Miss MELMOTH a kiss, and bade her adieu.



CHAPTER IV.

June 8th.—Having thus lost my charming companion, I travelled into a 
vast valley, enclosed by mountains whose tops were above the clouds, 
and soon came into a country that is wilder than the campagna of 
Rome, or the uncultivated vales of the Alps and Apennines. Warm with 
a classical enthusiasm, I journeyed on, and with fancy's eye beheld 
the rural divinities, in those sacred woods and groves, which shade 
the sides of many of the vast surrounding fells, and the shores and 
promontories of many lovely lakes and bright running streams. For 
several hours I travelled over mountains tremendous to behold, and 
through vales the most enchanting in the world. Not a man or house 
could I see in eight hours' time, but towards five in the afternoon, 
there appeared at the foot of a hill a sweetly situated cottage, 
that was half covered with trees, and stood by the side of a large 
falling stream: a vale extended to the south from the door, that was 
terminated with rocks, and precipices on precipices, in an amazing 
point of view, and through the flowery ground, the water was 
beautifully seen, as it winded to a deeper flood at the bottom of 
the vale. Half a dozen cows were grazing in view: and a few flocks 
of feeding sheep added to the beauties of the scene.

To this house I sent my boy, to enquire who lived there, and to 
know, if for the night I could be entertained, as I knew not where 
else to go. O'FIN very quickly returned, and informed me, that one 
farmer PRICE was the owner of the place, but had gone in the morning 
to the next town, and that his wife said I was welcome to what her 
house afforded. In then I went, and was most civilly received by an 
exceedingly pretty woman, who told me her husband would soon be at 
home, and be glad she was sure to see me at their lonely place; for 
he was no stranger to gentlemen and the world, though at present he 
rarely conversed with any one. She told me, their own supper would 
be ready in an hour hence, and in the meantime would have me take a 
can of fine ale and a bit of bread. She brought me a cup of 
extraordinary malt-drink and a crust, and while I was eating my 
bread, in came Mr. PRICE.

The man seemed very greatly astonished at entering the room, and 
after he had looked with great earnestness at me for a little while, 
he cried out, "Good heaven! What do I see! FALSTAFF, my class-
fellow, and my second self. My dear friend you are welcome, thrice 
welcome to this part of the world." All this surprised me not a 
little, for I could not recollect at once a face that had been 
greatly altered by the small-pox: and it was not till I reflected on 
the name PRICE, that I knew I was then in the house of one of my 
school-fellows, with whom I had been most intimate, and had played 
the part of Plump Jack in Henry the Fourth, when he did Prince 
Henry. This was an unexpected meeting indeed: and considering the 
place, and all the circumstances belonging to the scene, a thing 
more strange and affecting never came in my way. Our pleasure at 
this meeting was very great, and when the most affectionate 
salutations were over, my friend PRICE proceeded in the following 
manner.

"Often have I remembered you since we parted, and exclusive of the 
Greek and English plays we have acted together at Sheridan's 
school,<19> in which you acquired no small applause, I have 
frequently thought of our frolicsome rambles in vacation time, and 
the merry dancings we had at Mother Red-Cap's in Back-Lane; the 
hurling matches we have played at Dolphin's-barn, and the cakes and 
ale we used to have at the Organ-house on Arbor-Hill. These things 
have often occurred to my mind: but little did I think we should 
ever meet again on Stainmore-hills. What strange things does time 
produce! It has taken me from a town life to live on the most 
solitary part of the globe:—and it has brought you to journey where 
never man I believe ever thought of travelling before." "So it is," 
I replied, "and stranger things, dear JACK, may happen yet before 
our eyes are closed: why I journey this untravelled way, I will 
inform you by and by; when you have told me by what strange means 
you came to dwell in this remote and silent vale." "That you shall 
know," said he, "very soon, as soon as we have eaten a morsel of 
something or other which my dear MARTHA has prepared against my 
return. Here it comes, a fowl, bacon and greens, and as fine I will 
answer as London market could yield. Let us sit down, my friend, and 
God bless us and our meat."

Down then we sat immediately to our dish, and most excellent 
everything was. The social goodness of this fond couple added 
greatly to the pleasure of the meal, and with mirth and friendship 
we eat up our capon, our bacon, and our greens. When we had done, 
PRICE brought in pipes and tobacco, and a fresh tankard of his 
admirable ale. "Listen now, said he," to my story, and then I will 
hearken to yours.

"When I left you at Sheridan's school, my remove was from Ireland to 
Barbados, to become a rich uncle's heir, and I got by my Indian 
airing a hundred thousand pounds. There I left the bones of my 
mother's brother, after I had lived two years in that burning place, 
and from thence proceeded to London, to spend what an honest, 
laborious man had long toiled to save. But I had not been above 
three months in the capital of England, when it came into my head to 
pass sometime in France, and with a girl I kept made haste to the 
French metropolis. There I lived at a grand rate, and took from the 
French Opera-house another whore. The Gaul and the Briton were both 
extreme fine girls, and agreed so well together, that I kept them 
both in one house. I thought myself superlatively happy in having 
such a brace of females, and spared no cost in procuring them all 
the finery and pleasures that Paris and London could yield. I had a 
furnished house in both these cities, and with an expensive equipage 
went backwards and forwards. In four years' time I spent a great 
deal of money, and as I had lost large sums at play, and these two 
whores agreed in the end to rob me, and retire with the money, where 
I should never discover them, I found myself in very middling 
circumstances, and had not six hundred pounds left in the fourth 
year from my uncle's death. How to dispose of this and myself was 
now the question. What I should do, was my deliberation, to secure 
bread and quiet? Many a thoughtful hour this gave me, and at length 
I determined to purchase a little annuity. But before this could be 
effected, I went down to Westmoreland, on an information I had 
received, that my two ladies were at Appleby with other names, and 
on my money appeared as women of fortune. But this journey was to no 
purpose, and I was preparing to return to London, when my wife you 
saw at the head of the table a while ago, came by chance in my way, 
and pleased me so well with her good understanding, face and person, 
that I resolved to marry her, if she would have me, and give her the 
management of my five hundred pounds on a farm, as she was a 
farmer's daughter, and could manage one to good advantage. Her 
father was lately dead, and this little mountain farm she continued 
to occupy: therefore nothing could he more to my purpose, if I could 
prevail on her to make me her husband, and with some difficulty she 
did, to my unspeakable felicity. She had no money worth mentioning: 
but her house was pretty and comfortable, and her land had grain and 
cattle; and as I threw into her lap my five hundred pounds, a little 
before we were married, to be by her disposed of and managed, 
according to her pleasure, she soon made some good improvements and 
additions, and by her fine understanding, sweet temper, and every 
Christian virtue, continues to render my life so completely happy; 
so joyous and delightful; that I would not change my partner and 
condition, for one of the first quality and greatest fortune. In her 
I have everything I could wish for in a wife and a woman, and she 
makes it the sole study and pleasure of her life to crown my every 
day with the highest satisfactions and comforts. Two years have I 
lived with her on these wild mountains, and in that time I have not 
had one dull or painful minute, but in thinking that I may lose her, 
and be the wretched survivor. That thought does sometimes wound me. 
In sum, my friend, we are the happiest of wedded mortals, and on 
this small remote farm, live in a state of bliss to be envied. This 
proves that happiness does not flow from riches only: but, that 
where pure, and perfect love, strict virtue, and unceasing industry, 
are united in the conjugal state, they can make the Stainmore 
mountains a Paradise to mortals in peace and little.

"But it is not only happiness in this world that I have acquired by 
this admirable woman, but life eternal. You remember, my friend, 
what a wild and wicked one I was when a school-boy, and as Barbadoes 
of all parts of the globe is no place to improve a man's morals in, 
I returned from thence to Europe as debauched a scelerate<20> as 
ever offended Heaven by blasphemy and illiberal gratifications. Even 
my losses and approaching poverty were not capable of making any 
great change in me. When I was courting my wife, she soon discerned 
my impiety, and perceived that I had very little notion of hell and 
heaven, death and judgment. This she made a principal objection 
against being concerned with me, and told me, she could not venture 
into a married connection with a man, who had no regard to the 
divine laws, and therefore, if she could not make me a Christian, in 
the true sense of the word, she would never be Mrs. PRICE.

"This from a plain country girl, surprised me not a little, and my 
astonishment arose very high, when I heard her talk of religion, and 
the great end of both, a blessed life after this. She soon convinced 
me that religion was the only means by which we can arrive at true 
happiness, by which we can attain to the last perfection and dignity 
of our nature, and that the authority and word of God is the surest 
foundation of religion. The substance of what she said is as 
follows. I shall never forget the lesson.

"The plain declarations of our Master in the Gospel restore the 
dictates of uncorrupted reason to their force and authority, and 
give us just notions of God and of ourselves. They instruct us in 
the nature of the Deity, discover to us his unity, holiness, and 
purity, and afford certain means of obtaining eternal life. 
Revelation commands us to worship one Supreme God, the Supreme 
Father of all things; and to do his will, by imitating his 
perfections, and practising everything recommended by that law of 
reason, which he sent the Messiah to revive and enforce: that by 
repentance, and righteousness, and acts of devotion, we may obtain 
the divine favour, and share in the glories of futurity; for, the 
Supreme Director, whose goodness gives counsel to his power, 
commanded us into existence to conduct us to everlasting happiness, 
and therefore teaches us by his Son to pray, to praise, and to 
repent, that we may be entitled to a nobler inheritance than this 
world knows, and obtain life and immortality, and all the joys and 
blessings of the heavenly Canaan. This was the godlike design of our 
Creator. That superior agent, who acts not by arbitrary will, but by 
the maxims of unclouded reason, when he made us and stationed us in 
this part of his creation, had no glory of his own in view, but what 
was perfectly consistent with a just regard to the felicity of his 
rational subjects.

"It was this made the apostle show Felix the unalterable obligations 
to justice and equity; to temperance, or a command over the 
appetites; and then, by displaying the great and awful judgment to 
come, urge him to the practice of these, and all the other branches 
of morality; that by using the means prescribed by God, and acting 
up to the conditions of salvation, he might escape that dreadful 
punishment, which in the reason and nature of things, is connected 
with vice, and which the good government of the rational world 
requires should be inflicted on the wicked; and might on the 
contrary by that mercy offered to the world through Jesus Christ, 
secure those immense rewards, which are promised to innocence and 
the testimony of an upright heart. This faith in Christ, St. Paul 
placed before the Roman governor in the best light. He described the 
complexion and genius of the Christian faith. He represented it as 
revealing the wrath of God against all immorality; and as joining 
with reason and uncorrupted nature, enforcing the practice of every 
moral and social duty.

"What effect this discourse had on Felix," continued MARTHA, "in 
producing faith, that is, morality in an intelligent agent, we are 
told by the apostle. He trembled: but iniquity and the world had 
taken such a hold of him, that he dismissed the subject, and turned 
from a present uneasiness to profit and the enjoyment of sin. He had 
done with St. Paul, and sacrificed the hopes of eternity to the 
world and its delights.

"But this," concluded MARTHA, "will not I hope be your case. As a 
judgment to come is an awful subject, you will ponder in time, and 
look into your own mind. As a man, a reasonable and social creature, 
designed for duty to a God above you, and to a world of fellow-
creatures around you, you will consider the rules of virtue and 
morality, and be no longer numbered with those miserable mortals, 
who are doomed to condemnation upon their disobedience. Those rules 
lie open in a perfect gospel, and the wicked can have nothing to 
plead for their behaviour. They want no light to direct them. They 
want no assistance to support them in doing their duty. They have a 
gospel to bring them to life and salvation, if they will but take 
notice of it; and if they will not walk in the light of God's law, 
this gospel must be their judgment and condemnation."

"Say then, Sir," MARTHA proceeded, "can you be prevailed on to think 
of religion in its native purity and simplicity, and by the power of 
the gospel, to act with regard to virtue and piety, that when Christ 
shall come not only in the power, but in the wisdom and the justice 
of God, to judge the world, you may be secured from that misery and 
distress, which is prepared for iniquity; and enjoy that eternal 
life, which is to be the portion of the righteous?"

"In this extraordinary manner did MARTHA HARRINGTON discourse me, 
and the effect of it was that I began a thorough reform from that 
hour. My rational life from that happy day commenced, and I entered 
seriously into my own breast, to think in earnest of that solemn 
judgment to come. What MARTHA said was so clear and strong, that I 
had not a thought of replying, but truth at once entirely subdued my 
heart, and I flew to the Son of God, to request his intercession 
with the Father of the Universe for the pardon of all my crimes. The 
dignity and end of my being has since been the subject of my 
meditations, and I live convinced, that everything is contemptible 
that is inconsistent with duty and morality. This renders even my 
pleasures more agreeable. This gives eternal peace to my mind."

Here PRICE ended his remarkable story, and according to our 
agreement, I began to relate what happened to me from the time we 
parted at school, and concluded with informing him, that I was going 
in search of CHARLES TURNER, my near friend, when fortune brought me 
to his house: that this gentleman lived somewhere towards the 
confines of Cumberland and the North Riding of Yorkshire, but where 
the spot was I could not tell, nor did I know well how to go on, as 
the country before me seemed impassable, on account of its 
mountains, precipices, and floods. "I must try however what can be 
done; not only in regard to this gentleman; but, because I have 
reason to think it may be very much to my advantage, as he is very 
rich, and the most generous of men. If he is to be found, I know I 
shall be welcome to share in his happiness as long as I please, nor 
will it be any weight to him." PRICE to this replied, that I was 
most heartily welcome to him as long as I pleased to stay, and that 
though he was far from being a rich man, yet he had every day enough 
for himself and one more; and his MARTHA he was sure would be as 
well pleased with my company, as if I had been his own brother, 
since she knew I was his esteemed friend. In respect of the way, he 
said, he would enable me to find Mr. TURNER, if he could, but the 
country was difficult to travel, and he doubted very much if one 
could go to the extremity of Cumberland or Yorkshire over the hills; 
but we would try however, and if it was possible, find out Mr. 
TURNER'S house. Yet solely with him I must not stay, if he could be 
seen. I must live between both, till I got some northern girl, and 
had a wife and habitation of my own; "and there is," continued 
Price, "not many miles from me, a sweet pretty lass, the daughter of 
a gentleman farmer, who is a very good man, and would, I believe, 
upon my recommendation, give you his girl, and a sum of money, to 
sit down on those hills." "This is vastly kind, Jack," said I, "and 
what I shall gratefully remember so long as I live. I may ride many 
a mile I am sure, and be an adventurer many a long day, before I 
meet with such offers again. Your sweetly situated house and good 
things, with a fine northern girl and money down, are benefits not 
to be met with every day. But at present the object I must pursue is 
my university friend, CHARLES TURNER, and if you please to do me the 
great favour of guiding me so far as you can over this wild, 
uninhabited land, after I have stayed with you for the first time, 
two or three days, and promise to abide many more hereafter, if it 
be in my power, we will set out in quest of what I want." "As you 
will," my friend PRICE replied, "and for the present let us be gay. 
Here comes my beloved with a little bowl of punch, and as she sings 
extremely well, and you have not forgot I fancy our old song, we 
will have it over our nectar. You shall represent Janus and Momus, 
and I will be Chronos and Mars, and my wife Diana and Venus. Let us 
take a glass first—'THE LIBERTIES OF THE WORLD,' and then do you 
begin." We drank, and in the following manner I went on.

SONG.

JANUS.
Chronos, Chronos, mend thy pace, 
A hundred times the rolling sun, 
Around the radiant belt has run, 
In his revolving race. 
Behold, behold, the goal in sight, 
Spread thy fans, and wing thy flight.

CHRONOS.
Weary, weary of my weight, 
Let me, let me drop my freight, 
And leave the world behind. 
I could not bear 
Another year 
The load of human kind.

MOMUS.
Ha! ha! ha! ha! ha! ha! well hast thou done, 
To lay down thy pack, 
And lighten thy back. 
The world was a fool, e'er since it begun. 
And since neither Janus, nor Chronos, nor I, 
Can hinder the crimes, 
Or mend the bad times, 
'Tis better to laugh than to cry.

CHORUS.
'Tis better to laugh than to cry.

JANUS.
Since Momus comes to laugh below, 
Old Time begin the show! 
That he may see, in every scene, 
What changes in this age have been;

CHRONOS.
Then goddess of the silver bow begin!


DIANA.
With horns and with hounds I waken the day, 
And hie to my woodland walks away; 
I tuck up my robe, and am buskined soon, 
And tie to my forehead a waxing moon; 
I course the fleet stag, unkennel the fox, 
And chase the wild goats o'er summits of rocks, 
With shouting and hooting we pierce through the sky: 
And echo turns hunter, and doubles the cry.

CHORUS.
With shouting and hooting we pierce through the sky, 
And echo turns hunter, and doubles the cry.

JANUS.
Then our age was in its prime,

CHRONUS.
Free from rage,

DIANA.
---- And free from crime.

MOMUS.
A very merry, dancing, drinking, 
Laughing, quaffing, and unthinking time.

CHORUS.
Then our age was in its prime, 
Free from rage, and free from crime. 
A very merry, dancing, drinking, 
Laughing, quaffing, and unthinking time.

MARS.
Inspire the vocal brass, inspire; 
The world is past its infant age: 
Arms and honour, 
Arms and honour, 
Set the martial mind on fire, 
And kindle manly rage. 
Mars has looked the sky to red; 
And peace, the lazy good, is fled. 
Plenty, peace, and pleasure fly; 
The sprightly green 
In Woodland walks, no more is seen; 
The sprightly green has drank the Tyrian dye.

CHORUS.
Plenty, peace, and pleasure fly; 
The sprightly green 
In Woodland walks, no more is seen; 
The sprightly green has drank the Tyrian dye.

MARS.
Sound the trumpet, beat the drum, 
Through all the world around; 
Sound a reveille, sound, sound, 
The warrior God is come.
CHORUS.
Sound the trumpet, beat the drum, 
Through all the world around; 
Sound a reveille, sound, sound, 
The warrior God is come.

MOMUS.
Thy sword within the scabbard keep, 
And let mankind agree; 
Better the world were fast asleep, 
Than kept awake by thee. 
The fools are only thinner, 
With all our cost and care; 
But neither side a winner, 
For things are as they were.

CHORUS.
The fools are only thinner, 
With all our cost and care; 
But neither side a winner, 
For things are as they were.

VENUS.
Calms appear, when storms are past, 
Love will have its hour at last: 
Nature is my kindly care; 
Mars destroys, and I repair; 
Take me, take me, while you may, 
Venus comes not ev'ry day.

CHORUS.
Take her, take her, while you may, 
Venus comes not ev'ry day.

CHRONOS.
The world was then so light, 
I scarcely felt the weight; 
Joy ruled the day, and love the night. 
But since the queen of pleasure left the ground, 
I faint, I lag, 
And feebly drag 
The pond'rous orb around.

MOMUS, pointing to Diana.
All, all, of a piece throughout; 
The chase had a beast in view;

DIANA, to Mars.
Thy wars brought nothing about;

MARS, to Venus.
Thy lovers were all untrue,

VENUS, to Janus.
'Tis well an old age is out, 
And time to begin a new.

CHORUS.
All, all, of a piece throughout; 
Thy chase had a beast in view; 
Thy wars brought nothing about; 
Thy lovers were all untrue: 
'Tis well an old age is out, 
And time to begin a new.

In this happy manner did we pass the night in this wild and 
frightful part of the world, and for three succeeding evenings and 
days, enjoyed as much true satisfaction as it was possible for 
mortals to feel. PRICE was an ingenious, cheerful, entertaining man, 
and his wife had not only sense more than ordinary, but was one of 
the best of women. I was prodigiously pleased with her conversation. 
Though she was no woman of letters, nor had any books in her house 
except the Bible, Barrow's and Whichcot's Sermons, Howell's History 
of the World, and the History of England, yet from these few, a 
great memory, and an extraordinary conception of things, had 
collected a valuable knowledge, and she talked with an ease and 
perspicuity that was wonderful. On religious subjects she astonished 
me.



CHAPTER V.

As Sunday was one of the days I stayed there, and PRICE was obliged 
in the afternoon to be from home, I passed it in conversation with 
his wife. The day introduced religion, and among other things I 
asked her, which she thought the best evidences of Christianity? The 
prophecies or the miracles?

"Neither," Mrs. PRICE replied. "The prophecies of the Messiah 
recorded in the Old Testament, are a good proof of the Christian 
religion, as it is plain from many instances in the New Testament, 
that the Jewish converts of that generation understood them to 
relate to our Lord; which is a sufficient reason for our believing 
them. Since they knew the true intent and meaning of them, and on 
account of their knowing it, were converted; the prophecies for this 
reason should by us be regarded as divine testimony in favour of 
Christ Jesus. Then as to miracles, they are to be sure a means of 
proving and spreading the Christian religion, as they show the 
divine mission of the Messiah, and rouse the mind to attend to the 
power by which these mighty works were wrought. Thus miracle and 
prophecy show the teacher came from God. They contribute to the 
establishment of his kingdom, and have a tendency to produce that 
faith which purifies the heart, and brings forth the new birth.

"But the greater evidence for the truth of our holy religion, 
appears to me to be that which converted the primitive Christians, 
to wit, the powerful influence which the gospel has on the minds of 
those who study it with sincerity, and the inward discoveries Christ 
makes to the understanding of the faithful by his light and good 
spirit. This exceeds the other evidences, if the heart be honest. 
The gospel is irresistible, when the spirit of God moves upon the 
minds of Christians. When the divine power, dispensed through 
Christ, assists and strengthens us to do good, and to eschew evil, 
then Christianity appears a religion worthy of God, and in itself 
the most reasonable. The complete salvation deserves our ready 
acceptation. That religion must charm a reasonable world, which not 
only restores the worship of the one true God, and exhibits, in a 
perfect plan, those rules of moral rectitude, whereby the conduct of 
men should be governed, and their future happiness secured; but, by 
its blessed spirit, informs our judgments, influences our wills, 
rectifies and subdues our passions, turns the bias of our minds from 
the objects and pleasures of sense, and fixes them upon the supreme 
good. Most glorious surely is such a gospel."

"But does not this operation of the spirit," said I, "which you make 
the principal evidence for Christianity, debase human nature, and 
make man too weak, too helpless and depending a being? If voluntary 
good agency depends on supernatural influence and enlivening aid, 
does not this make us mere patients, and if we are not moral agents, 
that is, have not a power of choosing or refusing, of doing or 
avoiding, either good or evil, can there be any human virtue? Can we 
in such case approve or disapprove ourselves to God. To me it seems 
that man was created to perform things natural, rational, and 
spiritual, and has an ability to act within the reach of his agency, 
as his duty requires. I think the moral fitness of things is a rule 
of action to conduct our actions by, and that the great advantage of 
revelation consists in its heavenly moral lessons, and the certainty 
of that future judgment and retribution, which has a powerful 
influence upon a rational mind, and strongly inclines a reasonable 
being to save his soul, by so acting in this world as to avoid 
everlasting misery, and ensure the favour of God, and eternal 
happiness in another world. This appears to me more consistent with 
the nature and the truth of things. It is more to the honour of 
human nature, if I mistake not, and gives more glory to God."

To this Mrs. PRICE answered, that "as she was sensible of the 
shortness of her own understanding, and believed the faculties of 
the human mind in general were weak and deficient, she could not see 
anything unreasonable in supposing the thing formed depended on, and 
was subject to the Creator that made it. It cannot be absurd, 
surely, to say, that so weak and helpless a being as man, depends 
entirely on God. Where in the nature of things can we fix a standard 
of certainty in understanding, and stability in practice, but in the 
fountain of truth, and all perfection?

"But to our better comprehending this matter, let us take a view of 
primitive Christian religion. Christianity is a divine institution, 
by which God declares himself reconciled to mankind for the sake of 
his beloved son, the Lord Jesus Christ, on condition of repentance, 
amendment of life, and perseverance in a state of holiness; and that 
we might be able to perform the things required of us, he offers the 
assistance of his good spirit. This last offer, in a proper sense, 
is salvation; 'for according to his mercy, he saved us, by the 
washing of regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost. By 
grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of yourselves; it is 
the gift of God.'<21> We find, then, that there are two parts in the 
Christian religion: one, external and historical; the other, 
internal and experimental. The first comprehends what is no more to 
be repeated, though the effects are lasting and permanent, to wit, 
the life and good works of Jesus, his miracles, death, and 
resurrection; which declare him spotless virtue, perfect obedience, 
and the son of God with power. And in the second part, we have that 
standing experience of a divine help, which converts and supports a 
spiritual life. It is true, both the parts have a near relation, and 
in conjunction produce the good ends of religion. The second is the 
effect of the first. Redemption from the power of sin, 
sanctification, and justification, are blessings wrought in us by 
the good spirit of him, who without us did many glorious things, 
that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a 
peculiar people zealous of good works; and that they who live should 
not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him that died for them 
and rose again. But it is in the second part that the excellence of 
our holy religion consists. We have no ability of ourselves to take 
off our minds from the things that are evil, and engage them in the 
work of religion and godliness. This is the gift of God. It is a 
continued miracle that cleanses that polluted fountain, the heart, 
and therefore I call this experience the principal evidence of the 
Christian religion. It is the glory of Christianity, and renders it 
the perfection of all religions."

"That Christianity," I replied, "is the perfection of all religions, 
is granted; but that we have no ability to save our souls without a 
supernatural operation on them, this is what I have still some doubt 
of. A careful examination of the subject, produces some hard 
objections, and therefore, madam, I will lay my difficulties before 
you, that your fine natural understanding may remove them, if it be 
possible. I will be short on the article, for many words would only 
darken it.

"In the first place, then, as to man's inability to live a religious 
life, and practice the precepts of the gospel, it must be the effect 
of the human composition, or the effect of the agency of the 
serpent. If the former, it is chargeable upon the author of the 
composition; if the latter, upon the agent which acts upon it. Man 
could not be culpable, I think, for a bad life, in either case. If 
my nature be weakness itself, or the serpent is superior to me, what 
good can be required of me? Can the supreme reason call for brick, 
where there are no materials to make it with? will you say yes, 
because he gives supernatural ability to perform? But then, can this 
be called man's action? It is the action of the author by his 
miserable creature, man; and in such case, may we not say, that 
though commands are given to man to obey revealed laws, yet the 
obedience is performed by God?

"In the next place, as man in his natural capacity, and all his 
natural powers, are the work of God, and as truly derived from him 
as any supernatural powers can be, it follows, I imagine, that a 
voluntary agent's making a right use of the powers of his nature, is 
as valuable as his being compelled to act well and wisely by a 
supernatural power. To assert, then, such experiences or operations, 
to me seems to misrepresent the nature of a being excellently 
constituted to answer the good purposes he was created for. I am 
likewise, at present, of opinion, that depreciating our natural 
abilities, does not give so much glory to God as you imagine."

To this Mrs. PRICE replied, "that by the operation of the spirit, 
she did not mean that man was purely passive, and had no part in the 
working out his salvation, but that God co-operates with man, and 
without destroying the faculty of reason, improves it by convincing 
and enlightening the understanding, and by moving and inclining the 
will towards such objects as are acceptable to himself, and from 
those that are contrary to his gospel. The mind in this manner 
enlightened and affected, begins to act, and as the spirit moves 
upon the soul, the quickened man, under the divine direction, does 
all the good the scripture commands him to do, and eschews the evil 
he is ordered to avoid. By God through Christ, he practises the 
excellent virtues recommended in the holy books, and for this 
reason, the righteousness which Christians bring forth, is called in 
scripture the righteousness of Christ, the righteousness of God, and 
the righteousness of faith. Christ is the efficient. We, through 
him, are made able to act. Notwithstanding the weakness and 
incapacity of our nature, yet through faith in the power of God, 
which is given to all who believe in him, we are enabled to flee 
immorality and vice, and by a life of virtue and piety, to enjoy the 
pleasure of a sweet reflection, and the praises of unpolluted 
reason.

That this is the case of man, the sacred writings declare in a 
thousand places, and set forth the exceeding greatness of God's 
power in this respect. The ministry of the gospel appears to have 
been ordained for this end, and the perfection of the Christian 
religion to rest on this particular thing. 'The Lord died for our 
sins, and rose again for our justification, that we, through the 
power of his resurrection, might be made righteous.'<22> And the 
apostle adds, 'I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ, for it is 
the power of God unto salvation, to every one that believeth, to the 
Jew first, and also to the Greek, for therein is the righteousness 
of God revealed from faith to faith.'<23> And.that the promise of 
the Holy Ghost had reference not only to the great effusion of the 
spirit at Pentecost, which was a solemn confirmation of the new and 
spiritual dispensation of the gospel; but also to that instruction 
which Christians of every age were to receive from it continually, 
if they attended to it, is evident from the promise of Christ, 'I 
will pray the. Father, and he shall give you another comforter, (the 
spirit of truth) that he may abide with you for ever.'<24> This 
spirit was to supply the place of his personal presence. It was to 
become a teacher and comforter to his disciples and followers to the 
end of time, to enlighten and incline their minds to piety and 
virtue, to enable them to do all things appertaining to life and to 
godliness, and. to have a faith in God's power and all-sufficiency. 
This is the glorious specific difference of Christianity from all 
other religions. We have an inward instructor and supporter always 
abiding with us. And what can be a higher honour to mankind, or an 
act of greater love in God, than for him to interpose continually, 
and by his holy spirit restore the teachable and attentive to that 
purity and uprightness in which he at first created man? Glorious 
dispensation! Here is a complete reparation of the loss sustained by 
transgression. We are created anew in Christ Jesus, and are made 
partakers of the divine nature. Surely this is the utmost that can 
be expected from religion. In short," continued Mrs. Price," it is 
to me a most amazing thing, to see men of sense disclaim this help, 
argue for self-sufficiency and independency, and receive only the 
outward appearance of the son of God, in a literal, historical, and 
formal profession of Christianity! This will never do the work. The 
outward appearance of the Son of God only puts us in a capacity of 
salvation; it is the inward appearance by the power and virtue of 
the spirit that must save us. The end of the gospel is repentance, 
forgiveness of sins, and amendment of manners; and the means of 
obtaining that end, is Christianity in the life, spirit, and power 
of it."

"You talk extremely well, madam," said I, "upon this subject, and 
have almost made me a convert to the notion of an inward appearance 
of the Son of God; but I must beg leave to observe to you, that as 
to what you have added, by way of explication and vindication of the 
operation of the spirit, to wit, that man has agency, and God 
cooperates with it, by which means the man is enabled to apply his 
agency to the performance of good; this does not seem to me to make 
the matter quite plain. The virtue or goodness of an agent must 
certainly arise from a right exercise of his own power, and how then 
can God's co-operating with him make him a better man? Can such co-
operation add anything to my virtue, if my goodness is to be rated 
in proportion to the exertion of my own will and agency? If I am not 
able to save a man from drowning, though I pity him, and do my best 
to preserve his life; but God gives me strength, or co-operates with 
me, and so the man is saved; can this add anything to my virtue or 
goodness? It would be indeed an instance of God's goodness to the 
man; but as to myself, I did no more with the divine cooperation 
than I did without it. I made all the use I could of what power I 
had. This seems to me a strong objection against the inward 
appearance: nor is it all there is to object. If I see a man in a 
deep wet ditch, in a dangerous and miserable way, and am prompted by 
a natural affection, and the fitness of relieving, to exert a 
sufficient strength I have, to take the man out of his distress, and 
put him in a comfortable way, which is a thing I really did once, 
and thereby saved a useful life; in this case there was good done by 
an agent, without any supernatural co-operation at all. Many more 
instances might be produced; but from what has been said, is it not 
plain that much good may be done without any interposition; and, 
with it, that no good can be added to the character of the agent?

"But you will say, perhaps, that the good disposition of the agent 
in such cases, is supernatural operation, and without such 
operation, he could not make a right use of his ability. To this we 
reply, that if by disposition is meant a given power to distinguish 
betwixt motive and motive, and so to judge of moral fitness and 
unfitness; or, a power to act from right motives, when such are 
present to the mind; these cannot be given, because they are the 
powers which constitute a man a moral agent, and render him 
accountable for his actions. Without them he could not be a subject 
of moral government.

"And if you mean by the term disposition, God's presenting such 
motives to the mind, as are necessary to excite to right action; the 
answer is, that though God may kindly interpose, and in many 
instances, by supernatural operation, present such motives to the 
mind, yet such operation cannot be always necessary, in order to our 
doing good. In many cases we see at once what good ought to be done, 
and we do it instantly of ourselves, unless the natural faculties be 
perverted by false principles. If our fellow-creature falls into the 
fire, or has a fit, while we are near him, the fitness of relieving 
him, and the natural compassion essential to our constitution, will 
make us fly to his assistance, without a supernatural operation. We 
want no divine impulse to make us interpose. Without being reminded, 
we will do our best to recover the man, if superstition or passion 
hath not misled the natural powers of the mind. In a great variety 
of things, the case is the same, and when at a glance we see the 
fitness of action, there is an immediate production of good.

"It is not just, then, to assert that the heart cannot be the spring 
of good actions, without the actings of God. It is the seat and 
source of both evil and good. Man is capable of giving glory to God, 
and of doing the contrary. He is constituted to answer all the 
purposes of social felicity, and to act a part suitable to, and 
becoming that reason and understanding, which God hath given him to 
guide his steps; and he may, on the contrary, by abusing his 
liberty, act an unsocial part in the creation, and do great 
dishonour to his Maker, by the evil imaginations of his heart, and 
the violence his hand commits. This hath been the state of human 
nature from the fall to the flood, and from the flood to our time. 
The human race have a natural ability for good or evil, and are at 
liberty for the choice of either of these. 'If thou doest well, 
Cain, who has power, and is at liberty to do evil, thou shalt be 
accepted; and if thou doest not well, who hast power, and is at 
liberty to do good, sin lieth at the door.'<25> If this had not been 
the case of Cain, and of others since his days, it seems to me, at 
present, that God would act an unequal part with his creatures. Can 
happiness or misery be called reward or punishment, unless the 
creature can voluntarily choose or avoid the thing which renders him 
the object of infliction or glory? I think not. 'For we must all 
appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one may 
receive the things done in his body, according to that he hath done, 
whether it be good or bad.'<26> The agency of a serpent will be no 
plea then, for a Cain, I suppose: nor will Abel's title to an 
inheritance depend only on the good brought forth in him by the 
Lord. And as to a self-sufficiency or independency in all this, as 
often charged, I can see none, for the reason already given, to wit, 
that my natural powers are as much the gift of God to me as 
supernatural powers can be, and render me as dependent a being. They 
are derived from him: It is his given powers I use, and if I make a 
right use of them, to answer the great and wise purpose I was 
created for, the good application must be as valuable as if I had 
applied supernatural powers to the same purpose."

"What you say, sir," answered Mrs. PRICE, "has reason in it, to be 
sure: but it seems inconsistent with the language of the Bible, and 
takes away the grace of God entirely, and the principal evidence of 
the Christian religion: As to the necessary guilt of mankind, Moses 
says, 'and God saw, that the wickednesses of man was great in the 
earth; and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart, was 
only evil continually: and it repented the Lord, that he had made 
man on the earth, &c.'<27> And again; ' The earth also was corrupt 
before God, and the earth was filled with violence: and God looked 
upon the earth, and behold it was corrupt, for all flesh had 
corrupted his way on the earth. And God said unto Noah, the end of 
all flesh is come before me, for the earth is filled with violence 
through them; and behold, I will destroy them with the earth. But 
Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord.'<28> The prophet Jeremiah 
does likewise affirm, 'The heart is deceitful above all things, and 
desperately wicked.'<29> And St. Paul declares from Psalm 14 and 53, 
'There is none righteous, no not one; there is none that 
understandeth, there is none that seeketh after God. They are all 
gone out of the way, they are altogether become unprofitable; there 
is none that doth good, no not one. Their throat is an open 
sepulchre; with their tongues have they used deceit; the poison of 
asps is under their lips: whose mouth is full of cursing and 
bitterness. Their feet are swift to shed blood. Destruction and 
misery are in their ways. And the way of peace have they not 
known.'<30>

"Then as to grace, or the operation of the Spirit, to cure this 
miserable condition of mankind, Peter said unto them, 'Repent, and 
be baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the 
remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, 
for the promise is unto you and your children, and to all that are 
afar off.'<31> This is a very extensive declaration both as to time 
and place. After Peter had told the people, 'the God of our fathers 
raised up Jesus whom he slew, and hanged on a tree, him hath God 
exalted with his right hand, to be a prince and a saviour, for to 
give repentance unto Israel, and forgiveness of sins, and we are his 
witnesses of these things, and so also is the Holy Ghost, whom God 
hath given to them that obey him,'<32> the apostle adds, 'then they 
(the Gentiles) were filled with the Holy Ghost.'<33> All who obeyed, 
without distinction, had the Holy Ghost given them, and it was a 
witness to them of the truth of Christ's divine mission, and the 
good effects of it, according to the promise of the Lord, to wit, 
'he shall testify of me.'

"St. Paul likewise tells us, 'if any man have not the spirit of 
Christ, he is none of his. And if Christ be in you, the body is dead 
because of sin, but the spirit is life, because of righteousness; 
but if the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell 
in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken 
your mortal bodies by his spirit that dwelleth in you. Therefore 
brethren, we are debtors, not to the flesh to live after the flesh, 
for if ye live after the flesh ye shall die; but if ye through the 
spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. For as many 
as are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God. For ye 
have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear, but ye have 
received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father, the 
spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the 
children of God.'<34> Here we see the necessity of having the spirit 
of Christ, and that those who have it not, do not belong to him. 
They are none of his. We may likewise observe, that it mortifies the 
deeds of the body, and quickens the soul to a life of holiness; the 
passage likewise shows, that the spirit bears witness with our 
spirits, and by an evidence peculiar to itself, gives us a certain 
sense, or understanding of it.

"In short, sir, a great number of texts might be produced, to show 
not only the work and effect of the divine spirit upon our minds; 
but that, it is an evidence, the principal evidence and ground of 
certainty to believers, respecting the truth of Christianity. I will 
mention however only two or three more, and then shall be glad to 
hear what you say to those things.

"'What man knoweth the spirit of man, save the spirit of man which 
is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the spirit 
of God. Now we have received not the spirit of the world, but the 
spirit which is of God, that we might know the things which are 
freely given to us of God. Ye have an unction from the Holy one, and 
ye know all things. These things I have written to you, concerning 
them that seduce you; but the anointing which ye have received of 
him, abideth in you, and ye need not that any teach you, but as the 
same anointing teacheth you of all things, and is truth, and is no 
lie, and even as it hath taught you, ye shall abide in it. Hereby we 
know that he abideth in us by his spirit, which he bath given us. 
Hereby we know that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he hath 
given us of his spirit.'

"What do you say to all this? do not the sacred passages I have 
repeated seem to declare in the plainest manner the necessary 
iniquity of man; that this is to be cured only, and his nature 
rectified by the operation of the divine spirit; and that the 
effusion of the spirit, both as to instruction and evidence, was not 
peculiar to the infancy of Christianity? This appears to my 
understanding. The Very essence of the Christian religion I think 
from these scriptures consists in the power and efficacy of the 
spiritual principle."

"What you have said, madam," I replied, "seems strong indeed in 
defence of the weakness of man, and the operation of the spirit, and 
I should be of your way of thinking as to the manifestation of it, 
but that I imagine the thing may be explained in a different manner. 
Let us review our religion, if you please, and perhaps we may find, 
that another account may be given of sanctification, and the 
renewing the mind into a state of holiness.

"When God called this world into being, his purpose was without all 
peradventure, that his rational creatures might enjoy the noblest 
pleasures, and by conforming their conduct to the fitness and 
relation of things, from a due regard to the authority of the first 
cause, by whom this fitness and relation were wisely constituted, 
secure all the blessings of this life, and honour, and glory, and 
immortality, in some future state of existence. This I think was the 
case. True religion was to form and fix every good principle in the 
human mind, produce all righteousness in the conversation, and 
thereby render mankind the blessed of the universal Father. They 
were to worship the one true God; the possessor of all being, and 
the fountain of all good; to believe on him, and have their trust 
and dependence always on him; to be pure and peaceable, gentle and 
full of mercy, without partiality, without hypocrisy, and so devoted 
to holiness and obedience, to every virtue and every good work which 
the law of reason can require from men; that after a long life spent 
in acting a part the most honourable to God, and the most 
advantageous to mankind, in obeying the dictates of reason, and 
thereby imitating the example of God; they might be translated to 
the regions of immortality, where the first and great Original 
displays as it were face to face the perfections of the Deity, and 
from an all-perfect and holy being receive the vast rewards he has 
prepared for those, who, in this first state, have been to all the 
purposes of life and religion, perfect as he is perfect. For these 
reasons did the supreme director, the greatest and the best Being in 
the universe, command the human race into existence. He gave them 
faculties to conduct them here through various scenes of happiness 
to the realms of immortality and immutable felicity. It was a 
Godlike design!

"But it was not very long before this human race became corrupt, and 
not only did evil in the sight of the Lord, but ceased to apprehend 
the first cause as one most perfect mind. The natural notions of 
moral perfection which reason and the light of nature supply, they 
no longer minded, nor thought of what is fit and reasonable to be 
done in every case. The passions began to influence and direct their 
lives: just and pure ideas of the Deity were lost, false ones took 
place, and the mischief and its fatal consequences became very 
great. It was a melancholy scene! The exalted notions of one 
glorious God, and of that true religion which subsists in the 
expectation of a future state, were no longer known, nor did the 
race ever think of approving themselves in the eye of an all perfect 
and holy being. Superstition and iniquity prevailed, and the spread 
of evil was wide.

"God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth," the 
thoughts of his heart evil continually, &c. as you have before 
quoted from the book of Genesis; and because the wickedness of the 
tenth generation was so great, and men no longer endeavoured after 
those perfections, which are natural and proper to rational minds; 
no longer thought of conforming themselves to the divine nature, or 
strove to imitate the excellencies of it, though constituted to give 
glory to their Maker, and endued with a reason and understanding 
sufficient to teach them the rule of duty, and guide their steps in 
the ways of true religion; but against the light of their own minds, 
acted the most impious and unsociable part: therefore God repented 
that he had made them, that is, he did what is the product of 
repentance in men, when they undo, as far as it is in their power, 
what they repent of, and destroyed his own work by that desolating 
judgment, the flood. This seems to be the truth of the case. The 
words of Moses do not mean the state of human nature on account of 
the fall. They express only the wickedness of the tenth generation 
as a reason for the deluge at that time. There is not the least 
ground for asserting from this passage in the sacred historian, that 
man was unable to do good by his natural powers, and that his crimes 
arose from resisting the actings of God upon his mind. The impiety 
of this generation was a mere abuse of free will, and acting against 
the plain dictates of their own minds; therefore, when wilful 
oppression and sensuality filled the earth, God destroyed the world 
by an inundation. Noah only, who was a just man, and perfect in his 
generation, with his family escaped.

"This terrible execution of an awful vengeance on the guilty race, 
demonstrated to the survivors, and to all ages to come, the great 
malignity of sin, and the uncontrollable supremacy of the divine 
government. As the venerable patriarch and his family sailed over 
the bosom of the boundless ocean of waters, and above the wrecks and 
ruins of this terrestrial world, they adored with grateful hearts, 
the Almighty Father of virtue and goodness, who had so wonderfully 
preserved them, and were convinced by the amazing, striking 
evidence, that sin is the greatest infamy and degradation of our 
reason and nature; that it has an insuperable repugnancy and 
irreversible contrariety, to our true happiness, and is infamous, 
pernicious, and ruinous, by the sentence of the Almighty. The 
dreadful event unanswerably evinced his constant actual cognizance 
of enormous faith and manners, and his unchangeable displeasure with 
them. This truth, which was learned at first, by the expulsion from 
Paradise, and the sad inheritance of mortality, they saw again 
republished in the most awful manner. This gave undoubtedly a very 
religious turn to their minds, and they determined to adhere to 
those excellent principles and practices, which had been, through 
God's goodness, their security in the general desolation, and to 
flee the contrary malignant ones which had procured that desolation 
on the rest. In a degree suitable to their nature and ability, they 
resolved to imitate the perfections of God, and to employ the powers 
and faculties of reason in endeavouring to be just, and righteous, 
and merciful. And as the amazing operation of God in the deluge 
called for their wonder and praise, we must think their hearts 
glowed with the sense of his goodness to them, and that they 
extolled his mercy and power in the salvation they had received. So 
we are told by an inspired writer. Noah restored the ancient rites 
of divine service, and built an altar to the Lord, 'And the Lord 
smelled a sweet savour, and said, never any more will I curse the 
ground for man's sake, though the imagination of man's heart is evil 
from his youth;'<36> because he will not hearken to the voice of 
reason, and with the greatest ardour and contention of mind, labour 
to attain a conformity to the divine nature in the moral perfections 
of it which is the true dignity of man, and the utmost excellence of 
human souls. 'Neither will I again smite any more every living 
creature as I have done. While the earth remaineth, seed time and 
harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night 
shall not cease.' <37>

"Thus did God enter into a covenant with Noah, and his sons, and 
their seed; and as the late amazing occurrences must incline the 
spectators of the flood to piety and goodness; and the fathers of 
the post-diluvian world were careful to instruct their children in 
the several parts of the stupendous fact, and from the whole 
inculcate the being and perfections of God, his universal dominion 
and actual providence and government over all things, his love of 
virtue and goodness and infinite detestation of all sin; to which we 
may add, that the imitation of God is not a new principle introduced 
into religion by revelation, but has its foundation in the reason 
and nature of things; we may from hence conclude, that the rising 
generation were persons of conspicuous devotion, and followed after 
the moral virtues, the holiness, justice and mercy which the light 
of nature discovers. They were, I believe, most excellent mortals 
for some time. They obeyed to be sure every dictate of reason, and 
adored and praised the invisible Deity; the supreme immutable mind.

"But this beautiful scene had an end, and man once more forgot his 
Maker and himself. He prostituted the honour of both, by robbing God 
of the obedience due to him, and by submitting himself a slave to 
the elements of the world. When he looked up to the heavens, and saw 
the glory of the sun and stars, instead of praising the Lord of all, 
he foolishly said, these are thy gods, O Man! An universal apostasy 
from the primitive religion prevailed. They began with the heavenly 
bodies, or sidereal gods, and proceeded to heroes, brutes, and 
images, till the world was overflowed with an inundation of 
idolatry, and superstition; even such superstition, as nourished 
under the notion of religion, and pleasing the gods, the most 
bestial impurities, the most inhuman and unnatural cruelties, and 
the most unmanly and contemptible follies. Moral virtue and goodness 
were totally extinguished. When men had lost the sense of the 
Supreme Being, the Creator, Governor, and Judge of the world, they 
not only ceased to be righteous and holy, but became necessarily 
vicious and corrupt in practice; for iniquity flows from corrupt 
religion, as the waters from the spring. The principles and 
ceremonies of the established idolatries gave additional strength to 
men's natural inclinations, to intemperance, lust, fraud, violence, 
and every kind of unrighteousness and debauchery. Long before the 
days of Moses this was the general case. Idolatry had violated all 
the duties of true religion, and the most abominable practices by 
constitution were authorised. The Phalli<38> and the Mylli<39>, 
rites that modesty forbids to explain, were esteemed principal parts 
of their ritual; virgins before marriage were to sacrifice their 
chastity to the honour of Venus;<40> the men were offered upon the 
altars for sacrifices; and children were burned alive to Moloch and 
Adramalech. In a word, the most abominable immoralities universally 
prevailed; with the encouragements of religion, men were led into 
intemperance, uncleanness, murders, and many vices, inconsistent 
with the prosperity and peace of society, as well as with the 
happiness of private persons; and that such iniquities might have a 
perpetual source, the most shameful idolatries were preserved in 
opposition to the knowledge and worship of the one true God. So 
general was this corruption and idolatry, that the infection seized 
the descendants of Shem, the pious race. Even Terah, the father of 
Abram, we find charged with it. And Abram himself was culpable I 
think in this respect, as the word Asebes imports. It is rendered in 
our Bible ungodly, but it signifies more properly idolatry, and that 
is what St. Paul in the 4th chapter to the Romans hints. The apostle 
speaking of Abraham, says, but to him that worketh not, but 
believeth in him that justifieth the ungodly,<41> that is, an 
ungodly idolator, who has no manner of claim to the blessings of 
God, he must be justified upon the foot, not of his own prior 
obedience, but of God's mercy.

"In such a calamitous state, a revelation to restore the law of 
nature, and make it more fully and clearly known, to enforce its 
observance, to afford helps and motives to the better performance of 
what it enjoins, and relieve the guilty mind against all its doubts, 
would certainly be a merciful vouchsafement from God to mankind, and 
be much for their advantage and happiness; and therefore, in the 
428th year from the flood, to provide for the restoration of the 
true religion, and preserve the knowledge and worship of the one 
true God on earth, in opposition to the prevailing idolatry, and the 
gross immoralities that were the effects of idolatrous principles 
and practices, Jehovah commanded Abraham to leave his country, his 
kindred, and his father's house, and proceed with his family to the 
land of Canaan. Here God entered into covenants with Abraham and his 
posterity,<42> to be instruments in the hands of Providence for 
bringing about great designs in the world, that he and his posterity 
were to be the church of God, and depositaries of a hope, that the 
covenant limited to Abraham and his chosen seed, was to grow in the 
fulness of time into a blessing upon all the nations of the earth. 
Ahraham was at this time seventy-five years old, and God added to 
the patriarchal worship the visible mark of circumcision, as a seal 
of a covenant between himself and Abraham.

"Yet how fit soever such a visible mark might be, to keep in 
remembrance the covenant between God and the family of Abraham, it 
was found in experience, insufficient to preserve them from the 
idolatrous customs of their neighbours. Some new laws, some further 
constitutions of worship were to be added, or, as the family of 
Abraham were situated in the midst of idolators and unrighteous 
ones, it was foreseen they would soon fall from the essentials of 
religion; and instead of preserving a right knowledge of God, of his 
being, perfections and government, a just sense of the reverence all 
men owe to him, from a firm belief of his being, power, dominion, 
justice, and goodness, and an hearty concern to obey the known will 
of God in all things; doing what is pleasing in his sight, seeking, 
and hoping their perfection and happiness, in the likeness, and in 
the image of God; they would, on the contrary, serve other Gods, and 
make their idolatry, not a matter of harmless speculation, but a 
fountain of the most dangerous immoralities; and therefore, as it 
was highly fit in itself, and well becoming the wisdom of God, he 
gave Moses a Christianity in hieroglyphics, that is, a tabernacle, a 
shechinah,<43> a priesthood, an altar, sacrifices, laws moral, and 
ceremonial, with every constituent part of the Hebrew ritual; being 
figures of a better shechinah, temple, priest, altar, sacrifice, 
revelation, and blessings—figurative representations of the more 
perfect constitutions in the days of Messiah the King. This was in 
the year 875 after the flood, and in 1491 before Christ. By a ritual 
so becoming the wisdom of God, given for a preservative against 
idolatrous principles, and as a dispensation preparatory to that 
future heavenly religion, the Hebrew nation were guarded against the 
surrounding corruptions of the world, and raised up the defenders of 
true religion, to preserve the knowledge and worship of the one true 
God.

"But as mankind would not follow the light of nature, which is 
sufficient, when attended to for a constant universal practice of 
piety and morality; so neither would they be engaged by various 
revealed laws, from time to time given, and by the calls and lessons 
of many prophets, to the practice of true religion and 
righteousness; but as the heart is the seat and source of wickedness 
in man, according to the prophet Jeremiah, so even the hearts of the 
Jews became deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked. And 
the prophet goes on to show, not the necessary inability of man 
without experiences, or an operating spirit within, as you suppose, 
madam; but that, though men thus wickedly deceive one another, yet 
they cannot possibly by such a wilful desperate piece of wickedness 
deceive their Maker, because to him the most secret recesses of 
their hearts lie open; and, consequently, in the issue, they deceive 
themselves, seeing God, who knows the deceit which is lodged in 
their hearts, will render unto them according to their works, and 
according to the fruit of their doings: so that their hope and 
expectation will be disappointed, even as a partridge is 
disappointed that sitteth on eggs, and hatcheth them not.<44>

"And as St. Paul says from the fourteenth and fifty-third Psalm, 
there was none righteous, no not one; there is none that 
understandeth, there is none that seeketh after God; and so on, as 
you madam, have quoted the verses, in which the apostle did not 
intend to show the necessary pollution of man without the help of 
grace; but the groundlessness of that opinion which the Jews had 
gone into, that they were the only people which pleased God; for 
they were as guilty as the Gentiles were in transgressing the law of 
nature. Neither of them had any legal title to justification. They 
were all very great transgressors. The throat of Jew and Gentile an 
open sepulchre: their tongues, deceit: the poison of asps under 
their lips: their mouths, full of cursing and bitterness: their feet 
swift to shed blood. Destruction and misery in their ways: and the 
way of peace have they not known:<45> Therefore the justification of 
the Jew as well as the Gentile must be of grace, and not of debt.

"In this was manifested the inestimable love of God in the 
redemption of the world by Jesus Christ. Though Jew and Gentile were 
qualified to discern and do both good and evil, and the Jew had a 
written law as a further assistance, but nevertheless they violated 
the plain dictates of natural reason, and the divine precepts of the 
law, and by unrighteousness and impurity, rendered themselves 
objects of judgment and condemnation; yet the Father of the 
universe, in compassion to mankind, sent a divine teacher from 
heaven, Christ, the true prophet that was to come into the word, and 
by his divinely revealed testimony and authority, attempts to 
abolish the superstition of men, reclaim their wickedness, and bring 
them back to the true spiritual worship of God, and to that holiness 
of life and manners which is agreeable to the uncorrupted light and 
dictates of nature. This was love. The blessed God, in compassion to 
human ignorance and wickedness, contracted by men's own fault, gives 
them an express revelation of his will, and re-establishes the rule 
of pure uncorrupt religion and morality. He declares those terms of 
sinful man's reconcilement to him which he was pleased to accept. 
Grace is manifested in the gospel to turn men from their vanities, 
or idol service, unto the living God, who made heaven and earth, and 
by the doctrine and sacrifice of Jesus Christ, to redeem us from all 
iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good 
works:—That denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should 
live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, looking 
for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearance of the great God; 
who will judge the world by that divine person, and great temporary 
minister, whom he sent before to destroy sin, and the kingdom of 
Satan; and to bring mankind into a perfect obedience to the will of 
the supreme Being. This renders Christianity a heavenly thing. 
Revelation thus explained is beautiful and useful to an extreme 
degree. It does not contradict, but strengthens the obligations of 
natural religion."

"Your account, Sir," said Mrs. PRICE, "of man and religion is 
different indeed from mine, and I must allow your explications have 
reason in them: but still they do not satisfy me, nor can I part 
with my own opinion. Two things in particular to me appear very 
strange in your scheme. It seems to take away the necessity of the 
Christian revelation, if natural religion, duly attended to, was 
perfect, and sufficient for virtue and holiness, and thereby to gain 
the favour of God. If reason alone can do the work, if men please, 
then what need of the gospel? If men will consider, and without 
consideration, no scheme can be of service; they may as well turn 
their thoughts to the law of nature as to the law of grace, if there 
is no different betwixt the rule of nature and the law of Christ, 
with regard to the knowledge of God, the maker of heaven and earth, 
and the worship due to him on that account, and the practice of 
virtue and morality.

"In the next place, if I understand you right, the grace of God is 
of no use at all in religion, as you account for salvation. What is 
out of order within us, in the mind and its faculties, the will and 
its affections, and wants to be set right in good thoughts and 
works, our own reason, in your notion of religion, is sufficient to 
regulate, and unassisted by the illumination of the holy spirit of 
God, we may live in an uncorrupted state of piety and morality, and 
so save our souls, if we please. This is what I cannot believe. The 
grace of God in the gospel is the glory and comfort of the Christian 
religion. A divine operation that renews and sanctifies the mind is 
an invaluable blessing, and in a manner inexpressibly charming, 
satisfies me beyond hesitation, that the Christian religion is true, 
while it puts me in the actual possession of the good effects of it. 
The spirit of God discovers to me the state of my own mind, in all 
the circumstances of a Christian life, sets my follies, my neglects, 
and my failings, in order before me, which is the first right step 
in order to the overcoming them; and then observing the discoveries 
I was not able to make myself, and having a strong faith in the 
divine power and sufficiency, I am enabled to gain victories my 
insufficient reason could never obtain. May this divine monitor then 
abide in my breast. It is by the heavenly assistance of the holy 
spirit only, as vouchsafed in the Christian dispensation, that I can 
secure for myself eternal life. The wise and prudent of this world 
may think as they please of this matter, and produce reasonings 
against it beyond my power to answer; but for my part, I must 
consider it as the principle of my salvation, and think I cannot be 
thankful enough for the inestimable blessing. It is to me a glorious 
instance of the great wisdom and goodness of God."

Madam," I replied, "in relation to your first objection, that I make 
no difference between revealed and natural religion, for nature is 
as sufficient as grace, in my account, I assure you that I think the 
revelation of the gospel excels the best scheme of natural religion 
that could be proposed; in declaring the terms of reconcilement, in 
demonstrating the divine wrath against sin, in the method of showing 
mercy by the death of God's beloved son, and the promise of free 
pardon on the condition of repentance and newness of life. This 
manner gives unspeakable comfort to repenting sinners. It gives the 
greatest encouragement to engage them to the love of God, and the 
practice of all his commandments; an encouragement that reason could 
not discover. To Christianity, therefore, the true preference is 
due. Though philosophy or the doctrine of reason may reform men, yet 
the Christian religion is a clearer and more powerful guide. It 
improves the light of reason by the supernatural evidence and 
declaration of God's will, and the means of man's redemption is a 
more efficacious motive and obligation to universal obedience than 
nature could ever with certainty propose. A revelation that has the 
clearest and strongest evidence of being the divine will, must be 
the most easy and effectual method of instruction, and be more 
noticed than the best human teaching; and this will of God being 
truly and faithfully committed to writing, and preserved uncorrupt, 
must always be the best and surest rule of faith and manners. It is 
a rule absolutely free from all those errors and superstitions, both 
of belief and practice, which no human composure was ever before 
free from, or, probably, would have been free from, without the 
assistance of such a revelation. Nor is this all. This is not the 
only superior excellence of our holy religion.

"A Mediator and crucified Redeemer brought into the Christian 
revelation, has a noble effect on a considering mind, and shows the 
reasonableness of the gospel-dispensation. The wisest and most 
rational heathens ever were for sacrifices and mediators, as the 
greatness of God was thereby declared, and that not only sin 
deserved punishment, but men's lives to be forfeited by their breach 
of the divine laws; and when a divine person, made man, like unto 
us, appears instead of all other mediators, by whom, as the 
instrument of the means of salvation, we are to offer up our prayers 
to the only true God; and his voluntary dying in testimony of the 
truth of his mission and doctrine, is appointed to be instead of all 
other sacrifices, and to remain a memorial that God requires no 
atonement of us, but repentance and newness of life; and the 
spotless virtues and obedience of this divine Redeemer, are to be a 
most perfect and moving example for us to imitate; this renders 
Christianity worthy of God, and makes it the perfection of religion. 
Great then are the advantages which the revelation of Christ Jesus 
has above mere reason, darkened by the clouds of error and a general 
corruption. It is the most perfect rule of life. It is the most 
powerful means to promote a constant uniform practice of virtue and 
piety. It advances human nature to its highest perfection, fills it 
with all the fruits of righteousness, and grants us privileges and 
blessings far superior to what we could attain any other way.

"With regard to the second objection, that I take away the grace of 
God, to preserve the dignity of human nature, this is far from my 
intention. I do indeed think, that as the gospel was given for the 
noblest purpose; to wit, to call in an extraordinary manner upon 
mankind, to forsake that vice and idolatry, the corrupt creed of 
polytheism, the guilt of superstition, their great iniquities, 
violent passions, and wordly affections, which are all contrary to 
reason, and disgrace human nature; and to practise that whole system 
of morality, which they must know to be most useful to them; that 
they might turn to a religion which had but one object, the Great 
Invisible Being, all-knowing and all-sufficient, to whom all the 
intelligent world are to make their devout applications; because he 
is an infinite, independent, sovereign mind, who has created all 
things, and absolutely rules and governs all; possesses all natural 
perfections, exists in all duration, fills all space with his 
presence, and is the omniscient witness of all their difficulties 
and wants; and that since they were bound by all the ties of moral 
duty to obey this one God, and observe the rational institutions of 
religion, therefore they should make it the labour of their whole 
lives to excel in holiness and righteousness, and by virtue and 
piety unite themselves to God, and entitle themselves to glory at 
the great day. That as this is the nature, end, and design of the 
Christian revelation, so I do think the gospel of our salvation the 
word of truth, as an apostle calls it, is sufficient for the 
purpose, without immediate impulses. As we have a reasonable, 
intellectual nature, there is no want of mechanical powers. The 
words of Christ, which are the words of God, are, our life, and 
will, if attended to, powerfully enable us to practise good works, 
and to excel, and persevere therein. I can do all these things, 
through Christ, who strengtheneth me, that is, through the written 
directions of Christ, and through the arguments and motives of the 
Christian doctrine. To say otherwise of the gospel, is, in my 
opinion, injurious to it.

God may, to be sure, give special aids to men, whenever he thinks 
fit. He may, by an extraordinary agency, render our faculties more 
capable of apprehension, where divine things are concerned, may 
awaken a dormant idea, which lay neglected in the memory, with 
unusual energy; may secretly attract the more attentive regard of 
the mind, and give it an inclination and an ability of tracing its 
various relations, with an unusual attention, so that a lustre 
before quite unknown shall be, as it were, poured upon it; the 
spirit of God may render the mind more susceptible and more 
tenacious of divine knowledge; I believe he often does by 
interposition, if in the spirit of Christ's doctrine we ask it of 
the great Father of Lights, the author of all the understanding 
divided among the various ranks of created beings; who, as he first 
formed the minds of angels and men, continues the exercise of their 
intellectual faculties, and one way or another communicates to them 
all the knowledge of every kind which they possess: in which view 
all our knowledge of every kind may be called a revelation from God, 
and be ascribed, as it is by Elihu in Job, to the inspiration of the 
Almighty. This the holy Spirit may do, and dissipate a prejudice 
that opposes truth. But this is not always necessary, nor always to 
be expected. It is evident from the gospel, that our Lord rather 
speaks of his word and doctrine, as the aids to save men's souls, 
than of himself, or spirit, personally considered. Abiding in him, 
and he in them, as necessary to their bearing fruit, signifies a 
strict and steady regard to his word, and the influence of that upon 
our minds. 'If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you; ye shall 
ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you:'<47> that is, 'If 
you continue to believe in me, and to pay a steady regard to my 
doctrine, you will be highly acceptable to God.'

"In short, as 'no man can come unto me,' says our Lord, except the 
Father which hath sent me draw him;'<48> that is, no man will 
receive my pure, sublime and spiritual doctrine, unless he have 
first gained some just apprehensions concerning the general 
principles of religion; but if he has a good notion of God and his 
perfections, and desires to Advance in virtue, he will come unto me, 
and hearken to that revelation, which contains the best directions 
for the performance of all the duties, and the greatest incitement 
to virtue, piety and devotion, so, no man can come to the Father but 
by the Son, that is, by obeying the written word, and proceeding in 
that way in which the Son has declared it to be the will of the 
Father, that men should come to him, namely, by keeping God's 
commandments, and by repentance and amendment of life; there being 
no other name, or way given among men, but this way given or 
declared by Jesus Christ, by which they may be saved. In all this, 
there is not a word of supernatural light or operation; though such 
operation, as before observed, there may be. There is not a hint of 
man's natural inability.

"To the glorious gospel then, the gospel of our salvation, the word 
of truth, the word of life, let us come, and with diligence and 
impartiality study it. Let us follow the truth we there find in 
every page, and it will enable us to triumph over the temptations of 
allurement and of terror. We shall become the children of God by the 
spirit of adoption. We shall be easy and happy in this life, and 
glorious and ever blessed in that which is to come. If we obey the 
gospel of the Son of God, and hearken to his word, he will take us 
under his guardian care. He descended from heaven, to deliver us 
from everlasting ruin, he purchased us with the price of his own 
blood, and if we live up to the word of truth, he will conduct us 
safely through life and death, into the abode of holy and happy 
spirits, and at length raise our bodies from the dust, and fix our 
complete persons in a state of immortal glory and felicity. This is 
my sense of religion. Where I am wrong, I shall ever be glad to be 
set right."

Mrs. PRICE made no reply, and so ended this remarkable conversation. 
On whose side the truth is, the reader is to judge. What she 
advances for supernatural operation is strong and pious; and 
considering Mrs. PRICE had no learning, and was almost without any 
reading, I thought it very wonderful to hear her on this, and many 
other subjects. She was such another genius as Chubb, but on the 
other side of the question; if she had been able to write as 
sensibly and correctly as she talked on several articles of 
religion, she would have made a good author. So much goodness and 
good sense I have not very often found in her kind. They merit a 
memorial in a journal of the curious things that have occurred to me 
in my life-time.



CHAPTER VI.

The thirteenth of June, 1725, I took my leave of my friend, JOHN 
PRICE, and his admirable wife, promising to visit them again as soon 
as it was in my power, and proceeded on my journey in quest of Mr. 
Turner. I would not let PRICE go with me, on second thoughts, as 
many sad accidents might happen in this rough and desolate part of 
the world, and no relief in such case to be found. If I fell, there 
was no one belonging to me to shed a tear for me; but if a mischief 
should befall JACK PRICE, his wife would be miserable indeed, and I 
the maker of a breach in the sweetest system of felicity that love 
and good sense had ever formed. This made me refuse his repeated 
offers to accompany me. All I would have was a boy and horse of his 
to carry some provisions wet and dry, as there was no public-house 
to be found in ascending those tremendous hills, or in the deep 
vales through which I must go; nor any house that he knew of beyond 
his own.

With the rising sun then I set out, and was charmed for several 
hours with the air and views. The mountains, the rocky precipices, 
the woods and the waters, appeared in various striking situations 
every mile I travelled on, and formed the most astonishing points of 
view. Sometimes I was above the clouds, and then crept to enchanting 
valleys below. Here glens were seen that looked as if the mountains 
had been rent asunder to form the amazing scenes, and there, forests 
and falling streams covered the sides of the hills. Rivers in many 
places, in the most beautiful cascades, were tumbling along; and 
cataracts from the tops of mountains came roaring down. The whole 
was grand, wonderful, and fine. On the top of one of the mountains I 
passed over at noon, the air was piercing cold, on account of its 
great height, and so subtle, that we breathed with difficulty, and 
were a little sick. From hence I saw several black subjacent clouds 
big with thunder, and the lightning within them rolled backwards and 
forwards, like shining bodies of the brightest lustre. One of them 
went off in the grandest horrors through the vale below, and had no 
more to do with the pike I was on than if it had been a summit in 
another planet. The scene was prodigiously fine. Sub pedibus ventos 
et rauca tonitrua calcat.<49>

Till the evening, I rid and walked it, and in numberless windings 
round impassable hills, and by the sides of rivers it was impossible 
to cross, journeyed a great many miles, but no human creature, or 
any kind of house, did I meet with in all the long way, and as I 
arrived at last at a beautiful lake, whose banks the hand of nature 
had adorned with vast old trees, I sat down by this water in the 
shade to dine, on a neat's tongue I had got from good Mrs. PRICE; 
and was so delighted with the striking beauties and stillness of the 
place, that I determined to pass the night in this sweet retreat. 
Nor was it one night only, if I had my will, that I would have 
rested there. Often did I wish for a convenient little lodge by this 
sweet water-side, and that with the numerous swans, and other fowl 
that lived there, I might have spent my time in peace below, till I 
was removed to the established seat of happiness above.

Had this been possible, I should have avoided many an affliction, 
and had known but few of those expectations and disappointments, 
which render life a scene of emptiness, and bitterness itself. My 
years would have rolled on in peace and wisdom, in this sequestered, 
delightful scene, and my silent meditations had been productive of 
that good temper and good action, which the resurrection of the 
dead, the dissolution of the world, the judgement day, and the 
eternal state of men, requires us to have. Free from the various 
perplexities, and troubles I have experienced by land and sea, in 
different parts of the world, 1 should have lived, in this paradise 
of a place, in the enjoyment of that fine happiness, which easy 
country business and a studious life afford; and might have made a 
better preparation for that hour which is to disunite me, and let my 
invisible spirit depart to the shades of eternity. Happy they, who 
in some such rural retirement, can employ some useful hours every 
day in the management of a little comfortable farm, and devote the 
greater portion of their time to sacred knowledge, heavenly piety, 
and angelic goodness; which cannot be dissolved when the thinker 
goes, nor be confined to the box of obscurity, under the clods of 
the earth; but will exist in our souls for ever, and enable us to 
depart in peace to the happy regions. This has ever made me prefer a 
retired country life, when it was in my power to enjoy it. But be it 
town or country, the main business, my good readers, should be to 
secure an inheritance in that eternal world, where the sanctified 
live with God and his Christ. Getting, keeping, multiplying money; 
dress, pleasure, entry; are not only little things for such beings 
as we are: they are indeed sad principal work for creatures that are 
passing away to an everlasting state: there to lament their lost 
day, and talents misapplied, in dreadful agonies, in the habitations 
of darkness; or to remain for ever in the habitations of light, 
peace, and joy; if you have laboured to obtain, and improve in the 
graces and virtuous qualities which the gospel recommends. These are 
the treasure and possession worth a Christian's acquiring. These 
only are portable into the eternal world; when the body that was 
clothed in purple and fine linen, and fared sumptuously every day, 
is laid in a cold and narrow cave. Take my advice then, reader. Be 
ready. Let us so think and act in this first state, that in the 
next, we may meet in the regions of purity and righteousness, 
serenity and joy.

The lake I have mentioned was the largest I had seen in this wild 
part, being above a mile in length, and more than half a mile broad; 
and the water that filled it burst with the greatest impetuosity 
from the inside of a rocky mountain, that is very wonderful to 
behold. It is a vast craggy precipice, that ascends till it is 
almost out of sight, and by its gloomy and tremendous air, strikes 
the mind with a horror that has something pleasing in it. This 
amazing cliff stands perpendicular at one end of the lake, at the 
distance of a few yards, and has an opening at the bottom, that is 
wide enough for two coaches to enter at once, if the place was dry. 
In the middle of it there is a deep channel, down which the water 
rushes with a mighty swiftness and force, and on either side, the 
stone rises a yard above the impetuous stream. The ascent is easy 
and flat. How far it goes, I know not, being afraid to ascend more 
than forty yards; not only on account of the terrors common to the 
place, from the fall of so much water with a strange kind of roar, 
and the height of the arch which covers the torrent all the way: but 
because as I went up, there was of a sudden, an increase of noise so 
very terrible, that my heart failed me, and a trembling almost 
disabled me. The rock moved under me, as the frightful sounds 
increased, and as quick as it was possible for me, I came into day 
again. It was well I did; for I had not been many minutes out, 
before the water overflowed its channel, and filled the whole 
opening in rushing to the lake. The increase of the water, and the 
violence of the discharge, were an astonishing sight. I had a 
fortunate escape.

As the rocky mountain I have mentioned, is higher than either 
Snowden in North Wales, or Cader Idris in Merionethshire, which have 
been thought the highest mountains in this island; that is, it is 
full a mile and a half high from the basis, as I found by ascending 
it with great toil on the side that was from the water, and the top 
was a flat dry rock, that had not the least spring, or piece of 
water on it, how shall we account for the rapid flood that proceeded 
from its inside? Where did this great water come from? I answer, 
might it not flow from the great abyss, and the great increase of 
it, and the fearful noise, and the motion of the rock, be owing to 
some violent commotion in the abyss, occasioned by some natural or 
supernatural cause?

That there is such an abyss, no one can doubt that believes 
revelation, and from reason and history it is credible, that there 
are violent concussions on this vast collection of water, by the 
divine appointment: and therefore, I imagine it is from thence the 
water of this mountain proceeds, and the great overflowing and 
terrifying sound at certain times. To this motion of the abyss, by 
the divine power exerted on it, I ascribe the earthquakes; and not 
to vapour, or electricity. As to electricity, which Dr. Stukely 
makes the cause of the deplorable downfall of Lisbon, in his book on 
The Philosophy of Earthquakes; there are many things to be objected 
against its being the origin of such calamities; one objection is, 
and it is an insuperable one, that electrical shocks are ever 
momentary, by every experiment, but earthquakes are felt for several 
minutes. Another is, that many towns have been swallowed up in 
earthquakes, though Lisbon was only overthrown. Such was the case of 
the city of Callao, within two leagues of Lima. Though Lima was only 
tumbled into ruins, October 23, 1746; yet Callao sunk downright with 
all its inhabitants, and an unfathomable sea now covers the finest 
port in Peru, as I have seen on the spot. In the earthquake at 
Jamaica, June 7, 1692, in which several thousands perished, it is 
certain, that not only many houses, and a great number of people, 
were entirely swallowed up; but that, at many of the gapings or 
openings of the earth, torrents of water that formed great rivers, 
issued forth. This I had from a man of veracity then on the spot, 
who was an eye-witness of these things, and expected himself every 
minute to descend to the bowels of the earth, which heaved and 
swelled like a rolling sea. Now to me the electrical stroke does not 
appear sufficient to produce these things. The power of electricity, 
to be sure is vast and amazing. It may cause great tremors and 
undulations of the earth, and bring down all the buildings of a 
great city: but as to splitting the earth to great depths, and 
forcing up torrents of water, where there was no sign of the fluid 
element before, I question much if the vehemence of the elemental 
electric fire does this. Beside, when mountains and cities sink into 
the earth, and the deepest lakes are now seen to fill all the place 
where they once stood, as has been the case in many countries, where 
could these mighty waters come, but from the abyss? The great lake 
Oroquantur in Pegu, was once a vast city. In Jamaica, there is a 
large deep lake where once a mountain stood. In an earthquake in 
China, in the province of Sanci, deluges of water burst out of the 
earth, Feb. 7, 1556, and inundated the country for 180 miles. Many 
more instances of this kind I might produce, exclusive of Sodom, the 
ground of which was inundated by an irruption of waters from 
beneath, which now forms the Dead Sea; after the city was destroyed 
by fire from above; that the land which had been defiled with the 
unnatural lusts of the inhabitants might be no more inhabited, but 
remain a lasting monument of the divine vengeance on such crimes, to 
the end of the world; and the use I would make of those I have 
mentioned, is to show that these mighty waters were from the furious 
concussion of the abyss that caused the earthquakes. Electricity, I 
think, can never make seas and vast lakes to be where there were one 
before. Loch Erne, in the county of Fermanagh, in the province of 
Ulster in Ireland, is thirty three miles long, and fourteen broad, 
and as the old Irish Chronicle informs us, was once a place where 
large and populous towns appeared, till for the great iniquity of 
the inhabitants, the people and their fair habitations were 
destroyed in an earthquake, and mighty waters from the earth covered 
the place, and formed this lake. Could the electrical stroke produce 
this sea that was not to be found there before the destruction? Is 
it not more reasonable to suppose, that such vast waters have been 
forced by a supernatural commotion from the great abyss, in the 
earthquake that destroyed the towns which once stood in this place?

To this then, till I am better informed, I must ascribe such 
earthquakes as produce great rivers and lakes; and where no waters 
appear, I believe the earthquakes are caused by the immediate finger 
of God; either operating on the abyss, though not so as to make the 
water break out on the earth; or by directing the electrical 
violence or stroke; or otherwise acting on the ruined cities and 
shattered places.

For my part, I think it is a grievous mistake in our philosophical 
enquiries, to assign so much to second causes as the learned do. The 
government of the universe is given to matter and motion, and under 
pretence of extolling original contrivance, the execution of all is 
left to dead substance. It is just and reasonable, in which even 
Newton and McLaurin agree, to suppose that the whole chain of 
causes, or the several series of them, should centre in him, as 
their source and fountain; and the whole system appear depending 
upon him, the only independent cause. Now to me this supposition 
does not appear either just or reasonable. I think the noble 
phenomena of nature ought to be ascribed to the immediate operation 
of the Deity. Without looking for a subtle elastic medium, to 
produce gravity; which medium Sir Isaac confesses he had no proof 
of; nor is there in reality such a thing in the universe; I imagine 
the divine Newton would have done better, if, after establishing the 
true system by nature, by demonstrating the law of gravity, he had 
said this gravity was the constant and undeniable evidence of the 
immediate influence of the Deity in the material universe. A series 
of material causes betwixt Deity and effect, is, in truth, 
concealing him from the knowledge of mortals for ever. In the moral 
government of the world, second causes do, because free-agents acts 
a part; but, in the material universe to apply them, to me seems 
improper, as matter and motion only, that is, mechanism; come in 
competition with the Deity. Most certainly he constantly interposes. 
The divine power is perpetually put forth throughout all nature. 
Every particle of matter, must necessarily, by its nature, for ever 
go wrong, without the continued act of Deity. His everlasting 
interposition only can cause a body moving in a circle to change the 
direction of its motion in every point. Nor is it possible for 
subtle matter, the supposed cause of gravity, to know to impel 
bodies to a centre, with quadruple force at half the distance.

And as in gravity, and in the cohesion of the parts of matter, the 
Deity is, and acts in the motion of the celestial bodies, and in the 
resistance the least particles make to any force that would separate 
them; so is his immediate power, I think for myself, exerted not 
only in earthquakes and tides, but in the circulations of the blood, 
lymph, and chyle, in muscular motion, and in various other phenomena 
that might be named. Books I know have been written, and ingenious 
books they are, to show the causes of these things, and trace the 
ways they are performed by the materials themselves; but these 
explications never satisfied me. I had as many questions to ask, 
after reading these books, as I had before I looked into them, and 
could find no operator but infinite power, conducted by infinite 
wisdom.

As to the force of the moon, in raising tides, and, that spring 
tides are produced by the sum of the actions of the two luminaries, 
when the moon is in syzygy<50>, there is much fine mathematical 
reasoning to prove it, which the reader may find in Dr. Halley's 
abstract of Sir Isaac Newton's Theory of the Tides; and in Dr. 
Rutherforth's System of Natural Philosophy; but nevertheless, the 
concomitance of water and luminary, or the revolutions of ocean and 
moon answering one another so exactly, that the flow always happens 
when the moon hangs over the ocean, and the spring tides when it is 
nearer the earth, which is supposed to be in the new and full moon; 
this does not prove to me, that the periodical flux and reflux of 
the sea is derived from mechanism. As we have two ebbs and two flows 
in twenty-four hours, and the moon comes but once in that time to 
our meridian, how can the second ebb and flow be ascribed to it? and 
when, beneath the horizon, in the opposite hemisphere, the moon 
crosses the meridian again, is it credible, that from the eastern 
and southern ocean, round Good Hope and Cape Horn, it should as soon 
overflow our coasts, as when it is vertical to the shores of Guinea? 
If the moon, in conjunction with the sun, by pression and 
attraction, was the principal cause of flux and reflux, why is there 
no established tide on the Mediterranean sea, though of a vast 
breadth, and two thousand miles in length from the Straits of 
Gibraltar to the coasts of Syria and Palestine; but only some 
irregular and unaccountable swellings and falls in a few places of 
this sea, to wit, at Tunis, Messina, Venice, and Negroponte; and 
these swellings, as I have seen, flowing sometimes four, five, six 
or seven, and eight times in twenty-four hours; in the most 
irregular manner; against the fixed laws of pression and attraction, 
ascribed to the moon and sun, on a supposition of their causing the 
tides? If pression, and the strong attractive power of the moon, and 
the weaker influence of the sun, forces the immense ocean twice a 
day from its natural quietus, and rolls it in tides, why has the 
Caspian sea no tide; no swelling or flow, regular or irregular, 
excepting that sometimes, in the space of sixteen years, and never 
sooner, it rises many fathoms, and drowns the adjacent country; to 
the almost ruin, sometimes of Astrakhan in Asiatic Russia; as 
happened when I was there to embark for Persia? if it be said, that 
this is properly a lake, having no communication with the ocean; 
yet, I answer, that it is in every quality of saltness, &c. as much 
a sea as any other sea; and large enough for the luminaries 
attraction and pression; being five hundred miles from north to 
south, and near four hundred miles in breadth from east to west: I 
say, large enough to avoid continuing necessarily in equilibrium, as 
Dr. Rutherforth says must be the case, on account of the small 
extent of this sea. Five hundred by four hundred miles of sea does 
not require that such a sea should press equally, or that the 
gravity of its water should be equally diminished in every part of 
it, and so out of the powers, addititious and ablatitious, of the 
luminary; that is, the force, with which the moon increases the 
water's gravity, and the force, with which the moon diminishes the 
water's gravity. If the moon in zenith or nadir did the work, the 
equilibrium of the Caspian might be destroyed, as well as any other 
equilibrium of water, by force, addititious or ablatitious, or by 
the sum of these forces; therefore, there might, by this theory, be 
tides in the Caspian sea, though not great ones. There are small as 
well as great tides. The tides of the Atlantic Ocean are inferior in 
every respect to those of the larger Pacific ocean. A quarter of a 
great circle of the earth, that is, an extent of ocean from east to 
west 90 degrees, is only required, that the tides may have their 
full motion. A tide of less motion may be in such an extent of sea 
as the Caspian.

In the last place, how does the Theory of Tides account for the 
regular peculiarity of the flux and reflux of the Atlantic, 
different from all other tides; while at Bathsha in the kingdom of 
Tunquin, there never is more than one tide in twenty-four hours; and 
some days no tide? For my part, I resolve the whole into the 
immediate power of the Deity. This power is gravity, attraction, 
repulse. The inactivity of matter requires the constancy and 
universality of divine power to support the material universe, and 
move it as occasion requires; that is, as infinite wisdom sees most 
conducive to the benefit of his creation.

Men of fine imagination may make a wonderful display of mathematical 
learning in accounts of gravity, &c. combined with principles of 
mechanism; and electricity, which is called the immediate officer of 
God Almighty; but the truth is, a constant repetition of divine acts 
in regular and irregular motions of the earth and the seas. The 
finger of God moves the land and the waters.

In the case of earthquakes, as electricity, or aerial power, is 
insufficient to produce them in my opinion, for two reasons before 
given; to wit, that the electrical stroke is ever single and 
momentary, but the vibrations of the earth, in a quake, are often 
three and four minutes, and have held to seven minutes, and that, 
besides the swelling and trembling of the earth, it has so opened at 
those times, as to swallow not only houses and people, but even 
mountains, and to send forth great rivers and vast waters. And, as 
subterranean fire and vapour, I think, can never do such work, for 
many reasons that may be offered, we must, I think, ascribe the 
earthquakes to the immediate impression of divine power; by which a 
city is tumbled into ruins in three or four minutes, in the sad 
manner Lisbon was destroyed the first of November, 1755, or, the 
water of the great abyss is with such violence moved, that it shakes 
the arches of the earth, and where infinite wisdom directs, is 
enabled by Almighty Power to open the globe with tremendous noises, 
and pour forth vast torrents of water, to cover a land where once a 
flourishing city has stood. The electric stroke cannot be more 
dreadful than such exertion of omnipotence. The immediate action of 
the Deity, to destroy, must be as efficacious surely as any 
subordinate agent or cause: and it must be more terrible to the 
mind, as there can be no supposition of accident in ruin this way: 
but we see as it were the almighty arm, exerting an irresistible 
force, that could in the same few moments that a large town and its 
inhabitants are destroyed, shake the whole world into one dreadful 
ruin, or separate it into nothing. To my apprehension, the aerial 
power of electricity is not so fearfully striking, as the Creator's 
appearing, on the spot, to shake terribly the earth: and if we 
consider, that it is on account of sin, that God resigns his 
omnipotence to his wrath, and commands his whole displeasure to 
arise, must not this account of an earthquake have the greatest 
tendency to reform the manners of the surviving people?

As to muscular motion, if it be rightly considered, it appears very 
plainly to proceed from a living force, impressed ab extra;<51> that 
mechanism does not act as cause in this affair; but the divine power 
acts in the case, as it does in many different places of the human 
body at once, and with inexpressible variety.

Various are the accounts that learned men have given of muscular 
motion, and ingenious are their reasonings on the subject: but they 
are not satisfactory, nor do they at all explain the thing, and 
account for it. What is a muscle?

It is to be sure a bundle of small blood vessels, consisting of 
arteries and their returning veins, laid one upon another in their 
parallel plates, running through the whole length of the muscle; and 
at small intervals, these blood vessels, or longitudinal red and 
fleshy fibres, are contorted and bound about with small transverse, 
and spiral ramifications and twinings of the nerves. This is a 
muscle; it has two ends, or tendons, fastened to two bones, one of 
which is fixed, and the other movable; and by the contraction of the 
muscle, the movable bone is drawn upon its fulcrum towards a fixed 
point. This is indisputable; and it is likewise certain, that the 
muscles are to be distinguished into those of voluntary, and those 
of natural or necessary motion: that the voluntary muscles have 
antagonists, which act alternately in a contrary direction, that is 
are contracted by the command of the will, while the others are 
stretched, and again are extended, while the others contracted: but 
the necessary muscles have contracting and extending powers within 
themselves, and need no antagonists.

This being the true state of the muscles, the question is, what 
causes that elasticity, spring, or power of contraction and 
restoration, which their nervous coats and fibres have, to recover 
themselves against a given weight or force that stretches them? The 
reply is, that many unanswerable reasons can be given to prove, that 
this contractive restitutive force does not depend on the mixture, 
effervescence, or rarefaction of any fluids, humours, or liquors 
within the body; and there is one convincing experiment that shows 
it.

Lay open the thorax of a dog, as IT have often done; and take a 
distinct view of that famous muscle, the heart, in its curious and 
wonderful motion, while the animal is still alive. In diastole, the 
muscle is very red and florid, soft and yielding to the touch, and 
through it the vital fluid glows and shines; it appears in this 
state fully replenished and distended with blood; but in systole, as 
soon as it begins to contract, and the blood rushes out by the 
compression of the contracting fibres, the heart loses its florid 
colour, and becomes pale and livid, compact and solid, and evinces 
that, during this state of it, the muscle contracts inwardly into 
its own dense substance, and takes up less space than before, till 
it returns to its diastole; then the blood which flowed from it with 
velocity, during systole through the coronary veins into the 
auricles, rushes back into it through the coronary arteries, 
restores the glowing florid colour, and inflates the muscle, in 
order to strain the nerves for the next contraction. It is plain 
from hence, that the heart has less blood and fluid in time of 
contraction, and that the contraction is not caused by the addition 
of another fluid from the nerves, as the learned have asserted.

And as to what they say of the longitudinal fibres being divided 
into innumerable little cells or bladders, which have communications 
with the blood vessels and nerves, and that in these vesicles, the 
blood and nervous fluid mix, ferment, and by rarefaction and 
expansion, swell and blow up the cells, and thereby inflate and 
distend the muscle, and increase its thickness, while its length is 
shortened; this is so perplexed and unreasonable an hypothesis, that 
I am astonished how men of sense ever came to think of such a 
doctrine. There is no such nervous fluid to be found, to cause this 
fermentation, rarefaction, &c.; and if there was, expansive force 
must lengthen as well as thicken, and the muscle could not be 
shortened in length, and swelled in thickness. The natural action of 
the fluids upon the solids is, to increase dimensions proportionably 
every way, that is, in the direction of the axis and conjugate 
diameter equally. Beside, if there was expansion, circulation must 
stop. The distention of the vesicles, and the rapid exit of the 
rarifying fluid could not be at once.

The plain account of the matter is then, that muscular motion is 
performed by the elasticity of the nervous fibrillae, contracting 
and restoring themselves against the stretching force of the 
circulating blood. The contraction of the muscle straitens and 
compresses the blood-vessels, and forces the blood with impetuosity 
through the heart; and this squeezing or propelling force gives the 
fluid an impetus, that makes it return with violence upon the 
muscles, in the course of its circulation; then by force and 
impulse, it stretches the transverse and spiral nervous fibres, and 
so extends the contracted muscle, that drove it by contraction from 
itself. Upon this, the blood-vessels having obtained their due 
extent and capacity, the distending force of the blood of 
consequence ceases: but the moment it does, the contractive power of 
the nerves begins to act again, and restores them to a contracted 
dense state, by a force exactly equal to that which extended them; 
till the returning propelled blood re-enters the muscle, and 
stretches it again, as before described. Such are the two wonderful 
counter-forces that produce the natural involuntary motion of the 
heart, and carry on the circulation of the blood. You see with your 
eyes, in the opened live dog this alternate contraction and 
extension; and as the stretching power is but a consequence of the 
contracting power, contraction is the spring of this wonderful 
action, in which our will or free agency has no concern. And to what 
shall we ascribe this astonishing operation, this amazing 
contractive power, so exactly as to time, and so constantly 
continued on the muscles of natural or necessary motion; till the 
equilibrium by some means or other be broken, and the motion is 
preternaturally interrupted and suspended? Will the great mechanical 
reasoners say, that matter does this wonder—matter, that is blind 
and impotent? Stuff: we must ascribe to a cause wise and powerful, 
not only the original contrivance of the thing, but the execution of 
this extraordinary scene. While you gaze upon this noblest muscle of 
the dog, you see the Deity at work.

And if we turn our eyes from the muscles of mere natural involuntary 
motion, which performs by a contracting power acting within them; to 
those muscles which move the bones and members of our bodies, by the 
command of the will, how adorable is the wisdom and goodness of the 
Almighty Author of nature, not only in providing the animal machine 
with antagonistical muscles, one of which is contracted, while the 
other is extended; but for stimulating, contracting, and compressing 
the nervous elastic cords and blood-vessels, as our minds command or 
determine! there is no possibility of accounting for the directions 
at pleasure of the antagonistic muscles, but by resolving them into 
the continual presence and action of the first cause. He enforces 
and executes. It is the active principle gives energy and motion 
both to voluntary and necessary muscles, This, I think, is the truth 
of philosophy. To suppose everything to be effect without cause, is 
to reduce religion and philosophy to the same desperate state. It 
destroys all the principles of reason, as well as of virtue and 
moral conduct.

To say all that can be said, in as few words as possible, upon this 
article, it is not only the muscular motion, necessary and 
spontaneous,<52> that is caused by the action of the Deity; but the 
constant motions in the stomach, lungs, intestines, and other parts 
of the body, are caused by an acting Divine Power. It can be 
demonstrated, that in the action of soft bodies upon soft bodies, 
the motion is always diminished; and of consequence it must be 
greatly lessened in the yielding softness of the flesh and fluids of 
animal bodies. We see how soon water settles, after motion 
impressed, by the bare attrition of its parts on one another; 
although it has no obstacles to encounter, or narrow passages to 
move through. What then can we think of motion in such narrow 
twining meanders, as veins, arteries, intestines, and lacteal 
vessels, through which the fluids of animal bodies are conveyed to 
parts innumerable? while the blood, lymph, and chyle creep through 
such narrow winding vessels, the whole motion of those fluids must 
be consumed every instant by the attrition of their parts, and the 
force .of consequence be renewed every instant. Here is a perpetual 
miracle. The Divine Power urges on these fluids ten thousand ways at 
once. Reason must confess a miraculous power indefinitely and 
variously put forth in our bodies; while ignorance and vanity in 
vain attempts to account mechanically for the circulation of those 
fluids. We are not only fearfully and wonderfully formed in the 
womb, but fearfully and wonderfully preserved every minute! creating 
power never ceases.<53>

The conclusion of the matter is, that the plain argument for the 
existence of a Deity, obvious to all, and carrying irresistible 
conviction with it, is from the evident contrivance and fitness of 
things to one another, which we meet with through all the parts of 
the universe. There is no need of nice and subtle reasoning in this 
matter: a manifest contrivance immediately suggests a contriver. It 
strikes like a sensation, and artful reasonings against it may 
puzzle us, but it is without shaking our belief. No person, for 
example, who knows the principles of optics, and the structure of 
the eye, can believe that it is formed without skill in that 
science; or that the ear was formed without the knowledge of sounds. 
This is a just argument, and forces our assent. But the great 
McLaurin should not have stopped here. The plain argument for the 
existence of a Deity grows stronger, when we add to it what is as 
evident as divine contrivance, to wit, the constant interposition of 
God, to support and move his creatures. Original contrivance in the 
works of the creation is adorable. We are certain, demonstratively 
certain, that the heavens, the land, and the waters, and all the 
creatures in them contained, are the works of the living God; but it 
is the present performance that strikes us like a sensation. With 
inexpressible pleasure we see creating power with our eyes. 
Whichever way we turn them, we behold Almighty Power employed, and 
continually acting under the direction of infinite knowledge.

Since things are so, and all the works of nature, in the common 
voice of reason, declare the power and wisdom of the Creator, and 
speak his goodness in the innumerable mighty things he continually 
performs for our preservation and happiness, the contemplation of 
them should warm our hearts with the glory of the Almighty, and make 
us continually praise and adore that Almighty providence, which 
formed and sustains not only the human race, and this terrestrial 
globe, but numberless other worlds and their inhabitants, that hang 
in infinite space These mighty things displayed, ought surely to 
produce the most devout prayers, and songs of praises in no common 
strain; and especially, if we add to those works of nature, that 
second creation, the still greater work of grace. Such omnipotence 
in wisdom and action, and such amazing goodness as we see in the 
Christian gospel, should, I think, engage us to love and adore so 
great and good a Being as our Creator, and induce us to devote our 
lives to him.

For my part, when I consider the mighty scene and prospect of 
nature, and turn my thoughts from thence to God's word, that 
heavenly law, which directs our will and informs our reason, and 
teaches us in all things how to pursue our own happiness, I am so 
struck with a sense of infinite wisdom, goodness, and action, that I 
cannot help extolling the king of the universe for the greatness of 
his power and mercy, and am necessarily engaged in a scene of praise 
and devotion. Indeed the heart must be as hard and cold as marble, 
that does not glow, nor is inflamed with adoration to the great 
author of all things; after viewing with attention even one 
particular only in the works of nature, that material sun, which now 
shines out with light and beauty to animate and refresh the world; 
and in the creation of grace, that sun of righteousness, who sheds 
forth the choicest blessings of Heaven upon the inhabitants of the 
earth. Can we be silent, who behold and enjoy those things! alas! 
too many can, Neither the heavens, which declare the glory of God, 
nor the days of the gospel, nor the righteousness of the new law are 
regarded by them. But the wise will ever join with all their hearts, 
in the most exalted prayer and praise, and adore the giver of those 
good and perfect gifts; for all his blessings vouchsafed us; and 
especially, for the charter of his pardon granted by his blessed 
Son, and the promises of everlasting happiness and glory in a life 
to come, reason must declare it just to offer up religious praise, 
and make the greatest mental and moral improvement we can in this 
first state.

Another extraordinary thing I saw in the place I have mentioned, was 
a water on the top of a hill, which stood at the other end of the 
lake, and was full as high as the mountain, from the side of which, 
the water poured into the lake. This loch measured three quarters of 
a mile in length, and half a mile over. The water appeared as black 
as ink, but in a glass it was clear as other water, and bright in 
running down. It tasted sweet and good. At one end, it runs over its 
rocky bank, and in several noisy cascades, falls down the face of 
the mountain to a deep bottom, where a river is formed, that is seen 
for a considerable way, as it wanders along. The whole is a striking 
scene. The swarthy loch, the noisy descending streams, clumps of 
aged trees on the mountain's side, and the various shores and 
valleys below, afford an uncommon view. It was a fine change of 
ground, to ascend from the beautiful lake, encompassed with 
mountains, and adorned with trees, into which was poured from a 
gaping precipice, a torrent of streams; and see from the reverse of 
an opposite hill, an impetuous flood descending from the top to the 
finest points of view in the wildest glens below.

What line I had with me, for experiments on waters and holes, I 
applied to this loch, to discover the depth, but with three hundred 
yards of whipcord my lead could reach no ground, and from thence, 
and the blackness of the water, and the great issuing stream, I 
concluded, justly I think, that it went down to the great abyss, the 
vast treasury of waters within the earth. Many such unfathomable 
lochs as this have I seen on the summits of mountains in various 
parts of the world, and from them, I suppose, the greatest part of 
that deluge of waters came that drowned the old world. This leads me 
to say something of the flood.

Many books have been written in relation to this affair, and while 
some contend for the overflowing of the whole earth to a very great 
height of waters, and some for a partial deluge only, others will 
not allow there was any at all. The divine authority of Moses they 
disregard. For my part I believe the flood was universal, and that 
all the high hills and mountains under the whole heaven, were 
covered. The cause was forty days heavy rain, and such an agitation 
of the abyss, by the finger of God, as not only broke up the great 
deep, to pour out water at many places, but forced it out of such 
bottomless lochs as this I am speaking of on the mountain's top, and 
from various swallows in many places. This removes every objection 
from the case of the deluge, and gives water enough in the space of 
one hundred and fifty days, or five months of thirty days each, to 
over-top the highest mountains by fifteen cubits, the height 
designed. The abyss in strong commotion, or violent uproar, by a 
power divine, could shake the incumbent globe to pieces in a few 
minutes, and bury the whole ruins in the deep. To me, then, all the 
reasoning against the deluge, or for a partial flood appear sad 
stuff. Were this one loch in Stanmore to pour out torrents of water, 
down every side, for five months, by a divine force on part of the 
abyss, as it might very easily, by such means do, the inundation 
would cover a great part of this land; and if from every loch of the 
kind on the summits of mountains, the waters in like manner, with 
the greatest violence, flowed from every side out of the abyss, and 
that exclusive of the heavy rains, an earthquake should open some 
parts of the ground to let more water out of the great collection, 
and the seas and oceans surpass their natural bounds, by the winds 
forcing them over the earth, then would a universal flood very soon 
prevail. There is water enough for the purpose, and as to the 
supernatural ascent of them, natural and supernatural are nothing at 
all different with respect to God. They are distinctions merely in 
our conceptions of things. Regularly to move the sun or earth; and 
to stop its motion for a day; to make the waters that covered the 
whole earth at the creation, descend into the several receptacles 
prepared for them; and at the deluge to make them ascend again to 
cover the whole earth, are the effect of one and the same almighty 
Power; though we call one natural, and the other supernatural. The 
one is the effect of no greater power than the other. With respect 
to God, one is not more or less natural or supernatural than the 
other.

But how the waters of the deluge were drawn off at the end of the 
five months, is another question among the learned. The ingenious 
Keill, who wrote against the two ingenious theorists, says the thing 
is not at all accountable in any natural way; the draining off, and 
drying of the earth, of such a huge column of waters could only be 
effected by the power of God: natural causes both in decrease and 
the increase of the waters must have been vastly disproportionate to 
the effects; and to miracles they must be ascribed. This, I think, 
is as far from the truth, as the theorists ascribing both increase 
and decrease to natural causes. God was the performer to be sure in 
the flood and the going off, but he made use of natural causes in 
both, that is, of the things he had in the beginning created. The 
natural causes he is the author of were at hand, and with them he 
could do the work. The sun evaporated; the winds dried; and the 
waters no longer forced upwards from the abyss, subsided into the 
many swallows or swallow-holes, that are still to be seen in many 
places, on mountains and in valleys; those on the mountains being 
necessary to absorb that vast column of waters which rose fifteen 
cubits above the highest hills.

A swallow is such another opening in the ground as Eldine Hole in 
Derbyshire,<54> and in travelling from the Peak to the northern 
extremity of Northumberland, I have seen many such holes in the 
earth, both on the hills and in the vales. I have likewise met with 
them in other countries. By these swallows, a vast quantity of the 
waters to be sure went down to the great receptacle; all that was 
not exhaled, or licked up by the winds; or, except what might be 
left to increase the former seas of the antediluvian world into 
those vast oceans which now encompass the globe, and partly to form 
those vast lakes that are in several parts of the world. These 
things easily account for the removal of that vast mass of waters 
which covered the earth, and was in a mighty column above the 
highest hills. Every difficulty disappears before evaporation, the 
drying winds, the swallows, and perhaps the turning seas into 
oceans; but the three first things now named were sufficient, and 
the gentlemen who have reasoned so ingeniously against one another 
about the removal of the waters, might have saved themselves a deal 
of trouble, if they had reduced the operation to three simple 
things, under the direction of the first cause. The swallows 
especially must do great work in the case, if we take into their 
number not only very many open gulfs or chasms, the depth of which 
no line or sound can reach; but likewise the communications of very 
many parts of the sea, and of many great unfathomable lochs, with 
the abyss. These absorbers could easily receive what had before come 
out of them. The sun by evaporation, with the wind, might take .away 
what was raised. There is nothing hard then in conceiving how the 
waters of the deluge were brought away.

But as to the lake I have mentioned, into which a rapid flood poured 
from the bowels of the mountain, what became of this water the 
reader may enquire. To be sure, as it did not run off in any 
streams, nor make the lake rise in the least degree, there must have 
been a communication in some parts of its bottom, between the water 
of it and the abyss. As the loch on the top of the mountain I have 
described had no feeders, yet emitted streams, and therefore must be 
supported by the abyss; so this lake, with so powerful a feeder, not 
running over, or emitting water any way, must discharge itself in 
the abyss below. The case of it must be the same as that of the 
Caspian Sea. Into this sea many rivers pour, and one in particular, 
the Volga I mean, that is more than sufficient, in the quantity of 
water it turns out in a year, to drown the whole world. Yet the 
Caspian remains in one state, and does not overflow its banks, 
excepting, as before observed, sometimes in the space of sixteen 
years. It must by passages communicate with the great deep. It 
refunds the rivers into the great abyss. The case of the 
Mediterranean sea is the same; for, though a strong current from the 
Atlantic continually sets through the Strait of Gibraltar, yet these 
waters do not make it overflow the country round it, and, of 
consequence, they must be carried off by a subterranean passage, or 
passages, to the abyss.

From the lake I proceeded the next morning, June 14, 1725, toward 
the north-east end of Westmorland, having passed the night in a 
sound sleep under the trees by the water-side, but was forced by the 
precipices to shape my course from four in the morning till eight, 
to the north-west, and then the road turned east-north-east, till I 
came to a great glen, where a river made a rumbling noise over rocks 
and inequalities of many kinds, and formed a very wild, wonderful 
scene. The river was broad and deep, and on an easy descent to it, 
was an assemblage of stones, that ran in length about a hundred 
feet, in breadth thirty feet, and somewhat resembling the giant's 
causeway, in the county of Antrim, and province of Ulster, in 
Ireland; nine miles north-east from the pretty town of Coleraine. 
The giant's causeway, reader, is a prodigious pile of rocks, eighty 
feet broad, twenty feet above the rest of the strand, and that run 
from the bottom of a high hill above two hundred yards into the 
ocean.

The assemblage of stones I am speaking of are columns with several 
corners, that rise three yards above the ground and are joined as if 
done by art; the points being convex and concave, and lying one in 
another. These columns have five and six sides, a few of them seven; 
and a number of them nicely and exactly placed together make one 
large pillar from one foot to two in diameter. They are so nicely 
joined, that although they have five and six sides, as I before 
said, yet their contexture is so adapted, as to leave no vacuity 
between them; the prominent angles of one pillar fitting, and 
falling exactly into the hollows left them between two others, and 
the plain sides exactly answer to one another; so that those 
hexagons and pentagons of columnar marble appear as if finished by 
the hands of the most masterly workmen. All the pillars stood 
exactly perpendicular to the plane of the horizon.

Doctor Foley, in No. 212, of the Philosophical Transactions, 
speaking of the giant's causeway, seems to think these wonderful 
pillars are composed of the common sort of craggy rock by the sea 
side; and the authors of the Complete System of Geography are of 
opinion, they resemble the lapis basalts; but some think they are a 
sort of marble. Now the truth is, the basalt of the ancients is a 
very elegant and beautiful marble of a fine deep glossy black, like 
high polished steel, and is always found erect in the form of 
regular angular columns, composed of a number of joints, fitted 
together, and making pillars; so that where such pillars are seen, 
they are undoubtedly the columnar marble, or touchstone of the 
ancients. Dr. John Hill, in his History of Fossils, gives a good 
account of the nature of this body, and mentions several places it 
is to be found in; but seems not to have heard there was any of it 
among the northern mountains of our country.

This marble is one of the noblest productions of nature, and of all 
the fossil kingdom, the most astonishing body. If art is requisite 
for the formation of many things we see daily done with elegance and 
beauty; then certainly, mind itself, even the supreme mind, must 
have caused such effects as these astonishing marble pillars; which 
lie in vast compound perpendicular columns at great depths in the 
earth, none being in beds of strata, like the other marbles; and 
rise in such beautiful joints and angles, well fitted together, more 
than six and thirty foot above ground in some places. No other way 
could those wonderful productions have come into being, but by that 
intelligent, active power, who speaks intelligibly to every nation 
by his works. To talk as some people do, that necessity, which 
destroys the very idea of intelligent and designing activity, or 
chance—which is an utter absurdity—or the sea, according to 
Telliamed, generated and formed this genus of marble, and so 
wonderfully distinguished it from all the other marmora; by making 
it into pentagon, hexagon, and septagon columns, and rendering the 
points of the columns convex and concave, and so amazingly joining 
them together, that the prominent angles of one pillar fall exactly 
into the hollow left between two others, and the plain sides exactly 
answer to one another, as before observed, while all of them stand 
up perpendicular, contrary to the quality of all other marbles, and 
some lie in beds of strata. To talk I say of the sea, a chance, a 
necessity, doing this, or anything of so wonderful a kind, is to 
produce schemes founded in ignorance, and eversive of true 
knowledge, instead of giving a rational, intelligible account of the 
formation of the world, its order and appearances. In this wonderful 
production, a due attention perceives infinite art and power. Did we 
want that variety of things which employ the consideration of 
rational men, and force the tongues of thinking men to acknowledge 
creating power, this marble alone would be sufficient to demonstrate 
equal power directed by infinite wisdom.

Another extraordinary thing I saw in a valley not far from that 
where the basalts stands, is a boisterous burning spring. It rises 
with great noise and vibration, and gushes out with a force 
sufficient to turn many mills. The water is clear and cold, but to 
the taste unpleasant, being something like a bad egg. I judged from 
the nature of its motion that the water would take fire, and having 
lit my torch, soon put it in a flame. The fire was fierce, and the 
water ran down the vale in a blaze. It was a river of fire for a 
considerable way, till it sunk under ground among some rocks, and 
thereby disappeared. After it had burned some time, I took some 
boughs from a tree, and tying them together, beat the surface of the 
well for a few minutes, and the burning ceased. The water was not 
hot, as one might expect, but cold as the coldest spring could be. 
There are a great number of such springs in the world, but this is 
the largest I have read of, or seen. It differs from that of 
Broseley in Shropshire, within six miles of Bridgenorth, in this 
respect, that Broseley well will not continue to burn for any time, 
unless the air be kept from it; to which purpose they have enclosed 
it in an iron cistern with a cover to it; and to experiment the 
boiling a piece of meat by the fire of this spring, they clap the 
pot close down when the cover is taken up, and then it burns as long 
as they will; making the largest joint of meat fit to eat in half 
the time the strongest culinary fire could do the work. As to the 
medicinal virtues of the spring, in the mountains, I can only say, 
that as it has a copious sulphur, and from thence flames like a 
spirit of wine, it is probable it might be as effectual in 
communicating sanity in various cases, as the famous burning spring 
is in the palatinate of Cracow of the lesser Poland, mentioned in 
the Leipsic Acts, for 1681, p. 326. And as to the extinguishing this 
fire by beating it with twigs, it must be for the reason given by 
Mr. Denis, that as the inflammability of such springs is to be 
ascribed to sulphur, and to its exhalations bursting out of the 
water; so this floating flame, which is too subtle to heat the 
water, is stifled, by involving these spirits in the aqueous 
particles, by brushing the surface with brooms.

Conradus tells us, concerning the Polish spring, that at one time, 
when it was kindled by lightning, the people neglected to put it 
out, and the stream proceeded on fire for almost three years, and 
reduced all the neighbouring wood to ashes. It is really a wonderful 
sight to see such a river of fire, and adorable must be that power, 
who has caused such things. To say that matter and motion 
circumscribe and regulate such powers, is idle to the last degree. 
It is an inversion of reason. The very existence of the water and 
sulphur of this spring, must be by the power of the Creator 
constantly put forth upon it, which causes the parts to he what we 
call such things; and the motion of both must be an impression; for 
motion is not essential to matter. Nothing else could produce them, 
and a cause there must be equal to the various and wonderful effects 
of both, a cause that is infinity, wise, and powerful. The Deity is 
everywhere present, and everywhere active. His power is 
indesinently<55> working, gives existence to the various creatures, 
and produces the most noble phenomena in nature. All we see, all we 
feel, fire and water, the universal variety of inanimate and animate 
creatures, are only the effects of his creating power constantly 
repeated. The existence of the whole world is a continual new 
creation; and therefore it becomes the bounden duty of all rational 
creatures, to worship this Almighty Power, as well for his works of 
creation, as for the ways of his providence. Great and wonderful are 
thy works, O Lord God Almighty! and just and righteous are thy ways, 
O King of saints: who would not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy 
name, because thou only art holy.

From the burning fountain we proceeded for half an hour in the same 
valley right onwards, and then turned to the left in a course to the 
west, for about a mile, which brought us to the bottom of a steep 
mountain, we must ascend, or go no farther. It was hard to get the 
horses over this, and no less difficult to descend with them to a 
deep bottom on the other side of the hill: but with great hazard to 
ourselves and the beasts, we came down in safety. On the top of this 
mountain I saw another large loch that was black as ink in 
appearance, though bright when taken up in a glass; which as before 
observed, must be owing I suppose to its top communicating with the 
abyss below; and in the bottom we descend to, there was a swallow 
larger than the one I saw before. I could make no discovery as to 
its depth, either by line or sound; nor did my lead touch any water. 
On the sloping way from the first chasm in day to the gulf, were 
several lateral chambers, that descended one yard in six; but though 
the bottom was hard, the horrors of the places hindered me from 
going far. I went to the end of the first, which was sixty-seven 
yards, and having looked into the second, to which a narrow short 
pass leads the enquirer, I made what haste I could back; for the 
opening discovers a space so vast, dismal, and frightful, that it 
strikes one to the heart. The bottom, as far as my light could 
enable me to distinguish, was a continuance of stone; but neither 
top nor sides were to be seen. It is a horrible place.

Leaving this bottom, we mounted another very high and dangerous 
hill, and from the top of it descended into twenty acres of as rich 
and beautiful ground as my eyes had ever seen. It was covered with 
flowers and aromatic herbs; and had, in the centre of it, a little 
grove of beautiful trees; among which were fruits of several kinds. 
A flowing spring of the purest water was in the middle of this sweet 
little wood, and ran in pretty windings over the ground. It 
refreshed and adorned the field, and it was beautiful to see the 
deer from the hills, and the goats come down from the cliffs, to 
drink at these streams. The whole was surrounded with precipices 
that ascended above the clouds, and through one of these rocky 
mountains there was an opening that had a stupendous appearance.

It was a vast amazing arch, that had some resemblance of the Gothic 
aisle of a large cathedral church, and terminated in a view of rocks 
hanging over rocks in a manner frightful to behold. It measured an 
hundred yards in length, forty in breadth, and I judged it to be 
fifty yards high. The pending rocks in view enclosed a space of four 
acres, as it appeared to me, and the bottom was so very deep that it 
looked like night below. What line I had could not reach it, nor 
could I make anything of the depth by sound. It seemed to me to be a 
vast swallow that went down to the abyss. The whole was a scene that 
harrowed the soul with horror.

By the spring in the little grove I have mentioned, I sat down at 
eight in the morning, to breakfast on something that one of my 
squires produced from his store, while the other was looking for a 
passage or way onwards, between those vast precipices that 
surrounded us. Two hours he wasted in an enquiry, and then returned, 
to let me know there was no passage that he could find: the enclosed 
rocks were one continued chain of impassable mountains. Here then I 
thought was my ne plus ultra. As the man affirmed there was no 
getting beyond the vast enclosing cliffs that walled in this 
charming spot of earth, I imagined for some time, that I must of 
necessity return, and give over all thoughts of getting to the 
borders of Cumberland or Bishopric that way. It seemed impossible to 
proceed, and that was no small trouble to my mind. It was a great 
journey round, and if I did ride it, I knew not where to turn in on 
the confines of the country my friend lived on; for I had lost his 
directions, and had only a small remembrance of his dwelling 
somewhere on the north edge of Westmoreland or Yorkshire, or on the 
adjoining borders of Cumberland, or the county of Durham. What to do 
I could not for some time tell: going back I did not at all like, 
and therefore, to avoid it if possible, resolved to pass the day in 
trying if I could find any way out, without climbing the mountain 
again that I had lately come down. Round then I walked, once, and to 
no manner of purpose, for I did not see any kind of pass; but the 
second time, as I marched on observing the hill, I took notice of a 
large clump of great trees in an angle or deep corner, that seemed 
to stand very oddly, and in the mountain above them there appeared 
as I thought a distance or space that looked like an opening. I soon 
found it was so, and that at the back of this little wood, there lay 
a very narrow way, only broad enough for two horses a-breast: that 
it extended due west for more than a mile, and then west-north-west 
for a quarter of a mile, till it terminated in a plain that was 
several miles in circumference, and entirely surrounded with hills. 
This I discovered in walking the pass by myself, and then returned 
to bring the horses and men, through this amazing way. It was quite 
dark, mere night all along; and the bottom very bad. It was likewise 
very dangerous. It was evident from the ground that stones had 
fallen from the tops of the hills; and should any descend from so 
vast a height on us, though even small ones, they would without all 
peradventure be immediate death.

The plain we came into from the defile, was above a mile over to the 
opposite hills, and across it was a walk of aged oaks, that seemed, 
in such a place, as the avenue that leads to the fairy castle of 
wishes. If there are such beings, as Dr. Fowler, bishop of 
Gloucester, hath in one of his books affirmed, then here, I said, in 
this fine romantic region, where all the charms of the field, the 
forest, the water, and the mountains, are united, may be their 
favourite mansion, and perhaps they will admit me into their fairy 
castle, then commences their friendship, and when they have all 
breathed on me, it is but wishing for the future, and the completion 
of every desire is granted the moment it is formed. Would not this 
be complete happiness? what do you say, Reflection?

"No!" answered Reflection, as we rode up this avenue. "Imagination 
may form fine pictures of felicity from an indulgence in every wish; 
but, so blind are mankind to their own real happiness, that it is 
oftener to the gratification than to the disappointment of their 
wishes that all their misery is owing. We often choose what is not 
consonant to the welfare of our nature, and strive to avoid those 
incidents which are fated in the order of uncontrollable events for 
our good. Frequently do we labour to secure the things that debase 
us into slaves, and overwhelm us with calamity; but seldom do we 
desire, rarely do we strive to obtain those objects, and acquire 
that station, which are most likely to render humanity as perfect as 
it can be in this world, rational and godlike, and thereby crown our 
lives with true happiness. Many a man has pursued a Venus, an 
estate, an honour, with much toil and wonderful activity, and when 
possessed of the fancied blessing, have been made very miserable 
mortals. The wished-for beauty has often made even the husband 
wretched. An aching scar is often covered with the laurel: and in 
respect of envied great fortunes, gaudy is the thing without, and 
within very often is mere bitterness. The wisdom is as to this 
world, not to get from the fairies a power of enjoying all that 
fancy may desire, if that was possible; but, to act well and wisely, 
in the most reasonable, lovely, and fair manner, and propose nothing 
of ourselves, but with a reserve that supreme wisdom permits it; 
welcoming every event with cheerfulness and magnanimity, as best 
upon the whole, because ordained of infinite reason; and acquiescing 
in every obstruction, as ultimately reservable to divine providence. 
This," continued Reflection, "in respect of this life, were there no 
other, is preferable to the castle of wishes, if we could find it at 
the end of this avenue"<56>.

But if another life is taken into the question, the argument grows 
stronger against a power of enjoying all we could wish for. As we 
are accountable creatures, and are pouring fast out of time into 
eternity, religion undoubtedly ought to be the main business of 
mortals; that religion which is a living principle, spring or root 
of actions in the soul; wrought there by the hand of him that made 
us; and which requireth us to honour and fear God, as the supreme 
Lord, to esteem him as the chief good; and to exercise and express 
that honour, that fear, and that esteem, by all the means, and in 
all the ways which reason and revelation appoint for such exercise 
and expression; that we may gain the love of the Almighty, and 
obtain the established seat of happiness above: but such force hath 
the objects of sense upon the mind, that it is more than probable 
they would outweigh the distant hopes of religion, if wishing could 
bring in even a tenth part of what the vanity of man, and his senses 
would call for. It would be so far from being an advantage to 
mankind, if they could wish and have vast fortunes, all the 
pleasures, the pomps and honours of the world, that they would 
thereby be deprived of the rational joys of life, and be influenced 
to think no more of the excellency and beauty of religion, and the 
good consequences of serving God truly. They would not even divide 
themselves between this world and the other. The idol gods of this 
state would have all their service. The wish then should be for 
daily bread and of the kingdom of God may come, his will be done in 
our souls. In these are comprised the greatest and most valuable 
blessing, and we are sure we can obtain them, if we will add to 
asking an industry and prudence in acquiring, and take care by 
culture, to bring up the seeds of virtue and holiness. This is 
enough to make us as happy here as reason can desire. We have a 
sufficiency to go through this world to that other where we are to 
be stationed for ever, and against the accidents of the way, we have 
the supports which innocence and virtue to the good administer. 
Peace and tranquillity of mind here, and hopes full of comfort with 
respect to hereafter, are the ingredients of our happiness; a 
happiness the greatest! and we are certain that he, upon whose mercy 
and goodness we confess we exist, will, in regard to our confidence 
and trust, our faith and religion, when this fleeting scene is over, 
make us glorious and ever blessed in the kingdom he has prepared for 
those that rely on the Divine Goodness, and do their best to advance 
the state of true virtue in the world. Let us not regret, then, the 
want of a Castle of Wishes. Let us not have a desire of that wealth, 
dominion, and splendour, which lives in contempt of the prophets, 
and riots in the heinous pleasures of irreligion.

Let our great Master's will be made the rule of all our actions, and 
let his interest be regarded, as our interest. Let us consult his 
honour, as our own honour; and having food and raiment, be content, 
as we are hastening away with a never ceasing pace, to the realms of 
eternity and unmixed bliss. This is reason and light. This only 
deserves our care. There is nothing worth wishing for, but the 
happiness of God's presence in our hearts; and the more immediate 
communications of his love and favour in the regions of day.



CHAPTER VII.

Thus did reflection entertain me, as I rode up this grand shady 
walk, which looked like the avenue I had read of in the Tales of the 
Fairies<57>, and brought me to a natural grotto, more beautiful than 
AElian's description of Atalanta's<58>, or that in Homer, where 
Calypso lived<59>. It was a large cavern at the bottom of a marble 
mountain, and without, was covered round with ivy, that clung about 
some aged oaks, on either side the entrance, that seemed coeval with 
the earth on which they grew. Abundance of large laurel trees, in 
clumps, adorned an extensive area before the door; and saffron, and 
hyacinths, and flowers of many colours, covered in confused spots 
the green carpet. The beautiful ground refreshed the sight, and 
purified the air; and to enhance the beauties of the spot, a clear 
and cold stream gushed from a neighbouring rock; which watered the 
trees and plants, and seemed to combat with the earth, whether of 
them most contributed to their growth and preservation. It was a 
sweet rural scene. For charms and solitude the place was equally to 
be admired.

The inside of this grotto was a beautiful green marble, extremely 
bright, and even approaching to the appearance of the emerald. It 
was thick set with shells, and those not small ones, but some of the 
largest and finest kinds: many of them seemed as it were, squeezed 
together by the marble, so as to show the edges only; but more were 
to be seen at large, and filled with the purest spar. The whole had 
a fine effect, and as the cave had been divided by art into six fine 
apartments, and had doors and chimneys most ingeniously contrived, 
both the mansion and its situation charmed me in a high degree. On 
either side of it were many cottages, pretty and clean, and as sheep 
were feeding on the field, some cows grazing, and various kinds of 
tame fowl before the doors, I concluded it was an inhabited place, 
before I saw anyone.

The first human being I beheld, was an old woman, who appeared at 
the grotto door, and I requested her to inform me, who lived in this 
delightful place; and which was my best way to Cumberland or 
Bishopric? Sir, replied the good old woman, you are welcome to 
Burcot-lodge. Women only are the inhabitants of this spot and over 
the hills before you, you must go, to get to the countries you 
mention. We are an hundred souls in all that live here, and our 
mistress, superior and head, is a young woman. Her name is AZORA. 
Yonder she comes, goodness itself, and as it is now seven in the 
evening, too late to proceed any farther in this part of the world, 
you had better walk up to her, and pay her your respects. Great was 
my surprise at what I heard. A little female republic among those 
hills was news indeed; and when I came near AZORA, my astonishment 
increased.

She was attended by ten young women, straight, clean, handsome 
girls, and surpassed them in tallness. Her countenance was 
masculine, but not austere: her fine blue eyes discovered an 
excellence of temper, while they showed the penetration of her mind. 
Her hair was brown, bright and charming; and nature had stamped upon 
her cheeks a colour, that exceeded the most beautiful red of the 
finest flower. It was continually as the maiden blush of a modest 
innocence. She was dressed in a fine woollen stuff, made in the 
manner shepherdesses are painted, and on her head had a band or 
fillet like what the ladies now wear, with a bunch of artificial 
flowers in her hair. She had a very small straw hat on. In her hand, 
she held a long and pretty crook; and as her coats were short, her 
feet were seen, in black silk shoes, and the finest white stockings, 
and appeared vastly pretty. She struck me greatly. She was a 
charming, and uncommon figure. When I came up to AZORA, I could 
hardly forbear addressing her, as the son of Ulysses did the 
supernal; "O vous, qui que vous soiez, mortelle ou deesse, quoiqu'a 
vous voir on ne puisse vous prendre que pour une divinite, seriez-
vous insensible au malheur d'un fils, &c." Whoever you are, a mortal 
or a goddess, though sure your aspect speaks you all divine, can 
you, unmoved, behold a hapless son, by fate expelled, and urged by 
unrelenting rage, to wander through the world, exposed to winds and 
seas, and all the strokes of adverse fortune, till he arrived in 
this land of felicity and peace? But on better thoughts, I only 
said, "I am your most humble servant, madam," and told her I 
believed I had lost my way, and knew not where to go. To which she 
replied, "You are welcome, sir, to our hamlet, and to the best 
entertainment it affords, only tell me," she added with a smile, 
"what could induce you to travel this unbeaten road, and how did you 
pass the precipices and rivers you must have met with in the way?" 
"Curiosity, madam," I answered, "was one cause; that I might see a 
country no traveller had been in; and my next inducement, to find a 
valuable friend; who lives somewhere upon the northern bolder of 
this county, or Yorkshire, or on the adjoining limits of Cumberland 
or Durham; but on which I know not; and as I came from Brugh under 
Stanemore, I judged it the shortest way by a great many miles, and 
the likeliest to succeed in my enquiry after my friend, then as to 
hills and waters, many dangerous ones I have gone over, and with 
great toil and fatigue have got thus far." "This," AZORA said, "is a 
rational account of your journey, and as there are many difficulties 
still before you, you are welcome to rest with us till you are 
refreshed, and able to proceed."

By this time we reached the grotto door, and upon entering the first 
apartment, I saw another lady, dressed in the same manner, and 
seemed to be of the same age, that is, about six and twenty, as I 
was told. This was AZORA'S companion and friend. She was a very 
pretty woman, though inferior to AZORA in charms; but her mind was 
equally luminous and good. Neither she nor AZORA were learned women, 
that is, they understood no other language than the English tongue, 
and in that they had but a small collection of the best books; but 
those few they had read well, and they had capacities to think. In 
reason, philosophy, and mathematics, they were excellent, and in the 
most agreeable manner, discovered in conversation the finest 
conceptions of the most excellent things. AZORA, of the two, was by 
much the best speaker. Her voice was delightful, and her 
pronunciation just, strong, clear, and various. With unspeakable 
pleasure did I listen to her, during three days that I happily 
passed with her and her companion, and received from both many 
valuable informations. I thought I understood algebra very well, but 
I was their inferior, and they instructed me; and on the fundamental 
points of religion, they not only out-talked me, but out-reasoned 
me. It is very strange, I confess. It is very true, however.

AZORA, in particular, had an amazing collection of the most rational 
philosophical ideas, and she delivered them in the most pleasing 
dress, with as much ease as she breathed. She asked me, after I had 
feasted on an excellent supper, how religion went on in the world; 
and what was the condition of that which came from supernatural 
communication, as she phrased it? and when I told her, that our 
excellent divines did all that was possible for men to do, to turn 
the world from superstition of every kind, to that express 
revelation which restores the dictates of uncorrupted reason to 
their force and authority; which teaches the knowledge of one 
supreme Spirit or God, and the nature of that worship which is due 
to a Being not confined to, or dependent upon particular places, or 
circumstances; but always and everywhere  present with us: she 
answered, that such clergymen are glorious, and cannot be enough 
admired; and great is the unreasonableness of the men who opposed 
them, and forced them into the field of disputation, from their holy 
labour of instructing the people in penitential piety and 
sanctification; I mean the infidels and the bigots.

"What can be more unjust and impious," AZORA continued, "than for 
men to declaim against a revelation which displays the paternal 
regard of God for his creatures, by doing more than was strictly 
necessary for their happiness, as they had his original law of 
reason before he gave them the gospel; and which enables us to 
extend our knowledge even as to those things which we are by nature 
capable of knowing; which awakens us to duty, and advises us how to 
walk in the ways of prudence and safety. To reject such an 
extraordinary method of saving us, is senseless and culpable indeed. 
Surely, when superstition and enthusiasm has led mankind into 
errors, we ought to adore the divine goodness for re-communicating a 
knowledge of true religion; of duty in this life, and of what we are 
to expect in that which is to come. We can never be thankful enough 
for a revelation, that has a tendency to promote the happiness of 
mankind both here and hereafter. The opposition, in my opinion, is 
without excuse; as the external evidence of history, miracles, and 
prophesy for the gospel, is incontestably strong, when fairly 
examined; must appear with force to a modest, candid, impartial 
enquirer; and as the internal evidence for the sacred letters, their 
usefulness and excellence, must be obvious to every attentive 
capacity, that delights in the pursuit of religion and virtue. Truth 
and candour, then, those infidels are strangers to. They are not 
fair reasoners. They are haughty, over-bearing declaimers.

"Nor can I think much better," said AZORA, "of those great and 
reverend men, who preach and write to prove the weakness of human 
reason, and that the prime law of our creation, the law of nature, 
is imperfect, insufficient, and obscure; and therefore, supernatural 
communication was absolutely necessary; who add to this, things 
inconceivable and contradictory, and insist upon our believing 
articles too hard for rational beings. This is misrepresenting 
rationals, if we believe the scriptures, and is so far from being of 
service to the cause of Christianity, as in charity we must suppose 
those great men by such writing and preaching do intend; that it 
does, on the contrary, very greatly hurt revealed religion. It is to 
such wrong defences of revelation that antichristian deism owes its 
chief strength. Our holy religion wants not any real evidence that 
can be desired by the modest, candid, and impartial; but if great 
and learned men will deny the perfection of the primary law of God 
and substitute in the place of recommunicated nature, an invented 
gospel, that swells with useless mysteries, and hard doctrines; 
great damage must fall upon the true gospel. An unintelligible 
religion is no religion. It can be of no concern, with regard to 
rational creatures; and strong minds will laugh at its pieties."

"But exclusive of invented mysteries," I said, "which are to be sure 
sad stuff in the works of those great men, and deplorably corrupt 
the simplicity of the gospel, to me it is not so plain, that mankind 
could by reason acquire just and adequate ideas of the existence and 
nature of the Supreme Being, or know that they had immortal souls, 
and would expose themselves to eternal unavoidable misery in a 
future state, in proportion to the demerit of their thoughts and 
actions in this world; but might secure everlasting felicity by 
worshiping one supreme, universal, omnipotent, eternal, omnipresent, 
and intelligent Spirit, and doing all the good we have an 
opportunity and power to do in this life. I question if reason can 
make us clear and certain on these articles. The reason of the bulk 
of mankind cannot do it, I think. Therefore, the gospel was 
absolutely necessary for the salvation of men."

AZORA to this replied, that "faith in Christ, and all his own 
institutions, were of high value indeed; and beautiful his religion 
appears, when it is fairly represented, as an institution that has 
no other end than morality, the most noble end, and the most worthy 
of God; and that declares the practice of all the moral offices to 
be superior to any inward accomplishment, or outward Christian 
institution: but she could not allow, that Christianity was 
absolutely necessary: for the common reason of men, without 
launching out into the unfathomable ocean of metaphysical 
subtleties, appears upon trial to be able to discover the 
fundamental points of religion; and from the things that are made, 
from our moral capacities and powers, and from our relations to one 
another, to know the supreme Being, his attributes and perfections, 
and that we are accountable to our great Creator."

"If men will think, they must perceive without the reason of a 
Newton or Clarke, the existence of a spiritual influence in all the 
parts of inanimated matter, and the existence of their own spirits 
or souls. To which ever part of matter we look, we see a spirit 
employed. An influencing Being, endued with the faculties of 
perception, activity, and volition, is plain. The accidental 
qualities of matter, called attraction, repulsion, and communication 
of motion, evince that material and vegetable nature, and all the 
parts of inanimated matter, are actuated by one supreme and 
universal Spirit: I say One Spirit, because it is evident from a 
sameness of volition, that is, from one and the same faculty of 
volition, manifest throughout all nature, that there are not several 
distinct, independent spirits. In attraction, repulsion, and 
communication of motion, there appears no different faculty of 
volition, but a different exercise of the same faculty of volition; 
which, for wise reasons, makes some parts of matter cohere strongly, 
as stone and metal,—some weakly, as earth, &c.; some repel, while 
others attract; some elastic, and others non-elastic. In all these 
cases, one spirit only is the actor: that Being who holds all 
perfection in himself, and by an absolute command over all parts of 
matter, forms and manages it as his wisdom sees best; just as his 
adorable providence governs us, and disposes of us, by such laws as 
reason, consulting the good of the whole society, declares it to be 
best for us to obey: best, most surely, as it is the glory of the 
Almighty to be constantly and without any deviation governed by the 
eternal and immutable laws of good and right, just and equal. All is 
the operation of one and the same universal spirit. Identity is 
visible. The various kinds of attraction, repulsion, &c. only show 
the unlimited power of the Deity, in actuating matter as his 
established rules require. Were several arbitrary supreme spirits to 
act over matter, the consequence would be a breach of regularity, 
uniformity, and constancy, in the laws of nature, and that confusion 
would appear instead of beauty and order.

"Thus common reason confesses that there is one infinite universal, 
supreme spirit, who actuates and governs the universe; and from the 
heavens, the earth, and ourselves, we are as certain that there is a 
Creator and Lord of all the worlds, who directs every atom of it, 
and animates every material form, as we are of anything demonstrated 
to us. And as he is not only the Creator but the Manager and 
Preserver of every being, there can be no power equal to him. He 
must be omnipotent. He must likewise be eternal and omnipresent; for 
there was no superior power to receive existence from, nor is there 
a superior power to confine it. As to his infinite intelligence, his 
being the Author and Preserver of all things demonstrates it.

"In respect of the human soul," AZORA continued, "it is impossible 
for perception to proceed from the body, or from any motion or 
modification of parts of the body; and therefore, there must be a 
mind in which our ideas must be produced and exist. If the ideas of 
sensation may be supposed to be occasioned by the different motions 
of the constituent parts of the brain, yet they cannot be those 
motions. The motions can only enable a spiritual percipient to note 
them and remember them, and as to reflection, the other part of the 
perceptive faculty, attention, and contemplation, it is not possible 
they can proceed from the different motions into which the parts of 
the brain are put; because they are employed solely about 
perceptions which were only in the mind. The case is the same as to 
many other qualities or faculties; in the designing quality, the 
inventing quality, the judging quality, the reasoning quality, the 
compounding quality, the abstracting quality, the discerning 
quality, the recollective quality, the retentive quality, the 
freedom of will, the faculty of volition, and especially the 
foreseeing faculty: these cannot be the faculties of matter. Such 
qualities must exist ultimately and solely in mind. Can foresight, 
for example, be the work of matter, when it is employed about things 
and actions which have not yet happened, and for that reason cannot 
be the objects of the senses? No surely. It must be the spiritual 
part of the corn-pound that acts upon the occasion: in all the 
intelligent faculties which we comprehend under the complex idea of 
understanding, spirit only can be the performer.

"There is a soul or mind then in man, and that it is immortal and 
accountable, is as evident as that the retentive faculty, that is, 
retaining ideas received by reflection, does not pertain to body, 
but is a natural quality of the soul only, and does not proceed from 
its union with the body: for, as perception and retention prove the 
human mind to be a distinct being, and that it has qualities which 
cannot proceed from body, therefore it must still continue a spirit 
unless annihilated by its Creator, and must, after its separation, 
be endued with the qualities which are the faculties of soul only. 
The reason is plain. These qualities cannot be destroyed without a 
cause, but separation is no cause, as the quality or qualities did 
not proceed from, or depend on union, therefore the soul is 
immortal, unless we suppose what cannot be supposed, that its 
Creator puts an end to its being. We must know, after death, that we 
exist. We must remember a past existence, and call to mind every 
idea we had formed in this life by reflection.

"As to our being accountable hereafter for the deeds we have done in 
this first state of existence, this can admit of no speculation; for 
as we have received from our Creator the eternal law of reason, 
which enables us to distinguish right and wrong, and to govern the 
inferior powers and passions, appetites and senses, if we please; as 
we are endued with an understanding which can acquire large moral 
dominion, and may, if we oppose not, sit as queen upon the throne 
over the whole corporeal system; since the noble faculty of reason 
was given to rectify the soul, and purify it from earthly 
affections; to elevate it above the objects of sense, to purge it 
from pride and vanity, selfishness and hypocrisy, and render it 
just, pious, and good; of consequence, God has a right to call us to 
account for our conduct in this first state, and will reward or 
punish, in a most extraordinary manner; as the principles and 
actions of man have been righteous; or, his life and character 
stained by unjust dispositions and filthy deeds. This is plain to 
common reason. Every understanding must see this, how wrong soever 
they wilfully act. As God by his nature must abhor iniquity, and 
love what is honest, pure, and good; he must reward the piety and 
worthy behaviour of those, who act according to reason in this life, 
and with views beyond the bounds of time, endeavour to proceed each 
day to more exalted ideas of virtue: but, the mortals who deviate 
from rectitude and goodness, and wilfully live workers of iniquity, 
must expect that God, the father of spirits, the lover of truth, and 
the patron of righteousness and virtue, will proportion future 
punishments to present vices, and banish them to the regions of 
eternal darkness. From the natural lights of our understanding we 
have the highest reason to conclude this will be the case. The 
truths are as evident to a reflection, as that this world, and we 
who inhabit it, could not have had eternal existence, nor be first 
formed by any natural cause; but must have been originally produced, 
as we are now constantly preserved, by the supreme and universal 
spirit. This is the excellent law of reason or nature. There is a 
light sufficient in every human breast, to conduct the soul to 
perfect day, if men will follow it right onwards, and not turn into 
the paths that lead to the dark night of hell."

AZORA'S religious notions amazed me, and the more, as they were 
uttered with a fluency and ease beyond anything I had ever heard 
before. In the softest, sweetest voice, she expressed herself, and 
without the least appearance of labour, her ideas seemed to flow 
from a vast fountain. She was a master indeed in the doctrine of 
ideas. Her notion of them and their formation was just as possible; 
and in a few minutes she settled everything relating to them. Her 
ideas of activity and passivity afforded me much instruction, as did 
her notions of space, matter, and spirit: and what is still more 
extraordinary, she had a fine conception of an electrical fluid, 
which is thought to be a discovery made very lately, and made use of 
it to prove, not that it is the ultimate cause of effects, but that 
everything is caused and directed by an immaterial spirit. An 
immaterial spirit was her favourite article, and it was to me a fine 
entertainment to hear her on that subject; from the one supreme 
Spirit down to the spirit of brute animals. But to conclude our 
conversation on religion; I observed to AZORA, that "if things were 
so, and the law of reason was so perfect and sufficient, then I 
could not see that there was any want at all of the religion of 
favour, since that of nature was enough to confirm us in rectitude 
and holiness, if we would obey its directions; and to show us the 
way to the mansions of angels. Why the law of grace at so great an 
expense, if the rule of reason can make us good here, and for ever 
happy hereafter?"

AZORA replied, that she had before answered this question by 
observing, that "excellent as the primary law of the creation was, 
yet, revelation was of the greatest use, as it enables us to extend 
our knowledge even as to the things which we are by nature capable 
of knowing; and as it restored to the world the law of reason, that 
is, true religion, when superstition and enthusiasm had established 
false religion. This renders Christianity glorious were there 
nothing more to be said for it: But this is not all we can say.

The best of mortals are weak, and the most of them are so fully 
employed about things temporal, that it is impossible so much good 
should proceed from mere human reason as from a plain easy gospel, 
that delineates duty in the most intelligible manner, and contains 
the absolute command of the great God, to renounce vicious habits, 
impure desires, worldly tempers, and frame ourselves to purity, 
sincerity, and devotion; as the only means that can secure his 
felicitating presence, and gain us admission to the delightful seats 
of separate souls made perfect. In this the gospel is far preferable 
to reason.

Beside, as wilful disobedience strikes at the being and government 
of God, and devotedness to the Lord of all the worlds, in trust and 
resignation, is the perfection of religion, the example of the Son 
of God in his humiliation, his cross, his death, make an instance of 
resignation so consummate and instructive, that we not only learn 
from it what reason cannot half so well instruct us in; I mean the 
amiableness of virtue, the excellency of holiness, and the merit of 
absolute and unreserved obedience; but, we are roused to an 
imitation of this grand character; both on account of its beauty, 
and the promise of our sitting down with Christ in his throne, if, 
according to our measure, we work all righteousness, and overcome 
our present temptations and trials, even as he also overcame, and is 
set down with his Father in his throne. Reason is nothing compared 
to this. The gospel dispensation by this means is fitted to render 
us virtuous, holy, and thoroughly good, in a method the law of 
nature could never do."

And more than this; when the God of heaven saw his creatures and 
children everywhere  going wrong, without any help amongst 
themselves, and therefore sent his son to set them right; to set 
before them the unchangeable rule of everlasting righteousness in 
its original purity and perfection, and not only explain and enforce 
it by the most powerful considerations, but apply the commands of 
supreme reason to the government of the thoughts and passions of the 
heart; that duty and virtue in the principle, and habit of universal 
rectitude towards both God and man, might be the practice of all the 
earth, and mankind become a people holy to the Lord; He, the 
Universal Father, the better to effect this blessed purpose, added 
two things to religion, which have a power that reason wants to make 
us conform to God, and the eternal laws of righteousness, in 
principle, temper, and life. One is, Christ's appearing to put away 
sin by the sacrifice of himself, by his becoming a sin-offering. The 
other is the assistance of the Spirit of God. The oblation of the 
Son, and the grace of the Father, have effects in religion, in 
changing and sanctifying, that reason is an utter stranger to.

"The sum of the whole is, the Gospel, that word of truth and power, 
enters the hearts, and breaks the power of sin in the soul. The holy 
life of Christ sets us an example, that we should walk in his steps, 
and obey the will of the infinitely wise Creator; that, like him, we 
should accord by obedience with the harmony of God's moral 
government, and rather die than break or obstruct it by any wilful 
sin. And by his being a sin-offering, he not only put an end to all 
sin-offerings, which both Jews and Gentiles were wont to offer<60>; 
but, by his being the most precious one in the universe, showed 
God's great displeasure against sin, and in his obedience to the 
Father, even unto death, that we ought to cease from evil, and by a 
righteous obedience render ourselves worthy of God the Father's 
love. That we may do so we have the promise of the Spirit so enable 
us to turn from sin and Satan to the living God, that by the acting 
principle of sanctification, wrought within us by the hand of him 
that made us, without the least force on our will, we may perfect 
our souls in purity and holiness, exercise acts of love and 
benevolence, and worship the one true God in and through the one 
true Mediator. Reason alone, excellent as it is, cannot produce 
anything like this.

The religion of favour in these respects surpasses the law of 
nature. By the first law of the creation, reason, we may acquire 
that righteousness, which is an habitual rectitude of soul, and 
right actions flowing from it: but sanctification, that influencing 
principle, which adds holiness to righteousness, belongs, as I take 
it, to the law of grace. It is given to those who ask it, not for 
the sake of, but through Christ."

"All this," I answered, "is just and fine, and I have only to 
request, for my farther instruction, that you will be pleased, 
madam, to explain yourself a little more on the articles of a sin-
offering and grace; for I have always thought there was a darkness 
sat upon these parts of revealed religion, and have often wished for 
what I have not yet found, a head capable of giving me entire 
satisfaction on these points: but from what I have heard you say, I 
must now suppose that all my doubts, relative to the two subjects, 
you have the power to remove." "My power," replied AZORA, "is no 
more than a plain understanding, that in this still and peaceful 
region, has been at liberty to think, without being corrupted by 
sophistry, school-nonsense, or authority; and, as to giving 
satisfaction on the heads you mention, or any other, it is not what 
I pretend to: but my opinion you shall have since you ask;" and in 
the following manner AZORA proceeded.

"As to our Lord's becoming a sin-offering, I conceive, in the first 
place, that God ordained it, because he saw it needful, and 
necessary to answer many and great ends. It must be right, and what 
in the reason and nature of things ought to be, though we were not 
able to comprehend the reasons that made it needful. It must have 
been the properest way to make up the breach between heaven and 
earth, since infinite wisdom appointed it.

"In the next place, as the death of this great person not only gave 
the highest attestation to the truth of his doctrine, and confirmed 
every word he had preached; to the encouragement of sinners to 
repent, and the great consolation of saints; but has afforded us 
such a noble pattern of obedience, as must have an influence on 
intelligent beings, and excite them to practise obedience to all the 
commands of God, and perfect resignation to his will in every case; 
which are some excellent reasons for Christ's dying; so did Almighty 
God make this farther use of it, that he appointed the blood of 
Christ, which was shed to produce the essence of sanctification in 
the soul, to wit, devotedness, trust, and resignation to the 
Almighty Father of the universe, to be the blood of a new covenant, 
shed for many for the remission of sins. This seems to me to take in 
the whole case. Christ by obedience to the death, which happened in 
the natural course of things, is held out to the world a pattern of 
self-sacrifice in the cause of truth and virtue, a sample of that 
perfect religion, not my will, but thine be done; the glorious 
gospel is thereby confirmed; and our redemption is effected by the 
blood of the Son of God. As Moses, the mediator between God and 
Israel, repeated to the people the laws and judgments of God, and 
received their consent to the divine commands; entered this covenant 
in his book, offered sacrifices of praise and friendship, and then 
confirmed the covenant in the most solemn manner, by dividing the 
blood of the sacrifices into parts; one part of which he sprinkled 
on the altar, to ratify God's part of the covenant; and with the 
other part sprinkled the people, that is, the twelve princes, the 
heads, or the twelve pillars, which represented the twelve tribes, 
and then awfully cried out with a strong voice, 'Behold the blood of 
the covenant Jehovah has made with you:' so did the Lord Jesus 
Christ, the mediator between God and all mankind, teach the people 
by his gospel to rectify their notions, to regulate their 
affections, to direct their worship; with the judgments that were to 
be the consequence of disobedience, the rewards prepared for those 
who obey; and then declared, in relation to his death, This is my 
blood of the new covenant. The blood I must shed on the cross will 
seal, ratify, and confirm a pardoning covenant, and by virtue 
thereof, upon repentance and conversion, the world is washed clean 
through the blood of the Lamb.'

"This, I think for myself, renders the thing very plain and easy. 
The death of the Son of God was taken into the plan of redemption, 
not to pacify God's anger; for God could be no otherwise pleased or 
delighted with the blood of his Son, than as his shedding it was an 
act of the highest obedience, and a noble pattern to all the 
rational creation; but his blood was made the seal of a pardoning 
and justifying covenant; and by the death of Christ, the most 
powerful means to prevent sin, and to draw sinners to obey the 
commands of heaven, God demonstrated his love and mercy to mankind. 
I fancy I am clear. In this view of the matter, I can see no 
difficulty in being justified freely by the grace of God, through 
the redemption which is in Christ Jesus. God is the sole original 
and fountain of redemption. The Son, and his gospel are the great 
instruments. Lo! I come to do thy will, O my God, the Son declares: 
and the blood be shed, the better to bring the human race to wisdom, 
rectitude and happiness, is appointed by our merciful, good, and 
gracious Father, to be the seal and ratification of a new covenant. 
Moloch might want a cruel and bloody sacrifice to pacify him; but 
the Father of the universe sent his Christ to deliver his commands, 
and made the death which he foresaw would happen by his Son's 
delivering such commands to impious men, to be a covenant between 
Jehovah and the people, that Jesus should be considered as a 
propitiation for our sins, and his death be an eternal memorial of 
the Almighty's love, and abhorrence of iniquity. There can no 
objection lie against this. To me this appears the most rational and 
beautiful scheme that infinite wisdom could contrive. Most glorious 
and good is our God. Most happy may mortals be, if they please. The 
virtuous obedience of our Lord hath obtained from God a right and 
power to abolish death. His blood hath confirmed the covenant of 
grace, and his gospel hath brought life immortal into light.

"As to the influence of the spirit," AZORA continued, "that there is 
such a living principle in the human soul, cannot, I think, be 
denied, if revelation is to be believed; but the mode of influencing 
is not perhaps to be explained otherwise than by saying, that our 
gracious and good Father makes now and then some friendly 
impressions upon our minds, and by representing in several lights 
the terrors and promises of the gospel, excites our hopes and fears. 
As I apprehend, we can go very little further. It is easy, I think, 
to prove from the scriptures, that as the extraordinary assistance 
of the Holy Ghost was necessary for planting Christianity at first; 
so is a supernatural assistance of the Holy Ghost, though not in so 
illustrious a manner, still necessary to enable us to perform the 
conditions of the gospel. Though God has recalled the more visible 
signs of his presence, yet to be sure he continues to influence some 
way or other. I cannot suppose the Holy Ghost has wholly withdrawn 
himself from the church. 'The renewing of the Holy Ghost,' St. Peter 
says, 'was a promise made to them and to their children, and to 
those that were afar off, even as many as God should call;'<61> and 
as human nature has the same weakness and passions, and 
extravagancies of former ages, there is as much need of a divine 
assistance now as in the time of the apostles: nay, more need, I 
think, at present, as miracles are ceased. There must be a weight of 
supernatural power to press within, as there are now no flashings 
from the sky, or extraordinary appearances without, to prove the 
certainty of our religion, and make us consider its promises, 
threatenings, and rules: but the way this supernatural principle 
acts, as before observed, is hard to determine, any more than what I 
have said, and instead of wasting our time in enquiries how the 
thing is done, our business is to render ourselves capable of so 
great a blessing, by not grieving this holy spirit, lest he depart 
from us; and resolving with the psalmist, 'to walk with a perfect 
heart, and to set no wicked thing before our eyes.'<61> We must 
strive to improve religious thoughts: we must labour hard to obey 
the written rules; God will then give us the grace sufficient for 
us. To our considerable talent of natural power to do good, our 
Father will add the advantages of his spirit. If we desire to be 
good, he will make us good in conjunction with our own application 
and pains; by a gradual process, and human methods. If nature gives 
her utmost actings, the author of nature will move, and direct and 
assist her where she is weak. Both the grace and the providence of 
God may be likened to a little spring concealed within a great 
machine: to the known given powers of the machine, the operations of 
it are ascribed, and all its events imputed; yet it is the small 
secreted spring that directs, draws, checks, and gives movement to 
every weight and wheel. The case cannot be exactly alike, as a 
compound of matter and spirit is different from a machine: but it 
may suggest I imagine some imperfect idea of the affair: a very 
imperfect one, I confess, for if we were thinking ever so long of 
the matter, grace after all would be what the apostle calls it, an 
unspeakable gift. A gift surmounting our apprehensions as well as it 
does our merit. The theory of it may be perhaps too excellent for 
us, and our part is, not to determine how, but with honest hearts to 
pray, that a ray from heaven may open, and shine upon our 
understanding, clear it from prejudices and impostures, and render 
it teachable, considerative and firm; may inspire good thoughts, 
excite good purposes, and suggest wholesome counsels and expedients. 
This the divine power may easily do, without depriving us of free 
will, or lessening our own moral agency. That power may extinguish 
an imagination we strive to get rid of: may remove an impediment we 
labour to be freed from: may foil a temptation we do our best to 
resist. If we do all we can, and implore the divine aid, there is no 
doubt but the Almighty may give his free creatures such powers and 
dispositions, as will carry them innocently and safely through the 
trials of this first state. On such conditions, God, the Father of 
spirits, the friend of men, the patron of righteousness and all 
virtue, will, without all peradventure, distribute his grace to 
every mortal in proportion to the measures of necessary duty."

Here AZORA ended, and I sat for some minutes after in great 
admiration. Her fancy furnished ideas so very fast, and speaking was 
so very easy to her, without one pang in the delivery, or the least 
hesitation for hours, as she could, if she pleased, so long 
discourse; her judgment was so strong, and her words so proper and 
well placed, that she appeared to me a prodigy in speaking, and I 
could have listened to her with delight and amazement the whole 
night. But exactly at ten o'clock, the old woman I mentioned before, 
who first bid me welcome to Burcot-Lodge, came into the chamber with 
candles, and AZORA told me, that if I would follow Gladuse, she 
would light me to bed; this I did immediately, after wishing the 
ladies good night, and my guide brought me to her own cottage, which 
was next door to the grotto. She showed me into a small clean room, 
neatly and prettily furnished, and there I found a good bed. Down I 
lay as soon as I could, being much fatigued, and as the sun was 
rising, got up again, to write what I could remember to have heard 
AZORA say. My memory from my childhood has been very extraordinary. 
I believe there are few living exceed me in this respect. The 
greatest part of what I read and hear, remains with me, as if the 
book was still before me, or the speaker going on. This enables me 
to write down, with much exactness, what I care to note, and I can 
do it for the most part in the relater's or talker's own words, if I 
minute it in my shorthand within twenty-four hours after reading or 
discoursing. Upon this account, I can say, that I lost very little 
of all that AZORA was pleased to let me hear; or, of the discourses 
I had with her ingenious companion, ANTONIA FLETCHER.



CHAPTER VIII.

June 15th.—When I had done writing, I went out to wait upon the 
ladies, and found them in their fine gardens, busily employed in the 
useful and innocent diversion which the cultivation of some of the 
greatest beauties of the creation affords. They had every kind of 
fruit-tree in their ground, every plant and flower that grows, and 
such a variety of exotic rarities from the hotter climates, as 
engaged my admiration, and finely entertained me for many an hour, 
during my stay in this place. They both understood gardening to 
perfection, and continually lent their helping hands to the 
propagation of everything. The digging and laborious work was 
performed by many young women, who did it with great activity and 
understanding, and the nicer parts these ladies executed. I was 
astonished and delighted with their operations of various kinds. It 
was beautiful to see with what exquisite skill they used the knife, 
managed grafts, and scions, directed the branches and twigs in 
posture on espaliers, and raised flowers. They had everything in 
perfection in their kitchen garden and physic garden. Their fruits, 
roots, and herbs for the table, were most excellent; their 
collection of herbs for medicine the most valuable: and as the whole 
contrivance of the gardens approached nature, and beautiful in 
grass, gravel, and variety of evergreens, I was led with delight 
through the whole, till I came into the greenhouse. There I saw 
AZORA and ANTONIA at work, and paid them the compliments they 
deserved.

Immediately after my arrival, breakfast was brought in, chocolate 
and toast, and the ladies were extremely pleasant over it. They 
asked me a great many questions about the world, and were so 
facetious in their remarks, and pleased with my odd account of 
things, that they laughed as heartily as I did, and that was at no 
small rate. This being done, we walked over every part of the 
gardens, and AZORA did me the honour not only to show me all the 
curiosities, and improvements she had made, in the management of 
seeds, flowers, plants, and trees; but, lectured on various fine 
objects that appeared in our way, with a volubility of tongue, and a 
knowledge of the subjects, that was amazing indeed. Were I to set 
down what she said even on salads, cucumbers, cauliflowers, melons, 
asparagus, early cabbages, strawberries, raspberries, currants, 
gooseberries, apples, pears, plums, cherries, apricots, &c. and 
especially her propagation of mushrooms champignons, and buttons; 
this, exclusive of exotics, and flowers, would make I believe an 
octavo: and in relation to exotics and flowers, I am sure she talked 
twice as much, and of everything extremely well. I never did hear 
anything like her. The discourse cost her no more than the breath of 
her nostrils.

But at last we came to a fish-pond, that was an acre of water, and I 
assure you, reader, in half an hour's time the illustrious AZORA not 
only talked more of fish and ponds than the ingenious and honourable 
Roger North, of Rougham in Norfolk, hath written on these subjects 
in his excellent Discourse, printed in 1713, in 8vo.; but, mentioned 
many useful things relative to them, which Mr. North was a stranger 
to. She told me, among other matters, that there was only pike and 
perch in her pond, and the reason of it was, because she loved pike 
above all fish, and as the jacks were fish of prey, no fish but the 
perch could live with them: the perch on account of the thorny fins 
on its back, escapes the pike's voracious appetite. She further 
informed me, that the jacks in her pond were the finest in the 
world, as I would see at dinner, and the reason of it was owing to 
the high feeding she took care they had every day; beside the 
entrails of what fowl and sheep her people killed for her table and 
themselves, the pike had blood and bran mixed in plenty, and all the 
frogs she could get from a neighbouring fen; for of them the jacks 
are most fond. This made the fish extraordinary; and as the water 
was current through the pond, and the bottom of various depths from 
one to six feet, that the spawn may have shallow water to lie in, 
and the fry shallow water to swim in, as they both required, this 
was the reason, that one acre of water in such a manner, produced 
double the quantity of fish to what a pond of still water and a 
bottom all of one depth, could have. See, continued Azora, what 
multitudes there are. They know me, as I feed them myself every day, 
and tamely come up, cruel tyrants as they are, to get their meat. 
Here she called 'Jack, jack,' and throwing in a basket of 
unfortunate frogs, it was wonderful to see how those devouring 
monsters appeared, and voraciously swallowed the poor things.

AZORA was going to proceed to another pond of carp and tench, which 
she had at the other end of her gardens, and let me know how that 
was ordered, so as to produce the largest and finest fish: but a 
bell rung for morning prayers, at ten o'clock, and she immediately 
turned towards a chapel. She asked me if I would attend divine 
service, and upon my answering, with pleasure, desired me to come 
on. In the church I saw every soul of the community assembled, and 
while I chose to sit on one of the benches among the people, at some 
distance, that I might the better observe everything done, the 
ladies ascended by a few steps into a reading desk, and AZORA began 
with great devotion, to pray in the following manner:

"O Christ, our blessed mediator, pray for us that our faith fail 
not, and through thy merits and intercession, Lord Jesus, let our 
prayer be set forth in the sight of Almighty God as incense, and the 
lifting up of our hands as a morning sacrifice.

"Almighty and everlasting God, thou pure and infinite Spirit, who 
art the great cause and author of nature, and hast established the 
world by thy wisdom, and stretched out the heavens by thy 
discretion; upon whom depends the existence of all things, and by 
whose providence we have been preserved to this moment, and enjoyed 
many blessings and undeserved advantages; graciously accept, we 
beseech the, our grateful sense and acknowledgements of all thy 
beneficence towards us; accept, O Lord, our most hearty and 
unfeigned thanks for all the instances of thy favour which we have 
experienced; that we have the use of our reason and understanding, 
in which many fail, and have had refreshing sleep and quiet the past 
night; for delivering us from evil, and giving us our daily bread; 
for all the necessaries, conveniences, and comforts, which thy 
liberal hand hast provided for us, to sweeten human life, and render 
it more agreeable than otherwise it could be in this day of our 
exercise, probation and trial. While we live, we will praise and 
magnify thy aweful name, and join in ascribing, with the glorious 
and innumerable heavenly host, honour, power, and thanksgiving to 
the eternal God, who sits on the throne of supremacy unrivalled in 
majesty and power.

"But especially, O great and blessed God, adored be thy goodness for 
so loving the world, as to give thy only begotten Son, to the end, 
that all who believe in him, should not perish, but have everlasting 
life; for his humbling himself even to the death upon the cross, and 
shedding his blood for the remission of our sins. Great and 
marvellous are thy works of mercy, O Lord God Almighty! who can 
utter all thy praise? Praise our God, all ye his servants, and ye 
that fear him, small and great. Amen; allelujah. Blessing and 
honour, and glory, and power be unto him that sitteth upon the 
throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever.<63>

"O God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, have mercy on us dust 
and sin, weakness and imperfection, and enter not into strict 
judgment with us, thine unrighteous and unworthy servants. We 
confess, with shame and grief, that we have violated thine holy 
laws, and abused they tender mercies; that we have followed too much 
the devices and desires of our own hearts, and in numberless 
instances have offended against a most righteous governor, a most 
tender and compassionate Father, and a most kind and bounteous 
benefactor. In thought, word, and deed, many have been our offences; 
and many are still our imperfections. We have sinned against Heaven, 
and before thee, and have thereby deserved thy just displeasure. But 
our hope and confidence is in thine infinite mercy, O God, and that 
according to thy promises declared unto mankind in Christ Jesus, our 
Lord, thou wilt spare them who confess their faults, and restore 
them that are penitent. We do earnestly repent, and are heartily 
sorry for all our misdoings. Through faith we offer up the Lamb that 
was slain to the eternal God for the redemption of our souls; 
believing the worthiness of our Lord Jesus Christ to be a full, 
perfect, and sufficient sacrifice, oblation and atonement for the 
sins of a repenting world, and therefore resolving, with all our 
strength, to imitate his spotless virtue, and perfect obedience. 
Pardon us, then, we beseech thee, and blot out our iniquities. 
Deliver us, we pray, in the name of the Lord Jesus, from the evil 
consequences of all our transgressions and follies, and give us such 
powers and dispositions as will carry us, innocently and safely 
through all future trials.

"Create in us, O God, pure hearts, and renew right spirits within 
us. Cast thy bright beams of light upon our souls, and irradiate our 
understandings with the rays of that wisdom which sitteth on the 
right hand of thy throne. Let thy holy spirit enable us to act up to 
the dignity of our reasonable nature, and suitably to the high 
character, and glorious hopes of Christians; that we may subordinate 
the affairs and transactions of time to serve the interest of our 
souls in eternity; that we may shake off this vain world, and 
breathe after immortality and glory; that we may live in perfect 
reconciliation with the law of everlasting righteousness, truth, and 
goodness; and so comply with thy nature, mind, and will, O eternal 
and sovereign spirit, thou God most wonderful in all perfections, 
that we may fully answer the relation we stand in to thee. Relieve 
and ease our consciences, O blessed God, by the blood of sprinkling, 
according to our several conditions of body and mind; and supply us 
with suitable grace and strength.

"We beseech thee, in the next place, Almighty Lord, to take us into 
thy protection this day, and suffer no being to injure us, no 
misfortune to befall us, nor us to hurt ourselves by any error or 
misconduct of our own. Give us, O God, a clear conception of things, 
and in all dangers and distresses, stretch forth the right hand of 
thy majesty to help and defend us. From sickness and pain, and from 
all evil and mischief, good Lord deliver us this day, and be 
propitious unto us, we beseech thee.

"And while we remain in this world, O Father, Lord of heaven and 
earth, secure us from everything that is terrible and hurtful, and 
keep us in peace and safety. From all sad accidents and calamitous 
events, from all tormenting pains and grievous diseases, good Lord 
deliver us; and bless us with so much health and prosperity, as will 
enable us to pass our time here in contentment and tranquillity.

"And when the time of our dissolution shall come, by the appointment 
of thy adorable wisdom, O Father of mercies and the God of all 
comforts, grant us a decent and happy exit; without distraction of 
mind or torments of body: let thy servants depart in peace, and 
suddenly die in the Lord.

"We pray, likewise, for the happiness of all mankind: that they may 
all know, and obey, and worship thee, O Father, in spirit and in 
truth, and that all who name the name of Christ, may depart from 
iniquity, and live as becomes his holy gospel. We beseech thee to 
help and comfort all who are in danger, necessity, sickness, and 
tribulation: that it may please thee to sanctify their afflictions, 
and in thy good time to deliver them out of all their distresses. If 
we have any enemies, O Lord forgive them, and turn their hearts.

"Our Father, &c."

When this extraordinary prayer was done, which was prayed with a 
very uncommon devotion, such as I never had seen before; they all 
stood up, and AZORA said, "Let us sing the nineteenth psalm to the 
praise and glory of the most high God," and immediately raised it. 
Then all the people joined, and a psalm was sung to perfection 
indeed. AZORA and ANTONIA had delightful voices, and as they 
understood music very well, they had taught this congregation so 
much church harmony, as enabled them to perform beyond anything I 
have ever heard in any assembly of people. The whole scene was a 
strange and pleasing thing. They met again at four in the afternoon; 
and this is the work of their every day. At ten and four they go to 
prayers, and after it sing a psalm; concluding always in the 
following way. "May the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ procure us 
the love of God, that the Almighty Father of the universe may bless 
us with the heavenly assistance of the Holy Ghost."

As to the evening-office of devotion at this place, it was, 
exclusive of the first address, and the concluding Lord's Prayer, 
quite different from that of the morning; and because some readers 
may be pleased with a sight of another of AZORA'S religious 
compositions, I here set it down.

"O Christ, our blessed mediator, pray for us, that our faith fail 
not, and through thy merits and intercession, Lord Jesus, let our 
prayer be set forth in the sight of Almighty God as incense, and the 
lifting up of our hands as an evening-sacrifice.

"O God, who art the Father and Lord of all beings, and the eternal 
and inexhaustible fountain of mercy, we beseech thee to be merciful 
unto us, and to blot out all our transgressions; for we truly repent 
of our wilful imperfections, our failings and neglects, in every 
instance of thy law, and our duty: and through faith we offer up to 
thee the Lamb that was slain for the redemption of our souls: 
believing the worthiness of our Lord Jesus to be a full, perfect, 
and sufficient sacrifice, oblation and atonement for the sins of a 
repenting world, and therefore resolving, with all our strength, to 
imitate his spotless virtue and perfect obedience.

"Remember not, then, O Lord, our iniquities, neither take thou 
vengeance for our sins; but as we sincerely believe thy holy gospel, 
and are truly penitent, as we entirely and willingly forgive all, 
who have, in any instance or in any degree, offended, or injured us, 
and are truly disposed and ready to make all possible reparation, if 
we have injured anyone, have mercy upon us miserable sinners, and as 
thou hast promised by thy Son, pardon and forgive us all our sins, 
and restore us again to thy favour. Hear in heaven, thy dwelling 
place, and when thou hearest, accept us to thy mercy. O spare us 
whom thou hast redeemed by thy Son's most precious blood, and make 
us partakers of that salvation which thou hast appointed in Christ 
Jesus our Lord, and our souls shall bless thee to eternity.

"And that we may no more offend thee, or transgress the rule of 
virtue or true religion, but may hereafter truly please thee both in 
will and deed, and faithfully observe the right statutes, and all 
thy precepts, endue us, O Lord, with the grace of thy holy spirit, 
that we may amend our lives according to thy holy word. Vouchsafe we 
beseech thee, to direct, sanctify and govern both our hearts and 
bodies in the ways of thy laws, and in the works of thy 
commandments; and so teach us to number our clays, that we may apply 
our hearts unto wisdom, and mind those things which are in 
conjunction with our everlasting welfare. O let us be always under 
thy communication and influence, and give that light to our minds, 
that life to our souls that will raise us to a nearer resemblance of 
thee, and enable us to ascend still higher, towards the perfection 
of our nature. Let us be transformed by the working of thy grace and 
spirit into the image of thy son. Conform us to his likeness, O 
blessed God, and make us, body and soul, an habitation for thyself; 
that in our hearts we may continually offer up to thee, holy, 
sublime, and spiritual sacrifices.

"From all evil and mischief, good God deliver us, and defend us we 
beseech thee, from everything terrible and hurtful. Take us under 
thy protection the remaining part of this day, and grant us a night 
of peace, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

"And forasmuch as our earthly house of this tabernacle shall be 
dissolved, and that in a few years at farthest, it may be in a few 
minutes, we must descend to the bed of darkness, and acknowledge 
corruption to be our father, and the worms our sister and mother, 
grant, O everlasting God, that we may depart in peace, and by an 
improved principle of divine life, under the influence of the gospel 
be translated to that eternal world, where God dwells, where Christ 
lives, and sanctified souls enjoy endless life and the purest 
pleasures, for evermore.

"That it may please thee, most gracious and good God, to have mercy 
on the whole race of mankind, and to bless them with all things 
pertaining to life and godliness: let the light of thy glorious 
gospel shine upon the nations darkened by superstition, that they 
may worship thee who art God from everlasting to everlasting, and 
cultivate and establish in their minds the most pure, benevolent, 
and godlike dispositions. We beseech thee for all Christian 
churches; that their behaviour may, by the influence of thy blessed 
spirit, be suitable to their holy profession, and their conversation 
upright and unblamable. Where any have departed from the purity and 
simplicity of the gospel, lead them, O God, to the right practice 
and knowledge of their holy religion; and grant that they may feel 
the comfortable and sanctifying effects of it; and in their lives 
show forth its praise to others. We farther pray, most merciful 
Father, for all that are destitute or afflicted, either in body, 
mind, or estate; that from Heaven, the habitation of thy glory and 
goodness, thou would send them relief, and, if it be possible, put 
an end to their present calamities and troubles. O thou Father of 
mercies, and God of all consolation, bind up the broken in heart, 
and comfort those that mourn. We have a real sense of the miseries 
of the distressed part of mankind, and offer up for them our prayers 
to thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord."

A THANKSGIVING.

"O God, the author of all good, and the fountain of all happiness, 
we offer up our thanksgivings and praises unto thee, for thy great 
goodness to us, and to all mankind. We praise and magnify thy holy 
name for all thy mercies; for our existence, and the use of our 
reasoning powers and faculties; for the health and strength we 
enjoy, and for all the comforts and conveniences of life: for these 
thy gifts we adore thee, O munificent parent of good, and pray that 
a deep and efficacious sense of thy goodness may remain upon our 
hearts, and be a principle of constant and cheerful obedience to thy 
holy laws.

"But especially we offer up the acknowledgements of our hearts and 
mouths for all that thy Son Jesus Christ did, and taught, and 
suffered, in this world, to save us from our sins, and to conduct us 
to true and everlasting happiness. We bless thee for the glorious 
gospel, and for bringing us more effectually, by revelation, to the 
knowledge of thee, and the practice of our duty. For this merciful 
appointment, and for all thy mercies, which respect another and a 
better life than the present; for every instance of thy tender 
regards to us, and for the manifold experiences which we have had of 
thy loving kindness; we offer up the tribute of unfeigned thanks. 
Our souls do magnify thee, O Lord God most excellent and good, and 
all the powers within us praise thy holy name. To thee be glory in 
the church by Christ Jesus, throughout all ages, world without end. 
To thee, O thou God of love, be rendered by all beings endued with 
reason, all honour and obedience, both now, and for ever.

"Almighty and everlasting God, who hast promised to hear the 
petitions of them that pray unto thee in thy Son's name, we beseech 
thee of thy great mercy, to accept the sacrifice of prayer and 
praise, which we have this evening offered up to thy divine Majesty; 
and for the relief of our wants, and the manifestation of thy power 
and glory, grant us those things which we have requested, if thou 
seest it consistent with our chief and eternal good. In the name of 
thy Son Jesus Christ, and his disciples, we pray, and in his words 
conclude the services of this day.

"Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name, &c."

After this, they all stood up, and as in the morning, AZORA said, 
"let us sing to the praise and glory of God the 148th psalm." She 
sung the first verse alone, and at the second, they all joined, and 
went through the whole in a fine and heavenly manner. Then the 
service concluded with this benediction.

THE BENEDICTION.

"May the God of grace and peace be with us and bless us. May his 
holy spirit keep us from falling, and preserve us blameless, unto 
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ."

Thus ended the evening and morning offices of worship at Burcot-
Lodge, and as I cannot sufficiently praise, so I could not enough 
admire the religion and piety of this congregation. The purity of 
their worship was charming: and in the ladies and their people a 
devotion was manifest, that looked more like that of heavenly 
spirits, than of beings in an animal frame; who are warped with the 
customs of the world, and perplexed with difficulties which arise 
from sensible objects. They appeared in high admiration of God, 
endeared to his righteous government, devoted to his holy laws, and 
powerfully drawn to imitate him in all his imitable perfections. Not 
one idle word, or careless look, did I hear or see during the whole 
time of divine service; but, like creatures fixed unchangeably in 
the interest of religion and virtue, and delighted with the joys of 
piety, their hearts melted in every part of their devotions, and 
their breasts were filled with the most grateful transporting 
adorations and affections. So much beautiful religion I had net 
often seen in any assembly. They had a true sense indeed of the love 
and goodness of God, and of the grace and charity of Jesus Christ. 
They had all been carefully instructed by a wise and excellent man, 
who was not long since removed from them by death; and his daughter, 
the admirable AZORA, in conjunction with his niece, the amiable 
ANTONIA, took all possible pains, since the decease of Mr. Burcot, 
to maintain the power of religion in their community, and keep the 
people hearty and steady in the principles and practice of it. This 
brings me again to the history of AZORA.

AZORA BURCOT was the daughter of a gentleman who was once possessed 
of a very great fortune, but by a fatal passion for the grand 
operation<64>, and an opinion of the possibility of finding the 
philosopher's stone, he wasted immense sums in operations to 
discover that preparation, which forces the faces of infused metals 
to retire immediately on its approach, and so turns the rest of the 
mass into pure gold; communicating the malleability and great 
ductility of that metal, and giving it true specific gravity, that 
is, to water, as eighteen and one half is to one. His love of that 
fine, ancient art, called chemistry, brought him into this 
misfortune. For improvement and pleasure, he had been long engaged 
in various experiments, and at last, an adept came to his house, who 
was a man of great skill in the labours and operations of 
spagyrists<65>, and persuaded him it was possible to find the stone; 
for he, the adept, had seen it with a brother, who had been so 
fortunate as to discover it, after much labour and operation. The 
colour of it was a pale brimstone and transparent, and the size that 
of a small walnut. He affirmed that he had seen a little of this 
scraped into powder, cast into some melted lead, and turn it into 
the best and finest gold. This had the effect the adept desired, and 
from chemistry brought Mr. Burcot to alchemy. Heaps of money he 
wasted in operations of the most noble elixir by mineral and salt; 
but the stone after all he could not find: and then, by the adept's 
advice, he proceeded in a second method, by maturation, to 
subtilize, purify, and digest quicksilver, and thereby convert it 
into gold<66>.

This likewise came to nothing, and instead of the gold he expected, 
he had only heaps of mercury fixed with verdigris, which gives it a 
yellow tinge, and more deeply coloured with turmeric. Gold it 
seemed, but, on trial in the cupel, it flew away in fumes and the 
adept made off. Too late this good and learned man saw he had been 
imposed on, and that the spagyrists are in reality what Dr. 
Dickenson calls them, Enigmatistinubivagi.<67>

Chemistry, reader, is a fine and ancient art. The analysing of 
sensible bodies by fire, to discover their real powers and virtues, 
is highly praiseworthy, and the surprising experiments we make, fill 
the mind of an inquirer after truth, with the greatest veneration 
for the wonderful author of nature: but more than this, is a sad 
romance that ends in empty pockets. Never think then of The 
Hermetical Banquet, Glauber's Golden Ass, or the Philosopher's 
Magical Gold.<68> By the law of honest industry, endeavour to be 
rich if you can, for this sole reason, that it is more blessed to 
give than to receive; and if that lies not within your capacity, or 
means, be content with peace and little. There is more true 
happiness in daily bread, and the possession of the divine and 
social virtues, than in tons of gold without holiness and a strong 
attachment to virtue.

When Mr. Burcot found he had almost ruined himself, and that he was 
no longer able to live as he had done, he laid his melancholy case 
before his daughter AZORA, and asked her advice, what he should do? 
Her counsel was, to retire immediately to this part of Stanemore, 
which was an unvalued part of his estate, and bring as many of his 
tenants as he could persuade to inhabit this fine tract of land; to 
sell what remained of his fortune, and with the money procure as 
many of the necessaries or comforts of living as could be had, to 
get in particular some young tradesmen and their wives by offered 
rewards in this place; to build cottages for the people; and render 
the fine caverns in the rock as habitable and pleasing for 
themselves as art could render them. "Here," said AZORA, "we shall 
live more happy than we could do, if still possessed of a fortune to 
make an appearance in the world. We shall enjoy by industry and 
prudence every good thing that rational life can require, and live 
secured from the strokes of fortune, and the world's contempt. 
Strangers to vanity and the pleasures of high life, in this 
delightful retreat, we shall pass our happy days as in a region of 
goodness, knowledge, and joy; and the predominant bent of our hearts 
will be to wisdom, and virtue, and to ascend into the realms of 
perfect day." "Happy advice!" the father of AZORA said, and the 
thing was immediately done. A colony was quickly established here, 
and everything was settled and ordered in the most advantageous 
manner. Cattle, instruments, and grain to sow the land were sent in; 
clothes and every material the little republic could want were 
provided, and every hand was as useful as we could wish. "For four 
years," AZORA continued to inform me, "we lived in peace and 
tranquillity, and never once regretted the loss of our fortunes. We 
were happier far than when we had thousands. Industry, knowledge, 
and religion, were our employment. The night to come of pain and 
death gave us no uneasiness. We lived as the Christians of the two 
first centuries, and rather longed for than feared that event, which 
is to remove us to growing brightness for ever and ever. But a fever 
came in among us, and swept away my father, and every man of our 
little republic: several women likewise perished; but a hundred 
souls remained. Ninety-eight women, besides ANTONIA and AZORA. These 
loved me too well," she continued, "to abandon me; and as they were 
happily situated, and many of them had learned their husband's 
trades, they agreed and swore to spend their lives with me here, and 
be as serviceable as possible, without admitting any men to live 
among us. They are so in the highest degree: they are all useful and 
pious as I could wish them, and under the heavens there is not a 
happier society of mortals. We have the best of everything: all we 
want, and in reason could wish for."

Here AZORA ended her relation, and I wondered greatly at what I 
heard; nor did my admiration lessen when I saw how she governed this 
community, and they employed their time. Her great understanding 
enlightened and directed them, in the execution of everything 
serviceable and ingenious; and she lived before their eyes an 
example of the greatest industry, and the most exalted piety. They, 
on the other hand, were as useful and religious as possible, and so 
heartily and faithfully discharged social duties, in every instance, 
that they seemed as one great capacity and power at work, to promote 
every convenience and good. Some of them, as I have said, were at 
work in the gardens: others in the fields: various trades and 
occupations were going on within doors and without, and all were 
employed in ways that best subserved the general welfare. In their 
behaviour, there was nothing wild, insolent, or arch, to be seen: no 
swellings of vanity and pride: no passion to disoblige: no intention 
to offend: but, every one, discreet and calm; good-humoured, and 
very civil; worthily sustaining their various relations, and each 
attentive to her own incumbent duty. Their labours were but a 
diversion to them, and they lived in tranquillity and plenty. Their 
clothing was coarse, but very good, clean, and handsome. There was 
not one ragged or dirty person among them; nor any with bad shoes 
and stockings. In all respects they seemed a most happy community. 
AZORA studied, to the utmost degree, the advantage and happiness of 
these people: and they, in return, made their duty a vigorous and 
cheerful service. Most of the conveniences and comforts of life they 
had within their own little territory; flesh and fish, mutton, kid, 
and venison; corn for bread, every vegetable; malt-drink, mead, and 
cider; all in great plenty, and most excellent; wool and flax for 
clothing; good candles; and wood enough for firing. What things they 
wanted two of them rode for to the nearest town, and not only 
purchased such goods with the money they got by sale of several 
commodities; especially knit thread stockings and gloves; but always 
at such times brought in some cash to their mistress, and she gave 
part of it among the people, to buy them little things they fancied.

As to the ten young women I mentioned, who walked after AZORA when 
first I saw her, they were the daughters of some widows in this 
little republic, and by her chosen, not only to be her attendants 
and upper servants, and to look after her dairy, her bees, her 
poultry, and her aviary; which was the finest I have ever seen, for 
the variety of birds, and as it was turfed, to avoid the appearance 
of foulness on the floor, and so large as to give the birds some 
freedom of flight; but, on account of their good understanding, in 
which they far excelled their fellows. These girls were carefully 
instructed by AZORA and ANTONIA, and beside being taught the fine 
works of the needle, learned music, and the elements of the 
mathematics from the ladies. The eldest of these girls was but 
twenty, and the youngest eighteen, and they all surprised me very 
greatly with their quickness in answering very hard arithmetical 
questions. They could not only add, subtract, multiply, divide, find 
a fourth proportional, and extract roots of every kind, with 
exactness and readiness, and apply them upon all common occasions; 
but were perfect in fractions vulgar and decimal. They had even gone 
as far in algebra as the resolution of simple equations.

Finding them one morning at figures, I asked the youngest of them, 
what was the number, that 2/3 of it with 4 over, amounted to the 
same as 7/12 of it with 9 over? She immediately translated the 
question from common language into algebra 2/3x +4 = 7/12x + 9: and 
quickly discovered the unknown quantity x to be x = 60: Then she 
took it in synthetically, 2/3 of 60=40+4 = 44: 7/12 of 60 =35 + 9 = 
44. (Synthetically is tracing property from number:—Analytically is 
tracing number from property.) This made me wonder very greatly. I 
asked another of them, if she bought 20 loaves for 16 pence, all of 
them two-penny, penny, and farthing ones—how many would she have of 
each? She answered 5 two-penny loaves, 3 penny ones, and 12 farthing 
loaves; for the equations were x+y+z = 20 and 8x + 4y = z = 64. From 
whence by subtraction, 7x + 3y = 44, and of consequence, Y = (44-
7x)/3 = 14-2x + (2-x)/3

I asked a third, how many ways she could pay £20 in pistoles, 
guineas, and moidores, at 17s., 21s., and 27s. the pistole, the 
guinea, and the moidore? She replied in a very little time, 9 ways, 
to wit, 11 pistoles, 5 guineas, and 4 moidores—8 pistoles, 1 guinea, 
9 moidores-8 pistoles, 10 guineas, 2 moidores-17 pistoles, 4 
guineas, 1 moidore-2 pis-toles, 2 guineas, 12 moidores-2 pistoles, 
11 guineas, 5 moidores-5 pistoles, 6 guineas, 7 moidores-5, 15, 0—
and 14 pistoles, 0 guineas, 6 moidores. This was a hard operation.

I asked another of these young women, if her lady gave her 297 
guineas and 339 pistoles, to pay 6 men a hundred pounds apiece in 
guineas and pistoles only, as was agreed, how could she contrive to 
pay them, and dispatch the thing? I will tell you, sir, she 
answered, very soon. x represents my guineas, and y my pistoles, and 
21x + 17y = 2000, of consequence, x = (2000-17y)/21 = 95 + (5-
17y)/21; &c. and quickly discovered, that the first man should have 
92 guineas and 4 pistoles:—the second man, 75 guineas and 25 
pistoles:—the third, guineas, 45 pistoles:—the fourth, 41 guineas 
and 67 pistoles: —the fifth, 24 guineas and 88 pistoles:—and the 
sixth man, 7 guineas and 109 pistoles. This was admirable. But is 
there no other way I said of paying £100 in guineas and pistoles, 
besides the six ways you have mentioned? There is no other way, the 
fine girl answered. If a seventh man was to be paid £100 in these 
two kinds of money, he must be paid in one of these six methods. 
This was true. I was charmed with what I heard.

While I was thus engaged with the maids, AZORA and ANTONIA came into 
the room, and finding how I had been employed, they began to talk of 
problems, theorems, and equations, and soon convinced me, that I was 
not superior to them in this kind of knowledge; though I had studied 
it for a much longer time, and had taken more pains than ever they 
did. Their fine understandings saw at once the things that made me 
sweat many an hour, and in less time than I required for an 
operation, they could answer the most difficult questions, and do 
anything in simple quadratic equations, and in the composition and 
resolution of ratios. This I thought very wonderful; especially as 
they had been taught no longer than one year by Mr. Burcot; and that 
they had acquired the most abstruse part of their knowledge by their 
own application. I note the thing down as one of the strangest and 
most extraordinary cases that ever came in my way: perhaps, that 
ever was heard. It is such a specimen of female understanding, as 
must for ever knock up the positive assertions of some learned men, 
who will not allow that women have as strong reasoning heads as the 
men.

By the way, I observe, exclusive of these two ladies, that I have 
seen many of the sex who were distinguished for accuracy and 
comprehensiveness, not only in the science, where known and required 
qualities are denoted by letters, but in other fine parts of 
learning. I have little right to pretend to anything extraordinary 
in understanding, as my genius is slow, and such is common in the 
lower classes of men of letters; yet, my application has been very 
great: my whole life has been spent in reading and thinking: and 
nevertheless, I have met with many women, in my time, who, with very 
little reading have been too hard for me on several subjects. In 
justice, I declare this; and am very certain from what I have heard 
numbers of them say, and seen some of them write, that if they had 
the laboured education the men have, and applied to books with all 
possible attention for as many years as we do; there would be found 
among them as great divines as Episcopius, Limborch, Whichcote, 
Barrow, Tillotson, and Clarke; and as great mathematicians, as 
M'Laurin, Saunderson, and Simpson. The critics may laugh at this 
assertion, I know they will: and, if they please, they may doubt my 
veracity as to what I relate of the two ladies, and the ten young 
women, in Burcot-Hamlet; but what I say is true notwithstanding. 
Facts are things too stubborn to be destroyed by laughing and 
doubting.

As to the ladies I have mentioned, they both did wonders in specious 
arithmetic; but AZORA was the brightest of the two, and in pure 
algebra, had gone much further than ANTONIA. With wonder I beheld 
her, while she answered the most difficult questions as fast as 
fingers could move; and in the solution of cubics, and the 
resolution of equations, both according to Descartes' laborious 
method, and the better universal way, by converging series, work 
with a celerity and truth beyond what I have ever seen any man do. 
Nor was it only algebra independent of geometry that she understood. 
She could apply its reasoning to geometrical figures, and describe 
the loci of any equations by the mechanical motion of angles and 
lines. She was in this respect the greatest prodigy I ever saw.

But it was not on account of this excellence that I so much admired 
AZORA, and honour her memory so greatly as I do; nor because she 
talked so excellently on various subjects, as I have related; but, 
for her knowledge of the truths of Christianity, and the habits of 
goodness she had wrought into her soul; for the care she took of the 
people under her government, by communicating every felicity in her 
power, to their bodies and minds; and the pure religion of Christ 
Jesus, which she publicly maintained, in all the beauty of holiness 
and, in a just fervour of practice. She was herself, in her manners 
and piety, a fine copy of those blessed women who conversed with our 
Lord and his apostles: and her society, in innocence and goodness, 
in usefulness and devotion, seemed an epitome of the first Christian 
church at Jerusalem. Under a just impression of the most heavenly 
principles they all lived, and strictly regarded their several 
offices. As the gospel directs, they worshipped a first cause, the 
Deity, as the disciples of the Christ of God, our holy mediator; and 
the authority of a being of infinite wisdom, and unchangeable 
rectitude of nature, had made such an impression upon their minds, 
that they laboured continually to acquire that consecration and 
sanctity of heart and manners, which our divine religion requires. 
Excellent community! Happy would Europe be, if all her states were 
like this people. A false religion would not then prevail; nor would 
superstition be the idol to which the world bows down. The evils, 
which now dishonour human nature, and infest society, would not be 
seen among us; nor those excesses of passion be known, which are the 
parent of discord and calamity, and render this lower world one 
scene of sin and sorrow: but, as revelation inculcates, as reason 
suggests, mankind would worship the Almighty Principle, the One God, 
the Only True God, with a worship suitable to the nature of a Being, 
who is not confined to, or dependent upon, particular places and 
circumstances, who is always, and everywhere  present with us; and 
like the ministers attending on the glorious throne of the Monarch 
of the world, they would, according to their measure, be pure, 
benevolent mortals, and as perfect in goodness, as men can be within 
the degree and limit of their nature. In a word, the supreme Father 
of all things would then be the God of all Christians; and in doing 
his will, in imitating his perfections, and in practising everything 
recommended by the great and universal law of reason, that law which 
God sent our Lord to revive and enforce; they would find the 
greatest pleasure. Such were the people of Burcot-Hamlet. AZORA and 
ANTONIA were indeed most glorious women <69>.



CHAPTER IX.

The l8th of June, 1725, I took my leave of Mrs. BURCOT and Mrs. 
FLETCHER, for so they would be called, as they informed me, after I 
had once used the word Miss; and from this fine place, proceeded on 
my journey, by a paper of written directions I had received from 
them: as there was a pretty good, though a long and tedious way out 
of the mountains, if a traveller knew the passes and turnings; but 
otherwise, it was either impossible to go on; or a man must journey 
at the hazard of his life a thousand times a day, in crossing waters 
and precipices.

Our first labour was to ascend a very narrow steep way in the side 
of a mountain, which went up due north for a full mile, and brought 
us to another large, standing, black and unfathomable water, on the 
top of this high hill. There was no appearance of any feeders to 
supply this frightful lake, and therefore, and on account of its 
blackness, the surface must communicate with the abyss. From this 
water we rode due east for half an hour, and then descended to a 
sandy valley, where flames were rising from the ground. The fire 
came up without noise, smoke, or smell, and appeared to me very 
wonderful; but such things are common in many parts of the world. In 
the side of one of the Apennines, I have seen a large blazing vale. 
The learned tell us, this is owing to rich veins of bitumen, which 
crops in such places, and the heat of the air between the hills, in 
shallow valleys, causes it to burn. This crop of bitumen, and 
accension<70> by the agitation of hot air, is well fancied, I own: 
but it does not give me full satisfaction. I think of this, and many 
other natural things, as Moyle does of the aurora borealis: that 
these uncommon appearances should be looked on with wonder and 
admiration, and raise in us a due reverence of their great Author, 
who has shown his Almighty power and wisdom in forming such an 
infinite variety of productions in all parts of the universe. 
Philosophy undertakes to account for everything. I am sure it is in 
many cases mistaken.

Having passed the burning valley, we rode through a river, that was 
up to the horses' bellies, very rapid, and a bad bottom, and then 
proceeded along a steep hill side, the course N.W. till we came to a 
rich low land, that was covered with flowers and aromatic shrubs, 
and adorned with several clumps of oak, chestnut, and white walnut 
trees. This plain is about twenty-five acres, surrounded with stony 
mountains, some of which are very high and steep, and from the top 
of one of the lowest of them, a cataract descends, like the fall of 
the river Niagara in Canada, or New France, in North America. 
Swifter than an arrow from a bow the rapid water comes headlong down 
in a fall of an hundred and forty feet, which is three feet more 
than the descent of Niagara. The river here, to be sure, is not half 
so large as that which comes from the vast lakes of Canada, but it 
is a great and prodigious cadence of water, and tumbles 
perpendicularly in as surprising a manner, from as horrible a 
precipice; and in this very neatly resembles the Niagara-fall; that 
as you stand below, as near the fall as it is safe to go, you see 
the river come down a sloping mountain for a great way, as if it 
descended from the clouds. It is a grand and amazing scene. The 
water issues from a great lake on the top of a mountain that I found 
very hard to ascend, and the lake has many visible feeders from 
hills upon hills above it, which it is impossible to climb.

18 June.—It was twelve o'clock by the time we arrived at this 
waterfall, and therefore I sat down by the side of it to dine, 
before I attempted to get up to the top of the precipice, and see 
from whence this water came. While my eyes were entertained with the 
descending scene, I feasted on a piece of venison pasty, and some 
fine ale, which, among other provisions, Mrs. Burcot had ordered her 
servants to put up for me: but as I was thus happily engaged, my 
lad, O'Fin, had climbed up to the top of the waterfall, and was 
going to land from a tree that grew out of the rocky mountain near 
the summit of the hill, when his foot slipped, and he came tumbling 
down in a miserable way. I expected him in pieces on the ground, as 
I had him full in my view. There seemed no possibility of an escape, 
and yet he received no harm. In the middle of the descent, he stuck 
in another projecting thick tree, and from it came safely down. This 
was a deliverance. Providence often saves us in a wonderful manner, 
till the work appointed to be finished is done, or the limited time 
of our trial over. In relation to such escapes, I could give myself 
as an instance many a time, and will here mention one extraordinary 
case.

As I travelled once in the county of Kerry in Ireland, with the 
White Knight, and the Knight of the Glin,<71> we called at Terelach 
O Crohane's, an old Irish gentleman, our common friend, who kept up 
the hospitality of his ancestors, and showed how they lived, when 
Cormac Mac Cuillenan, the Generous, from whose house he descended; 
was king of Munster and archbishop of Cashel in the year 913.<72> 
There was no end of eating and drinking and the famous DOWNE FALVEY 
played on the harp. For a day and a night we sat to it by candle-
light, without shirts or clothes on; naked excepting that we had our 
breeches and shoes and stockings on; and I drank so much Burgundy in 
that time, that the sweat ran of a red colour down my body; and my 
senses were so disordered, that when we agreed to ride out for a 
couple of hours to take a little air, I leaped my horse into a 
dreadful quarry, and in the descent was thrown into a large deep 
water that was in a part of the frightful bottom, and by that means 
saved my life. When I came above water I swam very easily out of the 
pit, and walked up the low side of the quarry as sober as if I had 
not drank a glass. This is a fact, whatever the critics may say of 
the thing. All I can say to it is my hour was not come.

Having dined, and shot a bustard that weighed forty pounds, I went 
on again, the course north-west for half a mile, and then to my 
astonishment, it trended to the south for more than an hour; which 
was going back again: but at last it turned about, and for half an 
hour, we went to the north-west again, and then due east for a long 
time, till we come to hills upon hills that were very difficult to 
pass. We were obliged to alight at many of them, and walk up and 
down them, which was a delay of many hours: but we did it at last, 
and came into a large sandy opening, that had a number of rapid 
streams breaking over it, that fell from the mountains, and with the 
forest on the surrounding hills, formed a very wild and pleasing 
scene. Over this we went for half a mile, and then came to a long 
glen, so very deep and narrow, that it was quite night when we got 
to the bottom of it, though the sun was not yet down; and it brought 
to my remembrance Anchises' son, the wandering prince of Troy, when 
he descended to the shades below.<73> It had the appearance indeed 
of some such pass, and was a frightful way, as hills, like Caucasus 
and Atlas, were close on either hand of us, and a river roared 
through the bottom of the steep descent; which we were obliged to 
walk down on foot. This could not be the right road I was certain. 
AZORA and ANTONIA could never pass this deep and rapid flood. It was 
too much for any man to venture into, without knowing where the 
torrent went, or how the channel of the river was formed.

Up then I came again to the day, and resolved to pass the night at 
the foot of one of the woody hills, on the margin of the streams 
that sounded sweetly over the shores: but how to proceed the next 
morning I knew not. As my paper of directions did not mention the 
dark steep descent we had been down, but a little valley that lay 
due east, through which we were to go: no such vale could we see, 
and of consequence, in some turning of the road, we had gone wrong.



CHAPTER X.

When I came among the trees, on the side of one of the mountains, I 
began to look for some convenient resting place, while my two boys 
were plucking the bustard, and preparing a fire to roast it for 
supper, and wandered a good way till I saw a pretty hermitage in an 
open plain like a ring, and going up to it, found the skeleton of a 
man. He lay on a couch in an inward room without any covering, and 
the bones were as clean and white as if they had come from the 
surgeon's hands. The pismires <74> to be sure had eaten off the 
flesh. Who the man was, a paper lying on the table in a strong box 
informed me. It was called --

THE CASE OF JOHN ORTON.

I was twenty years old when Charles II. was restored, in 1660; and 
being master of large fortunes, and educated in an aversion to 
puritans and republican principles, went into all the licentiousness 
and impieties, which overspread and corrupted this nation, when that 
profligate prince ascended the throne. I drank up to the excess of 
the times: I debauched every woman I could get within my power, by 
gold, treachery, or force; maid, wife, and widow: I murdered several 
men in duels; and blasphemed the God of heaven continually. The 
devil was my first and last toast; and, in a club I belonged to, I 
proceeded to such scarce credible wickedness, as to perform the part 
of the priest in our infernal sodality, and after using the words of 
consecration over the elements, gave the profane bread and wine in 
the most horrible manner. I was the most abominable of mortals. 
Contrary to all the dictates and principles of wisdom, virtue, and 
honour, I acted; bound myself in bondage to Satan; and lived the 
most execrable slave to the vilest inclinations, and most heinous 
habits. Scratch was the name I had for the evil one, and upon all 
occasions I invoked him. The last words I said every night, after 
lying down, were 'Scratch, tuck me in.'

In this diabolical manner did I pass my life away till I was forty, 
and in twenty years' time committed every evil that can dishonour 
human manners, and infest society. I was a disgrace to my species, 
and unworthy of the name of man.

But as I went on in this manner, and gloried only in outdoing the 
greatest scelerates<75> in impiety and debauchery, in being the 
chief instrument of Satan, and striving to bring every soul I got 
acquainted with, in subjection to the flesh and the devil; 
maliciously committing all manner of sin; and with greediness 
executing the suggestions of a defiled imagination, and the purposes 
of the most corrupt heart; I was struck one night with the most 
excruciating torments of body; and had, at the same time, such 
unspeakable horrors upon my mind, that I believe my condition 
resembled the state of the damned. The tortures all over my frame, 
were beyond the pains any rack could cause; but were less afflicting 
than the panic fear that harrowed my soul under a lively sense of 
eternal vengeance, for the crying enormities and impurities of my 
life. All my crimson crimes were held as in a mirror before me; the 
most diabolical impieties against heaven, and the most shocking 
cruelties to men; the numbers I had drank to death, and secured in 
the service of hell; the men I had sent to the other world by combat 
at pistol and sword; and the women I had ruined, not only in this 
life, but perhaps, for evermore; the miseries I had brought upon 
families, and the manifold afflictions I had been the author of for 
years after years, by night and by day; all these offences I saw 
like the hand-writing on the wall, and in a horror and consternation 
of mind, that words cannot describe, lay a miserable spectacle for 
two nights and two days. Tormented, perplexed, and confounded, I 
rolled from side to side, and condemned myself and my folly in the 
most doleful complaints; but dared not look up to a just Judge and 
offended God. No slumber for this time did approach my eyes; but in 
agonies I shook with a frightful violence, and thought every moment, 
that the demons my fancy had in view, were going to force my 
miserable soul away to everlasting inflictions, in the most dismal 
cavern of hell. Spent, however, at last, I fell into a short sleep. 
I had half an hour's rest, and in that slumber imagined, I heard a 
small voice say, "As I live, saith the Lord, I have no pleasure in 
the death of the wicked; but that the wicked turn from his way, and 
live: Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die, O 
house of Israel. Rent your heart, and not your garments, and turn 
unto the Lord your God: for he is gracious and merciful, slow to 
anger, and of great kindness, and repenteth him of the evil."

Upon this I awaked, and found my pains were gone. To heaven I lifted 
my eyes, and as the tears poured down my face, cried out to God for 
mercy. "O God be merciful to me a sinner. Have mercy on me dust and 
sin, the vilest of all sinful creatures. To me belongs nothing but 
shame and confusion of face eternally. My portion should in justice 
be the lake of everlasting fire and brimstone. But O Lord God most 
mighty, O holy and most merciful Father, to thee belongeth infinite 
goodness and forgiveness. O remember not my sins and transgressions, 
my great and numberless provocations, and my trespasses that are 
grown up even unto heaven. Have mercy upon me, O God, after thy 
great goodness, and according to the multitude of thy mercies, do 
away mine offences. I have a hearty sense and detestation of all my 
abominations, and with a true contrition of heart, I repent of all 
my iniquities. Wash me, then, I beseech thee, O Father of mercies; 
wash my polluted soul in the blood of the holy Jesus, and forgive me 
all my sins, as I offer up a troubled spirit, and a broken and 
contrite heart, which thou hast promised not to despise. And grant, 
O Lord God, my Father, that I may from this hour, by the guidance 
and direction of thy sanctifying spirit, bid a final adieu to all 
ungodliness and iniquity; and consecrate myself entirely to thee, to 
serve thee with humility, love and devotion, and for the remainder 
of my life, give thee the sacrifices of righteousness, through Jesus 
Christ our Lord."

When I had thus implored the mercy of the Almighty, in a torrent of 
tears, with strong cryings, I found my heart quite easy, and my mind 
so filled with delights and comforts, that I cannot describe the 
strange happiness of my condition: but how to secure this felicity 
was the question. I was afraid of the world, and trembled when I 
thought of its temptations: beside the great wickedness of my past 
life made it necessary that I should live in an extraordinary state 
of penitence, and by great mortification and piety, make what amends 
I could for sinning against heaven in the most atrocious manner; and 
wilfully for a long series of years, breaking every law of the just 
and holy governor of the world. A change of mind, and common piety, 
were not enough for such a wretch as I had been. I was unworthy of 
the innocent comforts of life. I ought to breathe in sighs, and 
speak in groans. I resolved then to be a reform indeed, and in this 
part of Stanemore mountains, which I was well acquainted with, spend 
the remainder of my days, in the labours of a penitential piety.

As I had no relations living, I sold what estates I had left, and 
gave almost the whole money among the poor. With the little I kept, 
I bought what necessary things I should want in my solitude; and 
with tools and seeds, some clothes and linen, a few books, and other 
little matters, retired to this spot in the year 1681. I had some 
working men from the next village, to build me the little hut I live 
in; to sow my garden with every vegetable, and put some fruit-trees 
in the ground; to cut me a pile of firing from the woody hills; and 
make my place as convenient as my intended life could require. All 
this was soon done, and then I was left alone; in the possession of 
everything I had a wish for in this world. It is now twenty years 
since my arrival here, and in all the time, I have not had one sick 
or dismal hour. My garden and my cottage employ me in agreeable 
labours, to furnish my table with roots and fruits; which is what I 
mostly live on; having nothing more but goat's milk, and now and 
then a sea-biscuit; my drink being water, and sometimes a cup of 
mead of my own making.

When I am weary of working, I sit down to study my Bible, and in 
that most perfect treasure of saving knowledge, I find such joy and 
satisfaction as make my life a scene of heavenly happiness, and 
charm me into raptures the nearer I approach to the hour of my 
dissolution. That will be a blessed hour. By the amazing mercy of 
God, vouchsafed through the Lord Jesus, my crimson sins are 
pardoned; and when the voice of the Son of God, the thunder of the 
dreadful trumpet will awake all the dead, I shall have my part in 
the first resurrection, and ascend with the blessed to the eternal 
mansions of the sky. Adored be thy goodness, most glorious Eternal. 
Inestimable is thy love in the redemption of sinners by the gospel, 
and the sacrifice of the holy Jesus!

Fellow mortal, whoever thou art, into whose hands this paper cometh, 
take my advice, and remember thy latter end. If, like me, thou hast 
been betrayed by the demons into great impieties and presumptuous 
sins, and hast been persuaded to abdicate heaven, and its eternal 
hopes, in exchange for illicit gratifications of every kind, and the 
pleasures of this world; then, like me, repent, and in tears and 
mortification, implore the mercy of heaven. Turn to the everlasting 
Father of mercies, and the God of all comforts, after his own 
manner, with humility, sorrow, and resolutions of amendment, and in 
the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, implore his compassion and 
forgiveness, and he will repent and turn unto thee. He will wash you 
in the blood of Jesus, and make you whiter than snow. When he sees 
the sinner a great way off in tears, fasting, and prayer, he will 
run unto him, and fall upon his neck and kiss him. You will become 
the beloved of the Father, and be reinstated in the favour of the 
greatest and most glorious of immortal beings. He will bless you 
here with that peace that passeth all understanding. He will bless 
you for ever hereafter with glory and honour in the kingdom he has 
prepared for the benevolent, the pure, and the honest. But if you 
continue to offend your Creator, and violate the laws of the God of 
heaven, then will you live exposed to judgments in this world, and 
most certainly will depart in confusion and misery. The demons you 
obeyed will gather round the pale, the guilty, the affrighted ghost 
of you, eager to involve your wretched spirit in their own horrors, 
and will drag it to their dismal regions. And when all the monuments 
of human power, wealth and pride shall be overthrown; the earth 
itself be in a blaze, and the sea turned into vapours, at the 
descent of the Son of God, to judge the vast congregation of the 
sons of men, the amazing assembly of mortals, unheard of generations 
raised from the grave, to have all their actions tried; every 
condition everlastingly determined; then will you be placed in that 
division which will call upon the rocks to hide them, and the hills 
to cover them from the face of the Judge; but in vain attempt to 
secrete themselves from an infinite eye, and an Almighty power. Then 
will the terrors of the gospel stand in full force against thee, and 
in the dreadful sentence pronounced against the guilty you must 
share—Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire. O dreadful 
doom! what a tremendous day to sinners! and to see the righteous 
acquitted, and before your eyes ascend in triumph and splendour into 
the mansions of glory, to live the happy favourites of God and 
Christ for never-ending ages; while you are driven forward to the 
infernal prison, and shut up in the habitations of eternal darkness 
and torments, the very thought of it, if you will think seriously of 
it, is enough to curdle the blood, and wither in a moment every 
unlawful joy that sin can produce in bloom and glory. The despair, 
the sighs, the groans, the doleful shrieks, when the wicked are 
driven off to the regions of blackness and darkness for ever, are 
inexpressible. Think then. Think in time, my fellow mortal, and 
profit by the blood of a Saviour. Study his gospel. Hear his 
ministers. Regard the alarms of conscience, and submit to the 
influence of the holy Spirit.

And if you are not that monster of iniquity I once was, before I 
obtained the divine mercy, by a timely and severe repentance, yet, 
as in heaven so in hell, there are many mansions, and if you do not 
work out your salvation according to the terms of the gospel, and 
make every law of Christ the rules of your behaviour; if you do not 
act continually as related to God, to each other, and to another 
world, and seek first the kingdom of God, and the righteousness 
thereof, you will utterly disqualify yourself for the rewards and 
happiness of heaven, though your conduct may be far from meriting 
the most dreadful inflictions in another world. The gains of 
unrighteousness, or meddling with any forbidden fruit, is a 
violation of the laws of God that must ruin you for ever; though the 
punishment for so doing cannot be equal to the torments prepared for 
the tyrant and oppressor, the murderer, the adulterer, the drunkard, 
and offenders in the highest crimes. We must cease to do evil, and 
learn to do well, in order to be saved. Not according to promises 
and prayers at last, not according to legacies to be paid to the 
poor when we are dead, shall we be judged; but, as we have rectified 
the judgment and the will, made virtue the governor of the heart, 
and in all things sought God's glory, not our own. This do, and you 
will live. 

"JOHN ORTON." 

May 1, 1701.

This extraordinary paper surprised me very greatly, and when from 
reading it, I turned my eyes to the bones of JOHN ORTON, I could not 
help breaking out in the following reflection. "And is this the once 
lively, gallant, drinking JACK ORTON, who thought for forty years 
that he was made for no higher end than to gratify every appetite, 
and pass away time in a continual circle of vanity and pleasure! 
Poor skeleton, what a miserable spectacle art thou! Not the least 
remains of activity and joy, of that sprightliness and levity of 
mind, that jocund humour and frolic, which rendered thee the delight 
of the wild societies of thy youthful time: grim, stiff, and horrid, 
is the appearance now; vain mirth and luxury, licentious plays and 
sports, can have no connection with these dry bones."

"O Death, what a change dost thou make! The bulk of mankind are 
averse to serious thought, and hearken to the passions more than to 
the dictates of reason and religion: to kill time, and banish 
reflection, they indulge in a round of dissipations, and revel in 
the freedom of vicious excesses: their attention is engrossed by 
spectacle and entertainments, and fixed to follies and trifles; 
giddy and unthinking, loose and voluptuous, they spend their 
precious hours in the gay scenes of diversions, pomp and luxury; and 
as if the grave and a judgment to come, were a romance of former 
times, or things from which they are secured, never think of these 
important and momentous subjects with minds bewitched by exorbitant 
pleasure, and faculties enervated and broken by idle mirth and 
vanity, they pass their every day away without any of that 
consideration which becomes reasonable beings, and creatures 
designed for a state of immortality: but at last, you appear, and in 
a moment turn delight and admiration, into aversion and horror: 
strength, wealth, and charms, you instantly reduce to weakness, 
poverty, and deformity, in the first place; and then, to a skeleton 
like the bones before me.

"Nor is this the worst of the great revolution. When death 
approaches, the amusements of sense immediately fail, and past 
transactions in every circumstance of aggravation, crowd into the 
mind: conscience reproaches loudly, the heart condemns, and the sick 
tremble at the apprehensions of a vengeance they laughed at in the 
days of diversion, and the midnight hours of the ball: as they come 
near the black valley, they see the realities of a future state; and 
agonies convulse their souls: terrors till then unknown enter their 
breasts; and, in anxieties that are incapable of being uttered, and 
expectations the most torturing, on a review of life, they pass from 
the plains of time into the ocean of eternity. Here lies the frame, 
like the dry bones before me; but, the soul is gone to the sessions 
of righteousness; and perhaps, the dreadful sentence of the divine 
justice is pronounced on it. This is a tremendous affair, that calls 
for timely and serious consideration. Eternity! Eternal misery! They 
that have done evil, to come forth unto the resurrection of 
damnation.

I will take thy advice then, thou glorious penitent, JOHN ORTON; and 
since it is in my power to come forth unto the resurrection of life, 
and obtain immortality, honour, and glory, with the righteous, in 
the kingdom of their father, I will open the reforming gospel night 
and morning, and by its heavenly directions regulate my conduct. I 
am determined to make a wise and serious preparation for death and 
judgment. To the best of my power, I will provide for that day, when 
the prayers and charities of the righteous will be brought forth as 
their memorials before the tribunal of Jesus Christ.

This is the thing to be minded. The brightest scenes of worldly 
prosperity, and grandeur, are contemptible, when they do not accord 
with virtue and piety. Death, in a few years, blends the prince and 
the meanest subject, the conqueror and the slave, the statesman, the 
warrior and the most insignificant, in one promiscuous ruin; and the 
schemes, the competitions, and the interests, which have engaged the 
chief attention of the world, are brought to nothing, and appear, 
too often, ridiculous: but righteousness is unchangeably glorious, 
and in the universal ruin, receives no detriment: when all human 
power and policy will be extinct; concealed piety and persecuted 
virtue, will again appear, and be owned as his by the Lord of Hosts, 
in that day when he maketh up his jewels.

I will love thee therefore, O Lord, my strength; yea, I will love 
thee: and it shall ever be my heart's desire, that my soul may 
behold by faith in itself, as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, 
able and ready to change it into the same image from glory to glory, 
reflected upon, and conveyed to it by the Spirit of the Lord. May my 
portion here be this blessed transforming union, that I may be made 
partaker of the divine nature, by impressions from it.<76> I shall 
then have all I wish, and all I want. With a settled indifference I 
shall then look upon the highest advantages of this world. I shall 
have nothing to hope or to fear. The will of God will be to me 
unmixed felicity.

Such was the soliloquy I spoke, as I gazed on the skeleton of JOHN 
ORTON; and just as I had ended, the boys brought in the wild turkey, 
which they had very ingeniously roasted, and with some of Mrs. 
BURCOT'S fine ale and bread, I had an excellent supper. The bones of 
the penitent ORTON I removed to a hole I had ordered my lad to dig 
for them; the skull excepted, which I kept, and still keep on my 
table, for a memento mori; and that I may never forget the good 
lesson, which the percipient who once resided in it, had given. It 
is often the subject of my meditation. When I am alone of an 
evening, in my closet, which is often my case, I have the skull of 
JOHN ORTON before me, and as I smoke a philosophic pipe, with my 
eyes fastened on it, I learn more from the solemn object, than I 
could from the most philosophical and laboured speculations. What a 
wild and hot head once: how cold and still now; poor skull, I say: 
and what was the end of all thy daring frolics and gambols—thy 
licentiousness and impiety?—A severe and bitter repentance. In piety 
and goodness JOHN ORTON found at last that happiness the world could 
not give him. There is no real felicity for man, but in reforming 
all his errors and vices, and entering upon a strict and constant 
course of virtue. This only makes life comfortable; renders death 
serene and peaceful; and secures eternal joy and blessedness 
hereafter. Such are the lessons I extract from the skull of JOHN 
ORTON.

When I had supped, I went about, to see what things ORTON had left 
behind him in his little cottage, and I found a field bedstead large 
enough for two, with a mattress, silk blankets, quilt, and cotton 
curtains; two oak stools, and a strong square table of the same 
wood. An oak settee, on which his bones lay; a silver lamp to burn 
oil in; a tinderbox and matches; a case of razors; six handsome 
knives and forks in a case; half a dozen china plates, two china 
dishes; and two pint mugs of the same ware; half a dozen drinking-
glasses, a large copper kettle, a brass skillet, two silver spoons, 
and a silver ladle; in a chest were clothes and linen, shoes and 
stockings, and various useful matters. There were pens, ink, and 
paper in a writing-desk, and half a score guineas; and on a shelf 
over it, a dozen good books; three of which were, a large English 
Bible, Thomas a Kempis and Sir Walter Raleigh's History of the 
World: under the shelf hung a plain gold watch, and a large ring 
sun-dial. In a dark closet, I found a box of sea-biscuits, many 
flasks of oil for eating, and jars of it for the lamp; honey, salt, 
and vinegar; four dozen of quart bottles of mead, and two stone 
bottles, that held three gallons each, full of brandy: this I 
suppose was against the days of weakness or sickness. He had not 
used a pint of this liquor.

Having found these things within doors, I proceeded from the house 
to the garden, which lay at a small distance from the little 
thatched mansion, and contained about four acres; it had been very 
beautifully laid out, and filled with the best fruit-trees, and all 
the vegetables: but it was run to ruin and high weeds, and showed 
that its owner had been long dead. I suppose he died soon after the 
date of his paper; for, I observed, that many prior dates had been 
struck out; and had he lived after the year 1701, he would, in all 
probability, have razed that likewise, and set down 1702. Some 
sudden sickness must have seized him; and perhaps, when he found 
himself sinking, he laid himself out naked on the wooden couch where 
I found his skeleton. I can no otherwise account for his having no 
kind of covering over him. As to his bones being so clean, that to 
be sure was performed by the ants. I took notice of many nests here 
of the larger ants, in holes under the roots of great trees.

That the pismires are the best preparers of a skeleton is not only 
certain from the account the missionaries give of the coming on of 
the ants in Pegu; when in one night's time, the vast swarms of them 
that approach, reduce every human creature they can fasten on to 
clean bones; which makes the people set fire to their habitations, 
when they have notice given them by a kind of small monkey they keep 
for the purpose of the motion of this terrible enemy; but it is 
plain from what I have often experimented.

When I want to make a skeleton of any small animal, I put the dead 
creature in a box with holes in it among the ants, in their 
habitations, or nests, or in such parts of the house as a whole 
tribe will often march to, through several rooms, in one track or 
certain road, to eat sugar or sweetmeats they have discovered, and 
then in two or three days, they will perform what the finest knife 
cannot execute. The big ants which are larger than a common house 
fly, and are seldom less than six thousand in a nest, will clear the 
bones of a rat in half a night's time.

There was a pretty little wooden summer-house in the centre of the 
garden, and in it had been in pots some curious plants and flowers. 
Here were various tools, and many instruments of gardening. It 
appeared from them, and the great variety of things in the ground, 
that ORTON must have used himself to hard labour, and found great 
pleasure in his improvements and productions. There was a deal of 
art and ingenuity to be traced in the wild wilderness the garden was 
grown into. It was plain from a book, called The Carthusian 
Gardener, which lay on a table in the summer-house, that he had made 
that business his study. Round this summer-house were the remains of 
many hives on benches, but the bees were all gone, and the stock 
ruined.

All these things, and the place, set me a thinking, and soon 
suggested to my fancy, that in my condition, I could not do better 
than succeed ORTON on the premises; but, without turning hermit. 
Here is, I said, a pretty small thatched mansion, that might easily 
be enlarged, if more rooms were wanting; and a garden, which labour 
would soon restore to its usefulness and beauty, and make it produce 
the best vegetables in plenty. Here is fish in the waters, fowl of 
every kind, and deer on the mountains. Here are goats in great 
herds, for milk, for kids, and when cut, for excellent venison. Here 
is the finest water, and by getting bees, as ORTON had, mead may be 
made that will be equal to the best foreign wine. As to the 
situation, it is most delightful. Nothing can be more charming than 
these shores and breaking waters, the rocky precipices and the woody 
hills, which surround this little region. What then should hinder 
but that I here sit down, and put an end to my adventures; as the 
few things that are wanting may be had at the next town, and a stock 
for years be in a few days secured? The man I am looking for may 
never be found; and if I should meet with him, his circumstances and 
temper may be changed: then, as to the world, I know not how to deal 
in any kind of business; and to live on the small fortune in my 
possession, must reduce me to poverty very soon. Here then it is 
good for me to reside, and make myself as happy as I can, if it be 
not in my power to be as happy as I would. I have two lads with me, 
who are active, useful young men, willing to work, and pleased to 
stay wherever I am; and if I can commence a matrimonial relation 
with some sensible, good-humoured, dear delightful girl of the 
mountains, and persuade her to be the cheerful partner of my still 
life, nature and reason will create the highest scenes of felicity, 
and we shall live as it were in the suburbs of heaven. My lads too 
may pick up among the hills, upon scripture principles, two bouncing 
females: and a state will in a little time be formed. This is fine. 
For once in my life I am fortunate. And suppose this partner I want 
in my solitude could be Miss MELMOTH, one of the wisest and most 
discreet of women; a thinking bloom, and good-humour itself in a 
human figure; then indeed I must be happy in this silent, romantic 
station. This spot of earth would then have all the felicities. 
Resolved. Conclusum est contra Manicheos.<77> said the great St. 
Austin, and with a thump of his fist, he cracked the table.

END OF VOLUME 1



VOLUME 2.
Nec Vixit Male, qui Natus Moriensque fefellit. 
[Neither has he lived ill whose birth and death have passed 
unnoticed by the world – Horace, Letter 18. To Scaeva



CHAPTER XI.

Thus was my head employed, while I smoked a pipe after supper, and I 
determined to return to ORTON'S mansion, after I had found a way out 
of Stanemore; but the previous question was, how I should get out of 
the place I was in, without going back, as there appeared no passage 
onwards. I tried every angle the next morning, to no purpose, and in 
vain attempted some hills that were too steep for the horses. Down 
then I went again to the bottom of the black and narrow glen afore-
mentioned, and with lights observed the rumbling deep river. It 
appeared more frightful than the first time I saw it, and there was 
no venturing into it. This troubled me not a little, as the water 
was not above eight yards broad, and there was an ascending glen on 
the other side of it, that appeared to rise into a fine woody 
country. It was not half the length of that we had descended, nor 
near so steep; it began to widen at the distance of a hundred yards 
from the water, so as to show, at the summit, a fine plain 
encompassed with a sweep of forest. We could see the sun shining 
there. The view in contrast was quite charming.

For some time I stood in this perplexed condition by the water sides 
and could not tell what to do, when one of the lads came running to 
me, to let me know, that as he carefully examined the sides of the 
glen we came down, he discovered to the left, about fourscore yards 
above the river, a pass wide enough for one horse to go through, and 
he believed it was a way out. This was reviving news, and upon going 
into it, I found that it went straight on among the mountains, like 
a rent, or open crack, for three hundred yards, and then turned to 
the left for about fifty more, when it winded a little, and began to 
extend wider and wider every yard, till it brought us by several 
turnings to the beginning of a fine valley, where we again found the 
river we had seen in the bottom of the deep glen, and perceived that 
it ended in a great water, and went off in some subterranean way. 
The mountains were almost close to this fine water, on either hand, 
for near half a mile, and made a delightful rural scene. We could 
see the river, as we looked up it, come tumbling on for a great way 
between the steep rocky precipices; and the broad bright lake it 
formed between vast frowning mountains, with wood and lawns in it, 
at the end of the vale, were altogether a view most charming. This 
made me more highly value Orton-Lodge.

There is a cave there likewise, that adds great beauty to the place, 
and in charms and wonders, exceeds the grot of Tunis, a few miles 
east of Carthage, directly under Cape-Bonn, formerly called the 
promontory of Mercury, where AEneas sheltered after the storm;<78> 
and St. Donat's Cave in Glamorganshire,<79> which is much more 
beautiful than the African grot described in the first AEneid.

The cave in Stanemore is in the bottom of a perpendicular mountain 
of a vast height, the east side of the lake, and four yards from the 
shore. The entrance is a grand sweep, high and broad as the grot, 
that is, in breadth fifty two feet, in height fifty nine. It is an 
hundred and forty seven feet long. The stone of it is extremely 
beautiful; of a yellow and reddish colour, bright and glittering, 
and beautifully variegated with arched and undulated veins of 
various tinges. I broke of a piece of it, and found it a congeries 
of plates of spar, stained with a fine mixture of colours. It is a 
species of the alabaster, called Marmor Onychites, on account of its 
tabulated zones, resembling those of the onyx, and is very little 
inferior to the Egyptian alabaster. This Stanemore stone is far 
beyond the Cornish and Derbyshire alabaster. The caverns there are 
but incrusted with a sparry substance, as I have found upon various 
examinations; and, as is evident to every eye that sees the workmen 
making the elegant vases and chimney-columns we have of the 
alabaster of those counties; whereas in Stanemore this alabaster 
consists of strata of sparry substance, though somewhat coarser than 
this kind of Egyptian stone.

The top of the cave is a bold arch, finished beyond all that art 
could do, and the floor as smooth as it is possible to make the 
stone. At the far end of the grot, there are a dozen rows of seats 
like benches, that rise one above another. The uppermost will hold 
but two people, on each of the others a dozen may sit with ease; 
they make the place look as if it was the assembly room, or council 
chamber of the water-nymphs. There was no water dropping from the 
roof of this cave; but in a thousand places, where moss had 
agreeably covered the walls, it crept through the sides, and formed 
streams that ran softly over the ground, and had worn it smooth. It 
brought to my remembrance some very poetical lines in Lucretius:—

"Noctivagi Sylvestria templa tenebant 
Nympharum, quibus exibant humore fluenta 
Lubrica, proluvie larga lavere humida Saxa, 
Humida Saxa super viridi stillantia musco 
Et partim piano scatere atque erumpere campo."

"And then by night they took their rest in caves, 
Where little streams roll on with silent waves; 
They bubble through the stones, and softly creep, 
As fearful to disturb the nymphs that sleep. 
The moss spread o'er the marbles, seems to weep."

This was exactly the case of the water in this fine cave. In the 
lowest harmony, it gently fell over the slanting floor, and has 
Oldham has it:—

"Away the streams did with such softness creep, 
As 'twere by their own murmurs lull'd asleep."

Such was the delightful spot I at last discovered, when I thought I 
was come to the ne plus ultra, that is, had gone on till I could go 
no farther; and now seeing how my way lay, I departed from Orton-
Lodge betimes the next morning, June 19th, leaving my lad O'Fin to 
keep possession of the place till I returned, and with the other boy 
went through the lawns in the wood I have mentioned at the end of 
the vale. This brought me to a range of mountains most frightful to 
behold, and to the top of them, with great toil, we made a shift to 
climb, and from thence descended through many perils to a bottom 
between the hills we had come down, and some mountains that stood at 
a small distance from them. This low ground trended north and north-
west for an hour, and then turned north-east for three hours more, a 
very bad way; stony and wet, and some stiff pieces of road: but the 
bottoms brought us at last into a large and spacious plain, that was 
surrounded with hills, whose tops and sides were covered with 
ancient trees and lofty groves, and some mountains whose heads were 
above the clouds. Flowers and clover, and other herbs, adorned the 
ground, and it was watered with many never-drying streams. The plain 
seemed a vast amphitheatre, by nature formed; and variety and 
disposition refreshed the eyes whatever way they turned.

In the very centre of this ground, I found a house and gardens that 
charmed me very much. The mansion had a rusticity and wildness in 
its aspect, beyond anything I had seen, and looked like a mass of 
materials jumbled together without order or design. There was no 
appearance of rule in any part, and where a kind of proportion was 
to be seen, it seemed as a start into truth, by the inadvertent head 
of blind chance. It was the most Gothic, whimsical, four-fronted 
thing, without, that ever my eyes beheld; and within, the most 
convenient, comfortable dwelling I have seen.

This edifice, which looks more like a small Gothic cathedral, than a 
house, stands in the middle of large gardens, which are not only 
very fine, but uncommon, and different from all the gardens I have 
been in. There is no more rule observed in them, than in the house; 
but the plantations of trees, and plots of flowers, the raised 
hills, the artificial valleys, the streams that water these vales, 
and the large pieces of water, and lakes, they have brought in, and 
formed, are inexpressibly charming and fine. Wild and natural they 
seem, and are a beautiful imitation of the most beautiful scenes of 
nature. The wilderness, the openings, the parterres, the gardens, 
the streams, the lakes, the cascades, the valleys, and the rising 
grounds, in the most various disposition, and as if art had little, 
or no hand in the designs, have an admirable effect upon the eye.

The passages from valley to valley, between the hills they have 
made, are not by formal straight walks, but by windings in various 
ways, which are decorated with little grottos, and diversified in 
the manner of laying out the ground: the streams and canals 
sometimes serpent, and sometimes spread away. Rocks artfully placed, 
seem to push the waters off, and on the banks are seeming wild 
productions of flowers. As the hills and risings are sprinkled with 
flowery trees, so are these banks with all the sweets that grow. 
Small boats are on the running streams, and over them in many 
places, are winding bridges of wood, most ingeniously and finely 
made. These streams which they have from the mountains, supply the 
larger pieces of water; and in the largest of those lakes they had 
raised a rock, in the most natural manner. On this is a summer-house 
of great beauty. It is the reverse of the mansion, and has every 
charm that pure architecture could give it. It is large enough for a 
small family.

When I came up to this seat, which the owners of it call Ulubrae, 
some gentlemen, who were in the gardens, saw me, and saved me the 
trouble of asking admission, by inviting me in with the greatest 
civility; but they seemed under a vast surprise at my arrival; and 
much more so, when I gave them an account of the way I had 
travelled. It appeared almost incredible. They had not a notion of 
such a journey. They told me I was in Yorkshire now, and had been 
so, when I ascended the high mountains that are some miles behind 
the hills that surround their house; but they did not imagine there 
was any travelling over those mountains, and the alps upon alps 
beyond them, to Brugh under Stanemore. The way, they said, was very 
bad from their house to Eggleston, or Bowes, on account of hills, 
waters, and wet bottoms; it was worse to travel northward to 
Bishoprick; and scarce passable to the north-east to Cumberland. 
What then must it be to journey as I had done over the northern 
fells of Westmorland, and the bad part of Yorkshire-Stanemore I had 
passed.

It was a terrible way, I replied, and what I often despaired of 
coming through, even at the hazard of my life. Frequently we were 
locked in by chains of precipices, and thought we should never find 
a pass: some of the mountains were so steep, that it was with the 
greatest difficulty we could lead the horses up and down them: and 
many rivers were so rapid, and rocky at bottom, that we were often 
in danger of being lost; beside, if fortune had not conducted us to 
the habitations of people we little expected to find, we might have 
perished for want of food, as my servant could not bring from Brugh 
provisions sufficient for so long and uncertain a way. All these 
difficulties I saw very soon; in less than a day's ride to the north 
from the Bell-inn on the southern edge of Stanemore, a little lone 
public-house, that lies half-way the turnpike-road, on the left 
hand, as the traveller goes from Bowes to Brugh, Penrith, and 
Carlisle; but friendship and curiosity were too many for all the 
obstacles in the way, and in hopes of finding a beloved friend, who 
lives somewhere towards the northern edge of Yorkshire or 
Westmorland, or on the neighbouring confines of Bishoprick, or 
Cumberland; and that I might see a part of England, which even the 
borderers on it are strangers to, and of which Camden had not an 
idea;<80> I went on, and have had success thus far. The journey has 
been worth my pains. I have beheld the most delightful scenes, and 
met with very extraordinary things; and should I find my friend at 
last, my labours will be highly rewarded indeed.

The gentlemen I was talking to, seemed to wonder very much at me and 
my discourse; and as the rest of the society by this time came into 
the parlour, they introduced me to them, and then related what I had 
said. They all allowed it was very extraordinary, and requested I 
would oblige them with some particulars that occurred. I did so 
immediately, and told them, among other things, of my reception at 
Burcot-Lodge, and of the skeleton of JOHN ORTON which I found in the 
cottage on the side of a woody hill. I let them know the goods and 
conveniences I saw there, and that I was so pleased with the 
beauties of the place, the little mansion, the once fine gardens, 
and the useful things on the premises, that I intended to return to 
it, and make it my summer retreat; that I had left a man there to 
that purpose, who was at work in the garden, and expected to be back 
in a month's time, with such things as were wanting to make it an 
agreeable and comfortable little country house.

The philosophers wondered not a little at what they heard. If they 
were surprised at seeing me as a traveller in such a place, they 
were much more astonished at my relation. They could not enough 
admire Mrs. BURCOT and Mrs. FLETCHER. The history of the penitent 
ORTON, they thought very strange. They told me they were glad I had 
a thought of making Orton-Lodge a summer retreat, and hoped it would 
occasion my calling upon them many times; that I should always be 
heartily welcome to their house, and might with less difficulty go 
backwards and forwards, as their lodge was at my service, whenever I 
was pleased to do them the favour to call. This was civil, and I 
returned them the thanks they deserved.

Here dinner was brought in, and with these gentlemen I sat down to 
several excellent dishes. There was the best of every kind of meat 
and drink, and it was served up in the most elegant manner: their 
wine in particular was old and generous, and they gave it freely. We 
took a cheerful glass after dinner, and laughed a couple of hours 
away in a delightful manner. They were quite polite, friendly and 
obliging; and I soon found in conversing with them, that they were 
men of great reading, and greater abilities. Philosophy had not 
saddened their tempers. They were as lively companions, as they were 
wise and learned men.

These gentlemen are twenty in number, men of fortune, who had agreed 
to live together, on the plan of a college described by Evelyn in 
his letter to the Hon. Robert Boyle; but, with this difference, that 
they have no chaplain, may rise when they please, go and come as 
they think fit, and every one is not obliged to cultivate his 
garden. Every member lays down a hundred pounds on the first day of 
the year, and out of that fund they live, pay their servants, keep 
their horses, and purchase everything the society requires. What is 
wanting at home, this stock produces, and is to be expended only at 
Ulubre, for everything necessary and comfortable, except raiment and 
horses. When they are abroad, it is at a plus-expence.

I call these gentlemen philosophers, because, exclusive of their 
good morals, they devote the principal part of their time to natural 
philosophy and mathematics, and had, when I first saw them, made a 
great number of fine experiments and observations in the works of 
nature, though they had not been a society for more than four years. 
They make records of everything extraordinary which come within 
their cognizance, and register every experiment and observation. I 
saw several fine things in their transactions, and among them a most 
ingenious and new method of determining expeditiously the tangents 
of curve lines; which you know, mathematical reader, is a very 
prolix calculus, in the common way: and as the determination of the 
tangents of curves is of the greatest use, because such 
determinations exhibit the quadratures of curvilinear spaces, an 
easy method in doing the thing, is a promotion of geometry in the 
best manner. The rule is this.

 
<Diagram>

Suppose BDE the curve, BC the abcissa, D the ordinate = y, AB the 
tangent line = t, and the nature of the curve be such, that the 
greatest power of y ordinate be on one side of the equation; then y3 
= -x3 -xxy + xyy - a3 + aay - aax + axx-ayy: but if the greatest 
power of y be wanting, the terms must be put = 0

Then make a fraction and numerator; the numerator, by taking all the 
terms, wherein the known quantity is, with all their signs; and if 
the known quantity be of one dimension, to prefix unity, and of two, 
2, if of three, 3, and you will have -3a3 + 2aay - 2aax + axx — ayy:

The fraction, by assuming the terms wherein the abscissa x occurs, 
and retaining the signs, and if the quantity x be of one dimension, 
to prefix unity, as above, &c, &c; and then it will be -3X3 -2xxy + 
xyy - aax + 2axx: then diminish each of these by x, and the 
denominator will be -3xx - 2xy + yy -aa + 2ax.

This fraction is equal to A B, and therefore It is =

(-3a3 – 2aay -2 aax +axx –ayy)/(-3xx - 2xy + yy - aa +2ax)

In this easy way may the tangents of all geometrical curves be 
exhibited; and I add, by the same method, if you are skilful, may 
the tangents of infinite mechanical curves be determined. Many other 
fine things, in the mathematical way, I looked over in the journal 
of these gentlemen. I likewise saw them perform several 
extraordinary experiments.

They make all the mathematical instruments they use, and have 
brought the microscope in particular, to greater perfection than I 
have elsewhere seen it. They have them of all kinds, of one and more 
hemispherules, and from the invented spherule of Cardinal de 
Medicis, not exceeding the smallest pearl placed in a tube, to the 
largest that can be used. They had improved the double reflecting 
microscope, much farther than Marshal's is by Culpeper and Scarlet, 
and made several good alterations in the solar or camera obscura 
miscroscope; and in the catoptric microscope, which is made on the 
model of the Newtonian telescope.

In one of their best double reflecting optical instruments, I had a 
better view of the variety and true mixture of colours than ever I 
saw before. The origins and mixtures were finely visihle. In a 
common green ribbon, the yellow, the light red and a blue, appeared 
distinct and very plain; the lively green was a yellow and blue: in 
a sea green, more blue than yellow: the yellow was a light red and a 
pellucid white. All the phenomena of colours were here to be found 
out.

In this instrument, the finest point of a needle appeared more blunt 
and unequal, and more like a broken nail, than I had before seen it. 
The finest edge of a razor was like the back of a dog, with the hair 
up. The finest paper, was great hairs, cavities, and unevenness, and 
the smoothest plate of glass, was very rough, full of cracks, 
fissures and inequalities. Very different, indeed, are the things 
finished by human art from the things finished by the hand of 
nature. The points, the edges, the polish, the angles, everything 
that nature produces, appear in the instrument in a perfection that 
astonishes the beholder.

In the views I here took of the vegetable world, with my eye thus 
armed, I saw many extraordinary things I had never observed before. 
I took notice, in particular, that a sage leaf is covered with a 
kind of cobweb, in which swarms of little active creatures, with 
terrible horns and piercing eyes, are busily employed: a mulberry 
leaf was an amazing flexus or net-work: we can see but nine ribs on 
the sigillum Solomonis;<81> whereas my armed eye perceived here 
seventy-four: in a nettle I observed its whole surface covered over 
with needles of the most perfect polish, every one of which had 
three points, points very different from our finest points, not 
flat, but to perfection sharp; and that these needles rested on a 
base, which was a bag of a flexible substance, in form of a wild 
cucumber, and filled with a sharp, poisonous liquor: this is 
discharged at the extremity of every point of the needles that cover 
the surface of the nettle: from a hole visible in every point the 
poison is thrown out, and excites a sense of pain; and a heat arises 
as the blood flows more copiously to the wounded part. By pressing 
with my finger the extremity of the prickles, the bag of poison 
fell; and on taking off the finger, it swelled again. What a piece 
of workmanship is here in a nettle! Wonderful are thy works, O Lord 
God Almighty!

A leaf of sorrel in this microscope exhibited to my eye oblong, 
rough and straight atoms, sharp as needles, and from thence the 
tongue is twinged. In a bud cut away with a fine needle from a 
steeped seed of a French-bean, I saw the entire plant; and in an 
almond so cut away, the perfect tree. Many other wonderful things I 
observed of the vegetable kingdom, in the microscopes of these 
gentlemen.

As to the animal kingdom, my observations on it, in the optical 
instruments at Ulubrae, were so many, that I could fill a volume 
with the things I saw: but, as I have little room or time to spare, 
I shall only mention two or three. In the double reflecting 
telescope, a louse and a flea were put; which are creatures that 
hate each other as much as spiders do, and fight to death when they 
meet. The flea appeared first in the box, and as he was magnified 
very greatly, he looked like a locust without wings; with a roundish 
body, that is obtuse at the end, and the breast covered with an 
armature of a triangular figure; the head small in proportion to its 
body, but the eyes large, red, and very fierce; his six legs were 
long, robust and made for leaping; the antennae short, but firm and 
sharp; its tail was scaly, and full of stings, and its mouth pointed 
into active pincers: his colour was a deep purple.

The louse in white was next brought on, and had a well shaped, 
oblong indented body: his six legs were short, made for walking and 
running, and each of them armed at the extremity with two terrible 
claws: the head was large, and the eyes very small and black: its 
horns were short and jointed, and could be thrust forward with a 
spring. Its snout was pointed, and opened, contracted, and 
penetrated, in a wonderful manner.

The first that was brought on the stage was the flea, and to show us 
what an active one he was, he sprung and bounced at a strange rate: 
the velocity of his motions in leaping were astonishing; and 
sometimes, he would tumble over and over in a wanton way: but the 
moment the louse appeared, he stood stock still, gathered himself 
up, and fixed his flashing eyes on his foe. The gallant louse did 
with a frown for some time behold him, and then crouching down, 
began very softly to move towards him, when the flea gave a leap on 
his enemy, and with his dangerous tail and pinching mouth, began the 
battle with great fury; but the louse soon made him quit his hold, 
by hurting him with his claws, and wounding him with his sharp 
snout. This made the flea skip to the other side of the box, and 
they both kept at a distance for near a minute, looking with great 
indignation at each other, and offering several times to advance. 
The louse did it at last in a race, and then the flea flew at him, 
which produced a battle as terrible as ever was fought by two wild 
beasts. Every part of their bodies was in a most violent motion, and 
sometimes the flea was uppermost, but more frequently the louse. 
They did bite, and thrust, and claw one another most furiously, and 
the consequence of the dreadful engagement was, that the flea 
expired, and the louse remained victor in the box: but he was so 
much wounded, that he could scarce walk. This battle was to me a 
very surprising thing, as each of them was magnified to the size of 
two feet: but considering what specks or atoms of animated matter 
they were, it was astonishing to reflection to behold the amazing 
mechanism of these two minute things, which appeared in their 
exertions during the fray. It was still more strange to see the 
aversion these small creatures had to each other, the passions that 
worked in their little breasts, and the judgment they showed in 
their endeavours to destroy one another. It is indeed a wonderful 
affair: nor was it the least part of admiration to see through the 
extraordinary transparencies of the louse, the violent circulation 
of the blood in its heart. This was as plain to my eye, as red 
liquor forced by a pump in several experiments through circulating 
glass pipes. As to the dead flea it was opened, and by the camera 
obscura or solar microscope, which magnifies the picture of such a 
body as a flea, to eight feet;<82> we saw the intestines 
distinguished and arranged in a manner that cannot be enough 
admired. It was full of eggs, and in every egg were many half-formed 
young ones.

The water Aranea, or great water spider, was next put in, and made a 
wonderful appearance in his greatly magnified state. It is the 
largest of the spider kind, except the native of Apulia, called the 
Tarantula, and is furnished at the head with a hard black forceps, 
which resembles that of the Apulian Araneus: the colour of its oval 
body is a bluish black, and has a transverse line and two spots 
hollowed in it; its eight legs are very long, the joints large, and 
the little bones of the feet have different articulations: it was 
armed with bristles like a boar, and had claws very black, not 
unlike an eagle: it had eight eyes, and six of them were disposed in 
form of a half moon on the forehead; the other two were on the crown 
of the head: one to the left, the other to the right. This 
disposition affords light to the whole body, and as these eyes are 
well furnished with crystalline humours, they are sharp-sighted 
beyond all creatures, and so nimbly hunt down flies: the mouth was 
full of teeth, and they looked like short thick hairs.

In opposition to this amphibious creature, which walks on the mud at 
the bottom of standing waters, as well as on the banks, the silvery-
green bodied spider was put into the box, which is one of the class 
that lives in the woods, where it squats down on the branches of 
trees, and throws four of its legs forward, and four backward, 
extending them straight along the bough but the great water Aranea, 
with his terrible weapon, the black forceps, in a minute destroyed 
it, and we took the dead body out, to put in its place the red and 
yellow spider, which is a larger and stronger kind; this made a 
battle for two minutes, and hurt his foe; but he could not stand it 
longer and he expired at the victor's feet.

These things were a fine entertainment to me, as I had not before 
seen a solar, catoptric,<83> or improved double-reflecting 
microscope. I had now a nearer view of the skilful works of the 
supreme Artificer. With admiration I beheld the magnified objects, 
the wonderful arrangement of the intestines of a flea, the motion 
and ebullition of the blood of a louse, the various spiders, their 
forms, so astonishingly framed, the gnat, that elephant in so small 
a miniature, the amazing form of the ant, the astonishing claws and 
beautiful wings of a fly; the bones, nerves, arteries, veins, and 
moving blood in this very minute animal; the wonderful bee, its 
claws, its colours, and distinct rows of teeth, with which it sips 
the flowers, and carries the honey home in its stomach, but brings 
the wax externally on its thighs, and a thousand other things which 
manifest a Creator. In every object I viewed in the optical 
instruments, my eyes beheld one wise Being and supreme cause of all 
things. Every insect, herb, and spire of grass, declare eternal 
power and Godhead. Not only the speech and language of the heavens, 
but of all the works and parts of nature is gone out into all the 
earth, and to the ends of the world; loudly proclaiming, that thou. 
O God, art Lord alone: Thou hast made heaven, the heaven of heavens, 
and all their hosts; the earth, and all things that are therein; 
therefore be thou our Lord God for ever and ever.

The library belonging to these gentlemen is a very fine one, and 
contains many thousand volumes; but is much more valuable for the 
intrinsic merit, than the number of the books: and as to ancient 
manuscripts, there is a large store of great value: they had 
likewise many other curious monuments of antiquity; statues, 
paintings, medals, and coins, silver, gold, and brass. To describe 
those fine things would require a volume. Among the books, I saw the 
editions of the old authors, by the famous printers of the fifteenth 
and sixteenth centuries; editions greatly prized and sought after by 
most of the learned; but these gentlemen did not value them so much 
as the editions of the classics, that have been published within 
this last century; especially the quarto editions done in Holland. 
They showed me many errors in the Greek authors by the Stephens; and 
as to Plantin,<84> exclusive of his negligence, in several places, 
his Italic character they thought far inferior to the Roman in 
respect of beauty. All this was true, and it is most certain, that 
the best corrected books are the best editions of the classics. They 
are the best helps for our understanding them. There is no reason 
then for laying out so much money for the old editions, when in 
reality the modern ones are better.

One of the books in this library, which I chanced to take into my 
hand was the famous Vindiciae contra Tyrannos, which came out in 
Latin and French in 1579, under the name of Stephanus Junius Brutus, 
and is A Defence of Liberty against Tyrants. This treatise proves, 
in the first place, that subjects are not bound to obey princes, if 
they command that which is against the law of God; as the worship of 
a consecrated wafer, and the theology of St. Athanasius, 
marianolatry, the demonolatry, and all the diabolism of popery. 
Secondly, That it is lawful to resist a prince, who like James II., 
endeavours to ruin the true church, and make the superstition of 
Rome the religion of the land. Thirdly, That it is lawful to resist 
a prince, when he oppresses and strives to ruin a state; like 
Charles I. who would have exercised a power contrary to the interest 
of his people, contrary likewise to that of the Protestant 
religion;<85> and when James II. began his tyranny, by dispensing 
with the penal statute of 25 Car. II. in the case of Sir Edward 
Hales notwithstanding the true religion, the honour of Almighty God, 
the safety of the government, and the public good and peace of the 
nation depend upon this act of 25 Car. II., and Fourthly, That 
neighbour princes or states, may be or are bound by law, to give 
succours to the subjects of other princes, afflicted for the cause 
of true religion, or oppressed by manifest tyranny. These truths are 
finely proved in this extraordinary book. The excellent author 
evinces, that justice requires, that tyrants and destroyers of the 
commonwealth be compelled to reason. Charity challenges the right of 
relieving and restoring the oppressed. Those that make no account of 
these things, do as much as in them lies to drive piety, justice, 
and charity out of this world that they may never more be heard of.

I asked one of these gentlemen, if he knew who was the author of 
this book; for it was ascribed to various men. He told me, that the 
learned Hubert Languet was the reputed author, as we find in De la 
Mare's eulogium upon him; but De la Mare was misinformed by Legoux. 
The great Du Plessis<86> was the author. D'Aubigne<87>, whose word 
is sterling, affirms it. See here, said Mr. Seymour, the second 
volume of D'Aubigne's History, book ii. ch. 2. p. 108, "il 
paroissoit un autre livre qui s'appelloit Junius, ou defense contre 
les Tyrans, fait par M. Du Plessis, renomme pour plusieurs excellens 
livres." ["Another book appeared called Junius, or A Defence against 
Tyrants, written by M. du Duplessis, famous for many books"] And 
again D'Aubigne says that "M. Du Plessis lui a avoué qu'il en estoit 
l'auteur," ["M. Du Plessis had admitted to him that he was the 
author"] ib. book ii. ch. 15. p. 91.

Another extraordinary book I saw in this library, was the famous 
piece de Libertate Ecclesiastica, written against the papal 
usurpations, at the time his holiness Camille Borghense, commonly 
called Paul V., had the memorable contest with the Venetians; and 
upon enquiring, who was the author of this scarce and valuable work; 
which is even superior to Father Paul's book upon the same subject 
in defence of the liberties of mankind; Mr. Trenchard the president 
of the society, showed me Cappel's Assertion of the True Faith 
against Rosweius the Jesuit. In the same book, I saw some manuscript 
references to Casaubon's Lettres, p. 628. 632, and 647, and to one 
place in Scaliger's Letters, edit. 1627, p. 345. Several places I 
turned to, and saw that Casaubon hinted to his friends, that he was 
the author of the book de Ecclesiastica Antiquitate. Scaliger[88] 
affirms it.

Many other extraordinary books and manuscripts I saw in this 
library, and a great number of fine curiosities; but I can only 
mention one particular more. Engraven on a beautiful cornelian, I 
saw the Roman god of hounds, with these words, 'Concedo Nulli', and 
one of the gentlemen asked me, what I supposed the meaning of this 
design? The emblem, I answered, was a very just one, and in my 
opinion meant, that truth must never be given up.

That, it was replied, was not the meaning of it, though my thought 
was not unjust. The design is to put one in mind of death, of which 
terminus is the most just emblem; and he says, 'Concedo Nulli,' I 
favour none, I suffer none to pass the limit. 'There is,' continued 
the gentleman, 'a little curious history depends on this. Here is a 
gold medallion, on one side of which you see the image of the great 
Erasmus, and on the other this fancy; which he always wore in a 
ring, and from thence I had the medallion struck. Erasmus asked the 
famous Carvajal the Spanish cordelier, just as I did you, what the 
meaning of this ring was. Carvajal, who had had some contests with 
Erasmus and hated him greatly, said "it owed its being without all 
peradventure, to the pride of Erasmus, and meant, that he would 
never yield, right or wrong, to anyone in the republic of letters." 
Erasmus answered, that "his explication was quite wrong, and that on 
the contrary, he used the device, to kill his pride, and put him in 
mind of death, which suffers not the greatest men to pass the short 
limit of time allotted them." This pleased me much, and I resolved 
to get the fancy on a cornelian for a seal.'

Another extraordinary thing these gentlemen showed me was a hole 
leading to some wonderful caverns in the side of a mountain, about a 
mile to the north of their house. It resembles at the entrance, 
Penpark-hole, in Gloucestershire<88>, within three miles of Bristol; 
but with this difference, that Penpark-hole was once a lead ore pit, 
and one is let down by ropes through two tunnels, to the chamber; 
whereas the entrance of the place I am speaking of is the work of 
nature, a steep and narrow descent of twenty-three yards, which I 
went down by having a rope under my arm, and setting my hands and 
feet against the sides of the passage, till I came to a flat rough 
rock, which opened two yards and a half one way, and four yards the 
other way. This little cavern was two yards high. We went from it 
into a more easy sloping way, which brought us downward for thirteen 
yards, till we came to another cavern, that was six yards long, and 
four and a half broad. Here we found a perpendicular tunnel, two 
yards wide, and sixty-seven yards deep; but where it went to, and 
what caused the noise below, the gentlemen who came thus far with 
me, could not tell; for they had never ventured into it, nor could 
they persuade any of their people to be let down to the bottom, 
though they had found by the lead that there was hard ground below. 
"I will then," I said, "explore this subterranean realm, if you will 
let me and my lad down, with proper conveniences for an enquiry of 
the kind, and I dare say I will give you a good account of the 
region below." "This," they answered, "was not safe for me to do. I 
might perish many ways. The damps and vapours might kill me at once; 
or my lights by them might be put out, or kindle the vapour of the 
place below." "But to this, I said that I was sure the noise we 
heard at the bottom was some running water, and wherever that was in 
the caverns of the earth, the air must be pure and good. So Mr. 
Boyle says in his General History of the Air, and so I have often 
found it in my descents to the deepest mines." "As you please then," 
the gentlemen replied, "you shall have everything you can desire, 
and be let down very safely, however you may fare when you get to 
the ground: and when you want to come up, pull the packthread you 
have in your hand, that will be tied to a bell at the top of the 
tunnel, and you shall be immediately drawn up again." These things 
being agreed they let me down in a proper basket the next morning at 
eight o'clock, with a lighted torch in my hand, and soon after, my 
man Ralph followed with everything I had required. I was more than 
half an hour going down, for the rope was given like a jack line 
from the engine it came from. I saw several dismal lateral holes by 
the way; but no mischief or inconvenience did I meet with in my 
passage to the ground.

When I came to the bottom, I found I was in a chamber of a great 
extent, and though a hundred and three yards from the day, breathed 
as free as if I had been above ground. A little river made a noise 
in its fall from a high rock, within four yards of the spot I landed 
on, and ran with impetuosity in a rough channel I knew not where. 
The water was not deep, as we found with our poles, and but three 
yards broad, and therefore we crossed it, at a hundred yards from 
the fall, to get into a cavern that had an arched entrance, on the 
other side, within two yards of the stream. Our course to the 
crossing was due west, and then we went to the north, on passing the 
water, and walking up the second cave.

In it we ascended for seventy-nine yards, an easy rising way, and 
then came to a swallow, into which a river that ran towards us fell. 
Our course to this place was due north, but as the flood came from 
the west, we turned next to that point, and by the side of this 
water marched fifty yards. The cavern was so wide we could not see 
the walls, and the roof was of a vast height.

At the end of the fifty yards, the river appeared due north again, 
and by its side we went for ten more, till we came to another vast 
cavern, that was a steep ascending opening, down which the river 
very musically came. This place was so like Pool's Hole<89>, that I 
might think myself in the Peak. It was just such another grand 
opening, up the inside of a mountain, and had not only the 
descending flood, but as many beautiful stalactical concretions on 
the rising way; which formed the most beautiful pillars, walls, and 
figures of the finest carved work; but in this it differed from 
Pool's Hole' that the ascending opening in Richmondshire is much 
wider; the rough, open steep, much higher to the roof; and this 
steep reaches to the summit of the vast hills, and ends in an 
opening in day. We came out this way on the top of an exceeding high 
mountain, after we had climbed from the bottom to the upper end four 
hundred and seventy nine yards; add to this two hundred and twenty 
nine yards, the way we had come from the bottom of the tunnel to the 
beginning of the watery steep, and our march through the mountain, 
from the time we parted with the gentlemen, to our getting out at 
the top of it, was seven hundred and eight yards.

This was a laborious route, and at the hazard of our lives, many 
times, performed. Once, in particular, my lad RALPH fell into the 
river with his torch in the great ascent, and in striving to save 
his life I lost the other light I carried in my hand. This reduced 
us to a state of the blackest darkness, and in that condition, we 
could not stir. It was a horrible scene. It chilled my blood, and 
curdled it in my veins, but I had a tinder-box, matches and wax 
candle, in my pocket, and soon recovered the desirable light; at 
which we lighted other torches, and proceeded to ascend the rough 
and rocky steep, till we came to the fountain that made the 
descending flood. The opening upwards from that became very narrow, 
and the slant so great, that it was extremely difficult to go on; 
but as I could see the day at the end of it, I resolved to strive 
hard, and mount, if possible, these remaining sixty yards. In short, 
we did the work. As before related we came out this way, and from 
the dismal caverns of night ascended to a delightful plain; from 
which we again beheld the glorious sun, and had the finest points of 
view. It was by this time noon, and under the shade of some aged 
trees, that grew on the banks of a great lake, on the summit of this 
vast hill, I sat down to some bread and wine I had brought with me 
for relief. Never was repast more sweet. I was not only fatigued 
very much: but, had been in fear as to my ever climbing up, and knew 
not how to get down, when I had mounted two-thirds of the way. The 
descent was a thousand times more dangerous than the going towards 
the top.

When I had done, I walked about to see if there was any way down the 
mountain's sides, to go to Ulubrae, from whence I came; but for 
miles it was a frightful perpendicular rock, next that place, and 
impossible for a goat to descend; and on the side that faced 
Bishopric, a fine country house and gardens, about a quarter of a 
mile off, in a delightful valley, that extended with all the 
beauties of wood and lawn, meadow and water, from the foot of the 
mountain I was on, the precipice here was a terrible way for a man 
to venture down; but it was possible to do it with a long pole, at 
the hazard of his life, as the rocks projected in many places, and 
the side went sloping off; and therefore I resolved to descend. I 
could not think of going back the way I came; since I had got safe 
into day again, I thought it better to risk my limbs in the face of 
the sun, than perish as I might do in the black and dismal inside of 
those tremendous hills. Besides, the house in my view might be 
perhaps the one I wanted. It was possible my friend TURNER might 
live there.

With art and caution then I began to descend, and so happily took 
every offered advantage of jutting rock and path in my way, that 
without any accident I got in safety down; though the perils were so 
great, that often I could not reach from rock to rock with my pole. 
In this case, I aimed the point of my pole at the spot I intended to 
light on, and clapped my feet close to it, when I went off in the 
air from the rock: the pole coming first to the place broke the 
fall, and then sliding gently down by it, I pitched on the spot I 
designed to go to, though six, seven, or eight fathom off, and the 
part of the rock below not more than a yard broad. It is a frightful 
piece of activity to a bystander, but the youths on the mountains of 
Ireland make nothing of it, they are as expert at this work as the 
Tenerife men, from them I learned it; and made RALPH so perfect in 
the action, while he travelled with me, that he could go from rock 
to rock like a bird.

When we came to the ground, I sent my man before me to the house, 
with my humble service to the master of it, Mr. HARCOURT, and to let 
him know, that I had travelled through the inside of one of the high 
mountains that surrounded his house, and on coming out on the top of 
it, had made the precipice next him my road to the valley he lived 
in; that I knew not which way to turn next, in order to go to 
Cumberland, and begged leave to dine with him, and receive his 
information. This strange message, delivered by RALPH with much 
comic gravity, that gentleman could not tell what to make of; as I 
had ordered my young man not to explain himself, but still say that 
we had travelled the inside of the mountain, and came down the 
precipice. This was so surprising a thing to Mr. HARCOURT and his 
daughter, that they walked out with some impatience to see this 
extraordinary traveller, and expressed no little amazement when they 
came near me. After a salute, Mr. HARCOURT told me he did not 
understand what my servant had said to him; nor could he comprehend 
how I arrived in this valley, as there was but one passage into it 
at the front of his house; and my being on foot too, increased the 
wonder of my appearing in the place: but whatever way I came, I was 
welcome to his house, and he would show me the way in.

"My arrival here, Sir," I replied, "is to be sure very strange, and 
would be almost incredible to hear told by another person, of one 
that journeyed two hundred and twenty-nine yards deep, to the 
foundation of this Alp, on the other side of it, then ascended a 
hollow way, till he got out at the top, and came down a high and 
frightful precipice to the vale below: But here I am a proof of the 
fact. I will explain how it was done;" and I began to relate every 
particular at large.

"But tell me, Sir", Miss HARCOURT said, "if you please, why did you 
not return the way you came; since the other side of the mountain is 
impossible to descend, as you inform us on account of its being a 
perpendicular steep; and that you must have hazarded your life a 
thousand times, in coming down the way yon did with the pole? I 
tremble as I look at the place, and only with fancy's eye, see you 
on the descent. Beside, the gentlemen you left on the other side of 
the hill will conclude you lost, and be very greatly troubled on the 
account."

"My reason, Madam," I answered," for coming down this very dangerous 
way, was, because I thought it, with all its perils, much safer than 
the inside road I had come. My activity I had reason to think, was 
superior to the difficulties of the outward way, and if I should 
fall, it would be in the light of heaven, with a human habitation in 
view, that might afford me some relief, if I only broke my bones; 
but, if in descending the very steep and horrible caverns of the 
hill, which with the greatest difficulty I climbed up, I should 
happen to get a fall, as in all human probability I would, and break 
a limb in these most dismal cavities of eternal night. I must have 
perished in the most miserable manner, without a possibility of 
obtaining any relief. Nor is this all, madam, the thing that brought 
me here among the mountains of Richmondshire, was to find a 
gentleman of my acquaintance, and when I saw your house from the top 
of the mountain, I did not know but it might be his. I fancied it 
was, as the situation answered my friend's description of the spot 
he lived on.

"And if it had been his, madam, it would have put an end to all my 
toils; for I am a wanderer upon the face of the earth, through the 
cruelty of a mother-in-law, and the unreasonableness of a rich 
father, who has forsaken me because I will not submit to the 
declarations and decisions of weak and fallible men, in matters of 
pure revelation and divine faith, and own the infallibility of the 
orthodox system. Because the assent of my mind could not go beyond 
the perception of my understanding, and I would not allow that the 
popular confession is the faith once delivered to the saints, 
therefore I was thrown off, and obliged to become the pilgrim you 
see before you."

This history of a forlorn, seemed stranger to the young lady and her 
father than even the account of my journey through the inside of a 
mountain, and down a precipice that a goat would scarce venture. 
They were both very greatly amazed at my relation, and Mr. HARCOURT 
was about to ask me some questions, when one of his servants came to 
let him know that dinner was serving up: and this put an end to our 
conversation. The master of the house brought me into a fine room, 
and I saw on the table an elegant dinner, there was likewise a grand 
sideboard, and several men servants attending. Miss HARCOURT sat at 
the head of the table, and at her right hand two young ladies vastly 
handsome, whom I shall have occasion to mention hereafter in this 
journal; two ladies more were on the other side of her, pretty 
women, but no beauties; and next them sat three gentlemen; sensible, 
well-behaved men; one of them a master of music, the other a master 
of languages, and the third a great painter; who were kept in the 
house on large salaries, to teach the young lady these things. Mr. 
HARCOURT placed me by himself, and was not only extremely civil. but 
manifested a kind of fondness as if he was well pleased with my 
arrival. He and his daughter took great care of me, and treated me 
as if I had been a man of distinction rather than the poor pilgrim 
they saw me, with my staff in my hand. The young lady talked to me 
in a very pleasant manner, and as I saw the whole company were 
inclined to be very cheerful, I clubbed as much as I could to 
promote good-humour, and increase the festivity of the table. We 
laughed the afternoon away in a charming manner, and when we had 
done, we all went to walk in the gardens. Here the company soon 
separated, as the various beauties of the place inclined various 
minds to different things and parts. Some pensively roamed in shady 
walks, some sat by playing fountains, and others went to gather 
fruits and flowers. I had the honour to walk with Miss HARCOURT to a 
canal at some distance, and as we went, this young lady told me, she 
did not well understand me as to what I had said of religion being 
concerned in my becoming a traveller, and desired me to be a little 
more particular. "That I will," and immediately proceeded in the 
following manner.

"My father, Madam, is a man of great learning, virtue and knowledge, 
but orthodox to the last degree, and sent me to the university on 
purpose to make me a theologer, that I might be an able defender of 
the Creed of St. Athanasius, and convince the poor people of the 
country he lived in, and in good time, he fondly hoped, the 
inhabitants of many other countries: that notwithstanding the symbol 
I have mentioned is what no human apprehension can comprehend, and 
the judgment hath nothing to act on in the consideration of it; that 
there is nothing to be understood in that symbol, nor can a man form 
any determination of the matter therein contained; yet they must 
believe this great and awful mystery: that three persons and Gods 
are only one person and God; and, on peril of eternal misery, they 
must confess that, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, though three Beings, 
as distinct as any three things in the universe, yet are only one 
Being. This mystery I was to preach up in his church, a church in a 
field, near his house, to which he had the right of presenting, and 
inflame the people against reason, that traitor to God and religion, 
which our adversaries, the Christian deists, would make Lord and 
King in opposition to faith. I was to tell my beloved, that reason 
is a carnal sensual devil, and that instead of hearkening to this 
tempter, they must assent to those heavenly propositions, which give 
wisdom without ideas, and certainty without knowledge. You must 
believe, my beloved, that none is before or after the other. None is 
greater or less than another. The infidels call this an 
unintelligible piece of nonsense: but it is, my beloved, a very 
transcendent mystery. It does, we must own, stagger and astonish us, 
being a thing beyond our reach to comprehend; but, it must be 
believed, on peril of eternal misery, as I before observed: and it 
is easy to be believed, for this plain reason, given by a very 
learned and pious bishop of our church; to wit, that it is too high 
to be by us comprehended: This was the opinion of that great 
prelate, Bishop Beveridge, in his Private Thoughts, p. 52. to which 
book I refer you, my beloved, for more of his admirable reasoning on 
this capital article, and further observe to you, that not only this 
most pious bishop, and many other most excellent prelates were of 
this way of thinking; but all the most admirable divines have 
declared in their sermons and other matchless writings, that the 
more incredible the Athanasian creed is, and the fuller of 
contradictions, the more honour we do to our God in believing it. It 
is the glory of orthodox Christians, that their faith is not only 
contrary to the carnal mind, but even to the most exalted reason. In 
matters of faith, we must renounce our reason, even though it be the 
only thing that distinguishes us from the beasts, and makes us 
capable of any religion at all. No human arguments are to interfere 
in this victorious principle: the Catholic faith is the reverse of 
rational religion, and except a man believe it faithfully, he must 
go into everlasting fire and brimstone."<90>

"In this manner, Madam, like a mad bigot, a flaming zealot, and a 
sublime believer, was I to preach to the people of Ireland, and be 
an apostle for that faith which is an obedience to unreasonable 
commands: but unfortunately for my father's design: and fortunately 
for my soul; I was, on entering the university, put into the hands 
of a gentleman, who abhorred modern orthodoxy, and made the 
essential constitutive happiness and perfection of every intelligent 
being consist in the conformity of our mind to the moral rectitude 
of the Divine Nature. This excellent man convinced my understanding, 
that even faith in Christ is of an inferior nature to this, and that 
it is only the means to obtain it. Such a conformity and obedience 
of the heart and conscience to the will of God ought to be my 
religion, as it was the religion of our Saviour himself.

"Thus, Madam, was I instructed by a master of arts, my private 
tutor, and when to his lessons I added my own careful examinations 
of the vulgar faith, and the mind of our Lord as I found it in the 
books, I was thoroughly satisfied, that an act of faith is an act of 
reason, and an act of reason an act of faith, in religious matters; 
that our Lord was not the great God; nor a part of that compound, 
called the Triune-God; the miserable invention of divines; but, a 
more extraordinary messenger than the prophets under the law chosen 
by the divine wisdom, to publish the will of God to mankind, and 
sent under the character of his son, and spiritual heir of his 
inheritance the church, to new-form the ages, and fix such good 
principles in the minds of men, as would be productive of all 
righteousness in the conversation: that he was sent to destroy sin 
and the kingdom of Satan; and to bring the human race to a perfect 
obedience to the will of the Supreme Being.

"All this, Madam, was as plain to me as the sun in summer's bright 
day; and therefore, instead of laying aside my understanding, and 
believing things without any rational ground or evidence at all; 
instead of going into orders, to draw revealed conclusions from 
revealed propositions, and by a deep logic, make scripture 
consequences, that have no meaning in the words, for the faith of 
the people; I was so free and ingenuous as to let my father know, 
that of all things in the world I never would be a parson, since the 
character obliged me to swear and subscribe to articles I could not 
find in my Bible; nor would I, as a layman, ever read or join in the 
service of reading the tritheistic liturgy and offices he used in 
his family. I was determined, though I lost his favour and large 
fortune by the resolution, to live and die a Christian deist; 
confessing before men the personal unity and perfections of the true 
God, and the personal mediatorial office of Jesus Christ. As St. 
Paul maintained the personal unity and absolute supremacy of the 
true God, and in his description of the Deity, did not tell the 
Athenians, that he was a Triune Being, to be considered under the 
notion of three persons, of three understandings and will, in a co-
ordinate triplicity of all divine attributes and perfections; but 
one individual personal Agent—one great Spirit, or mind, self-
existent, and omnipotent in wisdom and action—one supreme Almighty 
Creator and Governor of the world, the God and Father of Jesus 
Christ; I shall therefore, in obedience to the apostle, and to the 
other inspired writers, believe in and worship the same God, the one 
God, the only true God, as our Lord says in Matthew and Mark; 
through the alone mediation and intercession of Jesus Christ, our 
Redeemer and only begotten Son of God; depending upon the effectual 
aid and assistance of the blessed Spirit, in hope of a glorious 
immortality. This is, this shall be my religion, whatever I may feel 
from an antichristian tyranny, on account of the confession. Though 
an outrage of uncharitable zeal should strip me of every worldly 
comfort, and reduce me to a want of bread. If I should become a 
spectacle to men and angels by this faith, yet I will believe as 
Jesus Christ and his apostles have ordered the world to believe. No 
unintelligible cant, or scholastic jargon for me. The Holy Ghost has 
in scripture expressed it sufficiently and unexceptionably clear, 
that there is One Supreme Independent First-Cause of all things, a 
Spirit, that is, One Spirit, One God; I am God, and there is none 
like me: I am God, and there is none else, beside Me; with Me; none 
but Me; Thus does the Holy Ghost declare; and what signify the 
despicable, heretical declarations of the doctors, in respect of 
this?

"Then, as a test of Christianity, the same blessed Spirit adds, that 
Jesus is the true Messiah, was sent from God to reveal his will for 
the salvation of man, and is the only Mediator betwixt God and man. 
Thus has the Holy Ghost regulated our faith and practice, and I 
think it incumbent on me to mind what he says, and flee the invented 
pieties of our theologers. I did so, and disobliged my father. I 
lost his favour entirely. He would take no farther notice of me, and 
1 became as you see a wanderer."

This discourse, delivered with my fire and action, amazed Miss 
HARCOURT so greatly, that for some time after I had done, she could 
not speak, but continued looking with great earnestness at me. At 
last however she said, "I am glad, Sir, it has been my fate to meet 
with you, and must, when there is more time, converse with you on 
this subject. My father and I have had some doubts as to the truth 
of the Athanasian Creed; but he told me, he did not choose to 
examine the thing, as it had the sanction of ages, and was believed 
by the greatest divines in all nations. If it be wrong, let the 
churchmen answer for it. But this does not satisfy me; and since I 
have seen one that has forsaken all rather than live a disciple of 
Athanasius, after a thorough examination of the system; and that you 
have now said some things against it that show the folly of 
believing it, and make it a faith the most preposterous and 
unreasonable, I am determined to enquire into the merit of it, and 
see if Christians ought to acknowledge the supreme dominion and 
authority of God the Father; that the Father is absolutely God, the 
great God in the absolute supreme sense by nature; and the Son, only 
a God by communication of divinity from the Father, that is, by 
having received from the Father, the supreme cause, his being, 
attributes, and power over the whole creation: or, if they ought to 
ascribe supreme authority, and original independent absolute 
dominion to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost; 
three distinct supreme Gods, and yet but one supreme God, as the 
church informs us in her famous creed, and thereby makes us swallow 
a contradiction, as I have often thought, and a doctrine against 
which a great number of texts can be produced. This I will examine. 
My reason shall be no longer silent in so important a case. If a 
Trinity in unity of equal minds or Gods is not to be proved by the 
inspired writings, the doctors preaching it, and by creed requiring 
it, will be no justifiable plea or excuse for me, I am sensible, in 
the great rising day. I had better, in such case, leave all as you 
have bravely done, were my father so orthodox and furious a bigot as 
to force me to be a religionist against my conscience. What I have 
to beg of you, Sir," Miss HARCOURT continued, "is, that you will to-
morrow, oblige me with your thoughts on the texts I have marked, as 
produced by orthodox divines for their mysterious religion.<91> If 
you make me sensible that those texts do not prove the doctrine they 
are brought for, and of consequence, that the doctrine of the 
Trinity as by them taught, is the work of uninspired writers, I 
shall renounce it to be sure. I will no longer mistake 
contradictions for mysteries. The schemes and inventions of men 
shall not pass with me for the revelations of God."

Here Mr. HARCOURT came up to us, and desired to know, if it was a 
fair question, what we two had been talking so earnestly on; for it 
seemed at a distance to be something more than ordinary. "I will 
tell you, Sir," his daughter replied, and immediately began to 
relate the whole conference, and her resolution. "Your resolution," 
the father said, "is excellent. You have not only my consent, but I 
recommend it to you as the noblest work you can employ any time on. 
For my part, Sir," Mr. HARCOURT continued, turning himself to me, "I 
never liked this part of our Protestant religion, and have often 
wished our public prayers had been more conformable to the 
simplicity of the gospel; that we had been contented with what our 
Master and the Holy Spirit delivered, and not made human 
compositions the standard of salvation: but since the church in her 
wisdom has thought it should be otherwise, I have submitted to her 
authority, and been silent on the doctrines she claims a right to 
determine; though some of them to me appear doubtful, and others 
repugnant to scripture: beside, my studies have been in other fields 
than that of controversy: mathematics and antiquities have employed 
my time, and I have neither taste nor capacity for that criticism 
which is necessary for the examination of such points: greatly 
however do I honour those who have the ability and patience to go 
through the work, as I must own it is of the utmost importance, and 
that the orthodox faith is a sad thing, if the truth be, after all 
our Athanasian believing, that Christ is no more than God's 
instrument, as St. Peter and St. Paul name him; a successful teacher 
of wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption: and that 
God is to be owned and praised, as the true, chief, and original 
cause of all spiritual blessings, according to the counsel of his 
own will, his own good pleasure, purpose, &c. without partner or 
second person to entreat and satisfy for us. If this be the case, 
may the Lord have mercy on our poor orthodox souls: and as it may be 
so, I honour you for enquiring into the matter, and especially for 
your good Spirit in preferring the things that are eternal, when 
what you thought truth could not be held with things temporal. "I 
have," Mr. HARCOURT continued, "a very great esteem for you on this 
account, and if I can be of service to you, I will. He imagined I 
might want money, and if I did, he would lend me a hundred guineas, 
without interest, payable on my note of hand, when I could. He 
immediately took out of his pocket-book a bank note for that sum, 
and pressed me to accept it. He likewise invited me to stay at his 
house, while he continued in the country, which would be for a month 
longer. He assured me also, that I might make it my residence after 
he left it, if I pleased; there would be two servants to attend me, 
and there was excellent mutton, and other things for my table. Nor 
is this all, you shall have the key of my study."

These offers astonished me, and I said, "most generous Sir, I return 
you the thanks of a grateful heart, and will ever remember your 
goodness to me with that sense such uncommon kindness deserves, 
though I cannot enjoy the benefits you would make me happy with. As 
to money I do not want any yet, and when I do it will be time enough 
for me to borrow, if I should find anyone, like you, so benevolently 
disposed as to lend me cash without security and interest: and as to 
staying at your house, that offer I cannot accept, as I am engaged 
to a near and rich friend, who will be to me a subaltern providence, 
if he can be found, and secure me from the evils my attachment to 
truth has exposed me to. One week however I will stay with you, 
since you are so good as to invite me in this kind manner."

Here then I stayed a week, and passed it in a most happy way. Mr. 
HARCOURT was fond of me, and did everything in his power to render 
the place agreeable. His lovely daughter was not only as civil as it 
was possible to be, but did me the honour to commence a friendship 
with me, which lasted from that time till death destroyed the golden 
thread that linked it.

Reader, this young lady, HARRIOT EUSEBIA HARCOURT, was the foundress 
of a religious house of Protestant recluses, who are still a society 
in that part of Richmondshire where I first saw her and her father. 
They are under no vow, but while they please to continue members, 
live as they do in nunneries, and in piety, and in all the parts of 
the Christian temper, endeavour a resemblance of their divine Lord 
and Master; with this distinction however, that to the plan of the 
regards due from man by the divine Law to God, to his fellow-
creatures, and to himself, they add music and painting for their 
diversion, and unbend their minds in these delightful arts, for a 
few hours every day. This makes them excel in these particulars. 
They are great masters in all kinds of music, and do wonders with 
the pencil.

EUSEBIA was but just turned of twenty when I first saw her, in the 
year 1725, and then her musical performances were admirable; her 
pictures had the ordonnance,<92> colouring, and expression of a 
great master. She was born with a picturesque genius, and a capacity 
to give measure and movement to compositions of harmony. Her music 
at the time I am speaking of had a most surprising power; and in 
painting, long before this time, she astonished. When she was a 
child, nine years old, and had no master, she would sketch with a 
black lead pencil on a sheet of paper the pictures of various kinds 
that came in her way, and make such imitations as deserved the 
attention of judges. This made her father get her an eminent master, 
and she had not been long under his direction, when she was able to 
infuse a soul into her figures, and motion into her compositions. 
She not only drew landscapes, and low subjects with a success great 
as Teniers, but evinced by her paintings, that she brought into the 
world with her an aptitude for works of a superior class. Her 
pictures show that she was not the last among the painters of 
history. They are as valuable for the merit of the execution as for 
the merit of the subjects.

Her histories of the Revelations of St. John, which she finished a 
little before her death, from the first vision to the last, 
demonstrated a genius very wonderful, and that her hand was 
perfected at the same time with her imagination. If this series of 
pictures is not in every respect equal to Giotto's on the same 
subject, which I have seen in the cloister of St. Clare at Naples; 
they are at least treated with greater truth, and show that the 
imagination of the painter had a hand and eye at its disposal to 
display the finest ideas. The great artist is obvious in them.

The first picture of this Series is a representation of the inside 
of the glorious temple, that was made the grand scene of all the 
things St. John saw in the Spirit; the golden lamp-sconce, called 
the seven candlesticks, which afforded the sanctuary all its light, 
and the august personage, who appears in refulgent brightness in the 
vision, in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks. The majestic 
and godlike form which the apostle beheld is wonderfully painted. He 
is represented with more than human majesty. Like Raphael in his 
picture of the Eternal Father, in one of the Vatican chapels, she 
does not inspire us merely with veneration, she strikes us even with 
an awful terror: elle n'inspire pas une simple veneration, elle 
imprime une terreur respectueuse.<92> In his right hand, this grand 
person holds the main shaft that supports the six branches of the 
six lighted lamps, and the seventh lamp at the top of the main 
trunk, which gleam like a rod of seven stars, as it is written, 
'having in his hand seven stars,' and in this attitude, with his 
face to the apostle, he appears in the midst of the seven golden 
candlesticks, the emblems of the churches walking, or attending to 
trim them, the churches; with a sharp two-edged sword, that is, the 
powerful word of God, as Aaron walked to trim the real lamps with 
the golden snuffers. St. John is seen on the floor. He is looking in 
great surprise at the whole appearance, and as with amazement he 
beholds the divine Person in the vision, he seems struck with dread, 
and going to faint away; as he says in the Apocalypse, 'When I saw 
him, I fell at his feet as dead.'

The next picture in this series is a continuation of, or another 
representation of the inside of the temple, the golden lamp-sconce 
of seven golden candlesticks, and the august personage in refulgent 
brightness, and splendours transcendently glorious; but with this 
difference, that in this piece, the divine personage does not hold 
the main shaft of the branches of lights in his right hand, or stand 
in the midst of the candlesticks; but, notwithstanding his sublime 
dignity, is painted with a godlike compassion in his face and 
manner, and with the greatest tenderness raises and supports the 
apostle. You see him, as described by St. John; 'he laid his right-
hand upon me,' the hand which before held the seven stars, or 
lighted golden lamps, that exhibited an appearance not unlike a 
constellation of stars; saying unto me, 'fear not. I am the first 
and the last. I am he that liveth, even though I was dead, and 
behold I am alive for evermore, Amen. And I have the keys of hell 
and of death.' One almost hears these words from the lips of the 
august form, so wonderfully is the figure painted, so happily has 
the pencil counterfeited nature, and the apostle appears to revive 
in transports, as he knows from the words that it is his Lord and 
Master is speaking to him. It is a fine picture.

The third painting in this series is the subsequent vision in the 
4th and 5th chapters of the Revelation of John the Divine. In a part 
of the heavens that are opened, the throne of God is represented by 
a crystal seat or glory, and from it proceed flashings of a bright 
flame like lightning and thunder, to represent the awful majesty of 
the One, and One Only, True God, the Supreme Lord of all things: 
seven lamps of fire are burning before this throne, as emblems of 
the seven spirits, or principal servants of God, to show with what 
purity, constancy, and zeal, the spirits of the just made perfect 
serve God in the heavenly church; and next them appears a crystal 
sea of great brightness and beauty; much more glorious than the 
brazen sea in the temple, which held the water for the use of the 
priests. This sea alludes to that purity that is required in all 
persons who have the honour and happiness of a near approach to God, 
as he manifests himself on the throne of inaccessible light, or, in 
the moral shechinah<43> in this lower world.<94> The next figures 
are the four living creatures, or cherubim of Ezekiel, which our 
English translation very badly renders four beasts; and they are 
placed in the middle of each side of the throne, in the whole circle 
round about, full of eyes, not only before but behind, so as to have 
a direct and full view every way, without-side them; on seats, are 
the four and twenty elders placed, in white and shining garments, 
with crowns of gold upon their heads. The person who sits on the 
throne appears in great majesty and glory, and round about his 
throne the most beautiful rainbow is seen; to express the glory of 
God, and his faithfulness to his covenant and promise: the four 
living creatures next the throne, who represent the angels attendant 
on the shechinah, and have the appearance of a lion, a calf, a man, 
and an eagle full of eyes, and with six wings, to express the great 
understanding and power of the angels, their activity, constancy, 
and good will; they are drawn in the act of adoring and praising the 
eternal living God; and are answered by the four and twenty elders, 
the representatives of the people, the churches. So inimitably are 
all these things painted, that the faces of the cherubim and the 
four and twenty elders seem to move in worship and thanksgiving: one 
acquainted with the divine songs, cannot help fancying that he hears 
the four living creatures, saying, 'Holy, holy, holy, Lord God 
Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come; who for ever wast, and 
for ever wilt be, the one true God, the everlasting Lord;' and that 
the elders, that is, the Christian people, reply, 'Thou art worthy, 
O Lord, to receive glory, and honour, and power: for Thou hast 
created all things, and for Thy pleasure they are and were created.'

The apostle St. John, appears in great admiration, on account of the 
things before him, but seems more particularly affected by a book 
sealed with seven seals, which the person who sits on the throne 
holds in his right hand; an angel who is painted in the act of 
proclaiming with a loud voice, 'Who is worthy to open the book, and 
to loose the seals thereof;' and a lamb with seven horns and eyes, 
standing just before the throne, within the circles of the cherubim 
and elders: this Lamb, represented as a sacrifice, and with seven 
horns and eyes, to show the power, wisdom, and goodness of our Lord 
in the work of redemption, and the accomplishment of all God's 
designs of wisdom and grace, engages the attention and wonder of the 
apostle; and as this Lamb of God receives the book from the person 
on the throne, a rising joy appears through the astonishment of St. 
John, and seems to be increasing, as he hears the living creatures 
and the elders sing a new song, or hymn of a new composition, which 
expresses the peculiar honour of the Son of God, and our peculiar 
engagements to him, in these words 'Thou art worthy to take the 
book, and to open the seals thereof: for thou wast slain, and hast 
redeemed us unto God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, 
and people, and nation. Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive 
power and riches, and wisdom and strength, and honour, and glory, 
and blessing. Blessing, and honour, and glory, and power, be unto 
him, that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and 
ever.' And as the angels conclude this solemn act of worship by 
saying 'Amen;' and the people by worshipping him that liveth for 
ever and ever, the true God, who liveth and reigneth from 
everlasting to everlasting; and having raised up his Son Jesus, sent 
him to bless you in turning every one of you from his iniquities; 
the apostle seems in pleasure to join them, and shows a sensibility 
and action that is very wonderful. It is a charming picture. The 
divine artist has treated the whole subject with the most elaborate 
and beautiful expression, and with a delightful richness of local 
colours. This painting gives the beholder a full and fine idea of 
the vision.

But it was not only in painting, and in music, that Miss HARCOURT 
excelled: she had when I first saw her, made great progress in her 
studies, and discovered in her conversation extraordinary abilities. 
She talked wisely and learnedly on many subjects, and in so charming 
a manner, that she entered into the possession of the heart, and the 
admiration of all that heard her: nor was it only in pure Italian, 
Spanish, and other languages that she could express her notions; 
but, in the correctest Latin she often spoke to me, and for an hour 
would discourse in the Roman tongue, with as great ease as if she 
had been talking English. She spoke it without any manner of 
difficulty, which was more than I could do. I was slow, and paused 
sometimes; but that young lady went on with that volubility of 
tongue the women are born with. The language being Latin was no 
check to her natural fluency of speech.

To all this let me add, and with truth I can add it, that EUSEBIA, 
from the time I was first acquainted with her to her death, walked 
in the fear of the Lord, and of consequence in the comforts of the 
Holy Ghost. Religion from her infancy was her stated and ordinary 
business, and her sole concern to know and to do her duty to God and 
men. The Proverbs of Solomon and the pattern of Christ, were her 
study when a very young girl, and from both she acquired a conduct 
so prudent and evangelical, that she seemed at the greatest heights 
of grace and goodness which a mortal can reach, and appeared as one 
that had made a prodigious proficiency in divine knowledge, and in 
every virtue: yet there was nothing gloomy, or even formal in her 
behaviour: she was good-humour itself: frank and free; quite easy, 
and for ever cheerful.

Miss HARCOURT, at the time I am speaking of, that is, in the one and 
twentieth year of her age, had all the qualities that constitute a 
beauty: she was tall and graceful, and in every action, and her 
whole behaviour, to the last degree charming; her eyes were vastly 
fine, large and long, even with her face, black as night, and had a 
sparkling brightness as great as could appear from the refraction of 
diamonds: her hair was as the polished jet, deep and glossy; and 
yet, her complexion fresh as the glories of the spring, and her lips 
like a beautiful flower.

This lady was nine years abroad with her father, who died of the 
plague at Constantinople in 1733, and in the course of her travels, 
did me the honour to write me many fine letters, in which she 
obliged me with her remarks on the things and people they saw in 
many countries. We held a correspondence together, for a 
considerable part of the time, and in return for her valuable 
favours, I sent her the best account I could give of the matters 
that came in my way. These letters may perhaps appear some day.

In 1734 Mrs. HARCOURT returned to England, and brought over with her 
some ladies, who became constituents of her claustral house. They 
formed the most rational and happy society that ever united, and 
during the life of the foundress, resided sometime in one of the 
Western Islands, but for the most part in Richmondshire. Since her 
death, which happened in 1745, they have lived entirely in the North 
of England, separated from all the world by the most dreadful 
mountains. They were but twelve in number for several years, but, in 
the sixth year of the Institute, Mrs. HARCOURT increased it to 
twenty-four members, by taking in twelve elèves or disciples. The 
twelve seniors govern a year about in their turns, unless it be the 
request of the house, that the superior for the year past should 
continue in the office another year. This, and their easy 
circumstances, secure their peace, and as they are ever wise to that 
which is good, and simple concerning evil, they lead most happy 
lives: nor can it be otherwise with mortals who cultivate the grace 
of humility, the want of which lies at the bottom of all 
contentions, and by a Christian prudence, make it their main work to 
facilitate the practice of piety, and to promote the pleasure and 
the lustre of it. Glorious women! to letters, arts, and piety, they 
devote those hours which others waste in vanities the most senseless 
and despicable; and pursuant to the advice, and according to the 
rule drawn up by their illustrious foundress, live as beings that 
have souls designed for eternity. They act continually upon a future 
prospect, and give all diligence in making constant advances toward 
the perfect day. Mrs. HARCOURT showed them, what an uninspired 
mortal could do by the means of grace; that it was possible for 
assisted human nature, feeble as flesh and blood is, to resist 
temptations the most violent, and by the supreme motives of our 
religion, acquit ourselves like Christians. If there be a devil to 
assault, a corrupt heart to oppose, and many difficulties to be 
encountered, yet her conduct was a demonstration, that those who are 
heirs of the heavenly country, may choose and prosecute their best 
interests, and improve the divine life to a high degree. "Let us," 
she used to say, "make salvation not only a concern on the bye, but 
the governing aim through the present life, and we shall not only 
live like the primitive Christians, but die for our holy faith, with 
more resolution than the worthies of Greece and Rome, though death 
should appear in all his array of terrors. Neither adversity nor 
prosperity could then tempt us to drop a grain of incense before any 
idol, or commit any action that dishonoured the gospel. Let what 
will happen, in all events, we should secure the future happiness of 
our souls, and thereby provide for the everlasting glory and 
felicity of our bodies too in the morning of the resurrection. Of 
Mrs. HARCOURT, a further account will be found in the Memoirs of 
Several Ladies of Great Britain, 1755, Svo. p. 324.



CHAPTER XII.

The twenty-fifth day of June I took my leave of Miss HARCOURT and 
her father, and the rest of the good company, and on horses I 
borrowed, we returned to the philosophers at Ulubrae. It was 
nineteen miles round of most terrible road; a great part of it being 
deep and swampy bottom, with holes up to the horses' shoulders in 
some places; and for several miles, we were obliged to ride on the 
sides of very steep and craggy mountains, in a path so very narrow, 
that we risked life, and passed in terror: a wrong step would have 
been destruction beyond recovery. It was likewise no small 
perplexity to find, that I was going back again, the course being 
south and south-west; and that there was no other way of journeying 
from Mr. HARCOURT'S to Ulubrae, but through the pass I first 
travelled from Westmorland; unless I rode from Mr. HARCOURT's into 
Cumberland, and then round through Bishopric to the valley the 
gentlemen lived in. On then I went at all hazards, and in a tedious 
manner was forced to creep the way: but to make some amends, the 
prospects from the hills were fine, and things very curious 
occurred. Groups of crests of mountains appeared here and there, 
like large cities with towers and old Gothic edifices, and from 
caverns in their sides torrents of water streamed out, and tumbled 
in various courses to the most delightful vales below. In some of 
the vast hills there were openings quite through, so as to see the 
sun, at the end of three or four thousand yards; and in many of them 
were sloping caverns, very wonderful to behold.

I found in one of them, near the top of a very high mountain, a 
descent like steps of stairs, that was in breadth and height like 
the aisle of a church, for three hundred yards, and then ended at a 
kind of door, or small arched opening, that was high enough for a 
tall man to walk into a grand room which it led to. This chamber was 
a square of seventeen yards, and had an arched roof about twenty 
high. The stone of it was a green marble, not earthy and opaque, but 
pure and crystalline, which made it appear very beautiful, as the 
walls were as smooth as if the best polish had made them so. There 
was another opening or door at the other side of this chamber, and 
from it likewise went a descent like steps, but the downward passage 
here was much steeper than the other I had come to, and the opening 
not more than one third as wide and high; narrowing gradually to the 
bottom of the sloping road, till it ended in a round hole, a yard 
and a quarter every way. I could see the day at the opening below, 
though it seemed at a great distance from me, and as it was not 
dangerous to descend, I determined to go down.

The descent was four hundred and seventy-nine yards in a straight 
line, and opened in a view of meadows, scattered trees, and streams, 
that were enchantingly fine. There appeared to be about four and 
twenty acres of fine land, quite surrounded with the most frightful 
precipices in the world, and in the centre of it a neat and pretty 
little country house, on an easy rising ground. I could discover 
with my long glass a young and handsome woman sitting at the door, 
engaged in needle-work of some kind; and on the margin of a brook 
hard by, another charmer stood, angling for fish of some sort: a 
garden appeared near the mansion that was well improved; and in the 
fields were sheep and goats, horses and cows; cocks and hens, ducks 
and geese, were walking about the ground; and I could perceive a 
college of bees. The whole formed a charming scene.

Pleased with the view, and impatient to know who the two charmers 
were, I quite forgot the poor situation in which I left TIM, holding 
the horses at the mouth of the cavern, on the dangerous side of so 
high a hill, and proceeded immediately to the house, as soon as I 
had recovered myself from a fall. My foot slipped in the passage, 
about six yards from the day, and I came rolling out of the mountain 
in a violent and surprising manner. It was just mid-day when I came 
up to the ladies, and as they did not see me till they chanced to 
turn round, they were so amazed at my appearing, they changed 
colour, and one of them shrieked aloud; but this fright was soon 
over, on my assuring them that I was their most humble servant, and 
had against my will tumbled out of the hole that was at the bottom 
of that vast mountain before them. This I explained, and protested 
that I had not thought of paying them a visit, when curiosity led me 
into an opening near the top of the hill, as I was travelling on; 
but that when I did get through so wonderful a passage, and saw what 
was still more strange, when I arrived in the vale, to wit, two 
ladies, in so wild and silent a place, I judged it my duty to pay my 
respects, and ask if you had any commands that I could execute in 
the world? This was polite, they said, and gave me thanks; but told 
me, they had no other favour to ask than that I would dine with 
them, and inform them how it happened that I was obliged to travel 
over these scarce passable mountains, where there was no society nor 
support to be had. Beside if in riding here you should receive a 
mischief, there was not a possibility of getting any relief. There 
must be something very extraordinary surely, that could cause you to 
journey over such frightful hills, and through the deep bottoms at 
the foot of them.

"Ladies," I replied, "necessity and curiosity united are the spring 
that move me over these mountains, and enable me to bear the 
hardships I meet with in these ways. Forced from home by the 
cruelties of a step-mother, and forsaken by my father on her 
account, I am wandering about the precipices of Richmondshire in 
search of a gentleman, my friend; to whose hospitable house and 
generous breast I should be welcome, if I could find out where he 
lives in some part of this remote and desolate region: and as my 
curiosity is more than ordinary, and I love to contemplate the works 
of nature, which are very grand and astonishing in this part of the 
world, I have gone many a mile out of my way while I have been 
looking for several days past for my friend, and have ventured into 
places where very few I believe would go. It was this taste for 
natural knowledge that travelled me down the inside of the mountain 
I am just come out of. If I had not had it, I should never have 
known there was so delightful a little country here as what I now 
see: nor should I have had the honour and happiness of being known 
to you."

"But tell me, Sir," one of these beauties said, "how have you lived 
for several days among these rocks and desert places, as there are 
no inns in this country, nor a house, except this, here, that we 
know? are you the favourite of the fairies and genies, or does the 
wise man of the hills, bring you every night in a cloud to his 
home?"

"It looks something like it, Madam," I answered, "and the thing to 
be sure must appear very strange, but it is like other strange 
things, when the nature of them is known, they appear easy and 
plain. This country I find consists, for the most part, of ranges 
and groups of mountains horrible to behold, and of bogs, deep swampy 
narrow bottoms; and waters that fall and run innumerable ways, but 
this is not always the case, like the charming plain I am now on, 
there are many flowery and delicious extensive pieces of ground, 
enclosed by vast surrounding hills; the finest intervals betwixt the 
mountains: the sweetest interchange between hill and valley, I 
believe in all the world, is to be found in Richmondshire, and in 
several of those delightful vales I discovered inhabitants as in 
this place, but the houses are so separated by fells scarcely 
passable, and torrents of water, that those who live in the centre 
of one group of mountains, know nothing of many agreeable 
inhabitants that may dwell on the other side of the hills in an 
adjacent vale. If there had been a fine spot at the bottom of the 
precipice I found the opening in, and people living there, as might 
have been the case, you ladies who live here, could have no notion 
of them, as you knew nothing of a passage from the foot to the 
summit of yonder mountain, within side of the vast hill, and if you 
did, would never venture to visit that way; and as there is not a 
pass in this chain of hills, to ride or walk through, to the other 
side of them: but the way out of this valley we are now in, as I 
judge from the trembling of the mountains all round us, must be an 
opening into some part of Cumberland. For this reason Stanemore 
hills may have several families among them, though you have never 
heard of them, and I will now give you an account of some, who 
behaved in the most kind and generous manner to me." Here I began to 
relate some particulars concerning my friend PRICE and his excellent 
wife; the admirable Mrs. BURCOT and Mrs. FLETCHER; the philosophers 
who lived at Ulubrae, to whom I was returning; and the generous Mr. 
HARCOURT, and his excellent daughter, whom I left in the morning; 
and at whose house I arrived by travelling up the dark bowels of a 
tremendous mountain; as, on the contrary, I arrived at theirs by a 
descent through yonder frightful hill, till I came rolling out from 
within, in a very surprising and comical way; a way that would have 
made you laugh, ladies; or, in a fright, cry out, if you had 
happened to be walking near the hole or opening in the bottom of 
that hill, when, by a slip of my foot, in descending, a few yards 
from the day, I tumbled over and over, not only down what remained 
of the dark steep within, but the high sloping bank that reaches 
from the outside of the opening to the first flat part of the vale. 
There is nothing wonderful then in my living in this lone country 
for so many days. The only strange thing is, considering the waters 
and swamps, that I was not drowned; or, on account of the precipices 
and descents I have been engaged on, that I did not break my neck, 
or my bones; but so long we are to live as Providence hath appointed 
for the accomplishment of the grand divine scheme. Till the part 
allotted us is acted, we are secure. When it is done, we must go, 
and leave the stage for other players to come on."

The ladies seemed greatly entertained with my histories, and 
especially with my tumbling out of the mountain into their vale. 
They laughed very heartily; but told me, if they had happened to be 
sitting near the hole, in the bottom of that tremendous rocky 
mountain, as they sometimes did, and often wondered where the 
opening went to, and that I had come rolling down upon them, they 
would have been frightened out of their senses, for they must have 
thought it a very strange appearance; without hearing the history of 
it, they must think it a prodigious occurrence, or exception, from 
the constant affairs of nature.

"This might be, ladies," I answered, "but from seeing me before your 
eyes you must own, that many things may be fact, which at first may 
seem to exceed the common limits of truth. Impossible or 
supernatural some people conclude many cases to be that have not the 
least difficulty in them, but happen to be made of occurrences and 
places they have not seen, nor heard the like of before. Things 
thought prodigious or incredible by ignorance and weakness, will 
appear to right knowledge and a due judgment very natural and 
accountable to the thoughts."

Here a footman came up to us, to let his mistress know that dinner 
was on the table, and we immediately went in to an excellent one. 
The ladies were very civil to me, and exerted a good humour to show 
me, I suppose, that my arrival was not disagreeable to them, though 
I tumbled upon their habitation, like the genie of the caverns, from 
the hollows of the mountains. They talked in an easy, rational 
manner, and asked me many questions that showed they were no 
strangers to books and men and things: but at last it came to pass, 
that the eldest of those ladies, who acted as mistress of the house 
and seemed to be about one or two and twenty, desired to know the 
name of the gentleman I was looking for among these hills, and 
called my friend. "My reason, Sir, for asking is, that you answer so 
exactly in face and person to a description of a gentleman I heard 
not very long ago, that I imagine it may be in my power to direct 
you right."

"Madam," I replied, "the gentleman I am in search of is CHARLES 
TURNER, who was my schoolfellow, and my senior by a year in the 
university, which he left two years before I did, and went from 
Dublin to the north of England, to inherit a paternal estate on the 
decease of his father. There was an uncommon friendship between this 
excellent young man and me, and he made me promise him, in a solemn 
manner, to call upon him as soon as it was in my power; assuring me 
at the same time, that if by any changes and chances in this lower 
hemisphere, I was ever brought into any perplexities, and he alive, 
I should be welcome to him and what he had, and share in his 
happiness in this world, while I pleased. This is the man I want, a 
man, for his years, one of the wisest and best of the race. His 
honest heart had no design in words. He ever spoke what he meant, 
and therefore, I am sure he is my friend."

To this the lady answered, "Sir, since CHARLES TURNER is the man you 
want, your enquiry is at an end, for you are now at his house; and 
I, who am his sister, bid you welcome to Skelsmore-Vale in his name. 
He has been for a year and a half last past in Italy, and a little 
before he went, gave me such a description of you as enabled me to 
guess who you were after I had looked a while at you, and he added 
to his description a request to me, that if you should happen to 
call here, while I happened to be in the country, that I would 
receive you, as if you were himself; and when I removed, if I could 
not, or did not choose to stay longer in the country that I would 
make you an offer of the house, and give you up all the keys of it, 
to make use of it and his servants, and the best things the place 
affords, till his return; which is to be, he says, in less than a 
year. Now, Sir, in regard to my brother and his friend, I not only 
offer you what he desired I should, but I will stay a month here 
longer than I intended; for this lady, my cousin, MARTHA JACQUELOT, 
and I, had determined to go to Scarborough next week, and from 
thence to London: nor is this all, as know I shall the more oblige 
my brother the civiller I am to you, I will, when the Scarborough 
season is over, if you choose to spend the winter here, come back to 
Skelsmore-Vale, and stay till Mr. TURNER returns."

This discourse astonished me to the last degree, to hear that I was 
at my friend TURNER'S house, he abroad, and to be so for another 
year; the possession of his seat offered me; and his charming sister 
so very civil and good, as to assure me she would return from the 
spa, and stay with me till her brother came home: were things so 
unexpected and extraordinary, that I was for some time silent, and 
at a loss what to say. I paused for some minutes, with my eyes 
fastened on this beauty, and then said "Miss TURNER, the account you 
have given of your brother, and the information that I am now at his 
house, his friendly offers to me by you, and your prodigious 
civility, in resolving to return from Scarborough, to stay with me 
here till your brother arrives, are things so strange so uncommon, 
and exceedingly generous and kind, that I am quite amazed at what I 
hear, and want words to express my obligations, and the grateful 
sense I have of such favours. Accept my thanks, and be assured, that 
while I live, I shall properly remember the civility and benevolence 
of this day; and be ever ready if occasion offered, and the fates 
should put it in my power, to make a due return. Your offer, Madam, 
in particular, is so high an honour done me, and shows a spirit so 
humane, as I told you I was an unfortunate one, that I shall ever 
think of it with pleasure, and mention it as a rare instance of 
female worth; but as to accepting these most kind offers I cannot do 
it. Since Mr. TURNER is from home, will go and visit another friend 
have in this country, to whom I shall be welcome, I believe, till 
your brother returns. To live by myself here at my friend's expense, 
would not be right, nor agreeable to me: and as to confining you, 
Madam, in staying with me, I would not do it for the world." "Sir," 
Miss TURNER replied, "in respect of my staying here, it will be no 
confinement to me, I assure you. My heart is not set upon going to 
London. It was only want of company made Miss JACQUELOT and me think 
of it, and if you will stay with us, we will not even go to 
Scarborough this season." This was goodness indeed, but against 
staying longer than two or three days, I had many good reasons that 
made it necessary for me to depart: beside the unreasonableness of 
my being an expense to Mr. TURNER in his absence, or confining his 
sister to the country; there was Orton-Lodge, where I had left 
O'FIN, my lad, at work, to which I could not avoid going again: and 
there was Miss MELMOTH, on whom I had promised to wait, and did 
intend to ask her if she would give me her hand, as I liked her and 
her circumstances, and fancied she would live with me in any retreat 
I pleased to name; which was a thing that would be most pleasing to 
my mind. It is true, if CHARLES TURNER had come home, while I stayed 
at his house, it was possible I might have got his sister, who was a 
very great fortune: but this was an uncertainty however, and in his 
absence, I could not in honour make my addresses to her: if it 
should be against his mind, it would be acting a false part, while I 
was eating his bread. MISS TURNER to be sure had fifty thousand 
pounds at her own disposal, and so far as I could judge of her mind, 
during the three days that I stayed with her at Skelsmore-Vale, I 
had some reason to imagine her heart might be gained: but for a man 
worth nothing to do this, in her brother's house, without his leave, 
was a part I could not act, though by missing her I had been brought 
to beg my bread, Three days then only I could be prevailed on to 
stay, and the time indeed was happily spent.

Miss TURNER was good-humoured, sensible, and discreet, as one could 
wish a woman to be, talked pleasantly upon common subjects, and was 
well acquainted with the three noblest branches of polite learning, 
antiquity, history, and geography. It was a fine entertainment to 
hear her. She likewise understood music, and sung, and played well 
on the small harpsicord; but her moral character shed the brightest 
lustre on her soul. Her thoughts and words were ever employed in 
promoting God's glory, her neighbour's benefit, and her own true 
welfare; and her hand very often, in giving to the poor. One third 
of her fine income she devoted to the miserable, and was in every 
respect so charitable, that she never indulged the least 
intemperance in speaking. She detested that calumny and reproach 
which assassinates a credit, as much as she abhorred the shedding a 
man's blood. The goodness of her heart was great indeed: the 
integrity of her life was glorious. She was perfection, so far as 
the thing is consistent with the nature and state of man here, as it 
was possible for a mortal to be exempt from blame in life, and 
blemish of soul. An absolute exemption from faults cannot be the 
condition of anyone in this world: But, to the ladies I now speak, 
you may, like Miss TURNER, be eminently good, if you will do your 
best to be perfect, in such a kind and degree as human frailty doth 
admit.

Miss JACQUELOT was by the head lower than Miss TURNER, and her hair 
the very reverse of my friend's sister, that is, black as the raven; 
but she had a most charming little person, and a mind adorned with 
the finest qualifications. Reason never lost the command in her, nor 
ceased to have an influence upon whatever she did. It secured her 
mind from being ever discomposed, and disengaged her life from the 
inconveniencies which a disregard to reason exposes us to. By a 
management it dictated, she enjoyed perpetual innocence and peace. 
She never uttered a word that entrenched upon piety, infringed 
charity, or disturbed the happiness of anyone, nor at any time 
showed the least sign of a vain and light spirit: yet she had a 
sportfulness of wit and fancy that was delightful, when she could 
handsomely and innocently use it, and loved to exert the sallies of 
wit in a lepid<95> way, when they had no tendency to defile or 
discompose her mind, to wrong or harm the hearer, or her neighbour, 
or to violate any of the grand duties incumbent on us; piety, 
charity, justice, and sobriety. Everything that reason made unfit to 
be expressed, in relation to these virtues, she always carefully 
avoided; but otherwise, such things excepted, would enliven and 
instruct by good sense in jocular expression, in a way the most 
charming and pleasing. She was very wise, agreeable and happy. She 
was very good and worthy.

This young lady was a great master on the fiddle, and very knowing 
in connoisance.<96> She painted well, and talked in an astonishing 
manner, for a woman, and for her years, of pictures, sculpture, and 
medals. She was indeed a fine creature in soul and body.

With these ladies I spent three days in Skelsmore-Vale; and the time 
we talked, walked, played, and laughed away. Sometimes we rambled 
about the hills, and low adown the dales. Sometimes we sat to 
serious ombre;<97> and often went to music by the falling-streams. 
Miss TURNER sung, Miss JACQUELOT played the fiddle, and on my German 
flute I breathed the softest airs. We were a happy three, and parted 
with regret on every side. Fain would they have had me stay, and 
Scarborough and London should be thought of no more; but the reason 
of things was against it, and the 28th day of June I took my leave. 
Through the mountain I had descended, I went up again to Tim and my 
horses; who were stabled in the mouth of the cavern above, and had 
got provender from the vale below.

The sun was rising as we mounted the horses, and struck me so 
powerfully with the surpassing splendour and majesty of its 
appearance, so cheered me by the gladsome influences, and intimate 
refreshment of its all-enlivening beams, that I was contriving an 
apology as I rode on, for the first adorers of the solar orb, and 
imagined they intended nothing more than the worship of the 
transcendent majesty of the invisible Creator, under the symbol of 
his most excellent and nearly resembling creature; and this 
according to some imperfect tradition, that man, as a compound 
being, had, in the beginning, a visible glorious presence of Jehovah 
Elohim, a visible exhibition of a more distinguished presence by an 
inexpressible brightness or glory: this is some excuse for the first 
worshippers of the solar orb: and when the thing consecrated to the 
imagery and representation of its Maker, became the rival of his 
honours, and from being a help to devotion, was advanced into the 
supreme object of it; yet considering the prodigious glory of this 
moving orb, and that all animated nature depends upon its auspicious 
presence, we cannot wonder that the Egyptian ruralists, without a 
creed, and without a philosophy, should be tempted to some warmer 
emotion than a merely speculative admiration, and inclined to 
something of immediate devotion. That universal chorus of joy that 
is manifested at the illustrious solemnities of opening sunshine, 
might tempt the weak to join in a seemingly-religious acclamation. 
At least I am sure there is much more to be said for this species of 
idolatry, than for the papists worshipping dead men, stocks, bones, 
and clouts. They have not only revelation expressly against them—" 
Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve." 
Matt. ch. iv. v. 10.—"Neither shalt thou set up any image or 
pillar." Deut. ch. xvi. v. 22. But downright reason demonstrates 
that the things are useless to the preservers, and offensive to God; 
whereas on the contrary, when the eye beholds that glorious and 
important luminary of heaven, and considers the benefits dispensed 
to mankind by the means of its most beautiful and invigorating 
beams, it might strike not only an unpractised thinker, and cause 
the vulgar, who are not able of themselves to raise their thoughts 
above their senses, and frame a notion of an invisible Deity, to 
acknowledge the blessings they received, by a devotion to this 
fancied visible exhibition of divinity. But even some of the wise 
ones who were a degree above the absurdity of popular thinking, 
might be led to address themselves to the golden sun, in splendour 
likest heaven. They might ascribe the origin of their own existence, 
and the world's, to this seemingly adequate cause, and genial power 
of the system; when they beheld him returning again in the east, as 
I now see him, after the gloom and sadness of the night; again the 
restorer of light and comfort, and the renewer of the world; regent 
of the day, and all the horizon round, invested with bright rays; 
that all inferior nature, the earth's own form, and the supports of 
its animated inhabitants, seem to depend on his dispensing 
authority, and to be the effects of his prolific virtue, and secret 
operation: they might suppose, in the corruption of tradition, or 
when the revealed truth and direction was lost, and reason not as 
now in its maturity of age and observation, that some kind of glory 
should be given to the subordinate divinity, as they fancied, of 
this heavenly body, and that some homage was due to the fountain of 
so much warmth and beneficence. This, I imagine, may account for the 
earliest kind of idolatry; the worship paid to the sun. The effects 
of his presence are so great, and his splendour so overpowering and 
astonishing, that veneration and gratitude united, might seduce 
those ignorant mortals to deify so glorious an object. When they had 
lost the guard of traditionary revelation<98>, and wanted those 
helps to judgment which are derived from the experience, 
observation, and reasoning of past times, the specious idolatry 
might have been introduced, and something tolerably plausible 
perhaps was pleaded by the better heads of those times. Exclusive of 
an imperfect notion of the Deity's appearing by shechinah, and that 
the sun might be the visible exhibition as before observed; they 
might, in the next place, conclude from the extraordinary motion of 
the luminary, that he was an animated being and noble intelligence, 
placed in the highest post of honour and usefulness, and employed by 
God as his first minister and servant; for which reason, they 
thought it their duty to magnify and venerate the sun, whom the 
creator had exalted so high; as the chief ministers of kings are had 
in honour, which is reflected back on their royal masters. Thus 
might the novel impiety come on. They might, in the beginning, 
worship the sun as the shechinah, appearing by a glorious light, or 
in a celestial train attending the presence, which, at so great a 
distance, must appear in an indistinct, luminous vision; but more 
generally as the minister of God; an animated being, who had a 
principle of consciousness put into it; as the human body has, 
seated in it, a human soul; and that this glorious creature was 
enabled to perform the ethereal journeys by its own understanding 
and will, and to make all lower nature happy by his benign and 
diffusive influence; could see as far as he is seen, and every way 
was fitted for the noble work he had to execute. Thus did the sun 
commence a God. He must, they thought, from every appearance, in his 
wondrous, useful course, have the most exalted powers; be wise and 
benevolent, great and good. And when the worship of this luminary 
was once established, it could not be long before the moon was 
deified, and then the stars became conservators of the universe. 
From thence idolatry went on, and added to the heavenly bodies the 
emblematic doctrine, and animal apotheosis. Artificial fire was 
consecrated, and made the symbol of sidereal splendours. Deity was 
exhibited to the multitude in the forms of its effects, and 
innumerable orders of inferior divinities by degrees sprang up. 
Successive enlargements of the system of natural apotheosis 
prevailed; and, at last, the world, which ought only to have been 
regarded, as the magnificent theatre of divine perfections, was 
itself blasphemously adored, as the independent proprietor of them.

It is evident from hence that a revealed rule was wanting, or man 
had need of physics, to suppress the rising transports of a too 
eager gratitude, and guard against the inclination to worship this 
rising, lucid being, now so glorious before me; whose motion is so 
steady and uniform, swift, regular, and useful, that it seems to 
manifest itself a wise and intelligent being. Without the lights of 
philosophers, or the supernatural assistance of religion, it was 
hard for recent and wondering mortals, to refrain from worshipping 
that beautiful body, as they saw it proceeded with the greatest 
harmony, and shed innumerable blessings on them. But pure revealed 
religion diffuses such a light as manifests the error and a correct 
and philosophic reasoning, in this improved age the safe guide, and 
proper arbitrator of religion, not only refuses to address itself to 
that God of the ancient popular theology, but proves the worship 
impious and absurd.

Right, reason, and revelation, demonstrate from the matchless graces 
and glories of nature, which occur in great variety, and without 
number, wherever we turn our eyes, that there is a Creator of 
infinite power, wisdom, and goodness; who bountifully provides for 
the uses and occasions of human life, and produces repeated millions 
of objects that bear the stamp of omnipotence, and remain perpetual 
monuments of the divine benevolence. Manifold are thy works, O Lord; 
in wisdom hast thou made them all!

And especially, when from the earth I lift up my eyes to the 
heavens, and behold among the wonders of the firmament, that vast 
and magnificent orb, the sun now rising before me, brightening by 
degrees the horizon, and pouring the whole flood of day upon us; the 
wonderful and grand scene strikes powerfully on my mind, and causes 
an awful impression. With sentiments of the greatest admiration, I 
consider the illustrious object, and feel the kindly heat of that 
bright luminary, inspiring me with more than usual gladness. And 
what power is it that supplies this fountain of light and heat, with 
his genial and unexhausted treasure, who dispenses it with such 
munificent, yet wise profusion? It must be some Almighty Being. It 
must be the work of the Deity, that is, the powerful, wise, and good 
Parent of mankind, the Maker, Preserver, and Ruler of the world; for 
his perfections are stamped upon the work. The evidence of reason 
declares it. Chance or necessity cannot form or guide. An active 
understanding only, and intending cause, can produce, and direct: 
and this cause, must be all-ruling wisdom, and unlimited power, in 
conjunction with the most amiable goodness. This is plain to a 
thorough and rational examination. A supreme Being, an eternal self-
existent mind, who comprehends and presides over all, must impart 
the benefits of that glorious creature before me, using it as an 
inanimate, unconscious, instrument of conveying light, heat, and 
prolific influence to the earth; which, by infinite power, is 
rendered as much active in sending the vegete juices through the 
vessels of all plants, as the sun is in diffusing its rays upon the 
surface of the globe we inhabit. The sun, and moon, and stars, are 
but instruments in his hand, for bringing about mechanically 
whatever good effects he has created them to produce. Our holy 
religion and philosophic reasoning evince this truth. This glorious 
sun bears the signatures of its author, and the finger of God is 
discernible everywhere. The wisdom and loving-kindness of the Lord 
are visible, whatever way we turn. His bounty appears by its 
constant, yet voluntary communication, and is the more to be admired 
as it is a never-failing principle. This rising luminary that visits 
our earth, is, in particular, a daily fresh instance of the divine 
favour; and did not God's goodness only, prevent its suspension, we 
should be involved in the utmost horror, nay, inevitable ruin, and 
when, in the evening it leaves us overspread by the darkness, to 
visit others with its benign influences; the change is charming, for 
night gives man a necessary vacation from the labours of the day. In 
sleep he takes the sweetest refreshment, till this rising sun, by 
the beneficent direction of its great Author, again appears in grace 
and splendour, and displays the face of nature in unspeakable 
beauties. Everywhere the bounty of the supreme Spirit I see 
diffused; through air, through earth, and in the waters. No place is 
without witnesses of his liberality; and life is the care of his 
providence.

Of him then should our songs be, and our talking, of all his 
wonderful works. We should join in adoring him, and acknowledge him 
'worthy to receive glory and honour and power, who has created all 
things, and for his pleasure they are and were created.'<99> And it 
follows, that we should likewise absolutely submit to this sovereign 
Being, and ever resign ourselves to his direction and disposal. 
Where can ignorance and impotence find so safe and sure a refuge as 
in infinite wisdom, and almighty power?

In this manner were my thoughts employed, as we rode over the brows 
of many high hills, with the rising sun before me, till we descended 
to a narrow wet bottom, which trended due west for an hour, and 
brought us to the foot of another high mountain. This we ascended 
with the horses as far as it was possible to bring them, and from 
thence I climbed up to the top, by a steep craggy way, near two 
hundred yards. This was very difficult and dangerous, but I had an 
enchanting prospect, when I gained the summit of the hill. A valley 
near a mile in breadth appeared betwixt the opposite mountains, and 
that on which I stood; and a river was running through it that 
spread sometimes into little lakes, and sometimes fell headlong from 
the rocks in sounding cascades. The finest meadows, and little 
thickets, bordered those waters on every side, and beyond them the 
vast hills had a fine effect in the view: some were covered with 
forest; and some with precipitating streams. I was charmed with this 
assemblage of the beauties of nature. It is a more delightful 
landscape than art has been able to form in the finest gardens of 
the world.

The descent was easy to this beautiful vale, and after I had feasted 
my eyes with the prospect of the place, I went down to see who lived 
in a house covered with creeping greens, that stood by a sonorous 
waterfall. Some wise one perhaps, said I, who scorns the character 
of the libertine, or the sot, and to the pursuits of avarice and 
ambition leaves the world, to enjoy in this fine retreat the true 
happiness of man; by embracing that wisdom which is from above, and 
aspiring to an equality with saints and angels: happy man! if such a 
man be here. Or, it may be, some happy pair possess this charming 
spot of earth, and in discharging all the duties of the matrimonial 
relation, enjoy that fullness of satisfactions and felicities, which 
the divine institution was designed to produce. Happy pair indeed! 
if such a pair be here.

But when I came near the mansion, no human creature could I see, 
nor, for some time, could I find an entrance any way. The gate of 
the garden, in which the house stood, was fast, and so was every 
window and door: but as the gardens were in fine order, and full of 
fruits, vegetables, and flowers, I knew it must be an inhabited 
place, though its people were from home. With my pole therefore I 
leaped a deep moat, which surrounded the garden, and for half an 
hour continued walking about it, pulling some things, and looking at 
others, in hopes that someone might be seen: no soul however 
appeared, and I was going to return to my horses, when, by accident, 
I came to a descent of stairs, that was planted round with a shade 
of laurel, evergreen, and branching palm. Down I went immediately, 
and walked through a long arched passage, in which two lamps were 
burning, and at the end of it came to an open door, that admitted me 
into an entry which led to a flight of stairs. Should I go any 
farther, was the question? If anyone within, I might greatly offend: 
and if it was the habitation of rogues, I might find myself in a 
pound. What shall I do then? Go on, said curiosity, and bravely 
finish the adventure.

Softly then I ascended, listening, by the way, if I could hear any 
voice, and proceeded upwards, to the first floor. A door was there 
open, and on my tiptoes I went to look in, but all I could see was a 
room well furnished, and through it I passed to another, which was 
likewise full of fine things, and had a door unlocked that opened 
into a large library. The books were all bound in vellum, in an 
extraordinary manner, the collection valuable, and most judiciously 
ordered. Mathematical instruments of all sorts were on a table, and 
everything looked as belonging to a scholar and man of fortune. 
Great was my amazement, as I saw no living creature. I knew not what 
to think of all these things: nor did my astonishment diminish, when 
I went from the library into two very handsome bedchambers, and saw 
in one of them the apparel of a woman; in the other the dress of a 
man.

Musing on these matters, and looking over the books, I continued 
near an hour, when I turned round to depart, and saw at the door of 
the library I was in, a gentleman, and two young ladies in riding-
dresses, who seemed more than amazed at the sight of me. The man's 
face I knew very well, and soon remembered he was one of the company 
that came over with me from Ireland in the Skinner and Jenkins, and 
a person I had thought a very odd man; for he never stirred out of 
his berth all the while he was on board, nor spoke a syllable to 
anyone, except myself; and that only for a couple of hours after we 
landed; when he was pleased to single me out, and requested we might 
dine together; to which I said, with pleasure, Sir, and he came with 
Miss MELMOTH and me to our inn. With us he sat for the time I have 
said, and talked like a man of sense and virtue. He was but three or 
four years older than I was, and yet so very grave, that in respect 
of temper, he was fit for the bench. He told me, he lived in too 
remote a place, ever to expect to see me in the country; but he had 
a house in London, where he was every winter, if not hindered by 
sickness, and to a part of it I should be welcome, if it was 
agreeable to me to improve our acquaintance. Many other civil things 
he said, and showed a regard for me that I little expected, and 
could not but wonder at. All this made me as well known to him as he 
was remembered by me; but he looked as it were scared at the sight 
of me, in the place I now appeared in; where I stood leaning on my 
long pole, when he came to the closet door, and was reading aloud in 
a book I chanced to take into my hand.

"With regard to the gods, do what your ancestors handed down: 
believe that for your spirit to be most beautiful and to 
provide the ultimate honour to the gods, what you should do is 
to be as good as possible and perfectly just. There is more to 
expect from that than from making many sacrifices on the altar 
while failing to do good."<101>

To which I added a few reflections: "True, most excellent sage. 
Rectitude and Benevolence are the perfection of rational nature, and 
when by philosophy we acquire a temper, disposition and action that 
are conformable to the truth of things, and continually display 
strict justice and universal charity, we offer the noblest sacrifice 
to heaven, and are consimilated<102> with the Deity. By this divine 
affection, for order and goodness, we manifest a continual use and 
employment of ourselves for the glory of the supreme virtue, and may 
by this means, expect to obtain the infinite mercy of God; when 
slaughtered Hecatombs<103> are despised; and the creeds of 
incomprehensible mysteries, and the external modes and forms of 
churchism, may be considered only as the weakness and blindness of 
reverend heads. Thousands of rams and ten thousand rivers of oil; 
speculative faith, rites and ceremonies, are nothing, abstracted 
from that temper and affection, which unites us to the Deity, and to 
the whole system of rationals. Virtue and charity is religion."

This passage and reflection pronounced very loud, with an enthusiasm 
that seizes me when I take a classic in my hand, added greatly to 
the astonishment of finding me in the closet, and for some time the 
gentleman was not able to speak, or come forward; but at last, 
moving towards me, as I did to him, the moment I saw him, he said, 
"by what strange chance have I the favour of seeing you here? Inform 
me, I beseech you, in the name of friendship, what surprising 
accident has thrown you on this solitude; without horse or servant, 
and how did you get over the broad moat of water, as the two garden 
gates were locked?"

"Mr. BERRISFORT," I answered, "you may well wonder at seeing me in 
this remote and silent part of the world, and especially at my being 
in your study, without either horse or attendant in waiting, that 
you could find, on coming home; bat the thing was all natural, in 
the common course of events, as you shall hear.

"Three weeks after you left me at Whitehaven, I set out from that 
place for Brugh under Stanemore, and went from thence up the 
northern mountains, in search of a gentleman I had some business 
with, who lives but a few miles beyond you, and on my return from 
his house, as the road lay very high on the side of yonder vast 
hill, I quitted my horse out of curiosity, to climb up to the top of 
the mountain, and see what kind of country lay on the other side of 
this long range of high hills. It was with great difficulty I got up 
to the pike, and few, perhaps, but myself, would attempt it: I was 
rewarded however by the fine prospect, and seeing the descent on 
this side easy, and a house and large gardens before me, I could not 
refrain from going down to the bottom. I marched on to take a view 
of the mansion and improvements, and as I saw some very fine things 
in the gardens, and no sign of any living creature; the gates shut 
and every place to appearance fastened, I leaped the moat with this 
pole, and after I had wandered about the ground, by accident came to 
the shady enclosure, in which I found the descending stairs from the 
garden; and seeing the lamps burning in the passage, could not avoid 
going down, and proceeded till I arrived at this fine library. My 
admiration was great, you may be sure, and the books too strong a 
temptation for me not to mind them. With great pleasure I looked 
into many of them, and at last opened the Greek writer I was reading 
aloud, when you came to the door of your study. Such were the causes 
that brought me where you find me."

Mr. BERRISFORT replied, "Sir, I am glad there was anything in the 
force and operation of casualties, that could bring you to my house, 
and I assure you upon my word, that you are most heartily welcome. 
As I lay in my cabin on ship-board I conceived a great regard for 
you, on account of many things I heard you say, and particularly for 
your lively arguments with Dr. WHALEY, before the storm began, in 
defence of the divine Unity, and against that miserable theology 
which the monks have invented, and continue to support, though it 
militates with the revealed truths of God, and the reason and 
fitness of things. I was greatly pleased with your different 
definitions of churchism and religion, and honoured you not a little 
for what you said in opposition to unintelligible mystery, and the 
glare of ceremony; at the same time, that you contended for the 
worship of the universal Father, and that sober, righteous and godly 
life, which springs from the love of truth, virtue, and moral 
rectitude. Once more then I assure you, Sir, I am most heartily glad 
to see you, and I shall take it as a great favour if you will pass 
the summer with me in this wild country place. Everything shall be 
made as agreeable as possible, and, exclusive of this closet of 
books, which you shall possess while you stay here, we will hunt, 
and set<100>, and shoot, and enjoy all the pleasures of the field: 
but in the meantime, as it is now ten o'clock, we ought to think of 
breakfast," and he desired his sister, a most charming creature, to 
call for it immediately, and I soon saw several servants bring in 
everything that was elegant and excellent. He told me I need be 
under no uneasiness about my mare and horses, for there was a steep 
narrow way for them to come down to his stables, about half a mile 
from the place I left them, and he would immediately send one of his 
servants to bring them.

This was vastly civil and affectionate, and I told Mr. BERRISFORT, 
that I was under great obligations to him for his goodness, which I 
should ever have an extreme sense of, but I was obliged to go on 
upon business: a few days however I would enjoy the happiness he 
offered me, and we passed them in a very delightful manner.

Early in the morning, we went out with the hounds, and for half a 
dozen hours, had the dogs in full cry before us. We had hawks and 
pointers in the afternoon, and enjoyed abroad all the sports of the 
field. Within, when our labours were over, we had the most elegant 
dinners and suppers; everything, of meat and drink, that the best 
taste could desire: and the conversation was excellent after the 
repasts.

Mr. BERRISFORT was a man of letters and breeding: and the ladies had 
sense, and were no strangers to the best English books. They 
understood no other language than their mother tongue, but the 
choicest authors of every kind that our country has produced, they 
had read with great care. The master of Yeoverin-Green was a 
learned, worthy, polite man, free in discourse, if he knew his 
company, and liked them, but otherwise quite mute, and he was 
instructive in everything he said. His sister and cousin were very 
good; discreet in their behaviour, temperate in their discourse, and 
easy in their manner. They had no learning; they pretended to no 
criticism; but talked, without vanity, of the best things, and what 
they did say, they expressed in a most agreeable way. There was no 
being dull with such people, in such a place. I have seen very few 
young ladies in my time that I liked better than those girls. They 
both charmed me with their persons, their faces, their good manners, 
and their chat; but I could not enough admire Miss BERRISFORT for 
one particular, in which she not only excelled Miss Fox, but all the 
women that I have ever seen. This was in hunting. In the field, she 
seemed the silver-shafted queen.

Mr. BERRISFORT and Miss Fox followed the dogs with caution, and 
never attempted any thing that could hazard their necks or their 
bones: but the charming JULIET BERRISFORT had so violent a passion 
for the diversion of the field, that she was seized with a kind of 
enthusiasm when she heard the cry of the hounds, and as if she had 
been the goddess of the silver bow, or one of her immortal train, 
went on without a thought of her having brittle limbs. She leaped 
everything to keep in with the dogs; five-bar gates; the most 
dangerous ditches and pales; and drove full-speed down the steepest 
hills, if it was possible for a horse to keep his feet on them. She 
frightened me the first morning I was out with her. She made my 
heart bounce a thousand times. I expected every now and then that 
she would break her neck—that neck where lilies grew! I was reckoned 
a very desperate rider by all that knew me, and yet, with this young 
lady, I paused several times at some leaps, when she did not 
hesitate at all. Over she went, in a moment, without thinking of the 
perils in her way; and then, if I broke my neck, I could not but 
pursue

When glory called, and beauty led the way, 
What man could think of life, and poorly stay?

It was not in my complexion to stay, and by that means, I got a 
terrible fall the second day; whether by my own fault, or my 
horse's, I cannot tell: but as no bone was broke, and I had received 
no other mischief than a black eye, a bruise in my side, and a torn 
face, I was soon on my mare again, and by Miss BERRISFORT'S side. 
She laughed immoderately at me, while the dogs were at fault, as my 
bones were safe, and advised me with a humorous tenderness, to ride 
with her brother and Miss Fox. It was not long however before I had 
more satisfaction than I desired; for in half an hour's time, we 
came to some pales, which the stag went over and I leaped first; but 
Miss BERRISFORT'S horse though one of the best in the world, 
unfortunately struck, and cleared them in such a manner, that the 
lovely JULIET came over his head. She fell very safely in high 
grass, where I waited for her, for fear of an accident of any kind, 
and did not receive the least hurt; but in the violence of the 
motion, and the way she came down, the curtain was thrown on her 
breast, and she lay for some moments stunned upon the ground. In a 
minute however I snatched her up, and set her on her feet. She came 
to herself immediately, and thanked me for my care of her; but was 
vexed to the heart at what had happened. She requested I would not 
mention the thing to her brother or Miss Fox, and hoped I would be 
so generous as not to speak of it to anyone. I assured her, "it was 
not in my soul to extract mirth from the bad fortune of anyone; and 
much less is it in my power to ridicule, or laugh at a woman of 
distinction for an accident like this. You may believe me, when I 
promise you, upon my word, and swear it by every sacred thing, that 
I will not so much as hint it to any mortal while you remain in this 
world." This gave her some relief, and by her foot in my hands I 
lifted her into her saddle again. Two benefits were derived from 
this mischance. One was, that for the future, this lady hunted with 
a little more caution, and did not take the leaps she was wont to 
do; the other, that it gained me her heart, though I did not know it 
for many months, and thereby secured for me the greatest happiness, 
against a day of distress. From the most trivial things the most 
important do often spring, but I proceed.

Vexatious as the fall was to this young lady, it was I however that 
had all the pain, by the mischief I received when my horse threw me. 
My eye was in a sad black way, my side troubled me, and the skin was 
off half my face; yet I did not much mind it, as the diversion was 
good, and that immediately after the death of the stag we hastened 
back to an excellent dinner, and some flasks of old generous wine; 
to which BOB BERRISFORT and I sat for two or three hours. The ladies 
had left us to change their dress, and walk in the gardens, and we 
fell into very serious chat.

"I am thinking," said Mr. BERRISFORT, after a considerable pause, as 
we sat smoking a pipe over against each other, "that the cause you 
gave Dr. WHALEY, on ship-board, for the decay of Christianity, was 
the best I have heard. I remember you told this divine, that it was 
not want of faith in the present generation that made so many 
renounce Christianity; for, the world were no enemies to a 
republication of the law of nature by the man Christ Jesus; but the 
thing that makes infidels, and supports infidelity, is the 
extravagant doctrines which the theologers have obtruded upon the 
church, as essential parts of Christianity. Enthusiasm, absurdity, 
and error, and the blind and bloody scenes of cruelty and 
superstition have been the great stumbling-blocks to mankind, and 
given the most sad, severe and lasting stabs, to the interests and 
success of the pure and peaceable gospel of Christ. This is just. 
But exclusive of this, may we not say that there are so many seeming 
contradictions, and a multiplicity of obscure passages in it, that 
it looks as if it could not be, in its present condition, a rule of 
faith, and that Christians differ so much about the meaning of the 
texts of their Bible, that reason knows not what to say to a 
religion so variously represented. It is not only the two great 
camps, Papist against Protestant, and Protestant against Papist, who 
make the religion as different as black and white; that the reformed 
mission at Malabar tell the Indians they must not hearken to the 
Jesuits, if they expect salvation; and the monks at Coromandel 
declare, on the contrary, to those Indians, that they will be damned 
to eternity, if they are converted to what the Danish ministers call 
Christianity: which made the famous bramin Padmanaba say, that it 
was impossible for him to become a Christian, till the learned 
Christian priests had agreed among themselves what Christianity was; 
for he had not erudition and judgment enough to decide in the 
intricate controversy; but, exclusive of this, Protestants are so 
divided among themselves, even the Church of England against the 
Church of England, dissenters against dissenters, and give such 
different accounts of the revealed system, that it requires more 
understanding, and strict serious enquiry, than the generality of 
people have, or can spare, to be able to determine in what party of 
the celebrated critics and expositors true religion is to be found: 
and when the controversy is so dark and various, and the authorised 
professors can never agree among themselves, what can a man of a 
plain understanding say to it? This makes many, I imagine, turn from 
the scriptures to study nature, and the general laws which are 
established among the several gradations, ranks and classes of 
beings, so far as they are connected with intelligent, moral agency. 
In the natural, agreeable pages of that infinite volume, we see and 
perceive beauty and order, art, wisdom, and goodness, and are 
thereby led to the Creator and Governor of the world, the universal 
cause, preserver, and director of nature. We discover his 
providence, measures and benevolence, the rules and principles of 
eternal, immutable wisdom and reason, and by them are compelled to 
confess a universal, intelligent Efficient; one infinite, eternal, 
omnipotent, wise, good Being, from whom all others derive, and on 
whom all others necessarily depend, and that continually. In short, 
by studying nature, we discover a God of truth, order and rectitude, 
and as we find perfect universal truth, and moral rectitude to be 
the highest perfection in the Deity, our reason informs us, that we 
ought to show our love of God, by a love of these; and that a 
regular, uniform pursuit of them, must be the only true and rational 
pursuit of human happiness. Here is a plain and good religion. Can 
we wonder then that many study and follow nature, and disregard 
those interested commentators, who, like opposite counsel at the 
bar, multiply and make void the law by different and contradictory 
pleadings on it?" Here BOB ended, and lighted his pipe again, while 
I laid mine down, and went on in the following manner:

"As Christianity was instituted by its great Author and Publisher, 
for the benefit of mankind, it is to be lamented that the divines 
should so differ, concerning what genuine revealed religion is, as 
to cause many to renounce this standing and perpetual rule of faith 
and manners, but as to contradictions and inconsistencies in the 
apostle's writings, I have read them over several times, and never 
could find such things in them. Obscure passages there are a few at 
first sight; but a little consideration can explain them by other 
scriptures, if we do not, like some commentators endeavour, by 
forced constructions, to adapt the sense of them to a system. This 
is what ruins Christianity. The monks shut out the light of reason, 
which is to explain scripture by scripture, and in the dark, fancy a 
metaphysical theology: they speculate a tritheistic mystery, 
original sin, divine sovereignty, election, reprobation, with many 
other pieties, and call the things revelation, which are, in 
reality, an artificial, invented corruption of the gospel. The 
majority of the doctors insist upon it that their reverend notions 
are revealed religion, and where they have a power, wattle the 
people into them; but men who will use the human understanding their 
Creator has given them, and employ the reason of men in the choice 
of their religion, very easily perceive that unnatural 
representation could never come down from heaven: and that whatever 
the declaimers on human nature may say in praise of their gospel, it 
is impossible it should be inspiration, when the propositions rather 
merit laughter and contempt than the attention of rational 
creatures. This makes the Indians of any understanding flee 
Christianity. This causes men of sense, in a free country, to 
declare against revealed religion. The principal offence must 
remain, while the majority of the clergy continue to blind the human 
understanding, and instead of couching the cataract, darken the 
souls of the people with a suffusion of mystery: to which I may add, 
and obstinately refuse to make use of unexceptionable, scriptural 
forms of expression in divine public service, though an alteration 
might be made without any possible danger or injury to the church, 
and continue to use in our liturgy unscriptural phrases, and 
metaphysical notions, the imaginations of weak men. While this is 
done, the Christian religion must suffer, and of consequence, the 
divines who contend for mystery, and labour to destroy human reason 
and the powers thereof: to stifle and extinguish our common notions 
of things, and preclude all reasoning whatsoever upon the subject of 
religion; must have the blood of more souls to answer for, in the 
approaching day of calamity, than they now seem to imagine, while 
great preferments blind their understanding, and render them 
insolent and positive. All this however has nothing to do with the 
true gospel. If men would read the historical, and the argumentative 
parts of the sacred writings with honesty, and explain them as right 
reason and true criticism directs; if they would study them with 
that true zeal, which is guided by a good light in the head, and 
which consists of good and innocent affections in the heart; and 
have at the same time a knowledge of the customs which prevailed, 
and the notions that were commonly received in those distant ages 
and countries, they would find no inconsistencies and contradictions 
in the scriptures, even the difficulties would soon disappear. The 
sacred writings would appear to be what they are, a system of 
religion that answers to all our wishes and desires; that requires 
of us that obedience to which as rational beings we are antecedently 
bound: and offers us rewards for obeying more than nature could ever 
claim. In the gospel, we have the religion of nature in perfection, 
and with it a certainty of mercy and unutterable blessings: but in 
natural religion, as the reason and understanding of men can collect 
it, our hopes of pardon and glory have but uncertain foundation. 
Without revelation, our hopes are liable to be disturbed and shaken 
by frequent doubts and misgivings of mind: but in revealed religion, 
that is, the moral law republished by inspired men, the promises of 
the gospel take in all the wishes of nature, and establish all her 
hopes. Blessed be God, then for sending his well-beloved Son into 
the world. From him we have a law that is holy, and the commandment 
holy, and just, and good: and by a dutiful submission to this plain 
and perfect law, in which there is no mystery, no inconsistency, no 
contradiction, we are delivered from condemnation, by the grace of 
God through Christ. Here is reason for adoring the divine goodness. 
The gospel gives a better evidence for the truth and certainty of 
life and immortality than nature before had given, and thereby 
displays the love that God has for the children of men."

To this Mr. BERRISFORT said, that "he thought my plea for original 
Christianity was good, and allowed it was not the gospel that was 
faulty in mystery and obscurity, contradiction and inconsistency; 
but, human ignorance, and human vanity, which have loaded it with 
absurdities, while they excluded reasoning about it, and warped its 
fair and heavenly maxims to the interests of systems and 
temporalities. However," continued Bob, "you will allow I believe, 
that the sacred writers had not perpetually the aid of an unerring 
Spirit, and therefore are sometimes inconsistent in their accounts: 
that as they were sometimes destitute of divine assistance, they 
were liable to error when guided only by the human spirit, and did 
act like common men upon several occasions. This seems to be evident 
from the relations, and the human sentiments of the apostles. The 
evangelists speak of the same facts differently; and in citing 
prophecy, while one adapts a fact to the letter of the prophecy, 
another accommodates the letter of the prophecy to the letter of the 
fact: I mean here, the ass and colt in Matthew, and the colt only in 
John, and their citing Zechariah, ch. ix. v. 9. differently <104>. 
And as to the other sacred writers, does not the dispute between 
Paul and Peter, show a subjection, sometimes, to ignorance and 
error? does not the quarrel between Barnabas and Paul let us see, 
that one of them was mistaken, and both of them to be blamed? Tell 
me likewise, what you think of Mark and John's different accounts of 
the time of the crucifixion, and does not Matthew contradict Mark in 
his relation of the resurrection of Jesus?" To this I replied, "that 
however some zealots may contend for the perpetual inspiration of 
the sacred writers, yet he could not think such doctrine necessary 
to the creed of a Christian: Jesus only is called the truth, and was 
incapable of error. Christ only in all his actions, was directed by 
a prophetic spirit. All other men, prophets and apostles, were 
sometimes left to the guidance of their own spirit; and therefore 
all things which they have signified to us by their words or deeds, 
are not to be considered as divine oracles. So Limborch, Dodwell, 
and Baxter say, and of the same opinion were Grotius and 
Erasmus.<105> They assert, that the apostles, on ordinary occasions, 
were ordinary men. All true Christian critics must allow this, and 
grant that, the universal inspiration of the sacred penmen, is a 
notion founded in the prejudices of pious men and their mistaken 
sense of scripture. Such infallible authority they think the best 
way to silence all objections, and weakly embrace the hypothesis to 
advance the honour of religion.

But our allowing this, and that there are some disagreements and 
variations in the evangelists, cannot hurt the gospel. St. Paul 
might reprove St. Peter, and speak himself sometimes after the 
manner of men; yet, we see where they had the divine assistance in 
their explications, and the power of working miracles to confirm 
their doctrine; and there, as rational and thinking men, we must 
allow the authority of the sacred books; the few places that have 
the marks of weakness, only serve to convince us, that the divine 
writers of the books made not the least pretension to perpetual 
inspiration. "In suo sensu abundat aliquid humanae fragilitatis 
dissentio habet;" says Jerome. Human frailty and their own sense 
honestly appear, when there was not an occasion for infallibility 
and miracle. But whenever the preachers of the New Testament were 
wanted for the extraordinary purposes of divine providence, they 
were made superior to the infirmities of nature: their 
understandings were enlarged and enlightened and an inspired 
knowledge rendered them incapable of error. This, in my judgment, is 
so far from ruining the authority of scripture, that it is the 
greatest confirmation of its truth. It shows the honesty of the 
preachers of the New Testament, in owning they were only 
occasionally inspired: and when the incredulous see the ingenuous 
acknowledgment of what is human in the inspired writings, the truth 
of our religion must be more conspicuous to their eyes: whereas the 
truths of the Testament are hid from them, by making God the 
dictator of the whole; because they think that impossible, and 
therefore conclude, the Christian religion has no better foundation. 
In short there is no reason to believe that the apostles were 
extraordinarily inspired, when they say it not; and when their 
discourses have in them no mark of such like inspiration. It is 
sufficient, says Le Cleve, if we believe that, no prophet of the New 
Testament has said anything in the name of God, or by his order, 
which God has not effectually ordered him to say; nor has undertaken 
to foretell anything, which God had not indeed truly revealed to 
him: that every matter of fact related in the hooks is true, and the 
records, in general, the truest and most holy history that ever was 
published amongst men, notwithstanding the writers may be mistaken 
in some slight circumstances: that all the doctrines proposed are 
really and truly divine doctrines, and there is no sort of reasoning 
in the dogmatical places of the Holy Scriptures, that can lead us 
into error, or into the belief of anything that is false, or 
contrary to piety; that Jesus Christ was absolutely infallible, as 
well as free from all sin, because of the Godhead that was always 
united to him, and which perpetually inspired him; insomuch, that 
all he taught is as certain as if God himself had pronounced; and in 
the last place, that God did not often dictate to the apostles the 
very words which they should use. These five heads are enough to 
believe. We allow in these things the authority of the Holy 
Scriptures, and they who affirm more are deceived.<106> 

 The case is the same as to differences, want of exactness, and 
small mistakes. We may justly celebrate the harmony or agreement of 
the sacred writers, with regard to the principal transactions by 
them mentioned, as a strong proof of the integrity of the 
evangelists, and of the certainty of the fact. This evinces the 
truth of Christianity: but in matters of very small moment, we must 
allow a want of accuracy, or slips of memory, or different 
informations. This cannot hurt the authority of the gospels, as it 
proves the honesty of the writers by showing they did not compose by 
compact: and I think, that some of the evangelists having been eye-
witnesses of, and actors in the facts of the several gospels; and 
others having written for the information of those who had got a 
perfect information of all things from the very beginning, is an 
argument solid and rational for the credibility of the evangelical 
history. It is sufficient. I am sure it is better to allow this, 
than to say the writers of the four gospels were mere organs, when 
the little omissions and inaccuracies observable in their records, 
cannot be accounted for, if we suppose that God conveyed the facts 
and truths through them, as pipes, to the world. It must needs be a 
perfect work, which the spirit of God directs.

As to St. Mark and St. John's accounts, I see no contradiction in 
the relations. St. John says, reckoning as the Romans did, as he was 
then in Asia, and Jerusalem destroyed; that at the sixth hour, that 
is, six o'clock in the morning, he brought Jesus out to them again, 
the last time and strove to mitigate the rage of the Jews, and save 
the life of Christ: but as this was what he could not do, he washed 
his hands before them all, to let them know he was not the author of 
the innocent man's death, and after that delivered him up to the 
soldiers, to be crucified. when they had scourged him.

When all this was done, says St. Mark, reckoning in the Jewish 
manner; it was the third hour, that is nine o'clock in the morning, 
and they crucified him. This perfectly reconciles the two 
evangelists. There is no sign of a contradiction in the places.

As to St. Matthew and St. Mark's accounts of the resurrection of 
Jesus, they are not so free from obscurity, but I can see no 
inconsistency in them. If St. Matthew says, "the Lord appeared to 
Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary," that might be, without a 
contradiction, though St. Mark says, "he appeared first to Mary 
Magdalene." The case to me appears to be this. Mary Magdalene, Mary 
the mother of James, and the other women, went with spices and 
ointments to embalm the body, Sunday the 28th of April, early in the 
morning, about six and thirty hours after it had been laid in the 
sepulchre, and when they arrived at the place, found not the body, 
but two angels, as young men in white apparel, who told them Jesus 
of Nazareth was risen to life again, as he himself foretold, and 
therefore they must make haste to his apostles, to acquaint them 
with the news, and let them know that they would see him in Galilee, 
according to his prediction. With these joyful tidings the women 
hastened away to the eleven disciples, and related to them what they 
had heard and seen. The apostles looked upon this account as a dream 
or vision; but however, on Mary Magdalene's assuring Peter and John 
apart, that she had really been in the tomb, and found it empty; 
from whence it was most certain, that either Jesus was risen, or 
they had removed his body; these apostles ran both to the sepulchre, 
and Mary Magdalene went with them. Peter and John then saw, that it 
was as she had affirmed, and after they had viewed the tomb, the 
clothes, and the napkin, returned from the sepulchre, greatly 
wondering what was become of their master's body; but Mary continued 
at the monument, lamenting very greatly, that she could not see 
Jesus either alive or dead, and while she thus bemoaned herself, the 
Lord appeared to her. As St. Mark says "Jesus appeared first to Mary 
Magdalene, out of whom he had cast out seven devils;" and after she 
had reverenced her dear Lord and master, he bid her go immediately 
to his disciples, and tell them she had seen him: "let them also 
know that I have assured thee, I shall quickly leave this world, and 
ascend to the God and Father of us all, my Father and your Father, 
my God and your God, unto those happy mansions where he manifests 
his presence in a roost especial manner; there to receive full power 
over all things both in heaven and earth, and to prepare a place for 
you; that where I am, there ye may be also." Mary accordingly 
departed. She told the apostles that Jesus had appeared to her, and 
acquainted them with the joyful message.

As to the other women, it is evident that they likewise went a 
second time to the sepulchre, to look for the body of their master, 
and having in vain searched for it, were returning to the apostles 
to let them know they had enquired to no purpose, when Jesus himself 
met them, saying "All hail." Does not this reconcile Mark's account 
with Matthew's? I think so. To me it is so very plain from what all 
the sacred relators have declared of the matter, that I am 
astonished how Jerome could be so perplexed with the two accounts, 
as to say, that Mark's account, which constitutes the last twelve 
verses of his gospel; might be rejected here as spurious, because it 
was found only in a few copies of that gospel, and contradicted the 
other evangelists. Non recipimus Marci testimonium, quod in raris 
fertur evangeliis, praesertim cum diversa atque contraria 
evangelistis ceteris narrare videatur.["We do not accept the 
testimony of Mark, which is found in few documents, especially as we 
see many other documents with the other account."]

In the next place, if the account I have given was liable to any 
objection, and you could show me that it was not the truth of the 
case; which, at present, I think impossible: If it was evident from 
the gospels, that the women were not a second time at the tomb, but 
that Jesus appeared to Mary Magdalene and the other women, the first 
time they were all there together, yet this may be, as I apprehend, 
without Mark's contradicting Matthew. The meaning of the words of 
Mark, "he appeared first to Mary Magdalene" might be, that as she 
and the women were returning from the monument, to tell the news to 
the apostles, Jesus appeared to them, and in particular, addressed 
himself to Mary Magdalene; directing his discourse to her, and 
speaking familiarly and affectionately to her, to distinguish her as 
his constant follower in his lifetime, and one on whom he had worked 
a great miracle of healing. This, I imagine might very justly be 
termed "he appeared first to Mary Magdalene." To appear first to 
anyone of a company, as I take it, is to come up to, or stand before 
some particular person, in order to speak to such person. This, in 
my imagination, removes the difficulty, and reconciles Mark to 
Matthew; but to this explication I prefer the women's being a second 
time at the sepulchre: that is, Mary Magdalene a second time, when 
Peter and John went to the tomb, on what she had earnestly told them 
apart: and afterwards, the other Mary, Salome, Joanna, &c. a second 
time. The gospels, in my opinion, make this very plain<107>.

"What has been said," rejoined Mr. BERRISFORT, "seems plausible, and 
ought to satisfy every honest man. It gives me content: but there is 
one thing still that perplexes me, and that is the various 
lections<108> of the New Testament. Do they not hurt the book?"

"No: I replied, "notwithstanding the cry of infidels, and that some 
learned men of the church of Rome have endeavoured to shake the 
credit of the two testaments, and to bring the people to the papal 
chair, to know the truth, on account of the various readings; yet, 
nevertheless, they are rather an advantage and security to the 
sacred text than a detriment to the written word. They corroborate 
the authority of the sacred book, and give it additional advantages.

"It is a truth that there are many various readings in Terence, 
Livy, Virgil, Caesar, Thucydides, Homer, Plutarch, and others, yet 
who denies the genuineness and great use of those noble authors of 
sense and politeness? who is so hardy as to question whether the 
works universally ascribed to them be their own and the product of 
those immortal wits? On the contrary, men of thought and clear 
heads, conversant in those studies, will agree that those authors of 
antiquity of which there are the most various readings, are rendered 
the most pure and correct. And why should not the various readings 
of the Bible rather lead men of sound learning and judgment to the 
true meaning of the divine writers, than endanger their mistaking 
their genuine language and sense.

"Where there are several readings, it is highly probable one of them 
is the original; and it is easier by their help to rectify the 
mistakes of some copies, for when we have only one manuscript, there 
may be scope for fancy; but none for judicious comparison and well-
grounded criticism.

"Style and language may be distinguished by a happy genius of 
natural sagacity, improved by true learning and proper application, 
as well as statues, pictures and medals. No age can counterfeit 
Cicero, Terence, St. Mark, St. John, St. Paul, no more than a 
counterfeit picture, or medal, can be imposed on and deceive the 
complete masters and judges of those ingenious professions and 
sciences.

"Secondly, there is nothing in the various lections that affects the 
essentials of religion, or can imply a considerable depravation of 
the copies, that alters or weakens one moral contained in the divine 
books. And therefore, though it cannot with reason be supposed, that 
God Almighty should work perpetual miracles to prevent the mistakes 
and blunders of every careless or corrupt hand, of those numerous 
transcribers of those sacred volumes, no more than by a resistless 
power and restraint to prevent all the errors and villainies 
committed by free and accountable creatures; yet the argument 
receives strength, that notwithstanding the innumerable variations, 
mistakes and contradictions in small matters, the all-seeing eye of 
Providence has so watched his own blessed and glorious revelations 
to mankind, that all the transcripts, of that divine volume agree in 
the essential doctrine and grand design of Christianity. This is a 
truth that Infidels and Papists cannot disprove.

"I observe in the last place, that exclusive of the care of 
Providence, there could not possibly happen any detriment to our 
sacred records by various readings: for though in an innumerable 
number of copies of the gospel that were made before printing was 
known, and in the many translations of it into several languages, 
where the idioms are different, and the phrase may be mistaken, it 
was almost impossible there should not be various lections, and 
slips of amanuenses, yet the sacred volumes in the early ages of 
Christianity, were disposed into innumerable hands, translated into 
so many languages, kept in so many libraries, churches, and in 
private families of believers, and so carefully preserved and 
revered as the authentic deeds and charters of eternal happiness, 
that they were not capable of being falsified.

Nor could those inestimable copies, scattered as they were over the 
then discovered world, and in the noble language so universally 
known and acceptable, be liable to hazards, by sudden revolutions 
and public disasters; because those convulsions and surprising 
calamities, could not happen alike in every country at one time.

"Neither could a general corruption of manners, a spirit of 
profuseness or superstition, nor the wicked example, and strong 
influence of tyrannical princes, of an apostate clergy, and 
atheistical ministers of state, prevail over many distant and 
independent nations, to endeavour to corrupt and destroy their 
sacred book.

"On the contrary, we are to consider that Christianity was the 
ecclesiastical law of all Christian nations under the sun. The great 
law which assured to them their religious rights and properties, 
their claims and titles to immortality, to the inheritance of the 
saints in light, an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, that 
fadeth not away, reserved for them in the heavens. Which, to 
everyone that deserves the name of man and Christian must be 
infinitely more dear than titles to lands on this earth. For men are 
naturally more watchful in a matter so dear to them, and every 
believer would think himself concerned, no more to let a change of 
consequence to pass uncorrected, than the children of this world, 
who are wisest in their generation, would overlook a flaw in deeds 
of sale, or contract, which would assert their title, and evacuate 
the main intention of making such indentures.

"The primitive Christians must be supposed to be exceeding watchful 
and jealous that no corruption or abuses should be put on that 
sacred book, more dear and valuable to them than all other interests 
and treasures. When these brave champions of the cross were brought 
to the tribunals of the heathen persecutors, and were commanded to 
deliver their Bible to the flames, they most courageously refused 
it, and gave their bodies to be burnt rather than the divine book.

"In short, it is easier to suppose, a new Bible or a new statute 
book might be imposed at this time of day upon this nation, without 
discovery, than to suppose a forged gospel, a New Testament 
corrupted so far as to be insufficient for the good ends Providence 
designed by it, could be imposed on the universal Christian world. 
It is easier to suppose that any forgery might creep into the 
municipal law of any particular nation, than that all the nations, 
whither Christianity is spread, should conspire in the corruption of 
the gospel: which most sacred institution is to all Christians of 
infinitely greater concern and value than their temporal laws, and 
all the secular immunities and privileges which they secure to them.

"And without such a wicked concert, or such an astonishing 
carelessness and negligence in all Christian people and nations 
supposed, which would be a monstrous supposition. No such forgery, 
no such alteration of essentials could pass undiscovered in the 
gospel, which was spread in the hands, hearts, and memories of 
myriads of rational devout Christians of all ranks, qualities and 
sex, was constantly read in private families, frequently explained 
in schools, and daily used in public divine offices. It was 
impossible then in the nature of things that there could be any such 
alterations or corruptions introduced into the sacred text as would 
affect its doctrines, morals, or truth of its historical relations, 
or defeat the blessed end and design of the gospel revelation in any 
period of time, from the beginning of Christianity to this present 
age<109>

"And if from this unanswerable way of reasoning in defence of the 
genuine purity of the sacred scriptures, we look next upon the 
Providence of the Great God in this important case, is it not 
consonant to sound sense, and the notions that rational creatures 
must have of the supreme and all-perfect Being, firmly to believe 
that the same goodness and providence, which took care for the 
writing, would likewise take care for preserving these inestimable 
books, so free at least from corruption, that they might be 
sufficient for the gracious ends for which they were written, and be 
able to make us wise to salvation? I think so. To me it is evident, 
that since infinite goodness was pleased to reveal a religion, that 
teaches men to know Jehovah to be the true God, and to know Jesus 
Christ, whom he hath sent; his providence must not only preserve the 
book on which the doctrine depends, but so secure it from 
corruption, as to render it a plain rule to mankind. While there is 
a Providence, the Holy Scriptures will remain the sacred and 
unalterable standard of true religion."

"What you say," replied Mr. BERRISFORT, "seems to me to be true. I 
have nothing to object. But once more, let me ask you, in respect of 
the ascension, which followed the resurrection of Jesus, is it not 
very strange, that this is not mentioned by any of the apostles who 
are said to have been eyewitnesses of the fact, but Luke and Mark 
only are the relators of the thing, who were not apostles, and had 
all they wrote from the information of the apostles. If the 
apostles, Matthew and John, did really see with their eyes the Lord 
Jesus taken up from them into heaven, might we not expect, that they 
would write the history of that still more wonderful transaction, as 
well as they had so exactly related the resurrection of Jesus? for 
the men, who stood gazing up into heaven, after the Lord was carried 
up in a cloud, as Luke says they did, not to mention so very 
wonderful and interesting an affair in their gospels; and men who 
did not see the thing, to relate it as a part of the history they 
had received from the apostles; this is what astonishes me. If it 
was a truth, surely so important a one ought not to be omitted by 
those who saw it: since Matthew and John did write histories of 
Christ, why should they be silent on this grand article, and take no 
notice of it in their records? What do you say to this?"

"I will tell you," I replied; "in the first place, nostrum non est 
providentiaeae divinae rationes reddere. Placuit spiritue sancto ita 
dirigere calamos Matthaei et Ioannis, ut narratione resurrectionis 
dominicae evangelia sua concluderent. Sic refert Limborch.["It is 
not for us to reason about the Divine providence. It pleased the 
Holy Ghost to inspire the pens of Mark and John to finish their 
Gospels with the resurrectionof the Lord. So says Limborch"] It does 
not become us to call Providence to account, or assign the ways it 
ought to act in: infinite wisdom thought fit to appoint, that 
Matthew and John should end their gospels with the relation of our 
Lord's resurtection: the resurrection demonstrated the divine 
mission of Jesus Christ. To it, as a proof the most valid, and 
unexceptionable, our Lord referred the Jews, and therefore, to it, 
as the great fundamental, Matthew and John appealed: they proved it 
by declaring that they had conversed with Jesus Christ after he 
arose from the sepulchre; and when that was proved, there could be 
no dispute about anything else. The divinity of the Christian 
religion, and the ascension and glory of their Lord, rest on this 
base. All the blessings likewise of the gospel, regeneration, our 
resurrection, and life eternal, are ascribed by the apostles, Peter 
and Paul, to the resurrection of Christ; and for these reasons, to 
be sure, when John had described his Lord's resurrection, he added, 
'and many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his 
disciples, which are not written in this book. But these are 
written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of 
God, and that believing, ye might have life through his name.' We 
must allow then, that the account of the ascension by Luke and Mark, 
may be authentic, though not mentioned by Matthew and John.

"In the next place, St. John is not totally silent as to the 
ascension of our Lord. In his sixth chapter, ver. 62, it is written 
'What and if ye shall see the Son of Man ascend up where he was 
before?' and in the 7th chapter, ver. 39, 'But this spake he of the 
Spirit, which they that believe in him should receive. For the Holy 
Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet glorified.' 
Here most certainly the apostle speaks of the ascension of his 
Master, and though he did not write the history of it, yet, not 
obscurely, says the thing was to be; which confirms the accounts of 
St. Luke and St. Mark. And since, in the 14th and 15th chapters of 
St. John, ver. 16 and 26, the apostle declares, that Jesus foretold 
he would send to them, his disciples, the Comforter or Holy Spirit 
from the Father, after his ascension to heaven; and that the 
apostles demonstrated by miracles, after the death of their Lord, 
that they had received this Comforter or divine Spirit, it follows, 
that the ascension and glorification of Jesus is as much asserted 
and confirmed by the gospel of St. John, as if that apostle, like 
Luke, had wrote the history of it. This is evident to me, and I 
think, it is not possible to dispute it.

"The sum of the whole is, that the prejudices of the pious, and the 
arts of the crafty and interested, have defaced the true gospel of 
Christ, and substituted human notions and consequences in the place 
of divine revelation: but let us strip the sacred records of the 
false glosses and systems, with which the theorists have covered it, 
and allow the enemy, that the apostles, sometimes wanting the 
unerring spirit of their Master, were liable to slight mistakes, and 
inadvertencies, in the representation of ordinary events; that they 
did, sometimes, by too great an affection for their Master's 
doctrine, strain some things, and cite prophecies that did not 
relate to Jesus in any sense at all;<110> — let this be done to 
remove encumbrances, to clear up difficulties, and to answer 
objections otherwise unanswerable, and the writings of the apostles 
will appear to be a globe of light from heaven; to irradiate the 
human understanding, and conduct the sons of men to the realms of 
bliss. Their lessons are the dictates of the Spirit of God: their 
sanctions are of such force, in a certainty of future judgment and 
retribution, that they incline a rational to have a serious regard 
to them.

In a word, the religion of nature is perfect, but men are imperfect, 
and therefore it pleased God to send our Saviour into the world, to 
republish the law of reason by his preaching, and in the writings of 
the apostles, and by him to give many motives to men, to incite them 
to perform their duty, as set forth in his written laws, and in the 
more striking example of our Lord, his only-begotten Son. Let us be 
Christians then, my dear BOB, and adore the divine goodness, for the 
life eternal prepared for the righteous, as declared in the sacred 
records. Let us hearken to the apostles, who, knowing the terror of 
the Lord, persuade men, and so govern and conduct ourselves by the 
rules of revelation, that when the man Christ Jesus, who appeared in 
the world to redeem us, will return to judge us by the gospel, we 
may ascend with him to the unbounded regions of eternal day, and in 
ever-blooming joys, live for ever in the presence of God. have done. 
Where you think I am wrong, you will be pleased to say."

My friend replied, that he had no objection to make: he was quite 
satisfied; and obliged to me for my advice. Thus ended the 
conversation between BOB BERRISFORT and JACK BUNCLE.



CHAPTER XIII.

The third day of July, I left Yeoverin Green, and set out again for 
Ulubrae, to get my horses and portmanteau, but proceeded now on 
foot; because, by climbing over a high mountain, which it was 
impossible for a horse to ascend, and then walking half a mile over 
a shaking-bog, where a beast could not go, I was to save many miles; 
and beside, Mr. BERRISFORT was so obliging as to send one of his 
servants back with Mr. HARCOURT'S horses, which I knew not which way 
to return. With my pole in my hand then I set out, and after I had 
bade adieu to my friends, who walked with me a couple of miles to 
the foot of the hills, I began to mount the Alp at six in the 
morning, and at eight arrived on its summit. Here I had a fine road, 
due south, for an hour, till I came to a very steep descent, that 
led to the shaking-bog, as my paper of directions informed me. It 
was an ugly way down, and the better to go it, I resolved first to 
breakfast, and bid TIM see what he had got in his wallet. 
Immediately he produced a roast fowl, a manchet,<111> and a bottle 
of cider, and among some trees, on the brow of a hill, by the side 
of a spring, that ran off the way I was to go, I sat down to the 
repast. I gave my lad half the bird, and the other half I dispatched 
in a very short time, drank a pint of cyder, and was on my feet 
again. I then began to descend, and in an hour made a shift to get 
to the bottom, though the way was bad; being very steep, wet, and 
slippery. I came to a dirty lane, about two hundred yards long, and 
that ended at the shaking-bog.

This kind of bog I take to be an abyss of standing water, covered 
with a thin arch of earth, that is, a water communicating with the 
abyss so covered, or weakly vaulted over: and of this opinion I find 
the right Reverend Erich Pontoppidan is, in his Natural History of 
Norway. The bishop does not tell his reason for so thinking; but 
mine is, that I have seen in Ireland the arches of several of those 
bogs broken, and a deep unfathomable water at some distance from the 
arch. They are very dangerous, frightful places, and many of them 
play up and down, like a long plank, in a very surprising manner.

To go half a mile over such a bog, and the most elastic of them I 
had ever tried, was what I did not much like; though the author of 
my paper of directions, an old servant of Mr. BERRISFORT, affirmed 
it was quite safe; and as to Tim, he would not, on any 
consideration, cross it. He was positive we should sink beyond 
recovery. What to do then, was the question? I tried for some time 
to go round the bog, at the bottom of the enclosing mountains, but 
that was soon found impossible, and therefore, it only remained, to 
go up again to the top of the hill, and try onwards for some other 
descent beyond the bog. We did so, and after walking two hours 
south-west, at a good rate, had a view of a deep glen, to which we 
descended by an easy slope, and marched through it, to the west, and 
northwest for two hours, till it ended at a wood. This we passed 
without any difficulty, as there were walks cut through it, and came 
out into a broad valley, that had a river very near us, and a sweet 
pretty cottage on the margin of the flood. I went up to the house to 
ask my way, and found at the door three men, the eldest of whom 
seemed to be about thirty years old. They asked me very civilly to 
walk in, and seemed to wonder not a little at seeing me and my man, 
in such a place, with our poles in our hands.

These men were three brothers, and Roman Catholics. Two of them were 
gentlemen-farmers, who lived together, and jointly managed the 
country business. The eldest was a Franciscan friar, who came to 
visit them. Their good manners, in their plain dress, surprised me; 
and their benevolence made me wonder a great deal more. Their maid 
laid a clean cloth in a minute, and brought some cold roast beef, 
good bread, and fine ale. They hid me heartily welcome many times, 
and were so frank and generous, so cheerful and gay; especially the 
eldest of the farmers, who sang several good songs over a bowl of 
punch after dinner, that I could not think of leaving them 
immediately, if I had known my road, and was easily prevailed on to 
stay several days. A friendship commenced immediately between the 
eldest FLEMING and me, and there was not one cold or cross minute in 
it for the few years that he lived. He loved me as his brother from 
the first day he saw me, and I had so great a regard for him, that 
with a sorrow I cannot help, I think of his death to this day. How 
to account for such sudden passions I know not, and have always 
appeared to me very strange. FLEMING was a man of a bright and very 
extraordinary understanding, though no more than a farmer, had a 
most happy temper, a generosity too great for his fortune, and was 
for ever cheerful and free; but these, however pleasing, could not 
be the cause of the sudden and lasting friendship between us, as I 
have been acquainted with men of fortune who equalled him in these 
respects, and yet they never struck me more than for the present 
time. Whatever might be the cause, the fact is certain. No two men 
ever liked one another more than we did from the first hour of our 
acquaintance, and as I had the happiness of converting him to the 
Protestant religion,<112> it is possible, that might cement a 
friendship, which, a sameness of disposition had helped to produce. 
This is all I can say as to the reason of this matter. In respect of 
the thing, it was of the greatest service to me. My new acquired 
friend assisted me to the utmost of his power, in the accomplishment 
of my designs, in that part of the world I then was. I had his head, 
his hand, and his house at my service, and by them I was enabled to 
give a roundness to a system, that was too happy to last long.

But as to the shaking bog I was to have passed to go to the 
gentlemen at Ulubrae, FLEMING told me, I had had a fortunate escape 
in not venturing over it; for, though it be passable in one narrow 
way, about a yard broad, yet a stranger to the bog must perish in 
attempting to cross; as the timber causeway that was made over the 
great marsh, time out of mind, is invisible in many places, and one 
sinks for ever, the moment he steps off that way; but I will show 
you an easy road, continued my new friend, to the gentlemen's house, 
to whom I am no stranger, and will make you acquainted with some 
passes through the mountains, that will render it easier riding over 
this country than you have found it. He did so, and by his guidance 
I arrived at Ulubrae, the 7th day of July; being the 17th day from 
the morning I left the philosophers. The gentlemen were startled at 
the sight of me, as they concluded I had perished, and had, as they 
assured me, mourned my sad fate: they were impatient to hear the 
adventure of the mountain, and by what strange means I was jumbled 
all the way to Tom FLEMING'S; who lives so far from the hill I went 
into; and the road from it to his house, scarce passable for a 
mortal. "Inform us, we beseech you, how these strange things came to 
pass."

"Gentlemen," said I, "I am extremely obliged to you for your concern 
for me, and will tell you my story as soon as we have dined, as the 
servants are now bringing the dishes in," and accordingly, when we 
had done, I gave them a relation in detail. They were greatly 
pleased with my history, and much more, to have me returned to them 
in safety again. If they had not seen me, they said, they could not 
believe the thing, and they would order the whole account to be 
entered in the journal of their society, as the most extraordinary 
case they had ever known: or, perhaps, should ever hear related 
again. Their secretary, as directed, wrote it down in their book of 
transactions, and it remains in their records to this day. In short, 
reader, these worthy men were so greatly rejoiced at my being alive, 
when they thought me for certain among the dead, that they put the 
bottle round in a festal manner after dinner. We drank and laughed 
till it was midnight.

The 8th day of July, I took my leave of the gentlemen at Ulubrae, 
and proceeded to the East-riding of Yorkshire, to look for Miss 
MELMOTH. FLEMING came with me as far as Eggleston to 
 show me the passes between the hills, and the best ways over the 
mountains. Many vast high ones we crossed, and travelled through 
very wonderful glens. Several scenes were as charming as any I had 
before seen, and the low ways as bad; but he knew all the roads and 
cross turnings perfectly well; and shortened the journey a great 
many miles. I had told him the business I was going on, and he 
requested, if I succeeded, that I would bring Miss MELMOTH to his 
house, that his brother might marry us; and as to Orton-Lodge, which 
I had described to him, and told him where to find, for he had no 
notion of it, nor had ever been among the fells of Westmoreland; as 
he thought that country impassable; he promised me, he would go 
there himself, and bring with him two labouring men to assist my 
lad, in putting the garden and house in the best condition they were 
capable of receiving; that he would bring there seeds, and trees, 
such as the season allowed, and do everything in his power, to 
render the place convenient and pleasing: he would likewise sell me 
a couple of his cows, a few sheep, and other things, which I should 
find before me at the lodge, and let me have one of his maids for my 
servant in the house. This was good indeed. I could not wish for 
more. .

The 9th of July, early in the morning, FLEMING and I parted, and I 
proceeded as fast as I well could to the appointed station, but when 
I came up to Mrs. ASGILL's door, on the second day in the evening, 
July 10, and asked for Miss MELMOTH, an old man, the only person in 
the house, told me, Mrs. ASGILL had been dead near a month, and Miss 
MELMOTH went from thence immediately after the funeral of her 
friend; that she had left a letter with him for a gentleman that was 
to call upon her; but that letter by an accident was destroyed, and 
where the lady then was, he could not so much as guess; he farther 
told me, that Miss MELMOTH had sold the goods of the house, and the 
stock, bequeathed to her by her deceased friend, to the gentleman 
who inherited the late Mrs. ASGILL'S jointure, and she would return 
no more to the place. This was news to me. It struck me to the soul. 
Doleful tidings, how ye wound. What to do I could not tell, but as I 
rode to the next town, determined at last, to try if I could hear of 
her at York. To that city I went the next day, asked at the inns, 
walked the walls, and went to the assembly-room. My enquiries were 
all in vain. One gentleman only did I see who was acquainted with 
her, and he knew nothing of her present abode. From York then I 
proceeded the next morning to search other towns, and left no place 
unexamined where I could think she might be. Three weeks were spent 
in this manner, without hearing a syllable of her, and then I 
thought it was best to return to my lodge; for what signified my 
five hundred pounds to appear with in the world. It must be soon 
gone as I had not the least notion of any kind of trade; and if I 
joined anyone that was in business, I might be mistaken in the man, 
and so cheated and undone. Then what could I do but carry a brown 
musket,<113> or go a hand before the mast; for, as to being an usher 
to a school for bread, were I reduced to want, that was the life of 
all lives that I most abhorred. Nothing else then had I for it but 
my silent mountain-lodge, which kind Providence had brought me to. 
There I resolved to go, and in that charming solitude, peruse alone 
the book of nature, till I could hear of some better way of spending 
my time.

To this purpose then I went the second of August, 1725, to Barnard's 
Castle in Durham, and intended the next morning to set out for 
FLEMING'S house in Stanemore, to go from thence to my cottage on the 
side of a Westmoreland fell, but after I had rode a mile off the 
road to Eggleston, where I purposed to dine, I called out to my lad 
to stop. A sudden thought came into my head, to ride first to Greta-
bridge, as I was so near it, to see some fine Roman monuments, that 
are in the neighbourhood of that village. To that place I went then, 
and passed the day in looking over all the antiquities and 
curiosities I could find there. I returned in the evening to my inn, 
and while a fowl was roasting for my supper, stood leaning against 
the house-door, looking at several travellers that went by, and some 
that came to rest where I did that night. Many figures I beheld, but 
none I knew. At last there came riding up to the inn, full speed, a 
young lady on a most beautiful beast, and after her, two horses 
more; on one of which was her man servant, and on the other her 
maid. She had a black mask on her face, to save her from the dust 
and sun, and when she alighted from her horse, she did not take it 
off, but went with it on into the house, after she had looked for a 
moment or two at me. This I thought very strange. "A charmer to be 
sure?" said I. "With what life and grace did she come to the ground! 
but how cruel the dear little rogue is, to conceal the wonders of 
its face." "Landlord," said I, to the master of the house, who was 
coming up to me, "can you contrive a way to get me one view of that 
masked lady, and I will give you a pint." "Sir," mine host replied, 
"that I can do very easily, for this lady has sent me to let you 
know, she wants to speak with you." "With me? Transporting news!" I 
flew to her apartment, and there saw that dear irresistible 
creature, who had added to the inferior charms of face and person, 
that wisdom and goodness of conduct and conversation, which are the 
true glory of a woman. It was Miss MELMOTH. She had heard I had been 
at Mrs. ASGILL'S house, and did not get the letter she left for me; 
which made her think of riding towards Greta-bridge, on an 
imagination she might find me thereabout; as she remembered to have 
heard me say, in one of our conversations, that I intended as soon 
as I could, to look at the Roman antiquities in this place; but she 
had very little hopes, she added, of succeeding in her enquiry; as 
little as I had of her riding up to the inn; and this made the 
meeting the more pleasing. It did enhance the pleasure indeed. It 
turned the amour into an adventure, and gave it that delicious 
flavour, which the moderns read of in the histories of past times, 
but rarely experience in these days. The reader that has been 
engaged in such a wonderful and tender scene, can only form an idea 
a felicity, which words would in vain attempt to express.

As soon as we had supped, I recited my adventures since we parted, 
and gave Miss MELMOTH a flowery description of Orton-Lodge; then 
asked if she would bless me with her hand, and sit down with me in 
my pretty solitude.

"Sir," replied Miss MELMOTH, "if you required it, I would go with 
you to Hudson's Bay, had I a hundred thousand, instead of four 
thousand pounds; which is my fortune exclusive of some personal 
estate, which my friend Mrs. ASGILL by her will bequeathed me: and 
the whole is at your service, to dispose of as you please."

"Give me thy hand then," said I, "thou generous girl. You make me 
the happiest of men, and in return I swear by that one, supreme, 
tremendous Power I adore, that I will be true and faithful to thee, 
till death dissolves the sacred obligation. Twice do I swear by the 
great Spirit, in whose dread presence I am, with your right hand now 
locked fast in mine across this table, and call on him as witness to 
our vows, that neither time, nor chance, nor aught but death's 
inevitable hand, shall e'er divide our loves." "Amen," responded 
Miss MELMOTH.

Early the next morning, the third of August, we rode to Eggleston, 
where we breakfasted and proceeded from thence to FLEMING'S house up 
Stanemore hills, where we arrived at nine o'clock in the evening, 
and had beds there that night. My friend TOM and his brother JEMMY, 
were gone to a fair; but the eldest brother, the Franciscan friar, 
was at home and entertained us very well. We took him with us very 
early the next day to Orton-Lodge, which we reached at eight in the 
evening, and found the house and garden in good order. My friend, 
FLEMING, had done everything possible, to make it a convenient and 
comfortable place. He had made near the Lodge two little rooms for 
servants, and had put a bed in the green-house in the garden for a 
friend. He had likewise sent there a couple of cows, some sheep and 
lambs, ducks and geese, cocks and hens, and every necessary he 
thought we might want there. Good Tom FLEMING! there never was a 
better man, or a kinder friend, to his small power.

We had likewise fish in abundance, in the waters at the foot of our 
hills, and goats and kids, and plenty of wild fowl. Few things were 
wanting that reason could desire; and for us, who thought that 
happiness, that is, pleasure and repose did not precariously depend 
on what others think, or say, or do; but solidly consisted in what 
we ourselves did feel, and relish, and enjoy, there could not be a 
more delightful station discovered on this globe.

To conclude, the best things that Orton- Lodge afforded, were 
ordered to the fire, and before they were brought on the table, the 
man of God threw the fillet or ribband over our hands, according to 
the Romish manner, and pronounced the nuptial benediction on us. 
Husband and wife we sat down to supper.

Thus did the stars preside with friendly rays, 
And bid me hail at last the happy days, 
When sheltered within this wild retreat, 
Above the scorn, below the rage of fate; 
Blest in a wife, a friend, and books, alone; 
To this mad world, and all its plagues unknown; 
The smooth-paced hours did sweetly pass away, 
And happy nights still closed each happy day.

When I consider how happy I have been in the married state, and in a 
succession of seven wives, never had one uneasy hour; that even a 
Paradise, without an Eve, would have been a wilderness to me; that 
the woods, the groves, the walks, the prospects, the flowers, the 
fruits, the day, the night, all would have wanted a relish, without 
that dear, delightful companion, a wife; it amazes me to hear many 
sensible people speak with abhorrence of matrimony, and insist upon 
it, that wedlock produces so many troubles, even where the pair have 
affection, and sorrows so very great, when they have no love for 
each other, or begin to fail in the kind and obliging offices, that 
it is contrary to reason to contract, if we have a just regard to 
peace and satisfaction of mind, and would avoid, as much as 
possible, the woes and bewailings of this turbid period. If you have 
acquired the divine habits, marriage may unhinge them. It often 
forces even the pious into immoralities. True, unhappy are many a 
wedded pair: years of calamity this engagement has produced to 
thousands of mortals; it has made the most pious divines become very 
cruel, as I could relate: it has caused the most generous, sensible 
men, to murder the women they adored before they were their wives.

THE HISTORY OF ORLANDO AND BELINDA.

This story has been told before by the Tatler, in his 172nd paper; 
but as he has related it only by hearsay, and was mistaken in 
several particulars, the account I give of this extraordinary 
affair, may be grateful to the reader.

When I was a little boy in Dublin, between seven and eight, Mr. 
EUSTACE and his lady lived next door to my father, in Smithfield, 
and the two families were intimate. Being a lively prating thing, 
Mrs. EUSTACE was fond of me, and by tarts and fruit encouraged me to 
run into her parlour as often as I could. This made me well 
acquainted in the house; and, as I was a remarker so early in my 
life, I had an opportunity of making the following observations.

ORLANDO EUSTACE was a tall, thin, strong man, well made, and a very 
genteel person. His face was pale and marked with the smallpox; his 
features were good, and yet there was something fierce in his look, 
even when he was not displeased. He had sense and learning, and, 
with a large fortune, was a generous man; but passionate to an 
amazing degree, for his understanding; and a trifle would throw him 
into a rage. He had been humoured in everything from his cradle, on 
account of his fine estate; from his infancy to his manhood, had 
been continually flattered, and in everything obeyed. This made him 
opinionated and proud, obstinate, and incapable of bearing the least 
contradiction.

BELINDA COOTE, his lady, with whom he had been passionately in love, 
was as fine a figure as could be seen among the daughters of men. 
Her person was charming; her face was beautiful, and had a sweetness 
in it that was pleasing to look at. Her vivacity was great, and her 
understanding extraordinary; but she had a satirical wit, and a 
vanity which made her delight in showing the weakness of other 
minds, and the clearness of her own conception. She was too good, 
however, to have the least malice, in such procedure. It was human 
weakness, and a desire to make her neighbours wiser. Unfortunately 
for her, she was married to a man, who, of all men in the world, was 
the unfittest subject for her quick fancy to act on.

But, notwithstanding this, EUSTACE and BELINDA were, for the most of 
their time, very fond. As she was formed in a prodigality of nature, 
to show mankind a finished composition, and had wit and charms 
enough to fire the dullest and most insensible heart; a man of 
ORLANDO'S taste for the sex, could not be without an inflamed heart, 
when so near the transporting object of desire. She was his delight 
for almost a year, the dear support of his life. He seemed to value 
her esteem, her respect, her love; and endeavoured to merit them by 
the virtues which fortify love: and therefore, when by his being 
short, positive, and unreasonable in his dictates, as was too often 
his wont; and on her being intemperate in the strong sentiments her 
imagination produced upon the occasion, which was too frequently the 
case; when they seemed to forget the Apostle's advice for a while, 
'that ye love one another with a pure heart, fervently;' 1 Peter, 
ch. 1. v. 22, and had strifes and debates, which showed, for the 
time they lasted, that they were far from being perfect and entire, 
wanting nothing; then would her throwing her face into smiles, with 
some tender expression, prove a reconciling method at once. Till the 
fatal night, this always had a power to soften pain, to ease and 
calm the raging man.

But poor at best is the condition of human life here below; and, 
when to weak and imperfect faculties, we add inconsistencies, and do 
not act up to the eternal law of reason, and of God; when love of 
fame, curiosity, resentment, or any of our particular propensities; 
when humour, vanity, or any of our inferior powers, are permitted to 
act against justice and veracity, and instead of reflecting on the 
reason of the thing, or the right of the case, that by the influence 
this has on the mind, we may be constituted virtuous, and attached 
to truth; we go down with the current of the passions, and let bent 
and humour determine us, in opposition to what is decent and fit: if 
in a state so unfriendly as this is, to the heavenly and divine 
life, where folly and vice are for ever striving to introduce 
disorder into our frame, and it is difficult indeed, to preserve, in 
any degree, an integrity of character, and peace within: if, in such 
a situation, instead of labouring to destroy all the seeds of envy, 
pride, ill-will, and impatience, and endeavouring to establish and 
maintain a due inward oeconomy and harmony, by paying a perpetual 
regard to truth, that is, to the real circumstances and relation of 
things in which we stand, to the practice of reason in its just 
extent, according to the capacities and natures of every being; we 
do, on the contrary, disregard the moral faculty, and become a mere 
system of passions and affections, without any thing at the head of 
them to govern them; what then can be expected, but deficiency and 
deformity, degeneracy and guilty practice? This was the case of 
EUSTACE and BELINDA. Passion and own-will were so near and intimate 
to him, that he seemed to live under a deliberate resolution not to 
be governed by reason. He would wink at the light he had, struggle 
to evade conviction, and make his mind a chaos and a hell. BELINDA, 
at the same time, was too quick, too vain, and too often forgot to 
take into her idea of a good character, a continual subordination of 
the lower powers of our nature to the faculty of reason. This 
produced the following scene.

MARIA, sister to BELINDA, returned one evening with a five-guinea 
fan she had bought that afternoon, and was tedious in praising some 
Indian figures that were painted in it. Mrs. EUSTACE, who had a 
taste for pictures, said, the colours were fine, but the images 
ridiculous and despicable; and her sister must certainly be a little 
Indian-mad, or her fondness for everything from that side of the 
globe could not he so excessive and extravagant as it always 
appeared to be.

To this MARIA replied with some heat, and EUSTACE very peremptorily 
insisted upon it, that she was right. With positiveness and passion, 
he magnified the beauties of the figures on the fan, and with 
violence reflected so severely on the good judgment BELINDA, upon 
all occasions, pretended to, as he expressed it; that at last, her 
imagination was fired, and, with too much eagerness, she not only 
ridiculed the opinion of her sister, in respect of such things, but 
spoke with too much warmth against the despotic tempers of self-
sufficient husbands.

To reverence and obey, she said, was not required by any obligation, 
when men were unreasonable, and paid no regard to a wife's domestic 
and personal felicity; nor would she give up her understanding to 
his weak determination, since custom cannot confer an authority 
which nature has denied: It cannot license a husband to be unjust, 
nor give right to treat her as a slave. If this was to be the case 
in matrimony, and women were to suffer under conjugal vexations, as 
she did, by his senseless arguments every day, they had better bear 
the reproach and solitude of antiquated virginity, and be treated as 
the refuse of the world, in the character of old maids.

This too lively, though just speech, enraged EUSTACE to the last 
degree, and from a fury, he sunk in a few minutes into a total 
sullen silence, and sat for half an hour, while I stayed, cruelly 
determining, I suppose, her sad doom. BELINDA soon saw she had gone 
too far, and did all that could be done to recover him from the fit 
he was in. She smiled, cried, asked pardon; but 'twas all in vain. 
Every charm had lost its power, and he seemed no longer man. When 
this beauty stood weeping by his chair, and said "My love, forgive 
me, as it was in raillery only I spoke, and let our pleasures and 
pains be hereafter honestly shared." I remember the tears burst from 
my eyes, and in that condition I went away. It was frightful to look 
at EUSTACE, as he shook, started, and wildly stared; and the 
distress his Lady appeared in, was enough to make the most stony 
heart bleed, it was a dismal scene.

This happened at nine at night, and at ten ORLANDO withdrew to bed, 
without speaking one word, as I was informed. Soon after he lay 
down, he pretended to be fast asleep, and his wife rejoicing to find 
him so, as she believed, in hopes that nature's soft nurse would 
lull the active instruments of motion, and calm the raging 
operations of his mind, she resigned herself to slumbers, and 
thought to abolish for that night every disagreeable sensation of 
pain, but no sooner did this furious man find that his charming wife 
was really asleep, than he plunged a dagger into her breast. The 
monster repeated the strokes, while she had life to speak to him, in 
the tenderest manner, and conjured him, in regard to his own 
happiness, to let her live, and not sink himself into perdition 
here, and hereafter, by her death. In vain she prayed; he gave her a 
thousand wounds, and I saw her the next morning a bloody, mangled 
corpse, in the great house in Smithfield, which stood at a distance 
from the street, with a wall before it, and an avenue of high trees 
up to the door; and not in the country as the Tatler says.

EUSTACE fled, when he thought she was expiring, though she lived for 
an hour after, to relate the case to her maid, who heard her groan 
and came into her room; and went from Dublin to a little lodge he 
had in the country, about twenty miles from town. The magistrates, 
in a short time, had information where he was; and one JOHN MANSEL, 
a constable, a bold and strong man, undertook for a reward, to 
apprehend him. To this purpose he set out immediately, with a case 
of pistols and a hanger, and lurked several days and nights in the 
fields, before he could find an opportunity of coming at him; for 
EUSTACE lived by himself in the house, well secured by strong doors 
and bars, and only went out now and then to an ale-house, the master 
of which was his friend. Near it, at last, about break of day, 
MANSEL chanced to find him, and, upon his refusing to be made a 
prisoner, and cocking a pistol to shoot the officer of justice, both 
their pistols were discharged at once, and they both dropt down dead 
men. EUSTACE was shot in the heart, and the constable in the brain. 
They were both brought to Dublin on one of the little low-backed 
cars there used; and I was one of the boys that followed the car, 
from the beginning of James' Street, the outside of the city, all 
through the town. EUSTACE'S head hung dangling near the ground, with 
his face upwards, and his torn bloody breast bare; and of all the 
faces of the dead I have seen, none ever looked like his. There was 
an anxiety, a rage, a horror, and a despair to be seen in it, that 
no pencil could express.

Thus fell EUSTACE in the twenty-ninth year of his age, and.by his 
hand his virtuous, beautiful, and ingenious wife: and what are we to 
learn from thence? is it, that on such accounts, we ought to dread 
wedlock, and never be concerned with a wife? No, surely, but to be 
from thence convinced, that it is necessary in order to [have] a 
happy marriage, to bring the will to the obedience of reason, and 
acquire an equanimity in the general tenor of life. Of all things in 
this world, moral dominion, or the empire over ourselves, is not 
only the most glorious, as reason is the superior nature of man, but 
the most valuable, in respect of real human happiness. A conformity 
to reason, or good sense, and to the inclination of our neighbours, 
with very little money, may produce great and lasting felicity; but 
without this subservience to our own reason, complaisance to 
company, and softness and benevolence to all around us, the greatest 
misery does frequently sprout from the largest stock of fortunes.

It was by ungoverned passions, that EUSTACE murdered his wife and 
died himself; the most miserable and wretched of all human beings. 
He might have been the happiest of mortals, if he had conformed to 
the dictates of reason, and softened his passions, as well for his 
own ease as in compliance to a creature formed with a mind of a 
quite different make from his own. There is a sort of sex in souls; 
and, exclusive of that love and patience which our religion 
requires, every couple should remember, that there are things which 
grow out of their very natures, that are pardonable, when considered 
as such. Let them not, therefore, be spying out faults, nor find a 
satisfaction in reproaching; but let them examine to what 
consequences their ideas tend, and resolve to cease from cherishing 
them, when they lead to contention and mischief. Let them both 
endeavour to amend what is wrong in each other, and act as becomes 
their character, in practising the social duties of married persons, 
which are so frequently and strongly inculcated by revelation and 
natural reason; and then, instead of matrimony's being a burthen, 
and hanging a weight upon our very beings, there will be no 
appearance of evil in it, but harmony and joy will shed unmixed 
felicities on them; they will live in no low degree of beatitude in 
the suburbs of heaven.

This was my case, wedlock to me became the greatest blessing; a 
scene of the most refined friendship, and a condition to which 
nothing can be added to complete the sum of human felicity. So I 
found the holy and sublime relation, and in the wilds of 
Westmoreland enjoyed a happiness as great as human nature is capable 
of, on this planet. Sensible to all the ties of social truth and 
honour, my partner and I lived in perfect felicity, on the products 
of our solitary farm. The amiable dispositions of her mind, 
cheerfulness, good nature, discretion, and diligence, gave a 
perpetual dignity and lustre to the grace and loveliness of her 
person; and as I did all that love and fidelity could do, by 
practising every rule of caution, prudence, and justice, to prevent 
variance, soften cares, and preserve affection undiminished, the 
harmony of our state was unmixed and divine. Since the primitive 
institution of the relation, it never existed in a more delightful 
manner. Devoted to each other's heart, we desired no other happiness 
in this world, than to pass life away together in the solitude we 
were in. We lived, hoped, and feared but for each other; and made it 
our daily study to be what revealed religion prescribes, and the 
concurrent voice of nature requires, in the sacred tie. Do so 
likewise, ye mortals, who intend to marry, and ye may, like us, be 
happy. As the instincts and passions were wisely and kindly given 
us, to subserve many purposes of our present state, let them have 
their proper, subaltern share of action; but let reason ever have 
the sovereignty, the divine law of reason and truth, and be as it 
were, sail and wind to die vessel of life.

Two years, almost, this fine scene lasted, and during that period, 
the business and diversions of our lone retreat appeared so various 
and pleasing, that it was not possible to think a hundred years so 
spent, in the least degree dull and tedious. Exclusive of books and 
gardening, and the improvement of the farm, we had, during the fine 
season, a thousand charming amusements on the mountains, and in the 
glens and valleys of that sweet silent place. Whole days we would 
spend in fishing, and dine in some cool grot by the water-side, or 
under an aged tree, on the margin of some beautiful stream. We 
generally used the fly and rod, but had recourse if in haste to one 
of the little water-falls, and, by fixing a net under one of them, 
would take a dozen or two of very large trouts, in a few minutes' 
time.

By a little water-fall I mean one of those that are formed by some 
small river, which tumbles there in various places, from rock to 
rock, about four feet each fall, and makes a most beautiful view 
from top to bottom of a fall. There are many of these falling waters 
among the vast mountains of Westmoreland, and I have seen them 
likewise in the Highlands of Scotland.

At Glencrow, half way between Dunbarton and Inverary, there are some 
very fine ones, and just by them one CAMPBELL keeps a poor inn. 
There we were entertained with water and whisky, oatcakes, milk, 
butter, and trouts he took by the net, at one of the little falls of 
a river that descends a prodigious mountain near his lone house, and 
forms, like what we have at Orton-Lodge, a most beautiful scene. 
Several happy days I passed at this place, with a dear creature, who 
is now a saint in heaven.

At other times we had the diversion of taking as much carp and tench 
as we pleased, in a large, standing, fenny water, that lies about 
two miles from the lodge, in a glen, and always found the fish of 
this water of an enormous size, three feet long, though the general 
length of fish of this species is eleven inches in our ponds. This 
vast bigness must be owing to the great age of these fish, which I 
may suppose, at least, an hundred years; for it is certain, that in 
garden-ponds, which have for experiment's sake, been left 
undisturbed for many years, the carp and tench have been found 
alive, and grown to a surprising bigness.

A gentleman, my near relation, who lived to a very advanced age, 
put. some fish of these species into a pond, 20th Nov. 1648; the day 
that Colonel Ewer, at the head of seven other officers, presented to 
the commons that fatal remonstrance, which in fact took off the head 
of Charles; and in the year 1727, seventy-nine years after, on his 
return to that seat, he found them all alive, and near two feet and 
a half in length. This demonstrates that fish may live to a very 
great age. It likewise proves that they continue to grow till they 
are an hundred years old, and then are the finest eating.

Another of our amusements, during the summer's bright day, was the 
pointer and gun, for the black cock, the moorcock, and the cock of 
the wood, which are in great plenty on those vast hills.<114>

CHARLOTTE was fond of this sport, and would walk with me for hours 
to see me knock down the game; till, late in the evening, we would 
wander over the fells, and then return to our clean, peaceful, 
little house, to sup as elegantly on our birds, as the great could 
do, and with a harmony and unmixed joy they are for ever strangers 
to. After supper, over some little nectared bowl, we sweetly 
chatted, till it was bed-time; or I played on my flute, and 
CHARLOTTE divinely sung. It was a happy life, all the riches and 
honours of the world cannot produce such scenes of bliss as we 
experienced in a cottage, in the wilds of Westmoreland. Even the 
winter, which is ever boisterous and extreme cold in that part of 
the world, was no severity to us. As we had most excellent 
provisions of every kind in abundance, and plenty of firing from the 
ancient woods, which cover many of those high hills; and two men 
servants, and two maids, to do whatever tended to being and to well-
being, to supply our wants, and to complete our happiness. This 
softened the hard rough scene, and the roaring waters, and the 
howling winds, appeared pleasing sounds. In short, every season, and 
all our hours, were quite charming, and full of delight. Good TOM 
FLEMING, our friend, did likewise enhance our felicity, by coming 
once or twice a week to see us, and staying sometimes two or three 
days. In the summer time, we also went now and then to visit him; 
and, if one was inclined to melancholy, it was impossible to be dull 
while he was by. His humour, and his songs, over a bowl of punch, 
were enough to charm the most splenetic, and make even rancour throw 
its face into smiles.



CHAPTER XIV.

1727.—Two years, as I have said, this fine scene lasted; and during 
that soft transporting period, I was the happiest man on earth. But 
in came Death, when we least expected him, snatched my charming 
partner from me, and melted all my happiness into air—into thin air. 
A fever, in a few days, snapped off the thread of her life, and made 
me the child of affliction, when I had not a thought of the mourner. 
Language cannot paint the distress this calamity reduced me to; nor 
give an idea of what I suffered, when I saw her eyes swimming in 
death, and the throes of her departing spirit. Blest as she was, in 
the exercise of every virtue that adorns a woman, how inconsolable 
must her husband be! and, to add to my distress, by the same fever 
fell my friend Tom FLEMING, who came the day before my wife sickened 
to see us. One of my lads likewise died, and the two servant maids. 
They all lay dead around me, and I sat like one inanimate by the 
corpse of CHARLOTTE, till friar FLEMING, the brother of Tom, brought 
coffins and buried them all. Thus did felicity vanish from my sight, 
and I remained like a traveller in Greenland, who had lost the sun.

"O eloquent, just, and mighty death!" says Raleigh, it is thou alone 
puts wisdom into the human heart, and suddenly makes man to know 
himself. It is death that makes the conqueror ashamed of his fame, 
and wish he had rather stolen out of the world, than purchased the 
report of his actions, by rapine, oppression, and cruelty; by giving 
in spoil the innocent and labouring soul to the idle and insolent; 
by emptying the cities of the world of their ancient inhabitants, 
and filling them again with so many and so variable sorts of 
sorrows. It is death tells the proud and insolent, that they are but 
abjects, and humbles them at the instant; makes them cry, complain, 
and repent; yea even, to hate their former happiness. It is death 
takes the account of the rich, and proves him a beggar, a naked 
beggar, which hath interest in nothing but the gravel which fills 
his mouth. It is death holds a glass before the eyes of the most 
beautiful, and makes them see therein their deformity and 
rottenness; and they acknowledge it.

Whom none could advise, thou hast persuaded: what none have dared, 
thou hast done: and whom all the world hath flattered, thou only 
hast cast out of the world, and despised. Thou hast drawn together 
all the far-stretched greatness, all the pride, cruelty, and 
ambition, of man; all the powerful charms of beauty; and covered it 
all over with these two narrow words, Hic jacet.

Nor is this all, mighty Death! It is thou that leadest to the 
resurrection of the dead; the dissolution of the world: the judgment 
day; and the eternal state of men. It is thou that finishes the 
trial of men, and seals their characters, for happiness or misery 
for ever.

Be thou then, Death, our morning and evening meditation: let us 
learn from thee the vanity of all human things; and that it is the 
most amazing folly, to melt away time, and misapply talents, as the 
generality of reasonable beings do: that we were not made men, 
thinking, rational beings, capable of the noblest contemplations, to 
spend all our thoughts and time in sense and pleasure, in dressing, 
feeding, and sporting; or, in purchases, building and planting; but 
to prepare for a dying hour; that, when at the call of God, we go 
out of the body, not knowing whither we go, we may, like Abraham, 
travel by faith, and trust to the conduct of the Lord of all 
countries. Since we must die, and thy power, O Death, we see, is 
uncontrollable; since to the dust we must return, and take our trial 
at the bar of Almighty God, as intelligent and free agents; for 
under moral government, and God is a perfectly wise and righteous 
governor, the wickedness of the wicked will be upon him, and the 
righteousness of the righteous will be upon him; since we must be 
numbered with the dead, and our circumstances and condition indicate 
a future judgment, surely we ought to remove our chief concern from 
this world to the other, and transfer our principal regard to the 
immortal spirit; that in the hour of agony, a virtuous mind, purity 
of conscience, and good actions, may procure us the favour of God, 
and the guidance of his good spirit to the mansions of the blessed, 
where new pleasures are for ever springing up, and the happiness of 
the heavenly inhabitants is perpetually increasing. This is the one 
thing needful. Death demonstrates, that this world of darkness and 
error, changes and chances, is not worth fixing our heart on. To 
secure our passage into the regions of perfect and eternal day, 
should be the employment of immortal mortals.

Thus did I reflect as I sat among the dead, with my eyes fastened on 
the breathless corpse of CHARLOTTE, and I wished, if it was 
possible, to have leave to depart, and in the hospitable grave, lie 
down from toil and pain, to take my last repose; for I knew not what 
to do, nor where to go. I was not qualified for the world; nor had I 
a friend, or even an acquaintance in it, that I knew where to find. 
But in vain I prayed, it was otherwise decreed; I must go on, or 
continue a solitary in the wild I was in. The latter it was not 
possible for me to do, in the state of mind I was in; overwhelmed 
with sorrow, and without a companion of any kind: and therefore, I 
must of necessity go to some other place. I sold all the living 
things I had to Friar FLEMING, and locked up my doors. My furniture, 
linen, clothes, books, liquors, and some salt provisions, 
instruments of various kinds, and such like things, I left in their 
several places. There was no one to take them, or probability that 
anyone would come there to disturb them; and perhaps, sometime or 
other, the fates might bring me back again to the same lone place. 
Though it was then a desolate, silent habitation, a striking memento 
of the vanity and precarious existence of all human good things; yet 
it was possible, that hearty friendship, festivity, and social life, 
might once more be seen there. The force and operation of casualties 
did wonders every day, and time might give me even a relish for the 
solitude in a few years more. Thus did I settle affairs in that 
remote place; and; taking leave of my friend, the friar, with my lad 
O'FIN, rode off.

August 4, I727.—The sun was rising when we mounted our horses, and I 
again went out to try my fortune in the world; not like the 
Chevalier La Mancha, in hopes of conquering a kingdom, or marrying 
some great Princess; but to see if I could find another good country 
girl for a wife, and get a little more money; as they were the only 
two things united, that could secure me from melancholy, and confer 
real happiness. To this purpose, as the day was extremely fine, and 
O'FIN had something cold, and a couple of bottles at the end of his 
valise, I gave my horse the rein, and let him take what way his 
fancy chose. For some time he gently trotted the path he had often 
gone, and over many a mountain made his road; but at last, he 
brought me to a place I was quite a stranger to, and made a full 
stop at a deep and rapid water, which ran by the bottom of a very 
high hill I had not been up before. Over this river I made him go, 
though it was far from being safe, and in an hour's ride from that 
flood, came to a fine rural scene.

It was pasture-ground, of a large extent, and in many places covered 
with groves of trees, of various kinds; walnuts, chestnuts, and 
oaks; the poplar, the plane-tree, the mulberry, and maple. There was 
likewise the Phoenician cedar, the larix, the large-leafed laurel, 
and the cytissus of Virgil. In the middle of this place were the 
ruins of an old seat, over-run with shrubby plants; the Virginia 
creeper, the box-thorn, the jessamine, the honeysuckle, the 
periwinkle, the birdweed, the ivy, and the climber; and near the 
door was a flowing spring of water, which formed a beautiful stream, 
and babbled to the river we came from. Charming scene! so silent, 
sweet, and pretty, that I was highly pleased with the discovery.

On the margin of the brook, under a mulberry tree, I sat down, and 
dined on some cold tongue and ham, and potted black cock, which 
O'FIN produced from his wallet; and having drank a pint of cider, 
set out again, to try what land lay right onwards. In an hour, we 
came to a large and dangerous watery moor, which we crossed over 
with great difficulty, and then arrived at a range of mountains, 
through which there was a narrow pass, wet and stony: a long and 
tedious ride which ended on the border of a fine country: at four in 
the afternoon, we arrived on the confines of a plain, of about a 
hundred acres, which was strewed with various flowers of the earth's 
natural produce that rendered the glebe delightful to behold, and 
was surrounded with groves. The place had all the charms that 
verdure, forest, and vale, can give a country. In the centre of this 
ground was a handsome square building, and behind it a large and 
beautiful garden, encompassed by a low, thick, holly-hedge. As the 
door of this house was not locked, but opened by a silver spring 
turner, I went in, and found it was one fine spacious room, filled 
on every side with books, bound in an extraordinary manner. Globes, 
telescopes, and other instruments of various kinds, were placed on 
stands, and there were two fine writing tables, one at each end of 
the library, which had paper, ink, and pens. In the middle of the 
room there was a reading-desk, which had a short inscription, and on 
it leaned the skeleton of a man. The legend said "THIS SKELETON WAS 
ONCE CHARLES HENLEY, ESQ."

Amazed I stood, looking on these things, and wondered much at the 
figure of the bones, tacked together with wires; once, to be sure, 
the master of this grand collection of books and manuscripts, and 
this fine room, so sweetly situated in the centre of distant groves; 
had a striking effect on my mind; and the more so, as it held a 
scroll of parchment, on which was beautifully written in the court-
hand, to appear more remarkable, I suppose, the following lines:

"Fellow-mortal, whoever thou art, whom the fates shall conduct into 
this chamber, remember, that before many years are passed, thou must 
be laid in the bed of corruption, in the dark caverns of death, 
among the lifeless dust, and rotten bones of others, and from the 
grave proceed to the general resurrection of all. To new life and 
vigour thou wilt most certainly be raised, to be brought to a great 
account. Naked and defenceless thou must stand before the awful 
tribunal of the great God, and from him receive a final sentence, 
which shall determine and fix thee in an eternal state of happiness 
or misery.

"What an alarm should this be! Ponder my fellow-mortal, and 
remember, God now commandeth men everywhere to repent, because he 
hath appointed a day, in which He will judge the. world in 
righteousness, by that man, whom he hath ordained; whereof he hath 
given assurance unto all men, in that he hath raised him from the 
dead. Judge the world! judgment! the very sound is solemn. Should it 
not deaden some part, at least, of your concern for things temporal, 
and quicken your care and industry for the future life; ought it not 
to make us condemn, before the dying hour, our vanity and devotion 
to bodily things, and make us employ the greatest part of our time 
in the acquisition of wisdom, and an improvement in virtue, that 
when we appear at the session of righteousness, a sacred knowledge, 
a heavenly piety, and an angelic goodness, may secure us from 
eternal punishment, and entitle us to a glorious eternity? Since a 
future judgment is most certainly the case, and the consequence 
eternal damnation or salvation, how contemptible a thing is a long 
busy life, spent in raking through the mire of trade and business, 
in pursuit of riches and a large estate; or in sweating up the steep 
hill of ambition, after fame and ambition; or in living and dressing 
as if we were all body, and sent into time for no other purpose, 
than to adorn like idols, gratify like brutes, and waste life in 
sensuality and vanity; how contemptible and unreasonable is this 
kind of existence for beings, who were created to no other end, than 
to be partakers of a divine life with God, and sing hallelujahs to 
all eternity; to separate the creature from error, fiction, 
impurity, and corruption, and acquire that purity and holiness, 
which alone can see God.  Away then with a worldly heart: away with 
all those follies, which engage us like fools and madmen; and let 
the principal thing be, to follow the steps of our great master, by 
patience and resignation, by a charity and contempt of the world; 
and by keeping a conscience void of offence, amidst the changes and 
chances of this mortal life; that at his second coming, to judge the 
world, we may be found acceptable in his sight.

"What a scene must this second coming be! I saw, says an apostle, a 
great white throne, and him that sat on it, from whose face the 
earth and the heavens fled away, and there was no place found for 
them; and I saw the dead small and great stand before God; and the 
books were opened, and the dead were judged out of those things 
which were written in the books: and the sea gave up her dead, and 
death and hell delivered up their dead which were in them, and they 
were judged every man, according to their works. The secret 
wickedness of men will be brought to light; and concealed piety and 
persecuted virtue be acknowledged and honoured. While innocence and 
piety are set at the right hand of the judge, and the righteous 
shall shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their father for ever 
and ever, shame and confusion must sit upon the faces of the sinner 
and the ungodly. Damnation will stand before the brethren in 
iniquity, and when the intolerable sentence is executed, what 
inexpressible agonies will they fall into? what amazement and 
excesses of horror must seize upon them?

"Ponder then, in time, fellow-mortal, and choose to be good, rather 
than to be great: prefer your baptismal vows to the pomps and 
vanities of this world; and value the secret whispers of a good 
conscience more than the noise of popular applause.

"Since you must appear before the judgment-seat of Christ; that 
every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that 
he hath done, whether it be good or bad, let it be your work from 
morning till night, to keep Jesus in your hearts; and long for 
nothing, desire nothing, hope for nothing, but to have all that is 
within you changed into the spirit and temper of the holy Jesus. 
Wherever you go, whatever you do, do all in imitation of his temper 
and inclination; and look upon all as nothing, but that which 
exercises and increases the spirit and life of Christ in your souls. 
Let this be your Christianity, your church, and your religion, and 
the judgment-day will be a charming scene. If in this world, the 
will of the creature, as an offspring of the divine will, wills and 
works with the will of God, and labours, without ceasing, to come as 
near as mortals can to the purity and perfection of the divine 
nature; then will the day of the Lord be a day of great joy, and 
with unutterable pleasure, you shall hear that tremendous voice: 
Awake, ye dead, and come to judgment. In transports, and full of 
honour and glory, the wise and righteous, will hear the happy 
sentence, Come, ye blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom 
prepared for you from the foundation of the world."

This, and the skeleton, astonished me not a little; and my wonder at 
the whole increased, as I could find no human creature living, nor 
discover any house or cottage for an inhabitant. This I thought 
exceeded all the strange things I had seen in this wonderful 
country. But perhaps, it occurred at last, there might be a mansion 
in the woods, before me, or somewhere in the groves on either side; 
and therefore, leaving the library, after I had spent an hour in it, 
I walked onwards, and came to a wood, which had private walks cut 
through it, and strewed with sand. They showed only light enough to 
distinguish the blaze of day from evening shade, and had seats 
dispersed, to sit and listen to the chorus of the birds, which added 
to the pleasures of the soft silent place. For about three hundred 
yards the walk I was in extended, and then terminated in meadows, 
which formed an oval of twenty acres surrounded by groves, like the 
large plain I came from. Exactly in the middle of these fields, part 
of which were turned into gardens, there stood a very handsome stone 
house, and not far from the door of it, a fountain played. On both 
side of the water was a garden-chair, of a very extraordinary make, 
curious and beautiful; and each of them stood under an ever-green 
oak, the broad leaved ilex, a charming shade.

In one of these chairs sat an ancient gentleman, a venerable man, 
whose hair was white as silver, and his countenance had dignity and 
goodness. His dress and manner showed him to be a person of fortune 
and distinction; and by a servant in waiting it appeared, he was 
Lord of the seigneurie I was arrived at. He was tall and graceful, 
and had not the least stoop, though he wanted but a year of an 
hundred. I could not but admire the fine old gentleman.

On the same chair, next to him, sat a young Lady, who was at this 
time just turned of twenty and had such diffusive charms as soon new 
fired my heart, and gave my soul a softness even beyond what it had 
felt before. She was a little taller than the middle size, and had a 
face that was perfectly beautiful. Her eyes were extremely fine, 
full, black, and sparkling; and her conversation was as charming as 
her person; both easy, unconstrained, and sprightly. When I came 
near two such personages, I bowed low to the ground, and asked 
pardon for intruding into their fine retirement. But the stars had 
led me, a wanderer, to this delightful solitude, without the least 
idea of there being such a place in our island, and as their 
malignant rays had forced me to offend, without intending it, I 
hoped they would pardon my breaking in upon them.

To this the old Gentleman replied, "You have not offended, Sir, I 
assure you, but you are welcome to the Groves of Basil. It gives me 
pleasure to see you here; for it is very seldom we are favoured with 
anyone's company. It is hard to discover or make out a road to this 
place, as we are surrounded almost by impassable mountains, and a 
very dangerous morass, nor can I conceive how you found the way here 
without a guide, or ventured to travel this country, as there are no 
towns in this part of the county. There must be something very 
extraordinary in your case, and as you mentioned your being a 
wanderer, I should be glad to hear the cause of your journeying in 
this uninhabited region. But first," said Mr. HENLEY, "as it is now 
near eight at night, and you most want refreshment, having met with 
no inn the whole day, we will go in to supper." He then arose, and 
brought me to an elegant parlour, where a table was soon covered 
with the best cold things, and we immediately sat down. Every 
eatable was excellent, and the wine and other liquors in perfection. 
Miss HENLEY sat at the head of the table, her grandfather over-
against her, and placed me at her right hand between them both. The 
young lady behaved in a very easy genteel manner; and the old 
gentleman, with freedom, cheerfulness, and good manners. Till nine 
this scene lasted, and then Mr. HENLEY again requested I would 
oblige him with an account of my travels in that part of the world. 
This, I said, I would do in the best manner I could, and while he 
leaned back in his easy chair, and the beautiful STATIA fastened her 
glorious eyes upon me, I went on in the following words:

"I am an Englishman, Sir, but have passed the greatest part of my 
life in Ireland, and from the western extremity of it I came. My 
father is one of the rich men in that kingdom, and was, for many 
years, the tenderest and most generous parent that ever son was 
blessed with. He spared no cost on my education, and gave me leave 
to draw upon him, while I resided in the University of Dublin five 
years, for what I pleased. Extravagant as I was in several articles, 
he never set any bounds to my demands, nor asked me what I did with 
the large sums I had yearly from him. My happiness was his felicity, 
and the glory of his life to have me appear to the greatest 
advantage, and in the most respected character, that money can gain 
a man.

But at last he married his servant maid, an artful cruel woman, who 
obtained by her wit and charms so great an ascendant over him, that 
he abandoned me, to raise a young nephew this stepmother had, to 
what splendour and power she pleased. He had everything he could 
name that money could procure, and was absolute master of the house 
and land. Not a shilling at this time could I get, nor obtain the 
least thing I asked for, and because I refused to become preceptor 
to this young man, and had made some alteration in my religion, 
having renounced that creed, which was composed nobody knows by 
whom, and introduced into the church in the darkest ages of popish 
ignorance; a symbol, which strongly participates of the true nature 
and spirit of popery, in those severe denunciations of God's wrath, 
which it pours so plentifully forth against all those whose heads 
are not turned to believe it; my father was so enraged that he would 
not even admit me to his table any longer, but bid me be gone. My 
mother-in-law likewise for ever abused me, and her nephew, the lad, 
insulted me when I came in his way.

"Being thus compelled to withdraw, I set sail for England as soon as 
it was in my power, and arrived in Cumberland by the force of a 
storm. 1 proceeded from thence to the mountains of Stanemore, to 
look for a gentleman, my friend, who lived among those hills; and as 
I journeyed over them, and missed him, I chanced to meet with a fine 
northern girl, and a habitation to my purpose. I married her, and 
for almost two years past was the happiest of the human race, till 
the sable curtain fell between us, and the angel of death translated 
her glorious soul to the fields of paradise. Not able to bear the 
place of our residence, after I had lost my heart's fond idol, I 
left the charming spot and mansion, where unmixed felicity had been 
for some time my portion, and I was travelling on towards London, to 
see what is ordained there in reserve for me; when by accident I 
lost my way, and the fates conducted me to the groves of Basil. 
Curiosity led me into the library I found in the plain, without this 
wood, from whence, in search for some human creatures, I proceeded 
to the fountain, where I had the pleasure of seeing you, Sir, and 
this young lady. This is a summary of my past life; what is before 
me heaven only knows. My fortune I trust with the Preserver of men, 
and the Father of spirits. One thing I am certain of by observation, 
few as the days of the years of my pilgrimage have been, that the 
emptiness, and unsatisfying nature of this world's enjoyments, are 
enough to prevent my having any fondness to stay in this region of 
darkness and sorrow. I shall never leap over the bars of life, let 
what will happen; but the sooner I have leave to depart, I shall 
think it the better for me."

The old gentleman seemed surprised at my story, and after some 
moments' silence, when I had done, he said, "Your measure, Sir, is 
hard, and as it was, in part, for declaring against a false religion 
at your years, you please me so much, that if you will give me 
leave, I will be your friend, and as a subaltern providence, 
recompense your loss as to fortune in this world. In what manner you 
shall know tomorrow, when we breakfast at eight. It is now time to 
finish our bottle, that we may, according to our custom betimes 
retire."

May 5th, 1727.—At the time appointed I met the old gentleman in the 
parlour, and just as we had done saluting each other, STATIA 
entered, bright and charming as Aurora. She was in a rich dress, and 
her bright victorious eyes flashed a celestial fire. She made our 
tea, and gave me some of her coffee. She asked me a few civil 
questions, and said two or three good things on the beauties of the 
morning, and the charms of the country. She left us the moment we 
had done breakfast, and then the old gentleman addressed himself to 
me in the following words.

"I do not forget the promise I made you, but must first relate the 
history of my family. I do it with the more pleasure, as I find you 
are of our religion, and I cannot help having a regard for you, on 
your daring to throw up a fortune for truth; for bravely daring to 
renounce those systems, which have an outward orthodox roundness 
given to them by their eloquent defenders, and within are mere 
corruption and apostacy.

"The skeleton you saw in the library was once my son, CHARLES 
HENLEY, a most extraordinary man. He had great abilities, and 
understood everything a mortal is capable of knowing, of things 
human and divine. When he was in his nineteenth year, I took him to 
France and other countries, to see the world, and, on our return to 
England, married him into a noble family, to a very valuable young 
woman, of a large fortune, and by her he had the young lady you saw 
sitting on the chair near the table by me. This son I lost, three 
years after his marriage, and with him all relish for the world; and 
being naturally inclined to retirement and a speculative life, never 
stirred since from this country-house. Here my son devoted himself 
entirely to study, and amused himself with instructing his beloved 
STATIA, the young lady you have seen. At his death he consigned her 
to my care; and as her understanding is very great, and her 
disposition sweet and charming. I have not only taken great pains in 
educating her, but have been delighted with my employment. Young as 
she is, but in the second month of her one and twentieth year she 
not only knows more than women of distinction generally do, but 
would be the admiration of learned men, if her knowledge in 
languages, mathematics, and philosophy, were known to them: and as 
her father taught her music and painting, perhaps there is not a 
young woman of finer accomplishments in the kingdom.

"Her father died towards the end of the year 1723, in the thirty-
ninth year of his age, when she was not quite sixteen, and, by his 
will left her ten thousand pounds, and Basil-House and estate; but 
she is not to inherit it, or marry, until she is two and twenty. 
This was her father's will. As to the skeleton in the library, it 
was my son's express order it should be so, and that the figure 
should not be removed from the place it stands in, while the library 
remained in that room; but continue a solemn memorial in his family, 
to perpetuate his memory, and be a memento mori to the living.

"This is the history of Basil Groves, and the late owner of this 
seat, and his daughter STATIA. We live a happy, religious life here, 
and enjoy every blessing that can be desired in this lower 
hemisphere. But as I am not very far from a hundred years, having 
passed that ninety-two which Sir William Temple says, he never knew 
anyone he was acquainted with arrive at, I must be on the brink of 
the grave, and expect every day to drop into it. What may become of 
STATIA, then, gives me some trouble to think, as all her relations, 
except myself are in the other world. To spend her life here in this 
solitude, as seems to be her inclination, is not proper; and to go 
into the world by herself. when I am dead, without knowing any 
mortal in it, may involve her in troubles and distresses. Hear then, 
my son, what I propose to you. You are a young man, but serious. You 
have got some wisdom in the school of affliction, and you have no 
aversion to matrimony, as you have just buried, you say, a glorious 
woman, your wife. If you will stay with us here, till STATIA is two 
and twenty, and in that time render yourself agreeable to her, I 
promise you, she shall be yours the day she enters the three and 
twentieth year of her age, and you shall have with her fortune, all 
that I am owner of, which is no small sum. What do you say to this 
proposal?"

"Sir," I replied, "you do me vast honour, much more I am sure than 
my merits can pretend to. I am infinitely obliged to you, and must 
be blind and insensible, if I refused such a woman as Miss HENLEY, 
were she far from being the fortune she is. But I have not vanity 
enough to imagine, can gain her affections; especially in my 
circumstances; and to get her by your authority or power of 
disposing of her, is what I cannot think of. I will stay however, a 
few months here, since you so generously invite me, and let Miss 
HENLEY know, I will be her humble servant, if she will allow me the 
honour of bearing that title." This made the old gentleman laugh, 
and he took me by the hand, saying, "This is right. Come, let us go 
and take a walk before dinner."

There I passed the winter, and part of the spring, and lived in a 
delightful manner. The mornings I generally spent in the library, 
reading, or writing extracts from some curious MSS. or scarce books; 
and in the afternoons Miss HENLEY and I walked in the lawns and 
woods, or sat down to cards. She was a fine creature indeed in body 
and soul, had a beautiful understanding, and charmed me to a high 
degree. Her conversation was rational and easy, without the least 
affectation from the books she had read; and she would enliven it 
sometimes by singing, in which kind of music she was as great a 
mistress as I have heard. As to her heart, I found it was to be 
gained; but an accident happened that put a stop to the amour.

1728.—In the beginning of March, the old gentleman, the excellent 
Mr. HENLEY, STATIA'S grandfather and guardian, and my great friend, 
died, and by his death a great alteration ensued in my affair. I 
thought to have had Miss HENLEY immediately, as there was no one to 
plead her father's will against the marriage, and intended to send 
O'FIN for friar FLEMING; but when STATIA saw herself her own 
mistress, without any superior, or control, and in possession of 
large fortunes, money, and an estate, that she might do as she 
pleased; this had an effect on her mind, and made a change. She told 
me, when I addressed myself to her, after her grandfather was 
interred. "that what she intended to do, in obedience to him, had he 
lived, she thought required very serious consideration now she was 
left to herself: that, exclusive of this, her inclination really was 
for a single life; and had it been otherwise, yet it was not proper, 
since her guardian was dead, that I should live with her till the 
time limited by her father's will for her to marry was come; but 
that, as she had too good an opinion of me to imagine her fortune 
was what chiefly urged my application, and must own she had a regard 
for me, she would be glad to hear from me sometimes, if I could 
think her worth remembering, after I had left the Groves of Basil." 
This she said with great seriousness, and seemed by her manner to 
forbid my urging any further.

I assured her, however, that time only could wear out her charming 
image from my mind, and that I had reason to fear, she would long 
remain the torment of my heart. She had a right to be sure to 
dismiss me from her service; but in respect of her inclination to 
live a single life, I begged leave to observe, that it was certainly 
quite wrong, and what she could not answer to the wise and bountiful 
Father of the Universe, as she was a Christian, and by being so, 
must believe, that baptism was a memorial of the covenant of grace.

The Catholics, and the Vision-mongers of the Protestant side, the 
Rev. Wm. Law, and others of his row, may magnify the excellence of 
celibacy as high as they please, and work it into Christian 
perfection, by sounding words and eloquent pens; but most surely, 
revelation was directly against them, and required the faithful to 
produce in a regular way.

"Consider, illustrious STATIA, that when the Most High gave the 
Abrahamic covenant in these words, I will be a God unto thee, and to 
thy seed after thee, and in thy seed shall all the families, or 
nations of the earth be blessed; which includes an interest in God, 
as a God, father and friend for ever, and a share in all the 
blessings wherewith the Messiah, in the gospel hath enriched the 
world; these inestimable blessings and promises of life and favour, 
were designed by the divine munificence for rising generations of 
mankind; and it was most certainly intended, not only that they 
should be received with the highest gratitude and duty, but that 
they should be strongly inculcated upon the thoughts of succeeding 
generations, by an instituted sign or memorial, to the end of the 
world.

"Circumcision was the first appointed token or memorial, and at the 
same time, an instruction in that moral rectitude to which the grace 
of God obliges: and when the New Testament succeeded the Law, then 
was the covenant interest of infants, or their right to the covenant 
of grace, to be confirmed by the token or sign called baptism; that 
action being appointed to give the expected rising generation an 
interest in the love of God, the grace of Christ, and the fellowship 
of the Holy Spirit, that is, in all covenant blessings. But what 
becomes of this great charter of heaven, if Christian women, out of 
an idle notion of perfection, will resolve to lead single lives, and 
thereby hinder rising generations from sharing in the honours and 
privileges of the church of Jesus Christ. Millions of the faithful 
must thereby be deprived of the token instituted by God to convey to 
them those covenant blessings, which his love and goodness designed 
for the rising generations of his people. Have a care then what you 
do, illustrious STATIA, in this particular. It must be a great crime 
to hinder the regular propagation of a species, which God hbath 
declared to be under his particular inspection and blessing, and by 
circumcision and baptism, hath made the special object of divine 
attention and care. Away then with all thoughts of a virgin life, 
whatever becomes of me. As God hath appointed matrimony and baptism, 
let it be your pious endeavour to bear sons and daughters, that may 
be related to God, their Father; to Jesus, their Redeemer, and first 
born in the family; and to all the excellent, who are to enjoy, 
through him, the blessings of the glorious world above. Marry, then, 
illustrious STATIA, marry, and let the blessing of Abraham come upon 
us gentiles. Oppose not the gospel covenant; that covenant which was 
made with that patriarch; but mind the comfortable promises; I will 
circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed. I will pour out my 
spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring. The seed 
of the righteous is blessed. They are the seed of the blessed of the 
Lord, and their offspring with them. Such is the Magna Charta of our 
existence and future happiness: and as infants descending from 
Abraham, in the line of election, to the end of the world, have as 
good a right and claim as we to the blessings of this covenant, and 
immense promise, 'I will be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after 
thee, in their generations;'<115> it must be a great crime, to 
deprive children of this entailed, heavenly inheritance, by our 
resolving to live in a state of virginity. In my opinion, it is a 
sin greater than murder. What is murder, but forcing one from his 
post against the will of Providence; and if the virgin hinders a 
being or beings from coming on the post, against the will of 
Providence, must she not be culpable; and must she not be doubly 
criminal, if the being or beings she hinders from coming on the 
stage, or into this first state, were to be a part of the perpetual 
generations, who have a right to the inheritance, the blessing, and 
were to be heirs according to the promise made to Abraham? Ponder, 
illustrious STATIA, on the important point. Consider what it is to 
die a maid, when you may, in a regular way, produce heirs to that 
inestimable blessing of life and favour, which the munificence of 
the Most High was pleased freely to bestow, and which the great 
Christian mediator, agent, and negotiator, republished, confirmed, 
and sealed with his blood. Marry then in regard to the gospel, and 
let it be the fine employment of your life, to open gradually the 
treasures of revelation to the understandings of the little 
Christians you produce.

This I am sure your holy religion requires from you: and if from the 
sacred oracles we turn to the book of nature, is it not in this 
volume written, that there must be a malignity in the hearts, of 
those mortals, who can remain unconcerned at the destruction and 
extirpation of the rest of mankind; and who want even so much good 
will as is requisite to propagate a creature, in a regular and 
hallowed way, though they received their own being from the mere 
benevolence of their divine Master? What do you say, illustrious 
STATIA? Shall it be a succession, as you are an upright Christian? 
And may I hope to have the high honour of sharing in the mutual 
satisfaction that must attend the discharge of so momentous a 
duty?<116>

All the smiles sat on the face of STATIA, while I was haranguing in 
this devout manner, and her countenance became a constellation of 
wonders. When I had done, this beauty said, "I thank you, Sir, for 
the information you have given me. I am a Christian. There is no 
malignity in my heart. You have altered my way of thinking, and I 
now declare for a succession. Let Father FLEMING be sent for, and 
without waiting for my being two and twenty, or minding my father's 
will, as there is no one to oblige me to it, I will give you my 
hand." Charming news! I dispatched my lad for the friar. The priest 
arrived the next day, and at night we were married. Three days after 
we set out for Orton-Lodge, at my wife's request, as she longed to 
see the place. For two years more I resided there; it being more 
agreeable to STATIA than the improved Groves of Basil. We lived 
there in as much happiness as it is possible to have in this lower 
hemisphere, and much in the same manner as I did with CHARLOTTE my 
first wife. STATIA had all the good qualities and perfections which 
rendered CHARLOTTE so dear and valuable to me; like her she studied 
to increase the delights of every day, and by art, good humour, and 
love, rendered the married state such a system of joys as might 
incline one to wish it could last a thousand years: But it was too 
sublime and desirable to have a long existence here. STATIA was 
taken ill of the smallpox, the morning we intended to return to 
Basil Groves; she died the seventh day, and I laid her by 
CHARLOTTE'S side. Thus did I again become a mourner. I sat with my 
eyes shut for three days, but at last, called for my horse to try 
what air, exercise, and a variety of objects could do.



CHAPTER XV.

April 1, 1729.—Very early, as soon as I could see day, I left Orton-
Lodge, and went to Basil-Groves, to order matters there. From thence 
I set out for Harrowgate-Spa to amuse myself in that agreeable 
place; but I did not go the way I came to Mr. HENLEY'S house. To 
avoid the dangerous morass I had passed, at the hazard of my life, 
we went over a wilder and more romantic country than I had before 
seen. We had higher mountains to ascend than I had ever passed 
before; and some valleys so very deep to ride through, that they 
seemed as it were descents to hell. The patriarch Bermudez, in 
journeying over Abyssinia,<117> never travelled in more frightful 
glens. And yet, we often came to plains and vales which had all the 
charms a paradise could have. Such is the nature of this country.

Through these scenes, an amazing mixture of the terrible and the 
beautiful, we proceeded from five in the morning till one in the 
afternoon, when we arrived at a vast waterfall, which descended from 
a precipice near two hundred yards high, into a deep lake, that 
emptied itself into a swallow fifty yards from the catadure or fall, 
and went I suppose to the abyss. The land from this headlong river, 
for half a mile in length and breadth, till it ended at vast 
mountains again, was a fine piece of ground, beautifully flowered 
with various perennials, the acanthus, the aconus, the adonis or 
pheasant's eye, the purple bistorta, the blue borago, the yellow 
bupthalmum, the white cacalia, the blue campanula, and the sweet-
smelling cassia, the pretty double daisy, the crimson dianthus, the 
white dictamnus, the red fruximella, and many other wild flowers. 
They make the green valley look charming; and as here and there 
stood two or three evergreen trees, the cypress, the larix, the balm 
of Gilead, and the Swedish juniper, the whole spot has a fine and 
delightful effect. On my arrival here, I was at a loss which way to 
turn.

I could not however be long in suspense how to proceed, as I saw 
near the waterfall a pretty thatched mansion, and several 
inhabitants in it. I found these were a religious society of married 
people, ten friars and their ten wives, who had agreed to retire to 
this still retreat, and form a holy house on the plan of the famous 
Ivon, the disciple of Labadie, so celebrated on account of his 
connection with Maria Schurman<118>, and his many fanatical 
writings.

A book called the Marriage Chretien, written by this Ivon, was their 
directory, and from it they formed a Protestant La Trappe; with this 
difference from the Catholic religious men, that the friars of the 
reformed monastery were to have wives in their convent: the better 
to enable them to obtain Christian perfection in the religious life. 
These Regulars, men and women, were a most industrious people, never 
idle; but between their hours of prayer always at work: the men were 
employed in a garden of ten acres, to provide vegetables and fruit, 
on which they chiefly lived; or in cutting down old trees, and 
fitting them for their fire: and the women were knitting, spinning, 
or twisting what they had spun into thread, which they sold for 
three shillings a pound: they were all together in a large, handsome 
room: they sat quite silent, kept their eyes on their work, and 
seemed more attentive to some inward meditations, than to any thing 
that appeared, or passed by them. They looked as if they were 
contented and happy. They were all extremely handsome, and quite 
clean; their linen fine and white, and their gowns a black stuff. 
The women dined at one table, the men at another; but all sat in the 
same room. The whole house was in bed by ten, and up by four in the 
morning, winter and summer. What they said at their table I could 
not hear, as they spoke low and little, and were at a distance from 
me, in a large apartment: but the conversation of the men, at table, 
was very agreeable, rational and improving. I observed they had a 
great many children, and kept four women-servants to attend them, 
and do the work of the house. The whole pleased me very greatly. I 
thought it a happy institution.

As to the marriage of the friars in this cloistral house, their 
founder, Ivon, in my opinion, was quite right in this notion. Chaste 
junction cannot have the least imperfection in it, as it is the 
appointment of God, and the inclination to a coit is so strongly 
impressed on the machine by the author of it; and since it is quite 
pure and perfect; since it was wisely intended as the only best 
expedient to keep man for ever innocent, it must certainly be much 
better for a regular or retreating priest, to have a lawful female 
companion with him; and so the woman, who chooses a convent, and 
dislikes the fashions of the world, to have her good and lawful monk 
every night in her arms; to love and procreate legally, when they 
have performed all the holy offices of the day; and then, from love 
and holy generation, return again to prayer, and all the heavenly 
duties of the cloistered life; than to live, against the institution 
of nature and providence, a burning, tortured nun, and a burning, 
tortured friar; locked up in walls they can never pass, and under 
the government of some old, cross, impotent superior. There is some 
sense in such a Marriage Chrètien in a convent. Ivon's convent is 
well enough. A cloister may do upon his plan, with the dear creature 
by one's side, after the daily labours of the monk are over. It had 
been better, if that infallible man, the Pope, had come into this 
scheme. How comfortable has Ivon made it to the human race, who 
renounce the dress and pageantry, and all the vanities of time. 
Their days are spent in piety and usefulness; and at night, after 
the completorium,<118> they lie down together in the most heavenly 
charity, and according to the first great hail, endeavour to 
increase and multiply. This is a divine life. I am for a cloister on 
these terms. It pleased me so much to see these monks march off with 
their smiling partners, after the last psalm, that I could not help 
wishing for a charmer there, that I might commence the Married 
Regular, and add to the stock of children in this holy house. It is 
really a fine thing to monk it on this plan. It is a divine 
institution, gentle and generous, useful and pious.

On the contrary, how cruel is the Roman church, to make perfection 
consist in celibacy, and cause so many millions of men and women to 
live at an eternal distance from each other, without the least 
regard to the given points of contact! How unfriendly to society! 
This is abusing Christianity, and perverting it to the most 
pernicious purposes; under a pretence of raising piety, by giving 
more time and leisure for devotion. For it never can be pious either 
in design or practice, to cancel any moral obligation, or to make 
void any command of God: and as to prayer, it may go along with 
every other duty, and be performed in every state. All states have 
their intermissions; and if it should be otherwise sometimes, I can 
then, while discharging any duty, or performing any office, pray as 
well in my heart, O God be merciful to me a sinner, and bless me 
with the blessing of thy grace and providence, as if I was prostrate 
before an altar. What Martha was reproved for, was on account of her 
being too solicitous about the things of this life. Where this is 
not the case, business and the world are far from being a hindrance 
to piety. God is as really glorified in the discharge of relative 
duties, as in the discharge of those which more immediately relate 
to himself. He is in truth more actively glorified by our 
discharging well the relative duties, and we thereby may become more 
extensively useful in the church and in the world, may he more 
public blessings, than it is possible to be in a single pious state. 
In short, this one thing, celibacy, were there nothing else, the 
making the unmarried state a more holy state than marriage, shows 
the prodigious nonsense and impiety of the Church of Rome, and is 
reason enough to flee that communion, if we had no other reasons for 
protesting against it. The tenet is so superstitious and dangerous, 
that it may well be esteemed a doctrine of those devils, who are the 
seducers and destroyers of mankind; but it is, says Wallace, in his 
Dissertation on the Numbers of Manhood, suitable to the views and 
designs of a church, which has discovered such an enormous ambition, 
and made such havoc of the human race, in order to raise, establish, 
and preserve an usurped and tyrannical power.

But as to the Married Regulars I have mentioned; they were very glad 
to see me, and entertained me with great civility and goodness. I 
lived a week with them, and was not only well fed with vegetables 
and puddings on their lean days, Wednesdays and Fridays, and with 
plain meat, and good malt drink, on the other days; but was greatly 
delighted with their manner and piety, their sense and knowledge. I 
will give my pious readers a sample of their prayers, as I imagine 
it may be to edification. These friars officiate in their turns, 
changing every day; and the morning and evening prayers of one of 
them, were in the words following. I took them off in my shorthand.

A PRAYER FOR MORNING.

"Almighty and everlasting God, the creator and preserver of 
all things, our law-giver, saviour, and judge, we adore thee 
the author of our beings, and the father of our spirits. We 
present ourselves, our acknowledgments, and our homage, at the 
foot of thy throne, and yield thee the thanks of the most 
grateful hearts for all the instances of thy favour which we 
have experienced. We thank thee for ever, O Lord God Almighty, 
for all thy mercies and blessings vouchsafed us; for defending 
us the past night from evil, and for that kind provision which 
thou hast made for our comfortable subsistence in this world.

"But above all, most glorious Eternal, adored be thy goodness, 
for repeating and reinforcing the laws and the religion of thy 
creation, by supernatural revelation, and for giving us that 
reason of mind, which unites us to thee, and makes us implore 
thy communications of righteousness, to create us again unto 
good works in Christ Jesus.

"We confess, O Lord, that we have done violence to our 
principles, and alienated ourselves from the natural use we 
were fitted for: we have revolted from thee into a state of 
sin, and by the operation of sense and passion, have been 
moved to such practices as are exorbitant and irregular: but 
we are heartily sorry for all our misdoings: to thee in Christ 
we now make our address, and beseech thee to inform our 
understandings, and refine our spirits, that we may reform our 
lives by repentance, redeem our time by righteousness, and 
live as the glorious gospel of thy Son requires. Let the 
divine spirit assist and enable us to over-rule, conduct, and 
employ, the subordinate and inferior powers, in the exercise 
of virtue, and the service of our Creator, and as far as the 
imperfections of our present state will admit, help us so to 
live by the measures and laws of heaven, that we may have the 
humility and meekness, the mortification and self-denial of 
the holy Jesus, his love of thee, his desire of doing thy 
will, and seeking only thy honour. Let us not come covered 
before thee under a form of godliness, a cloak of creeds, 
observances and institutions of religion; but with that inward 
salvation and vital sanctity, which renounces the spirit, 
wisdom, and honours of this world, dethrones self-love and 
pride, subdues sensuality and covetousness, and opens a 
kingdom of heaven within by the spirit of God. O let thy 
Christ be our Saviour in this world; and before we die, make 
us fit to live for ever with thee in the regions of purity and 
perfection.

"Since it is the peculiar privilege of our nature, through thy 
mercy and goodness, that we are made for an eternal 
entertainment in those glorious mansions, where the blessed 
society of saints and angels shall keep an everlasting 
Sabbath, and adore and glorify thee for ever, let thy 
inspiring spirit raise our apprehensions and desires above all 
things that are here below, and alienate our minds from the 
customs and principles of this mad, degenerate, and apostate 
world: mind us of the shortness and uncertainty of time, of 
the boundless duration, and the vast importance of eternity, 
and so enable us to imitate the example of the holy Jesus in 
this world, that we may hereafter ascend, with the greatest 
ardour of divine love, to those realms of holiness, where our 
hearts will be filled with raptures of gladness and joy, and 
we shall remain in the highest glory for ever and ever.

We live, O Lord, in reconciliation and friendship, in love and 
good will, with thy whole creation, with everything that 
derives from thee, holds of thee, is owned by thee; and under 
the power of this affection, we pray for all mankind; that 
they may be partakers of all the blessings which we enjoy or 
want, and that we may all be happy in the world to come, and 
glorify thee together in eternity. To this end bring all the 
human race to the knowledge of thy glorious gospel, and let 
its influence transform them into the likeness of Christ.

"But especially, we pray for all who suffer for truth and 
righteousness' sake, and beseech thee to prosper those that 
love thee. Defend, O Lord, the just rights and liberties of 
mankind, and rescue thy religion from the corruptions which 
have been introduced upon it, by length of time, and by decay 
of piety. Infatuate the counsels, and frustrate the endeavours 
of the priests of Rome, and against all the designs of those, 
who are enemies to the purity of the gospel, and substitute 
human inventions in the place of revealed religion; prosper 
the pious labours of those who teach mankind to worship one 
eternal and omnipresent being: in whose understanding, there 
is the perfection of wisdom; in whose will, there is the 
perfection of goodness; in whose actions, there is the 
perfection of power; a God without cause, the great creator, 
benefactor, and saviour of men:—And that the duty of man is to 
obey, in thought, word, and deed, the precepts of godliness 
and righteousness, without regard to pleasure, gain, or 
honour: to pain, loss, or disgrace; diligently imitating the 
life of the holy Jesus, and steadfastly confiding in his 
mediation.

"In the last place, O Lord God Almighty, we beseech thee to 
continue us under thy protection, guidance, and blessing this 
day; as the followers and disciples of thy Christ, through 
whom we recommend our souls and our bodies into thy hands, and 
according to the doctrine of his religion, say, Our Father, 
&c."

In this manner, did these pious Ivonites begin their every day; and 
when the sun was set, and they had finished their supper, they 
worshipped God again in these words.


A PRAYER FOR NIGHT.

"Most blessed, glorious, and holy Lord God Almighty, who art 
from everlasting to everlasting, God over all, magnified and 
adored for ever! we, thy unworthy creatures, humble our souls 
in thy presence, and confess ourselves miserable sinners. We 
acknowledge our miscarriages and faults, and condemn ourselves 
for having done amiss. We deprecate thy just offence and 
displeasure. We cry thee mercy. We ask thee pardon: and as we 
are quite sensible of our weakness and inability, and know 
thou lovest the souls of men, when they turn and repent, we 
beseech thee to give us true repentance, and endue us with the 
grace of thy sanctifying spirit, that we may be delivered from 
the bondage and slavery of iniquity, and have the law of the 
spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus. Upon thee our God, we 
call for that help which is never wanting, and beseech thee to 
give us thy heavenly assistance, that we may recover our 
reasonable nature, refine our spirits by goodness, and purify 
ourselves even as the Lord Jesus is pure. O thou Father of 
Lights, and the God of all comforts, inform our understandings 
with truth, and give us one ray of that divine wisdom which 
sitteth on the right hand of thy throne. O let us be always 
under thy communication and influence, and enable us, through 
the recommendation of thy Son, our mediator and redeemer, to 
lay aside all passion, prejudice, and vice, to receive thy 
truth in the love of it, and to serve thee with ingenuity of 
mind, and freedom of spirit: that we may pass through a 
religious life to a blessed immortality, and come to that 
eternal rest, where we shall behold thy face in righteousness, 
and adore and bless thee to eternity, for our salvation 
through him who hath redeemed us by his blood.

"We praise and magnify thy goodness, O Lord God Almighty, for 
our maintenance and preservation, by thy constant providence 
over us, and we beseech thee to take us into thy special care 
and protection this night. Defend us from all the powers of 
darkness, and from evil men and evil things, and raise us in 
health and safety. Do thou, most great and good God, protect 
us and bless us this night, and when we awake in the morning, 
let our hearts be with thee, and thy hand with us. And the 
same mercies we beg for all mankind; that thy goodness and 
power may preserve them, and thy direction and influence 
secure their eternal salvation, through Jesus Christ our Lord, 
by whom thou hast taught us to call upon thee as our Father, 
&c.”

By the way, I cannot help observing, that these disciples of Ivon 
are much reformed in respect of what his cloistered followers were 
in his time. It appears from Ivon's books, that he was as great a 
visionary and tritheist as his master Labadie, or any of our modern 
mystics now are. But these Regulars I found among the fells, though 
on Ivon's plan, are as rational Christians as ever adorned the 
religion of our Master by a purity of faith. You see by their 
prayers, that their devotions are quite reasonable and calm. There 
is no rant, nor words without meaning, no feeling instead of seeing 
the truth; nor expectation of covenant mercy on the belief of a 
point repugnant not only to the reason and nature of things, but to 
the plain repeated declarations of God in the Christian religion. 
Their prayer is a calm address to the great Maker, Governor, and 
Benefactor of the universe; and honour and obedience to Christ as 
Mediator, according to the will and appointment of God the Father.

Upon my asking one of these gentlemen, how they came to differ so 
much from Ivon, their founder, and cease to be the patrons of 
vision, and an implicit incomprehensible faith? He told me, they had 
read all the books on both sides of the question, that had been 
written of late years, and could not resist the force of the 
evidence in favour of reason and the divine unity. They saw it go 
against mechanical impulse, and strong persuasion without grounds, 
and therefore they dismissed Ivon's notions of believing without 
ideas, as they became sensible it was the same thing as seeing 
without light or objects. Without dealing any longer in a mist of 
words, or showing themselves orthodox, by empty, insignificant 
sounds, they resolved, that the object of their worship, for the 
time to come, should be, that one supreme self-existent being, of 
absolute, infinite perfection, who is the first cause of all things, 
and whose numerical identity and infinite perfections are 
demonstrable from certain principles of reason, antecedent to any 
peculiar revelation and confessed that the blessing, with which 
Jesus Christ was sent by God to bless the world, consists in turning 
men from their iniquities. They now perceived what the creed-makers, 
and Ivon, their founder, could not see, to wit, that it is against 
the sacred texts, to ascribe to each Person of Three the nature and 
all essential attributes and properties of the One only true God, 
and yet make the Three the One true God only, when considered 
conjunctly; for if each has all possible perfections and attributes, 
then each must be the same true God as if and when conjoined; and of 
consequence, there must then be three one true Gods, or one three 
true Gods; three one Supreme Beings, or one three Supreme Beings, 
since to each of the three must be ascribed, as the orthodox say, 
anything and everything, that is most peculiar and appropriated to 
the divine nature, without any difference. In short, by conjobbling 
matters of faith in this manner, they saw we had three distinct 
selfs, or intelligent agents, equal in power and all possible 
perfections, agreeing in one common essence, one sort of species, 
like a supreme magistracy of distinct persons, acting by a joint 
exercise of the same power, and so the three are one, not by a 
numerical but specific identity three Omnipotents and one Almighty, 
in a collective sense. This, continued the gentleman on searching 
the scriptures, we found was far from being the truth of the case. 
We discovered, upon a fair examination, and laying aside our old 
prejudices, that  there was nothing like this in the New Testament. 
It appeared to us to be the confused talk of weak heads. In the 
Bible we got a just idea of one Eternal Cause, God the Father, 
almighty, all-wise, unchangeable, infinite; and are there taught how 
to worship and serve him. The greatest care is there taken to guard 
against the ill effects of imagination and superstition; and in the 
plainest language, we are ordered to pray to this blessed and only 
potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords, who only, or alone 
hath immortality; and this in imitation of Jesus, who in the morning 
very early went out into a solitary place, and there prayed<119>. 
Who dismissing his disciples departed into a mountain to pray<120>. 
And he continued all night in prayer to GOD:<121> We are ordered to 
glorify and bless this only wise God for ever<122> Blessed be the 
God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ<123>. To God and our Father 
be glory for ever.<124> And to love him truly by keeping the 
commandments.<125>. Cui Jesus sic respondit primum omnium 
praeceptorum est; audi Israelita. Dominus Deus voster dominus unus 
est. Itaque dominum Deum tuum toto corde, toto animo, tota mente, 
totisque viribus amato. Hoc primum est praeceptum. Hear, O Israel, 
the Lord our God is one Lord. And thou shalt love the Lord thy God 
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy 
strength. This is the first commandment.

Et voici le second. Vous aimerez vostre prochain comme vous même. 
And the second is like the first. Hunc simile est alterum, alterum 
ut teipsum amato. His majus aliud prmceptum nullum est. Though shalt 
love thy neighbour as thyself. There is none other commandment 
greater than these.

To say it; we became fully satisfied, that the supreme God and 
governor of the world, who exists by a prior necessity, and 
therefore must be one, a perfect moral agent, and possessed of all 
moral perfections, is the sole object of religious worship: that 
Jesus Christ was a temporary minister, with a legatarian power, to 
publish and declare the spiritual laws of this great God: and that 
it is incumbent on mankind to yield a perfect obedience to these 
spiritual laws of this Supreme Being: that is, the duty of all, to 
make the object proposed by Christ, his God and our God, his Father 
and our Father, the sole object of faith; and to expect happiness or 
salvation, on the term of being turned from all our iniquities. This 
seemed a matter worthy of the Son of God's appearing in the world. 
Everything else must be enthusiasm and usurpation.

Here the Ivonist had done, and I was greatly pleased with his sense 
and piety. "What a heavenly Christianity should we profess," I said, 
"if the notions of our modern enthusiasts were as consistent with 
Christ's great design and profession! We should then set up the 
Kingdom of God among men, and be diligent and active in promoting 
the laws of that kingdom. We should then believe, like Jesus Christ 
and his apostles, that there is but one God, the Father Almighty. 
There is no one good, so commonly called, but one that is God; or 
only the one God.<126> Nullus est bonus nisi unus Deus. 
Castalio.<127> And Cant. MS. Clem. Alex. adds, My Father who is in 
Heaven. This is life eternal, to acknowledge thee, O Father, to be 
the only true GOD.<128> It is one God who will justify.<129> We know 
that there is none other Gods but one. For to us there is one GOD 
the Father.<130> There is one GOD and Father of all, who is over 
all, and through all, and in you all<131>. And we should confess one 
Mediator,—the man Christ Jesus<132>. We should be consistent, and 
not throw off those principles upon which Christianity was founded, 
and alone could be first built. We should invite men into our 
religion. by representing to them the perfection of that primary law 
of God, reason or natural religion; by declaring the plainness and 
clearness of it to all attentive and well-disposed minds; and then 
show them how worthy it was of the Supreme Governor to give such 
creatures as he has made us the gospel: that by the religion of 
favour, he has, with glory to himself, displayed his paternal regard 
for us, by doing much more than what is strictly necessary for our 
eternal good. God, on a principle of love, sends his Christ, to 
advise us and awaken us to a sense of our danger in passing through 
this world, in case, which he saw would be the thing, we should not 
constantly attend to the light we might strike out ourselves with 
some trouble. He calls us in an extraordinary manner to forsake vice 
and idolatry, and practise the whole system of morality. We might 
expect, that a good God, would once at least, interpose by such an 
extraordinary method as revelation, to turn and incline his 
reasonable creatures, to the study and practice of the religion of 
nature. This was acting like the Father of the universe, considering 
the negligence and corruption of the bulk of mankind. The reason he 
gave us, the law of nature, was giving us all that was absolutely 
necessary. The gospel was an addition of what is excellently useful. 
What, my beloved, might a rational divine say, can be more paternal, 
and worthy of the Almighty Creator, than to reveal plainly the 
motive of a judgment to come, in order to secure all obedience to 
the religion of nature? Reason may, to be sure, be sufficient to 
show men their duty, and to encourage their performance of it with 
the assurance of obtaining a reward, if they would duly attend to 
its dictates, and suffer them to have their due effect upon them: it 
may guide mankind to virtue, and happiness consequent to it, as God 
must be a rewarder of all those who diligently seek him, and was 
enough to bring them to the knowledge, and engage them in the 
practice of true religion and righteousness, if they had not shut 
their eyes to its light, and wilfully rejected the rule written in 
their hearts. But as this was what mankind really did, and now do; 
as errors and impieties, owing to an undue use or neglect of reason, 
became universal; just as the case of Christians is, by disregarding 
the New Testament; and reason, through men's faults, was rendered 
ineffectual, though still sufficient, which justifies both the 
wisdom and goodness of God, in leaving man for so many ages to his 
natural will, and so great a part of the globe to this day with no 
other light than the law of nature; and reason, I say, was rendered 
ineffectual, though still sufficient to teach men to worship God 
with pious hearts and sincere affections, and to do his will by the 
practice of moral duties; to expect his favour for their good deeds, 
and his condemnation of their evil works; then was revelation a more 
powerful means of promoting true religion and godliness. The gospel 
is a more effectual light. It is a clearer and more powerful guide; 
a brighter motive and stronger obligation to universal obedience 
than reason can with certainty propose. And therefore, though there 
was not a necessity for God to give a new rule in vindication of his 
providence, and in order to render men accountable to him for their 
actions; yet the divine goodness was pleased to enforce the 
principles of reason and morality more powerfully by an express 
sanction of future rewards and punishments, and by the gospel 
restore religious worship to the original uncorrupted rational 
service of the Deity. This displays his paternal regard to his 
children, with glory to himself. Love was the moving principle of 
his sending Christ into the world, to reform the corruptions of 
reason, to restore it to its purity, and most effectually to promote 
the practice of the rules of it. The gospel revelation considered in 
this manner appears to be the pure effect of the divine goodness. It 
is a conduct accompanied with the greatest propriety and glory.

If this representation of Christianity was as much the doctrine of 
the church as it is of the Ivonites I have mentioned, we might then, 
with hopes of success, call upon the rational infidels to come in. 
They could hardly refuse the invitation, when we told them, our 
religion was the eternal law of reason and of God restored, with a 
few excellently useful additions: that the gospel makes the very 
religion of nature, a main part of what it requires, and submits all 
that it reveals to the test of the law of reason: that the splendour 
of God's original light, the light of nature, and the revelation of 
Jesus, are the same; both made to deliver mankind from evils and 
madness of superstition, and make their religion worthy of God, and 
worthy of men; to enable them by the voice of reason in conjunction 
with the words of the gospel, to worship One God the Maker, the 
Governor, the Judge, of the world; and to practise all that is good 
and praise-worthy: that we may be blessed as we turn from iniquity 
to virtue; and by entering cordially into the spirit of the 
meritorious example or exemplary merits of Christ, be determined 
dead to sin, and alive to righteousness: in short, my brethren, in 
the suffering and death of Jesus, his patient, pious, and meek, his 
benevolent and compassionate behaviour, under the most shocking 
insult, indignity, and torture, we have what we could not learn from 
the religion of nature, a deportment that well deserves both our 
admiration and imitation. We learn from the perfect example of 
Jesus, recommended in his gospel, to bear patiently ill-usage, and 
to desire the welfare of our most unreasonable and malicious 
enemies. This is improving by religion to the best purpose; and as 
we resemble the Son of God, the man Christ Jesus, in patience, 
piety, and benevolence, we become the approved children of the Most 
High, who is kind and good to the unthankful and to the evil. In 
this view of the gospel, all is fine, reasonable, and heavenly. The 
gentile can have nothing to object. We have the religion of nature 
in its original perfection, in the doctrine of the New Testament, 
enforced by pains and pleasures everlasting; and we learn from the 
death of the Mediator, not only an unprecedented patience, in 
hearing our sins in his own body on the tree: but the divine 
compassion and piety with which he bore them. We have in this the 
noblest example to follow, whenever called to suffer for well-doing 
or for righteousness' sake; and by the imitation, we manifest such a 
command of temper and spirit, as can only be the result of the 
greatest piety and virtue. This added to keeping the commandments 
must render men the blessed of the Father, and entitle them to the 
kingdom prepared for the wise, the honest, and the excellent.

But, alas! instead of giving such an account of Christianity, the 
cry of the doctors is, for the most part, Discard reason, and 
prostrate your understanding before the adorable mysteries. Instead 
of a Supreme Independent First Cause of all things to believe in and 
worship, they give Three true Gods in number, Three infinite 
independent Beings, to be called One, as agreeing in one common 
abstract essence, or species; as all mankind are one, in one common 
rational nature, or abstract idea of humanity. Amazing account! A 
triune no infidel or gentile of sense will ever worship.

Instead of fixing salvation or moral rectitude, and our preferring 
the will of God, as delineated in the words of the gospel, before 
all other considerations, we are told of an innocent, meritorious, 
propitiating blood, spilt by wicked hands, and so made an acceptable 
sacrifice, to a Being who is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity. 
This, we are assured, satisfies all the demands of the law. Here is 
infinite satisfaction, and most certainly, I add, a cool 
indifference as to personal rectitude. When such a faith or 
credulity becomes the principal pillar of trust and dependence, then 
mere reliance on such satisfaction to divine justice, may be a 
stupefying opiate, and make many remiss in the labours of a 
penitential piety, and that exact rectitude of mind and life, which 
even reason requires, to render us acceptable to the Deity. Many an 
appetite and passion are indulged under this subterfuge; and with 
little fervency or zeal for good works, men expect to partake of the 
heavenly joys, by trusting to the merits of their Saviour, in their 
last will and testament. Deplorable case! Alas! how has Christianity 
suffered by its doctors! The infidel laughs at it as thus preached. 
It becomes a by-word, and a hissing to them that pass by.

As to the library of my friends, the Ivonites, it was far from being 
a grand one, but I saw many curious books in it which had not come 
in my way before. From them I made several extracts, and to gratify 
my reader's curiosity a little, I will here favour him with one of 
them.

The first book I chanced to open in this library, was the second 
volume of Severin Bini's<133> edition of the Councils printed at 
Paris, in 1630; and over against a very remarkable passage from 
Cyril, p. 548, I found several written leaves, bound up in the 
volume, and these leaves referred to by an asterisk.

The passage I call remarkable, is part of a homily pronounced by the 
Alexandrian Patriarch before the council of Ephesus on St. John's 
day, in a church dedicated to his name. In rehearsing his discourse 
to the Holy Fathers, the Saint cites Heb. ch. 1. v. 6, and then 
addresses himself to the apostle. "When he bringeth in the first-
begotten into the world, he saith, Let all the angels of God worship 
him.—"O blessed John the Evangelist, explain this mystery:" Who is 
the first-begotten, how came he into the world? Mysterium hoc aperi, 
effare etiam nunc, qui voces habes immortales. Resera nobis puteum 
vitae. Da, ut nunc quoque de salutis fontibus hauriamus.["Speak to 
us now and reveal this mystery, you whose voice is immortal. Open 
for us the well of life. Help us to draw from the well of 
salvation."]

This passage of Cyril I have heard several learned Roman Catholic 
gentlemen call a prayer, and affirm it was a proof of the Father's 
invocation of saints, in the beginning of the fifth century; for St. 
Cyril succeeded his uncle Theophilus in the see of Alexandria, 
October 16, 412. But to this it may be answered,

First, That Binius, though a zealous pleader for the Catholic cause, 
as the monks of Rome miscall it, was of another opinion, for he 
takes no notice of this passage in his notes, in calce part 3, 
Concill. Ephesini, tom. ii. p. 665, &c. and most certainly, he would 
not have failed to urge it, if he had considered it as a prayer, and 
believed it did prove the invocation of saints.

Secondly, Neither does Bellarmine, in his treatise de Sanctorum 
Beatitudine, Henricus Vicus de Sanctorum Invocatione, Gabriel 
Vasquez de Adoratione, or Gregorius de Valentia de Oratione, make 
use of this passage of Cyril, though they do, ex professo, and data 
opera,<134> diligently quote all the councils and fathers they can, 
to prove the invocation of saints.

Thirdly, As rhetorical apostrophes, or prosopopaeias, are usual in 
all authors, sacred or civil, this may be one in Cyril, and it seems 
very plain from the passage, that it was intended for no more. It 
appears to be a rhetorical figure, and not a prayer; such a figure 
as the Greek fathers were wont very frequently to use in their 
orations and poems.

Cyril intending, as appears by the sequel, to answer his own 
question with a passage in St. John's gospel, makes a long 
rhetorical apostrophe to the apostle, as if he were there present, 
then adds, An non dicentem audimus, But do we not hear him saying? 
Or, as Binius has the reading, let us hear what St. John saith, 
audiamus itaque dicentem, as if they had heard John. giving his 
answer, and then concludes with the first verse of the first chapter 
of his gospel, In the beginning was the word, &c.

It is therefore very plain, that this passage of Cyril is only a 
part of his homily or sermon, and that in a rhetorical manner, he 
quotes a text from a gospel written by John about three hundred and 
thirty years before, in answer to his own question, who the word 
was? For Cyril to pray to John to tell them what he had told them 
long before, were senseless and ridiculous; but to desire the 
apostle to do it in a rhetorical apostrophe, was allowable. It 
amounts to no more than the figurative expression in our liturgy, 
Hear what comfortable words our Saviour saith. Hear what St. Paul 
saith.

But if Cyril did in this passage truly pray to St. John, that could 
be no argument for popish invocation of saints; for if an hundred 
fathers in the beginning of the fourth century, had preached up, and 
practised invocation of saints, yet that could not make it lawful 
and right, since we are taught by the scriptures to direct our 
prayers neither to saint nor angel, but to God only, and in the name 
and mediation of Jesus Christ only. We are not only positively 
ordered by the apostles to make all our addresses and prayers to God 
only, and by the mediation and intercession of Jesus Christ, but are 
told, that God is omniscient, and so able to hear all our prayers: 
all sufficient, and therefore able to supply all our necessities; 
and that his mercies in Jesus Christ are infinite. This makes our 
way sure in this particular.

On the contrary, the papists have no precept to pray to saints; nor 
any promise that they shall be heard; nor any practice of the 
primitive church, for three hundred years after Christ, to encourage 
them; and therefore, such popish invocation is a novel, groundless, 
and impious error.

We are told by St. Peter, that God had exalted the Lord Jesus Christ 
to be a Prince and Saviour, that is, an intercessor.<135> By St. 
Paul, that Christ is able to save to the uttermost all that come to 
God by him, seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for 
them;<136> that he is gone to heaven, for this very end, to appear 
in the presence of God for us;<137> that there is no other mediator 
betwixt God and men but the man Christ Jesus<138> that is, whose 
prerogative it is to intercede for sinners to the Divine Majesty; 
being an honour and dignity God hath exalted him unto, after his 
sufferings, and as a reward thereof: Thus are we informed by the 
divine oracles, and yet, notwithstanding this, to make prayers and 
supplications to the Virgin Mary, and a thousand other saints, for 
aid or help; and to have by their merit and intercession, the gifts 
and graces they pray for conferred upon them: this is a doctrine of 
such dangerous consequence, as it is a depriving of Christ Jesus of 
that grand dignity and prerogative he is now in heaven exalted to, 
as much as in men lies, that I should have admired how it ever came 
to be embraced by such as profess Christianity, had not the spirit 
of God foretold<139> that some should depart from the faith, giving 
heed to seducing spirits, that is, seducing men, and doctrines of 
devils, that is to say, doctrines concerning demons, or souls of 
famous men departed this life; which the heathens called demons; and 
to whom they gave the worship of prayer or invocation, as 
intercessors or inferior divinities. This prophecy hinders my 
wondering at the thing; but then I must call such modern invocation, 
gentilism Christianized, a deplorable corruption.

Ponder then, ye Catholics, in time, and think not to excuse 
yourselves by arguing from the command Christians have here on earth 
to require each other's prayers to God for them: for, we have no 
command to supplicate any in heaven but only God.<140> We have no 
reasonable assurance that the saints in heaven do hear our prayers, 
and of consequence have not the same reasons to request their 
prayers to God for us that we have to request the prayers of saints 
on earth: nor is this all: our prayers to each other in this life 
are only Christian requests to recommend our conditions to God: 
offices only of kindness: no acts of religious worship.

When St. Paul was on earth, had anyone on bended knees, with hands 
and eyes lifted up to heaven, in time of public prayer, and amidst 
the solemn prayers to God, beseeched him for aid and help, and for 
the conference of gifts and graces, he would have rent his clothes, 
and said, Why do ye these things? and can we suppose, that now in 
heaven, the apostle is less careful to preserve entire God's 
prerogative.

Beside, there is a great deal of difference betwixt St. Paul's 
saying, Brethren, pray for us, or our requesting the prayers of the 
faithful here on earth for us, and praying to saints in heaven, as 
practised in the Roman church. Ours, are only wishes and requests; 
theirs, solemn prayers on bended knees, made in the places and 
proper seasons of divine worship, and joined with the prayers they 
make to God. They use the same postures and expressions of devotions 
they use to God himself. They pray to them for help and aid, and 
make them joint-petitioners with Christ; relying on their merits as 
the merits of Christ.

In sum, in the tabernacle of this world, we are to request the 
prayers of every good Christian for us: but in the tabernacle of 
heaven, we are to call on none but Him in whom we believe. As in the 
outward court of the Jewish tabernacle, every priest was permitted 
to officiate, to receive and present the devotions of the people to 
the divine majesty; but in the holy place, within the vail, none but 
the high-priest was to do any office or service: even so in the 
tabernacle of this world, every Christian being a priest to God, has 
this honour conferred upon him; but in the holy of holies, in 
heaven, none but Christ, our high-priest, is to officiate. He only 
is there to appear in the presence of God for us. It is his 
prerogative alone to receive our prayers, and present them to the 
divine majesty. As none but the high-priest was to offer incense in 
the holy of holies, so none in heaven but Christ our high-priest is 
to offer our prayers to God his father. He alone is that angel to 
whom much incense was given, that he should offer it with the 
prayers of all saints, upon the golden altar that was before the 
throne.<141> Which alludes to the altar that was before the mercy 
seat, on which the high-priest only was to offer incense.

But the Catholic may say perhaps, that as on earth, men do not 
presently run to kings to present their requests, but obtain his 
favours by the mediation of courtiers and favourites; even so, it is 
fitting we have recourse to saints, who are favourites in heaven, 
that we may obtain access to God, and have our suits accepted of 
him. Thus have I heard some learned men of the church of Rome argue. 
They should consider, however, in the first place, that if an 
earthly prince had declared he would have no solicitor but his son, 
and that all favours and royal graces should come to his subjects 
through his hands, and by means of his mediation; such subjects 
could deserve no favour, if they make their application to other 
favourites, contrary to their prince's command. In the next place, 
if the solicitor, the son, was out of the question, and no such one 
had been declared by the king, yet as we petition earthly princes by 
such as enjoy their presence, because they cannot give audience to 
all their subjects, nor do they know the worthy; but God is 
omnipresent, his ears always open, and his head bowed down to the 
prayers of his people; is no respecter of persons, but gives a like 
access to the beggar as to the prince, and promises to cast out none 
that make their application to him; it follows of consequence, that 
we ought to address ourselves immediately to God, and ask from him. 
If an earthly prince should thus invite his subjects to petition him 
for the supply of their wants, I should account the man no better 
than a fool or a madman, who would apply himself to any of the 
king's favourites.

The conclusion is; O thou that hearest prayer, unto thee shall all 
flesh come.<142> Since God, who is infinite in mercy, omnipresent, 
and omnipotent in wisdom and action, admits every man to the throne 
of grace, bids him ask in the name of Jesus Christ, and promises, 
whatever we ask in his Son's name, he will do it. Since the practice 
of praying to saints is injurious to Christ, and doth manifestly rob 
him of his royal prerogative, which is to be the one, and only 
mediator betwixt God and man; for in this office, he hath no sharers 
or partners, according to the scripture account: As God is but one, 
and there is no other; so the mediator (by the appointment of God) 
is but one, and there is, there can be no other.<143> And since, 
exclusive of these unalterable things, the Roman doctors cannot be 
certain, that saints in heaven hear the requests of suppliants on 
earth, or know whether our prayers are fit to be accepted of 
God;<144> let us reject that unlawful practice, the invocation of 
saints, and pray for pardon and grace, as the gospel directs, to God 
the judge of all, through Jesus Christ the mediator of the new 
covenant. This do, and thou shalt live.

N.B. Who was the author of these good remarks, these friars could 
not tell me: as they were in the book when they bought it. If I 
mistake not, they are an abstract from a letter of Bishop Barlow to 
Evelyn, with several additions. I have not Bishop Barlow's works by 
me: but I think I have seen something to this purpose, written by 
this prelate about one hundred years ago.

"Say why was man so eminently raised 
Amid the vast creation: why ordained 
Through life and death to dart his piercing eye, 
With thoughts beyond the limits of his frame; 
But that th'omnipotent might send him forth 
In sight of mortal and immortal powers, 
As on a boundless theatre, to run 
The great career of justice; to exalt 
His generous aim to all diviner deeds; 
To shake each partial purpose from his breast; 
And through the mists of passion and of sense, 
And through the tossing tide of chance and pain, 
To hold his course unfaltering, while the voice 
Of truth and virtue, up the steep ascent 
Of nature, calls him to his high reward, 
Th'applauding smile of heaven? Else wherefore burns 
In mortal bosoms this unquenched hope, 
That breathes from day to day sublimer things, 
And mocks possession? Wherefore darts the mind 
With such resistless ardor to embrace 
Majestic forms; impatient to be free, 
Spurning the gross control of wilful might; 
Proud of the strong contention of her toils; 
Proud to be daring?"



CHAPTER XVI.

The eighth of April, 1729, I bade the Ivonites adieu, and by their 
directions, walked up a very steep and stony mountain, which took me 
two hours, and then arrived at what I had often seen before in this 
part of the world, a great lake, the water of which was black as ink 
to look at as it stood, though very bright in a cup, and must be 
owing, as I suppose, to its descending to the abyss: by the side of 
this water, under the shade of oak-trees, many hundred years old, we 
rode for an hour, on even ground, and then came to a descent so very 
dangerous and dark, through a wood on the mountain's side, that we 
could hardly creep down it on our feet, nor our horses keep their 
legs as we led them to the bottom. This declivity was more than a 
mile, and ended in a narrow lane between a range of precipices that 
almost met at top. This pass was knee-deep in water, from a spring 
in the bottom of the mountain we had come down, which ran through 
it, and so very stony, that it took us three hours to walk the 
horses to the end of it, though it was not more than two miles: but 
at last we came to a fine plain, over which we rode for an hour and 
a half, and arrived at a wood, which seemed very large, and stood 
between two very high and unpassable hills. In this forest was our 
way, and the road so dark, and obstructed by the branches of trees, 
that it was dismal and uneasy to go. On however we went for a long 
time, and about the middle of it came to a circular opening of about 
four acres, in which four very narrow roads met; that we had 
travelled, another before us, and one on each hand. The way straight 
on we were cautioned by my friends not to go, as it was a terrible 
ride; but whether to turn to the right or left, we had forgot. I 
thought to the right; but my lad was positive, he remembered the 
direction was to take the left-hand road. This caused a stop for 
some time, and as I was a little fatigued, I thought it best while 
we paused to dine. O'FINN brought immediately some meat, bread, and 
a bottle of cider, from his valise, and under a great oak I sat 
down, while our horses fed on the green. One hour we rested, and 
then went on again, to the left, as O'FINN advised. For several 
hours we rode, or rather our horses walked, till we got out of the 
wood, and then arrived at the bottom of a steep mountain; one side 
of which is in the northern extremity of Westmoreland, and the other 
in the north end of Stanemore-Richmondshire. This vast hill we 
ascended, and came down the other side of the fell into a plain, 
which extends south-east for near half a mile to the river Tees, 
that divides the north end of Stanemore from Bishopric, or the 
county of Durham. Yorkshire here ends in an obtuse angle, between 
two mountains, and the angle, for a quarter of a mile, is filled 
with that beautiful tall ever-green tree, the broad leaved 
Alaternus,<145> intermixed here and there in a charming manner, with 
the fir tree, the Norway spruce, and the balm of Gilead. It is as 
fine a grove as can in any part of the world be seen.

Just at the entrance of it, by the side of a plentiful spring, which 
runs into the Tees, there stood the prettiest little house I had 
ever beheld, and over it crept the pretty rock-rose, the cassine, 
the sea-green coromilla, and other evergreen shrubs. Before the 
house, was a large garden, seven or eight acres of land, under 
fruit-trees, and vegetables of every kind; very beautifully laid 
out, and watered in a charming manner by the stream that murmured a 
thousand ways from the spring by the house-door. I have not seen a 
sweeter thing. It appeared so beautiful and useful, so still and 
delightful a place, so judiciously cultivated, and happily disposed, 
that I could not help wishing to be acquainted with the owner of 
such a lodge.

As there was no other fence to this fine spot of ground but a ditch 
like a ha-ha<146> to keep cattle out, I leaped into the gardens, and 
roamed about for some time, to look at the curious things. I then 
went up to the house, in hopes of seeing a human creature either 
high or low. I knocked at the door, but no one could I find, though 
the mansion did not look like an uninhabited place. I then sauntered 
into the grove behind, and in a winding way of three hundred yards, 
that had been cut through the perennial wood, and was made between 
banks of springing flowers, beautiful exotics, and various aromatic 
shrubs, crept on till I arrived at a sleeping parlour, which stood 
in the middle of a circular acre of ground, and was surrounded and 
shaded with a beautiful grove; the larix, the phoenician cedar, and 
the upright savin. There was a little falling water near the door, 
that was pleasing to look at, and charmed the ear. Entering this 
room, I found the walls painted by some masterly hand, in baskets of 
flowers, and the finest rural scenes. Two handsome couches were on 
either side the chamber, and between these lits-de-repos was as 
curious a table for wood and workmanship as could be seen. Pretty 
stools stood near it, and a one arm-chair. It was a sweet silent 
place, and in every respect, far beyond the sleeping parlour in the 
gardens at Stow.<147>

On one of the couches, as it was then evening, and I knew not what 
to do, I threw myself down, and very soon fell fast asleep. I lay 
the whole night without waking, and as soon as I could perceive any 
day, went to see what was become of O'FINN and the horses. The 
beasts I found feeding on very good grass in the green; and my lad 
still snoring under a great tree: but he was soon on his legs, and 
gave me the following account.

About an hour after my departure from him, he saw a poor man pass 
over the plain, who had come down the mountain we descended, and was 
going to cross the Tees in a small skiff of his own, in order to go 
to his cottage on the other side in Bishopric: that he lived by 
fishing and fowling, and sold what he got by land and water to the 
quality and gentlefolk, twenty miles round him. And on asking who 
lived in the house before us, on the skirts of the grove, he said, 
it belonged to a young lady of great fortune, Miss ANTONIA CRANMER, 
whose father died in the house I saw, and had been dead about a 
year; that she was the greatest beauty in the world, and only 
nineteen, and for one so young, wise to an astonishing degree: that 
she lived mostly at this seat, with her cousin, AGNES VANE, who was 
almost as handsome as she: that Miss CRANMER had no relish for the 
world, being used to still life, and seldom stirred from home but to 
visit an old lady, her aunt, who lived in Cumberland; that she was 
at present there, about twenty miles off, and would soon return: 
that she kept four young gentlewomen, who had no fortunes, to attend 
her and Miss VANE; two old men servants, a gardener, and a cook; and 
two boys: that whenever she went from her house, she took her whole 
family with her, and left every place locked up as I saw. O'FINN's 
account surprised me. It set me a thinking if it was possible to get 
this charming girl. I paused with my finger in my mouth for a few 
minutes, and then bid him saddle the horses.

As soon as it was possible, I went over the river to the fisherman's 
house, determining to wait there, till I could see the beautiful 
ANTONIA, and her fair kinswoman, another AGNES DE CASTRO, to be 
sure. My curiosity could not pass two such glorious objects without 
any acquaintance with them.

The poor fisherman gave me a bed very readily for money, as he had 
one to spare for a traveller, and he provided for me everything I 
could desire. He brought bread and ale from a village a few miles 
distant, and I had plenty of fish and wild-fowl for my table. Every 
afternoon I crossed the water, went to the sleeping parlour, and 
there waited for the charming ANTONIA. Twenty days I went backwards 
and forwards, but the beauties in that time did not return. Still 
however I resolved to wait, and, to amuse myself till they came, 
went a little way off to see an extraordinary man.

While I resided in this cottage, CHRISTOPHER informed me, that about 
three miles from his habitation, there lived, in a wild and 
beautiful glen, a gentleman well worth my knowing, not only on 
account of his pretty lodge, and lone manner of spending his time, 
but as he was a very extraordinary man. This was enough to excite my 
curiosity, and on the first of May, as soon as it was light, I went 
to look for this solitary. I found him in a vale, romantically 
situated, indeed, amongst vast rocks, ill-shaped and rude, and 
surrounded with trees, as venerable as the forest of Fontainebleau. 
His little house stood on the margin of a fountain, and was 
encompassed with copses of different trees and greens. The pine, the 
oak, the ash, the chestnut tree, cypresses, and the acacia, 
diversified the ground, and the negligent rural air of the whole 
spot, had charms that could always please. Variety and agreeableness 
were everywhere  to be seen. Here was an arbour of shrubs, with 
odoriferous flowers: and there, a copse of trees was crowned with 
the enamel of a meadow. There was a collection of the most beautiful 
vegetables in one part; and in another, an assembly of ever-greens, 
to form a perpetual spring. PAN had an altar of green turf, under 
the shade of elms and limes: and a water-nymph stood by the spring 
of a murmuring stream. The whole was a fine imitation of nature; 
simple and rural to a charming degree.

Here lived DORICK WATSON, an English gentleman, who had been bred a 
Catholic in France, and there married a sister of the famous Abbé le 
Blanc. But on returning to his own country, being inclined by good 
sense and curiosity, to see what the Protestants had to say in 
defence of their reformation, he read the best books he could get on 
the subject, and soon perceived, that Luther, Melancthon, Calvin, 
Zwinglius, Bucer, and other ministers of Christ, had said more 
against the Romish religion than the pretended Catholics had been 
able to give a solid answer to. He saw, that barbarity, policy, and 
sophistry, were the main props of popery; and that, in doctrine and 
practice, it was one of the greatest visible enemies that Christ has 
in the world. He found that even Bellarmine's notes of his church 
were so far from being a clear and necessary proof that the church 
of Rome is the body of Christ, or true church, that they proved it 
to be the Great Babylon, or that great enemy of God's church, which 
the apostles describe.

He saw, in the first place, that there has not been, since the 
writing of the New Testament, any empire, but that of the church of 
Rome, so universal for one thousand two hundred and sixty years 
together, as to have all that dwell upon earth, peoples, and 
multitudes, and nations, and tongues, to worship it; which is St 
John's description of the new power that prevailed on the 
inhabitants of the earth to receive his idolatrous constitutions, 
and yield obedience to his tyrannical authority. And all that dwell 
on the earth shall worship him<148>, except those who are enrolled 
in the registers, as heirs of eternal life, according to the 
promises of the mediator of acceptance and blessing. The waters 
which thou sawest, where the whore sitteth, are peoples, and 
multitudes, and nations, and tongues<149>. Bellarmine's Universality 
is then directly against him.

The Cardinal's second note, continued DORICK, is antiquity, and his 
third, a perpetual and uninterrupted duration. But on examination, I 
could find no ruling power, except Rome papal, so ancient, as to 
have the blood of prophets, and saints, and of all that were slain 
upon earth, of that kind for that space of time, to be found in 
it<150>. And what Rule but papal Rome had ever so long a duration 
upon  seven hills, so as to answer the whole length of the time of 
the Saracen and Turkish empires.

The Cardinal's fourth note is amplitude, and it is most certain, 
that never had any other church such a multitude and variety of 
believers, as to have all nations drink of the wine of her 
fornication, and to gain a blasphemous power over all kindreds, and 
tongues, and nations.

The fifth note is the succession of its bishops; and the sixth, 
Agreement with the doctrine of the ancient church. Now it is most 
true, that none but Rome was ever so eminently conspicuous for so 
long a time for the succession of its bishops under one supreme 
patriarch, as to be the living image of all the civil dignities of 
the empire, where it was under one supreme church head exercising 
all the power of the civil head: nor did ever any enemy of God's 
church act for so long a time like the red dragon in its bloody laws 
against the followers of the lamb: and yet so far agree with the 
primitive church in fundamental doctrines, as to answer the 
character of a false prophet with the horns of the lamb, that is, 
Christ, but speaking like the red dragon to his followers, as the 
church of Rome has done.<151>

The seventh note of Bellarmine's holy Roman Catholic church, is the 
Union of the members among themselves, and with the head. And sure 
it is, that nowhere else but in Rome papal, has there been such an 
union of head and members for that length of time, as to apply the 
one mind of the ten kings for their agreement together, to give 
their power, and strength, and their whole kingdoms to the beast.

The eighth note produced by Cardinal Bellarmine, is Sanctity; and 
WATSON saw it fairly proved by the Protestant writers, that no 
church but Rome did ever appear so long together with such a medley 
of sanctity, in some doctrines, and outward appearances of a strict 
holiness of life, joined with the most abominable doctrines, and 
practices, to qualify it for the horns of the lamb, and the speech 
of the dragon for the idolatrous and cruel commands of the image; 
or, for having the form of godliness in the latter times, and yet 
denying the power thereof.

In short, DORICK not only found, on a careful enquiry, that the 
system of the church of Rome was error and turpitude, abomination 
gain, and cruelty, and her great design the very reverse of the 
gospel revelation, which came down from heaven to prepare men, by 
the practice of universal holiness and virtue, for eternal life; but 
likewise, that even her Cardinal's notes prove, this church cannot 
be, in any sense, the true church of Christ; and Bellarmine was 
perfectly infatuated to make choice of such things for the marks of 
his church, as make it the very picture of Babylon the Great. He 
resolved then to come out of Rome. He determined to forsake a 
church, which had altered the institutions of Christ, and is 
therefore guilty of heresy as well as schism.

This change in religion gave DORICK the highest satisfaction, as he 
told me, and it was doubled by his being able to convert his beloved 
ADELAIDE from popery to the church of Christ. But this joy had soon 
after some mitigation, by losing one of  the most agreeable women in 
the world. Death robbed him of his heart's fond idol, and by that 
stroke he was so wounded, that he could not heal himself for a long 
time. He became the real mourner. He kept the reasons of his anguish 
continually before him, and was more intent upon spending his 
spirits, than his sorrows. He grew fond of solitude and silence, 
that he might indulge his passion, and provoke the emotion of that 
grief that was ready to devour him. In short, he retreated to the 
silent place I found him in, which was a part of his own estate, and 
turned hermit. He built the little villa I saw by the water-side, 
and formed the ground into the natural garden I beheld. Le Blanc 
mentions it in his letters, as an extraordinary thing, and very 
justly prefers it to the laboured and expensive Gardens at Chiswick, 
the work of the late Lord Burlington. Here WATSON laid in everything 
he had a mind for, and filled his closet with books. He amused and 
kept himself healthy by working in his garden, and when he had done 
abroad, went in to read. His principal study was the contemplation 
of the best learning, which is the true Christian; and from that he 
went to know what the Greeks, and Romans have resolved and taught. 
In some things, I found he was a learned agreeable man, and wondered 
greatly at his whim in turning hermit. I said a great deal against 
it, as we sat over a bottle of claret; told him he might employ his 
time and talents more usefully in the world by mixing and conversing 
with his fellow-creatures, and by a mutual participation and 
conveyance of the common blessings of nature and providence; and as 
he was not yet forty, advised him to go over the Tees, and make his 
addresses to Miss CRANMER or Miss VANE, both of them being most 
glorious girls, as I was told, and capable of adding greatly to the 
delights of philosophy, You have not seen two finer creatures, soul 
and body, than they are, if I have been rightly informed; and I 
think, it would be a nobler and more religious act to get one of 
them with child, in the state of holy wedlock, than to write the 
best book that was ever printed. For my own part, I had rather 
marry, and double-rib one of these dear creatures, than die with the 
character of a father of the deserts. But in vain did I remonstrate 
to this anchorite. Contemplation was become his Venus, from the hour 
he lost his ADELAIDE; and he had lived so very happy in his lone 
state for seven years past, that he could not think of hazarding 
felicity by a change of life. He had all he desired. If at any time, 
anything was wanting, CHRISTOPHER the fisherman, who came to see him 
once or twice a week, very quickly got him whatever he required. 
This was WATSON'S answer to my advice, and seeing it was to no 
purpose to say any more, I wished my hermit health, and bid him 
adieu.
END OF VOLUME 2.



VOLUME 3.

Nec Vixit Male, qui Natus Moriensque fefellit. 
[Neither has he lived ill whose birth and death have passed 
unnoticed by the world – Horace, Letter 18. To Scaeva




CHAPTER XVII.

HAVING, in the preceding volume, mentioned the famous Abbé Le Blanc, 
I think I ought to say something of him in this place, by adding a 
few remarks in relation to this extraordinary man. He was in England 
in the year 1735, and wrote two volumes of Letters in octavo, which 
were translated into English, and printed for Brindley in 1747. In 
this account of England, the French monk pretends to describe the 
natural and political constitution of our country, and the temper 
and manners of the nation; but it is evident from his epistles, that 
he knew nothing at all of any of them.

Voltaire, however, that wonderful compound of a man, half-infidel, 
half-papist; who seems to have had no regard for Christianity, and 
yet compliments popery, at the expense of his understanding;<152> 
who wrote the history of England with a partiality and malevolence 
almost as great as Smollet, and pretended to describe the Britannic 
constitution, though it is plain from what he says, that he had not 
one true idea of the primary institutions of it, but taking this 
nation to be just such another kingdom of slaves as his own country, 
railed at the Revolution, and like all the Jacobite dunces, prated 
against the placing the Prince of Orange on the throne, and the 
establishment of the succession in the present protestant heirs; 
though it is most certain, that these things were the natural fruit 
and effect of our incomparable constitution, and are de jure. In 
short, that Zoilus and plagiary, that carping superficial critic, as 
a good judge calls him; who abuses the English nation in his 
letters, and denies Shakespeare (who furnishes out more elegant, 
pleasing, and interesting entertainment, in his plays, than all the 
other dramatic writers, ancient and modern, have been able to do; 
and, without observing any one unity but that of character, for ever 
diverts and instructs, by the variety of his incidents, the 
propriety of his sentiments, the luxuriancy of his fancy and the 
purity and strength of his dialogue) almost every dramatic 
excellence; though in his Mahomet, he pilfers from Machbeth almost 
every capital scene: Voltaire, I say, speaking of this Abbé Le 
Blanc, wishes he had travelled through all the world, and wrote on 
all nations, for it becomes only a wise man to travel and write. Had 
I always such cordials, I would not complain any more of my ills. I 
support life, when I suffer. I enjoy it when I read you. This is 
Voltaire's account of the Abbé. How true and just it is, we shall 
see in a few observations on what this reverend man says of our 
religion and clergy.

The substance of what this French monk reports, vol. ii. from p. 64, 
to p. 75, in his letter to the President Bouhier,<153> is this:

1. That Cranmer, and the other doctors, who introduced the 
reformation into England, were downright enthusiasts, and compassed 
their designs by being seconded by those, who were animated by a 
spirit of irreligion, and by a greedy desire of seizing the 
possessions of the monks.

It was the desire of a change established the reformation. The new 
doctors seduced the people, and the people having mistaken darkness 
for light, quitted the road of truth, to walk in the ways of error.

2. As to morals, that this boasted reformation produced no change in 
that respect: for the people are not purer than they were in former 
times, and the ecclesiastics are despised and hated for the badness 
of their lives. The bishops sacrifice everything to their ambition; 
and the clergy of the second rank have no respect for their office. 
They spend the whole day in public places in smoking and drinking, 
and are remarkable for drunkenness, so dishonourable to 
ecclesiastics. Their talk is the most dissolute, and the vice that 
degrades these professors, sets a bad example to sober people, and 
makes them the jest of libertines.

3. The only remarkable change produced by the reformation was the 
marriage of priests; and, exclusive of this being against the 
decisions of the catholic church, it is contrary to sound policy and 
experience. The marriage of priests diminishes the respect we should 
have for them. The misconduct of a woman makes the clergyman fall 
into contempt. The lewdness of the daughter makes the priest, her 
father, the object of the most indecent jests; and for the most 
part, the daughters of the clergy turn whores after the death of 
their father; who, while living, spent more of his income in 
maintaining himself and children in pleasure and luxury, than in 
works of charity. He lived profusely, and dies poor.

Besides, if the English clergy were the greatest and most excellent 
men, yet a great man in the eyes of the world, loses the respect 
which is due to him, in proportion as he has anything in common with 
the rest of mankind. A Madam Newton, and a Madam Fontenelle, would 
injure the illustrious men whose name they bore. Nor is this all. 
Those who by their disposition cannot fix that secret inclination, 
which induces us to love, on one person, are more humane and 
charitable than others. The unmarried ecclesiastics are more 
animated with that charitable spirit their function requires, as 
they have no worldly affections to divert it. People very rarely, as 
Lord Bacon says, employ themselves in watering plants, when they 
want water themselves. In short, the English divines are the worst 
of men, and there is hardly any religion in England.

Thus does this French Abbé revile the English reformation and 
divines. He misrepresents the whole nation, and with a falsehood and 
outrage peculiar to popery and mass-priests, that is, to devils and 
the most execrable religion, screams against the pure religion of 
the gospel, and dishonestly blackens some of the finest characters 
that ever adorned human nature. So very virulent is this reverend 
French papist against the clergy of England, that he is even 
positive there is not a divine in the nation knows how to behave 
like a gentleman.

In answer to the first article of impeachment, I observe, that it is 
so far from being true, that Cranmer, and the other English divines, 
our reformers, were enthusiasts, and compassed their designs by the 
assistance of those who were animated by a spirit of irreligion, and 
by a greedy desire of seizing the possession of the monks, as this 
mass-priest asserts; that it is most certain, on the contrary, 
Cranmer, and the other reformers, were wise and upright Christians, 
who, from a good understanding of religion, opposed the false 
pretensions of the church of Rome. They saw that popery was contrary 
to the true genius of Christianity; its spirit insolent and cruel; 
and its worship not only a jumble of the most ridiculous fopperies 
and extravagancies, borrowed from heathen customs and superstitions; 
but the impurest that ever appeared in the world: that the designs 
of popish Rome were contrary to all the principles of humanity; its 
doctrines abominable and sinful; and its offices cursed and 
diabolical; it was evident, I say, to the conception of these great 
men, I mean Cranmer, and the other English reformers, that the 
Romish church was treacherous and inhuman, blood-thirsty and 
antichristian; that her devotions were horrible and impious; her 
ministers false prophets and liars, covered and decked with the 
livery of Christ, but in everything acting contrary to the salvation 
wrought by Jesus; and therefore these wise and excellent reformers 
renounced popery, and bravely declared for that religion, which 
promotes the good of all mankind, and inspires men to worship the 
Father only in spirit and in truth. They threw off the cloak and 
garments of antichrist: they gloriously separated from him, and 
joined together in purity and simplicity, to please the Lord 
Jehovah. There was no enthusiasm in the case, (as Le Blanc, the 
mass-priest, has the front to say) but, when the light of the gospel 
was obscured, and darkness had overspread the earth: when ignorance 
and superstition universally prevailed, and the immoralities of the 
Church of Rome were made to pass for Christianity in the world, then 
did these reformers call the people out of Rome, and preach to them 
the essential truths of the faith. They called them from an 
idolatrous religion, and all its train of direful effects; from that 
sin of the first rank, which strikes at the being of a God, and 
ravishes from him the greatest honour that is due to him from his 
creature, man; they called them from the horrible service of the 
mass, from their addresses to angels and saints, and their worship 
of images, to the inward knowledge of one true God, and the worship 
due to him only; to the sanctification and honour, which is due to 
him above all things, and above every name; to the living hope in 
God through Christ; to regeneration, and inward renovation by faith, 
hope, and charity; to a holy conversation, and a faithful 
performance of all the commandments; to true repentance, 
perseverance to the end, and life eternal. To these truths, (not to 
be found in the religion of our travelling mass-priest) did the 
great, the glorious English reformers call mankind. They laboured to 
establish them in everything tending to a pure faith, and good life. 
In this, there is not, there cannot be any enthusiasm.

And as to their being assisted by those who were animated by a 
spirit of irreligion, and by a greedy desire of seizing the 
possessions of the monks, it does not appear to be the truth of the 
case. Supposing there were such irreligious men, the assistance the 
reformers had from any great men in Henry the Eighth's time, when 
the abbeys were destroyed, was so very little, that malice only 
could mention it as an objection to the reformation. Popery, in that 
monarch's reign, was still the established religion of England, and 
both sides blame this king's persecutions. If papists were put to 
death for denying the supremacy of Harry, protestants were no less 
sufferers, for opposing the adoration of the host, and other 
religious impieties. And after the short reign of his son, Edward 
the Sixth, what assistance had the reformers under bloody Mary? Did 
she not do all that infernal popery could suggest, to destroy 
Cranmer, his brethren, and their reformation? And did not they, 
without any other assistance than what they received from the spirit 
of God, continue to vindicate the truth as it is in Jesus, and teach 
the pure doctrines of the gospel, in opposition to the frauds and 
vile inventions of papal Rome. Without minding the indignities, the 
torments, and the cruel death prepared for them, the brave honest 
men went on with their heavenly work, and, till the flames made them 
silent, endeavoured to destroy the Romish artifices and 
immoralities, and to spread the pure religion and undefiled before 
God and the Father. They were zealous, with the truth of religion on 
their side, and laboured to convert, out of a pure and friendly 
regard to the eternal welfare of mankind.

They did the work, by the blessing of God, and therefore the 
malicious Le Blanc, the mass-priest, reviles and blackens them.

What he says of usurpation, in respect of church lands, does not 
deserve any notice. The reforming clergy were not the actors in that 
scene, it was the king and his council. And as the Pope had shoewed 
them the way, by granting bulls for the dissolution of the lesser 
monasteries, they thought, since the Pope's power was taken away by 
a general consent of the nation, the king, the church, and the 
people concurring, they might, with as little sacrilege, dissolve 
the. rest. The king and parliament (says Bishop Burnet) could not 
discern the difference between greater and lesser as to the point of 
sacrilege. And although some uses might cease by the doctrines of 
the reformation, as masses for souls departed, and monks to pray the 
dead out of purgatory; yet there were others to employ the church 
lands about, as some of them were in founding new bishoprics. And if 
in this case, the reformers had been guilty of some wilful errors, 
that could be no crime of the reformation. The culpable must answer 
it. For the satisfaction of conscience about the reformation, there 
can be but three questions fairly proposed. Was there sufficient 
cause for it? Was there sufficient authority? And whether the 
proceedings of our reformation were justifiable by the rule of 
scripture, and the ancient church? Upon these points we ought to 
join issue, and I am sure the conclusion must be in the affirmative.

As to Le Blanc's second observation in relation to the marriage of 
priests, which our reformation he says produced, it may be answered, 
that the doctrine of a priest's marriage being unlawful, was 
borrowed by the church of Rome from the ancient heretics; especially 
from the Manichees, who allowed marriage to their hearers, as the 
church of Rome doth to laymen; but forbad it to their elect, as that 
church doth to her priests. St. Augustin charges the Manichees with 
this error. Hic non dubito vos esse clamaturos invidiamque factures, 
castitatem perfectam vos vehementur commendare atque laudare, non 
tamen nuptias prohibere; quandoquidem auditores vestri quorum apud 
vos secundus est gradus ducere atque habere non prohibentur 
uxores.<154> De Moribus Manichaeorum, lib. ii. c. 18.

The first pope we read of that condemned the marriage of priests, 
was Syricius, the Roman, A. D. 384-398. And upon this account, I 
wonder Baronius had not a regard to his memory: but it has been the 
misfortune of his holiness since his death to fall under the 
displeasure of the Cardinal to that degree, that he has struck him 
out of his catalogue of his Romish saints. He does not tell us for 
what reason. Perhaps it was because this pope rather dissuaded 
priests from marriage than peremptorily forbad it, as appears by his 
letters. Syr. epist. 1. et 4. apud Binium.

The next pope, who distinguished himself against the marriage of 
priests, was the son of Bald-head, count of Burgundy, whose grand-
daughter was consort to Lewis the sixth, king of France; I mean the 
celebrated Guy, archbishop of Vienne, who succeeded Gelasius, A. D. 
1119, and had for successor in the year 1124, Lambert of Bononia, 
commonly called Honorius the second. Calixtus the second, pope and 
prince of Burgundy, was the first who absolutely forbade priests 
marriage, and in case they were married, commanded them to be 
separated. Grat. Dist. 27. c. 8. This was in the beginning of the 
twelfth century. And towards the end of it, A. D. 1198, the renowned 
son of Count Trasimund, I mean Innocent the third, the ever 
memorable Cardinal Lotharius, pronounced all the marriages of 
priests null. And afterwards came on the council of Trent, A. D. 
1545-1563, which anathematizes those who say such marriages are 
valid. Sess. 24. can. 9.

But one would think, that God sufficiently declared his approbation 
of such marriages, in that the whole world hath by his appointment 
been twice peopled by two married priests; first by Adam, secondly 
by Noah. And we are sure, the holy scripture tells us, That marriage 
is honourable in all;<155> and places it among the qualifications of 
a bishop, That he be the husband of one wife, having faithful 
children.<156> This, saith St. Chrysostom, the apostle prescribed to 
this end, that he might stop the mouths of heretics, who reproached 
marriage; declaring thereby that marriage is no unclean thing, but 
so honourable, that a married man may be exalted to the sacred 
throne of a bishop.<157> What do you say to this, Le Blanc? I fancy 
you never read this homily of Chrysostom. And well might this saint 
think it not unbecoming a bishop to marry, when our Lord thought it 
not unbecoming an apostle, no not the prince of the apostles, as the 
Romanists will have him, for it is without doubt, that St. Peter was 
married; in that the scripture makes mention of his wife's mother. 
Matt. viii. 14. And Clemens of Alexandria tells us, that it was 
certainly reported, that when he saw his wife led to death, he 
rejoiced; and having exhorted her and comforted her, he called her 
by her name, and bid her remember the Lord. Stromat. lib. 7. p. 736. 
lut. 1629. And that he was not only married, but begat children, the 
same Clemens in another place affirms; Stromat. lib. 3. p. 448. Yea 
that St. Philip and St. Jude were also married, and had children, 
Eusebius is witness. Eccles. Hist. lib. 3. e. 20-31. And in like 
manner we find, that many of the primitive bishops were married. 
Charemon bishop of Nilus, St. Spiridion, St. Gregory Nazianzen, St. 
Gregory Nyssen, St. Hilary, and many more, were married men.

Nor can it be said, that they took wives while they were laymen, and 
after they took upon them the sacred ministry, were separated from 
them; since the canons, commonly called the apostles, did prohibit 
either bishop, priest, or deacon, to put away his wife upon pretence 
of religion. See Canon 5. And if any such shall abstain from 
marriage, as in itself abominable, command that he be corrected, or 
deposed, and cast out of the church. Canon 50.

Now supposing these canons, notwithstanding all that Whiston has 
said, were not made by them whose name they bear, yet they are 
allowed by all to be of much greater antiquity than the first Nicene 
council. And when in that council it was moved, that bishops and 
priests, deacons and sub-deacons, might not cohabit with their 
wives, which they had taken before ordination, the motion was 
presently dashed by the famous Paphnutius, who was himself a single 
person. Socrat. Eccles. Hist. lib. 1. c. 11. Yea a long time after 
this council, we meet with many popes, who were sons of bishops and 
priests.

Pope Theodorus, Silverius, and Gelasius I. were the sons of bishops; 
Pope Boniface I., Felix II. and Agapetus II. were the sons of 
priests. Gratian. Dist. 56. c. 2. and that we may not think this 
strange, Gratian himself informs us, that the marriage of priests 
was in those days lawful in the Latin church. Dist. 56. c. 12.

Nor is this doctrine to be rejected only as contrary to scripture, 
and to primitive and apostolical practice, but because of the 
abominable fruits produced in the church of Rome by it. For when the 
clergy might not have wives, which God allowed, instead of them they 
took whores; and that wickedness so far prevailed, in the church, 
that the Cardinal of Cambray informs us, De Reform. Eccles. many 
clergymen were not ashamed publicly, in the face of the world, to 
keep concubines. And the gloss upon Gratian says "A priest may not 
be deposed for simple fornication, because there are few priests to 
be found without that fault." This made Pius II. say, that though 
priests were by the western church forbid to marry for good reason 
yet there was stronger reason to restore marriage to them again. 
Hist. Council. Trent. lib. vii. p. 680. And many in that council, 
were so sensible of this, that they alleged the great scandal given 
by incontinent priests, and that there was want of continent persons 
fit to exercise the ministry. Paoli. p. 679. &c. The Emperor and the 
Duke of Bavaria did therefore require, that the marriage of priests 
might be granted. Paoli, p. 680. &c. And many bishops desired that 
married persons might be promoted to holy orders; but this request 
was not granted, because, as the fathers observed, if the clergy 
once come to be married, they will no longer depend on the Pope, but 
on their prince.

To conclude this article, and I shall do it in the words of a great 
man, a prelate of the church of England; To make war against the 
very being of their species, they, the Romish priests, devote 
themselves to a single life, in blasphemous opposition to that first 
great command and blessing, increase and multiply.

As to Le Blanc's third observation, relating to the immoralities and 
bad behaviour of the English clergy; I answer, if there are several 
bad men among so large a body as the protestant divines are, which 
is not strange, as it is the common case of all societies, yet the 
majority of them, orthodox and other dox, are as worthy men as can 
be found among the human race. I am very sure my acquaintance among 
them has been much larger than Le Blanc's could possibly be; and I 
can affirm from my own knowledge, that there are very many of this 
order of men, not only as fine gentlemen as I have ever conversed 
with; but, a clergy holy in heart, superior to pride, to anger, to 
foolish desires: who walk as Christ also walked, and by their 
example and doctrine, labour to make the people what the gospel 
requires they should be; that is, pious and useful, pure and honest, 
meek and charitable; to walk by faith, and not by sight; and so pass 
through things temporal, that they may be sure of obtaining the 
things eternal. This I can say of many English divines of my 
acquaintance: and I may add, that this testimony from me, who am not 
over-fond of the clergy, as the main of the Christianity of too many 
of them lies in their opinion; decked with a few outward 
observances, says Wesley very truly, in his letter to Bishop 
Warburton, and only upon occasion, endeavour now to do them justice, 
is certainly of more weight in their favour, than the calumny and 
abuse of a furious bigot and mass-priest, can be to make the world 
have as bad an opinion of them, as popery, and its wretched 
emissaries, would have the public entertain. Consider this then when 
you read Le Blanc's letters.

On the other hand, I have had a very large and intimate acquaintance 
with mass-priests in my time, in many parts of the world; and, a few 
excellent ones excepted, I can affirm, that more wicked and more 
worthless men than these Romish monks, I have never seen. If 
adultery, fornication, drunkenness, and swearing, are crimes, then 
the greatest criminals I could name in these respects, are Roman-
catholic priests. Let this assertion of mine be set over_against the 
character the Abbé Le Blanc gives the English protestant ministers. 
Consider all I have said, when you read this mass-priest's fifty-
eighth letter, and then judge of our reformation and clergy<158>. 
But it is time to return to the cottage of Christopher the 
fisherman, and see what happened to Antonia and Agnes.



CHAPTER XVIII.

When I came back to the poor man's cottage, he told me the ladies 
were come home, and as he had given Miss CRANMER some account of me, 
as a traveller who had journeyed into that remote corner of the 
world, in search of antiquities and curiosities, he did not think 
this lady would be averse to seeing me and hearing me too, if I 
contrived any plausible pretence to throw myself in her way.

Immediately then I crossed the water, went up to the house, and as I 
saw her and the fair AGNES, her cousin, walking in the garden, near 
the ha-ha, leaped it over immediately, broad as it was, and with my 
hat in my hand, made her a low bow, began an apology for presuming 
to introduce myself to her presence in such a manner, and concluded 
with my being in love with her charming character, before I had the 
honour and happiness of seeing her. What a condition then must I be 
in, when a heaven-born maid, like her, appeared! Strange pleasures 
filled my soul, unloosed my tongue, and my first talk could not be 
anything but love. I said much on the subject, not worth repeating 
to the reader; and the issue of the matter was, that I became so 
well acquainted with this innocent beauty, that, on taking my leave, 
I had an invitation to breakfast with her the next morning. I was 
there by eight, and really and truly quite charmed with her. She was 
pretty us it was possible for flesh and blood to be, had a beautiful 
understanding; and as she had very little notion of men, having seen 
very few, except the two old servants who lived with her, she had 
not a notion of any danger that could come from conversing freely 
with a man she knew nothing of, and who might be an enemy in 
disguise.

After breakfast, I offered to go, but she asked me to stay and dine; 
and to sum up the matter, I did dine, sup, and breakfast with her 
every day, for a month, till my good priest, FRIAR FLEMING, arrived, 
on a letter I had sent him, and we were married before the end of 
six weeks. We loved to excess, and did enhance human happiness to a 
high degree. She was good as an angel, and for two years we lived in 
unspeakable felicity. For the greatest part of that time, we were at 
Orton Lodge, as she liked the wild place. There she likewise died of 
the small-pox, in the first month of the third year, and left me the 
most disconsolate of men. Four days I sat with my eyes shut, on 
account of this loss, and then left the Lodge once more, to live if 
I could, since my religion ordered me so to do, and see what I was 
next to meet with in the world. As grief sat powerfully on my 
spirits, and if not dislodged, would have drank them all up very 
soon, I resolved to hasten to Harrogate, and in the festivities of 
that place forget my departed partner as soon as I could. I laid my 
Antonia by my Charlotte and my Statia, and then rode off. What 
happened at the Wells, and all the observations I made there, and 
thereabout, the reader will find shortly narrated.

As I mention nothing of any children by so many wives, some readers 
may perhaps wonder at this, and therefore, to give a general answer, 
once for all, I think it sufficient to observe, that I had a great 
many, to carry on the succession; but as they never were concerned 
in any extraordinary affairs, nor ever did any remarkable things, 
that I heard of; only rise and breakfast, read and saunter, drink 
and eat, it would not be fair, in my opinion, to make anyone pay for 
their history.

In the year 1731 I arrived at Harrogate, in the West-riding of 
Yorkshire, in order to amuse my mind with the diversions and company 
of the place. It is a small straggling village on a heath, two miles 
from Knaresborough, which is thirteen miles from York, and one 
hundred and seventy five from London. The sulphur wells are three, 
on the north side of the town, about five hundred yards east of the 
bog. They rise out of a little dry hill. The second is a yard from 
the first, and the third is five yards and a half from the second. 
The water rises into stone-basins, which are each enclosed in a 
small neat building of stone and lime a yard square on the insides, 
and two yards high, covered over with thick flagstones laid in a 
shelving direction.

The soil out of which these springs rise is first, corn-mould, then 
a marl limestone, and a stratum of plaster: the limestone is so 
abraded by the salt in the water, that when dried, it swims: and 
where the water stagnates between the basins and the brook, the 
earth is ink black, and has a dry white scum, which smells like 
sulphur, and burns with a blue flame. The water does likewise throw 
up much candied sea salts, that is, salts to which sulphur adheres, 
and the pigeons resort from all parts to pick them up. In moist or 
rainy weather, these waters send forth a strong smell at a distance, 
and before rain, they bubble up with an impetuous force; yet neither 
rain nor drought increases or decreases the springs.

From the large quantities of fine flower of brimstone which these 
waters throw off, it is plain, that sulphur is the principal thing 
in them; but experiment likewise proves, that besides sulphur, the 
stinking well has vitriol, nitre, copper, and salt. These lie in 
solutis principiis<> in earth from which the water comes, and may be 
separated by operation; some, I know, deny there is any copper in 
these waters; but they do not consider that the glittering glebes of 
a gold colour found here, can be nothing else than glebes gilt with 
copper.

As to the diseases wherein this strong sulphur-water is proper, it 
is good for everything, except a consumption. For this I recommend 
the Scarborough purging-chalybeate above all waters. But if, reader, 
you have obstructions in your liver and other viscera, and are 
tormented with vicious humours in your intestines; if your bowels 
are full of worms, the ascarides, or the broad round worm, or the 
worms called the dog and the wolf, from their likeness to these 
animals; or if, from a venereal cause, the malady of many a priest 
and layman, you have an ulcer in the anus, or in the neck of your 
bladder, go to Harrogate; drink the stinking-water, live temperate, 
and you will be cured. For the scurvy, that universal disease, it is 
better than all other medicines. It is excellent in the jaundice, 
though of many years standing. It cures the asthma, the 
scotomia,<161> and palsy, and in many other deplorable cases gives 
wonderful relief. Whatever ails you, consumption excepted, fly to 
Harrogate, and the water will do you good, if your hour be not come: 
and if you are well, the waters will promote long life, and make you 
the more able to dance with the ladies.

Four pints of water are enough for a patient, to be taken from half 
an hour to two hours after sun-rising, upon an empty stomach. You 
should take some preparatory medicine; and walk drinking the waters 
to warm the body a little, and make the passage the easier. Some 
people I have known drink their dose in bed, and it does well 
enough: but exercise and the thin open air do better, and contribute 
not a little to the patient's recovery: and there is no finer 
fresher air in England than at this place.

In short, these wells are the strongest sulphur-water in Great 
Britain, and, from the superior strength of the impregnating 
sulphur, it does not lose but retain the sulphureous smell, even 
when exposed to a scalding, and almost a violent heat; and, in 
distilling it, when three pints had been taken off from a gallon of 
it, the last was as strong as the first, and stunk intolerably.

Make haste then to Harrogate, if you are sick, and have money, and 
in all probability you will find the waters efficacious, unless thy 
distemper be a consumption, or in its nature incurable, which is the 
case of many, as death is the common fate of mankind.

But when you are there, let me advise you to exercise as much as you 
can bear, without fatiguing yourself; and in the next place, to be 
regular in meats and drinks, and as temperate as possible. Without 
these things, you will lose the benefit of the waters. No good can 
be expected, if men will indulge during a course of drinking the 
spa, and be not only excessive in quantity, but indiscreet as to the 
quality, of meats and liquors.

I have known some worn-out hard drinkers come to the Wells for 
relief, and at the same time increase by intemperance what they had 
contracted by the same measure. I have likewise seen some in a 
diabetes drink white wine; in a cachexy<162>, ale; in the stone and 
gravel, claret. I have known a man in a dropsy, eat nothing but 
cooling, insipid, mucilaginous foods, and drink malt-drink 
plentifully; a man in a jaundice, eat nothing but flesh meat and 
claret; in a scurvy, prefer the pungent, saline diet; in obstinate 
obstructions, and a chronic hypo, feed on thickening, hardening, and 
drying meats; and in a hectic, vomiting, and spitting of blood, 
choose only such things as increase the blood's momentum and 
velocity. I have known some gentlemen, who sat up late, never 
exercised, could not eat a dinner, and therefore would indulge in a 
flesh supper. All these, and many other irregularities, have I known 
expect surprising effects from the waters, and when they received no 
benefit, say, there were no sanative principles in them. 
Unreasonable, unhappy men! Be temperate and regular, use exercise, 
and keep the passions within bounds, and you may expect very 
astonishing cures; provided your bodies arc not become irreparable, 
and no longer tenantable; your juices not to the last degree 
glutinous and acrimonious, and the corrosiveness of your blood not 
bringing on mortifications; nor inflammations, filling, dilating, 
and breaking your vessels into suppuration and putrefactions. Then, 
live how you will, the waters can be of no use. You must pay the 
debt of nature by an incurable disease. Neither mineral waters, nor 
physic, can create and enliven new bodies, or make and adapt 
particular members to the old. But if you are only hurt a little, 
and the disease is curable, the waters will certainly be 
efficacious, and recover you, if you use moderate exercise, riding 
especially, diversion, a strict regularity, and great temperance.

O temperance! Divine temperance! Thou art the support of the other 
virtues, the preserver and restorer of health, and the 
protracter<163> of life! Thou art the maintainer of the dignity and 
liberty of rational beings, from the wretched inhuman slavery of 
sensuality, taste, custom, and examples; and the brightener of the 
understanding and memory! Thou art the sweetener of life and all its 
comforts, the companion of reason, and guard of the passions! Thou 
art the bountiful rewarder of thy admirers and followers, thine 
enemies praise thee, and thy friends with rapturous pleasure raise 
up a panegyric in thy praise.

O hunger, hunger, immortal hunger! Thou art the blessing of the 
poor, the regale of the temperate rich, and the delicious gust of 
the plainest morsel. Cursed is the man that has turned thee out of 
doors, and at whose table thou art a stranger! Yea, thrice cursed is 
he, who always thirsts, and hungers no more!

As to the company at these wells, I found it very good, and was 
pleased with the manner of living there. In the day-time we drank 
the waters, walked or rode about, and lived in separate parties; 
lodging in one or other of the three inns that are on the edge of 
the common; but at night, the company meet at one of the public-
houses, the inns having the benefit of the meeting in their turn, 
and supped together between eight and nine o'clock on the best 
substantial things, such as hot shoulders of mutton, rump steaks, 
hot pigeon pies, veal cutlets, and the like. For this supper, ladies 
and gentlemen pay eight-pence each, and after sitting an hour, and 
drinking what wine, punch, and ale, everyone chooses, all who please 
get up to country-dances, which generally last till one in the 
morning; those that dance, and those who do not, drinking as they 
will. The ladies pay nothing for what liquor is brought in, either 
at supper or after, and it costs the gentlemen five or six shillings 
a man. At one the ladies withdraw, some to their houses in the 
neighbourhood, and some to their beds in the inns. The men who are 
temperate, do then likewise go to rest.

In short, of all the wells I know, Harrogate is in my opinion the 
most charming. The waters are incomparable, no air can be better: 
and with the greatest civility, cheerfulness, and good humour, there 
is a certain rural plainness and freedom mixed, which are vastly 
pleasing. The lady of pleasure, the well-dressed tailor, and the 
gamester, are not to be found there. Gentlemen of the country, and 
women of birth and fortune, their wives, sisters, and daughters, are 
for the most part the company. There were at least fourscore ladies 
in the country-dances every night, while I was there, and among them 
many fine women.

Among the company I found at this agreeable place, were six Irish 
gentlemen, who had been my contemporaries in Trinity-College, 
Dublin, and were right glad to see me, as we had been 
Sociorums,<164> at the conniving-house at Ringsend, for many a 
summer's evening, and their regard for me was great. They thought I 
had been long numbered with the dead, as they could not get any 
account of me for so many years; and when they saw me, on their 
entering the public room, sitting by a beauty, in deep discourse, 
"God-zounds;" said one of them, "there he is, making love to the 
finest woman in the world." These gentlemen were MR GOLLOGHER, MR 
GALLASPY, MR DUNKLEY, MR MAKINS, MR MONAGHAN, and MR O'KEEFE, who 
was descended from the Irish kings, and first cousin to the great 
O'Keefe, who was buried not long ago in Westminster Abbey. They were 
all men of large fortunes, and, MAKINS excepted, were as handsome 
fine fellows as could be picked out in all the world. MAKINS was a 
very low, thin man, not four feet high, and had but one eye, with 
which he squinted most shockingly. He wore his own hair, which was 
short and bad, and only dressed by his combing it himself in the 
morning, without oil or powder. But as he was matchless on the 
fiddle, sung well, and chatted agreeably, he was a favourite with 
the ladies. They preferred ugly MAKINS, as he was called, to many 
very handsome men. I will here give the public the character of 
these Irish gentlemen, for the honour of Ireland, and as they were 
curiosities of the human kind.

O'KEEFE was as distinguished a character as I have ever known. He 
had read and thought, travelled and conversed, was a man of sense, 
and a scholar. He had a greatness of soul, which showed a pre-
eminence of dignity, and by conduct and behaviour, the faithful 
interpreters of the heart, always attested the noblest and most 
generous sentiments. He had an extreme abhorrence of meanness, 
treachery, revenge, envy, littleness of mind, and showed in all his 
actions the qualities that adorn a man. His learning was of the 
genteel and most useful kind, a sort of agreeable knowledge, which 
he acquired rather from a sound taste and good judgment than from 
the books he had read. He had a right estimation of things, and had 
gathered up almost everything amusing or instructive. This rendered 
him a master in the art of pleasing, and as he had added to these 
improvements the fashionable ornaments of life, languages and bodily 
exercises, he was the delight of all that knew him.

MAKINS was possessed of all the excellent qualities and perfections 
that are within the reach of human abilities. He had received from 
nature the happiest talents, and he had singularly improved them by 
a successful application to the most useful and most ornamental 
studies. Music, as before observed, he excelled in. His intellectual 
faculties were fine, and, to his honour I can affirm, that he mostly 
employed them, as he did his great estate, to the good of mankind, 
the advancement of morality, and the spread of pure theism, the 
worship of God our Saviour, who raised and sent Christ to be a 
Redeemer. This gentleman was a zealous Unitarian, and, though but 
five and twenty, when we met at Harrogate, he was a religious man; 
but his religion was without any melancholy, nor had it anything of 
that severity of temper, which diffuses too often into the hearts of 
the religious a morose contempt of the world, and an antipathy to 
the pleasures of it. He avoided the assemblies of fools, knaves, and 
blockheads, but was fond of good company, and condemned that 
doctrine which taught men to retire from human society to seek God 
in the horrors of solitude. He thought the Almighty may be best 
found among men, where his goodness is most active, and his 
providence most employed.

GALLASPY was the tallest and strongest man I have ever seen, well 
made, and very handsome. He had wit and abilities, sung well, and 
talked with great sweetness and fluency, but was so extremely 
wicked, that it were better for him, he had been a natural fool. By 
his vast strength and activity, his riches and eloquence, few things 
could withstand him. He was the most profane swearer I have known, 
fought everything, whored everything, and drank seven in a hand; 
that is, seven glasses so placed between the fingers of his right 
hand, that in drinking, the liquor fell into the next glasses, and 
thereby he drank out of the first glass seven glasses at once. This 
was a common thing, I find from a book in my possession, in the 
reign of Charles the Second, in the madness that followed the 
restoration of that profligate and worthless prince. But this 
gentleman was the only man I ever saw who could or would attempt to 
do it, and he made but one gulp of whatever he drank; he did not 
swallow a fluid like other people, but if it was a quart, poured it 
in as from pitcher to pitcher. When he smoked tobacco, he always 
blew two pipes at once, one at each corner of his mouth, and threw 
the smoke of both out of his nostrils. He had killed two men in 
duels before I left Ireland, and would have been hanged, but that it 
was his good fortune to be tried before a judge, the late Sir John 
St. Leger, who never let any man suffer for killing another in this 
manner. He debauched all the women he could, and many whom he could 
not corrupt, he ravished. I went with him once in the stage-coach to 
Kilkenny, and seeing two pretty ladies pass by in their own chariot, 
he swore in his horrible way, having drank very hard after dinner, 
that he would immediately stop them, and ravish them; nor was it 
without great difficulty that I hindered him from attempting the 
thing, by assuring him I would be their protector, and he must pass 
through my heart before he could proceed to offer them the least 
rudeness. In sum, I never saw his equal in impiety, especially when 
inflamed with liquor, as he was every day of his life, though it was 
not in the power of wine to make him drunk, weak, or senseless, He 
set no bounds or restrictions to mirth and revels. He only slept 
every third night, and that often in his clothes in a chair, where 
he would sweat so prodigiously as to be wet quite through, as if 
come from a pond, or that a pail of water had been thrown on him. 
While all the world was at rest, he was either drinking or dancing, 
scouring the bawdy-houses, or riding as hard as he could drive his 
horse on some iniquitous project. And yet he never was sick, nor did 
he ever receive any hurt or mischief. In health, joy, and plenty, he 
passed life away, and died about a year ago at his house in the 
county of Galway, without a pang, or any kind of pain. This was JACK 
GALLASPY. There are, however, some things to be said in his favour, 
and as he had more regard for me than any of his acquaintance, I 
should be ungrateful if I did not do him all the justice in my 
power.

He was in the first place far from being quarrelsome, and if he 
fought a gentleman at the small-sword, or boxed with a porter or 
coachman, it was because he had in some degree been ill-used, or 
fancied that the laws of honour required him to call an equal to an 
account, for a transaction. His temper was naturally amicable.

In the next place, he was the most generous of mankind. His purse of 
gold was ever at his friend's service, was kind and good to his 
tenants, and to the poor a very great benefactor. He would give more 
money away to the sick and distressed in one year, than I believe 
many rich and pious people do in seven. He had the blessings of 
thousands, for his charities, and, perhaps, this procured him the 
protection of heaven.

As to swearing, he thought it was only criminal, when it was false, 
or men lied in their affirmations; and for whoring, he hoped there 
would be mercy, since men will be men while there are women. 
Ravishing he did not pretend to justify, as the laws of his country 
were against it; but he could not think the woman was a sufferer by 
it, as she enjoyed without sinning the highest felicity. He intended 
her happiness; and her saying No, kept her an innocent.

How far all this can excuse JACK GALLASPY, I pretended not to 
determine: but as I thought it proper to give the world the picture 
of so extraordinary a man, it was incumbent on me, as his friend, to 
say all I could, with truth, in his vindication.

DUNKLEY had an extensive capacity, an exquisite taste, and a fine 
genius. Besides an erudition which denominates what we call a man of 
learning, he happily possessed a social knowledge, which rendered 
him agreeable to everybody. He was one of the men that are capable 
of touching every note. To all the variety of topics for 
conversation, the diversity of occurrences and incidents, the 
several distinctions of persons, he could adapt himself. He would 
laugh like Democritus, and weep like Heraclitus. He had the short, 
pert trip of the affected; the haughty, tragic stalk of the solemn; 
and the free, genteel gait of the fine gentleman. He was qualified 
to please all tastes, and capable of acting every part. He was 
grave, gay, a philosopher, and a trifler. He had a time for all 
things, relative to society, and his own true happiness, but none 
for anything repugnant to honour and conscience. He was a surprising 
and admirable man.

MONAGHAN had genius and knowledge, had read many books, but knew 
more of mankind. He laughed at those men who lose among their books 
the elegancy of mind so necessary in civil society. He had no relish 
but for nice studies and fine literature, and despised the too 
serious and abstruse sciences. This was reckoned a fault in him by 
several judges, but with me it is a query, if he was much to blame. 
Politeness is certainly preferable to dry knowledge and thorny 
enquiries. This gentleman's was such as rendered him forever 
agreeable and engaging. He was continually an improving friend, and 
a gay companion. In the qualities of his soul, he was generous 
without prodigality, humane without weakness, just without severity, 
and fond without folly. He was an honest and charming fellow. 
MONAGHAN and DUNKLEY married ladies they fell in love with at 
Harrogate Wells. DUNKLEY had the fair ALCMENA, Miss Cox of 
Northumberland; and MONAGHAN, ANTIOPE with haughty charms, Miss 
Pearson of Cumberland. They lived very happy many years, and their 
children I hear are settled in Ireland.

GOLLOGHER was a man of learning and extraordinary abilities. He had 
read very hard for several years, and during that time, had 
collected and extracted from the best books more than any man I ever 
was acquainted with. He had four vast volumes of common-place, royal 
paper, bound in rough calf, and had filled them with what is most 
curious and beautiful in works of literature, most refined in 
eloquent discourses, most poignant in books of criticism, most 
instructive in history, most touching and affecting in news, 
catastrophes, and stories; and with aphorisms, sayings, and 
epigrams. A prodigious memory made all this his own, and a great 
judgment enabled him to reduce everything to the most exact point of 
truth and accuracy. A rare man! Till he was five and twenty, he 
continued this studious life, and but seldom went into the mixed and 
fashionable circles of the world. Then, all at once, he sold every 
book he had, and determined to read no more. He spent his every day 
in the best company of every kind; and as he had the happy talent of 
manner, and possessed that great power which strikes and awakens 
fancy, by giving every subject the new dress and decoration it 
requires; could make the most common thing no longer trivial, when 
in his hand, and render a good thing most exquisitely pleasing. As 
he told a story beyond most men, and had, in short, a universal 
means towards a universal success, it was but natural that he should 
be everywhere liked and wished for. He charmed wherever he came. The 
specific I have mentioned made everyone fond of him. With the ladies 
especially he was a great favourite, and more fortunate in his 
amours .than any man I knew. Had he wanted the fine talents he was 
blest with, his being an extremely handsome man, and a master on the 
fiddle, could not but recommend him to the sex. He might, if he had 
pleased, have married any one of the most illustrious and richest 
women in the kingdom. But he had an aversion to matrimony, and could 
not bear the thought of a wife. Love and a bottle were his taste. He 
was however the most honourable of men in his amours, and never 
abandoned any woman to distress, as too many men of fortune do, when 
they have gratified desire. All the distressed were ever sharers in 
GOLLOGHER'S fine estate, and especially the girls he had taken to 
his breast. He provided happily for them all, and left nineteen 
daughters he had by several women a thousand pounds each. This was 
acting with a temper worthy of a man; and to the memory of the 
benevolent TOM GOLLOGHER I devote this memorandum.

Having said above, that too many men of fortune abandon the girls 
they have ruined, I will here relate a very remarkable story, in 
hopes it may make an impression on some rake of fortune, if such a 
man should ever take this book in his hand.

Travelling once in the summer-time, in the county of Kildare in 
Ireland, I came into a land of flowers and blossoms, hills, woods, 
and shades; where I saw upon an eminence a house, surrounded with 
the most agreeable images of rural beauties, and which appeared to 
be placed on purpose in that decorated spot for retirement and 
contemplation. It is in such silent recesses of life, that we can 
best enjoy the noble and felicitous ideas, which more immediately 
concern the attention of man, and in the cool hours of reflection, 
secreted from the fancies and follies, the business, the faction, 
and the pleasures of an engaged world, thoroughly consider the 
wisdom and harmony of the works of nature, the important purposes of 
providence, and the various reasons we have to adore that ever 
glorious Being, who formed us for rational happiness here, and after 
we have passed a few years on this sphere, in a life of virtue and 
charity, to translate us to the realms of endless bliss. Happy they 
who have a taste for these silent retreats, and when they please, 
can withdraw for a time from the world.

The owner of this sweet place was CHARLES HUNT, a gentleman of a 
small estate and good sense, whom I knew many years before fortune 
led me to his house. His wife was then dead, and he had but one 
child left, his daughter ELIZABETH. The beauties of this young lady 
were very extraordinary. She had the finest eyes in the world, she 
looked, she smiled, and she talked with such diffusive charms, as 
were sufficient to fire the heart of the most morose woman-hater 
that ever lived, and give his soul a softness it never felt before. 
Her father took all possible pains to educate her mind, and had the 
success to render her understanding a wonder, when she was but 
twenty years old. She sung likewise beyond most women, danced to 
perfection, and had every accomplishment of soul and body that a man 
of the best taste could wish for in a wife or a mistress. She was 
all beauty, life, and softness.

Mr HUNT thought to have had great happiness in this daughter, though 
it was not in his power to give her more than five hundred pounds 
for a fortune, and she would have been married to a country-
gentleman in his neighbourhood of a good estate, had not death 
carried off both her father and lover in a few days, just as the 
match was agreed on. This was a sad misfortune, and produced a long 
train of sorrows. For two years however after the decease of her 
father, she lived very happily with an old lady, her near relation, 
and was universally admired and respected. I saw her many times 
during that term, at the old lady's villa within a few miles of 
Dublin, and took great delight in her company. If I had not been 
then engaged to another, I would most certainly have married her.

In this way I left ELIZA, in Ireland, and for several years could 
not hear what was become of her. No one could give me any 
information: but, about a twelvemonth ago, as I was walking in 
Fleet-street, I saw a woman who cleaned shoes, and seemed to be an 
object of great distress. She was in rags and dirt beyond all I had 
ever seen of the profession, and was truly skin and bone. Her face 
was almost a skull, and the only remaining expression to be seen was 
despair and anguish. The object engaged my attention, not only on 
account of the uncommon misery that was visible; but, as her eyes, 
though sunk, were still extraordinary, and there were some remains 
of beauty to be traced. I thought I had somewhere seen that face in 
better condition. This kept me looking at her, unnoticed, for near a 
quarter of an hour; and as I found she turned her head from me, when 
she saw me, with a kind of consciousness, as if she knew me, I then 
asked her name, and if she had anywhere seen me before? The tears 
immediately ran plentifully from her eyes, and when she could speak, 
she said, I am ELIZABETH HUNT. What, Mr HUNT'S daughter of Rafarlin? 
I replied with amazement, and a concern that brought the tears into 
my eyes. I called a coach immediately, and took her to the house of 
a good woman, who lodges and attends sick people, ordered her clean 
clothes, and gave the woman a charge to take the greatest care of 
her, and let her want for nothing proper, till I called next day.

When I saw her again, she was clean and whole, and seemed to have 
recovered a little, though very little, of what she once was; for a 
more miserable spectacle my eyes have not often seen. She told me, 
that soon after I went to England, Mr R., a gentleman of my 
acquaintance of great fortune, got acquainted with her, courted her, 
and swore in the most solemn manner, by the supreme power, and the 
everlasting gospel, that he would be her husband, and marry her as 
soon as a rich dying uncle had breathed his last, if she would 
consent, in the meanwhile, to their living in secret as man and 
wife; for his uncle hated matrimony, and would not leave him his 
vast fortune, if he heard he had a wife; and he was sure, if he was 
married by any of the church, some whisperer would find it out, and 
bring it to his ear. But notwithstanding this plausible story, and 
that he acted the part of the fondest and tenderest man that ever 
lived, yet, for several months, she would not comply with his 
proposal. She refused to see him any more, and for several weeks he 
did not come in her sight.

The fatal night however at last arrived, and from the Lord Mayor's 
ball, he prevailed on her, by repeated vows of sincerity and truth, 
to come with him to his lodgings. She was undone, with child, and at 
the end of two months, she never saw him more. When her relations 
saw her big belly, they turned her out of doors; her friends and 
acquaintance would not look at her, and she was so despised, and 
ashamed to be seen, that she went to England with her little one. It 
fortunately died on the road to London, and as her five hundred 
pounds were going fast by the time she had been a year in the 
capital, she accepted an offer made her by a great man to go into 
keeping. Three years she lived with him in splendour, and when he 
died, she was with several in high life, till she got a cancer in 
her breast; and after it was cut off, an incurable abscess appeared. 
This struck her out of society, and as she grew worse and worse 
every day, the little money she had, and her clothes, were all gone 
in four years' time, in the relief she wanted and in support. She 
came the fifth year to a garret and rags, and at last, to clean 
shoes, or perish for want. She then uncovered the upper part of her 
body, which was half eaten away, so as to see into the trunk, and 
rendered her, in the emaciated condition she was in, an object 
shocking to behold. She lived in torment, and had no kind of ease or 
peace but in reflecting, that her misery and distress might procure 
her the mercy of heaven hereafter, and in conjunction with her true 
repentance bring her to rest, when she had passed through the grave 
and gate of death.

Such was the case of that Venus of her sex, Miss HUNT. When I first 
saw her, it was rapture to be in her company; her person matchless, 
and her conversation as charming as her person; both easy, 
unconstrained, and beautiful to perfection. But when I last saw her, 
she was grim as the skeleton, horrid, loathsome, and sinking fast 
into the grave by the laws of corruption. What a change was there! 
She lived but three months from the time I put her into a lodging, 
and died as happy a penitent as she had lived an unhappy woman. I 
gave her a decent private funeral; a hearse, and one mourning-coach, 
in which I alone attended her remains to the earth; the great 
charnel-house, where all the humane race must be deposited. Here 
ends the story of Miss HUNT.

And now a word or two to the man who ruined her. BOB R. is still 
living, the master of thousands, and has thought no more of the 
wretched ELIZA, than if her ruin and misery were a trifle. He 
fancies his riches and power will screen him from the hand of 
justice, and afford him lasting satisfaction; but, cruel man, after 
this short day, the present life, the night of death shall come, and 
your unrelenting soul must then appear before a judge, infinitely 
knowing and righteous; who is not to be imposed upon, and cannot be 
biased. The sighs and moans of ELIZA will then be remembered, 
confound and abash you for your falsehood and inhumanity to this 
unhappy woman. In your last agony, her spirit will haunt you, and at 
the sessions of righteousness appear against you, execrable R. R.

But to return to Harrogate. While I was there, it was my fortune to 
dance with a lady, who had the head of Aristotle, the heart of a 
primitive Christian, and the form of Venus de Medicis. This was Miss 
SPENCE of Westmoreland. I was not many hours in her company, before 
I became most passionately in love with her. I did all I could to 
win her heart, and at last asked her the question. But before I 
inform my readers what the consequence of this was, I must take some 
notice of what I expect from the criticalr. These gentlemen will 
attempt to raise the laugh. Our moralist, they will say, has buried 
three wives running, and they are hardly cold in their graves, 
before he is dancing like a buck at the Wells, and plighting vows to 
a fourth girl, the beautiful Miss SPENCE. An honest fellow, this 
Suarez, as Pascal says of that Jesuit, in his Provincial Letters.

To this I reply, that I think it unreasonable and impious to grieve 
immoderately for the dead. A decent and proper tribute of tears and 
sorrow, humanity requires; but when that duty has been paid, we must 
remember, that to lament a dead woman is not to lament a wife. A 
wife must be a living woman. The wife we lose by death is no more 
than a sad and empty object, formed by the imagination, and to be 
still devoted to her, is to be in love with an idea. It is a mere 
chimerical passion, as the deceased has no more to do with this 
world, than if she had existed before the flood. As we cannot 
restore what nature has destroyed, it is foolish to be faithful to 
affliction. Nor is this all, if the woman we marry has the seven 
qualifications which .very man would wish to find in a wife, beauty, 
discretion, sweetness of temper, a sprightly wit, fertility, wealth, 
and noble extraction, yet death's snatching so amiable a wife from 
our arms can be no reason for accusing fate of cruelty, that is, 
providence of injustice; nor can it authorise us to sink into 
insensibility, and neglect the duty and business of life. This wife 
was born to die, and we receive her under the condition of 
mortality. She is lent but for a term, the limits of which we are 
not made acquainted with; and when this term is expired, there can 
be no injustice in taking her back: nor are we to indulge the 
transports of grief to distraction, but should look out for another 
with the seven qualifications, as it is not good for man to be 
alone, and as he is by the Abrahamic covenant bound to carry on the 
succession, in a regular way, if it be in his power. Nor is this 
all, if the woman adorned with every natural and acquired excellence 
is translated from this gloomy planet to some better world, to be a 
sharer of the divine favour, in that peaceful and happy state which 
God hath prepared for the virtuous and faithful, must it not be 
senseless for me to indulge melancholy and continue a mourner on her 
account, while she is breathing the balmy air of paradise, enjoying 
pure and radiant vision, and beyond description happy?

In the next place, as I had forfeited my father's favour and estate, 
for the sake of Christian-Deism, and had nothing but my own honest 
industry to secure me daily bread, it was necessary for me to lay 
hold of every opportunity to improve my fortune, and of consequence 
do my best to gain the heart of the first rich young woman who came 
in my way, after I had buried a wife. It was not fit for me to sit 
snivelling for months, because my wife died before me, which was, at 
least, as probable, as that she should be the survivor; but instead 
of solemn affliction, and the inconsolable part, for an event I 
foresaw, it was incumbent on me, after a little decent mourning, to 
consecrate myself to virtue and good fortune united in the form of a 
woman. Whenever she appeared, it was my business to get her if I 
could. This made me sometimes a dancer at the Wells, in the days of 
my youth.

As to Miss SPENCE, she was not cruel, but told me at last, after I 
had tired her with my addresses and petitions, that she would 
consider my case, and give me an answer, when I called at her house 
in Westmoreland, to which she was then going; at present however, to 
tell me the truth, she had very little inclination to change her 
condition, she was as happy as she could wish to be, and she had 
observed, that many ladies of her acquaintance had been made unhappy 
by becoming wives. The husband generally proves a very different man 
from the courtier, and it is luck indeed, if a young woman, by 
marrying, is not undone. During the mollia tempora fandi,<165> as 
the poet calls it, the man may charm, when, like the god of 
eloquence, he pleads, and every word is soft as flakes of falling 
snow; but when the man is pleased to take off the mask, and play the 
domestic hero; Gods! What miseries have I seen in families ensue! If 
this were my case, I should run stark mad.

Miss SPENCE'S mentioning the memorable line from Virgil, surprised 
me not a little, as she never gave the least hint before, though we 
had conversed then a fortnight, of her having any notion of the 
Latin tongue, and I looked at her with a raised admiration, before I 
replied in the following manner. "What you say, Miss SPENCE, is 
true. But this is far from being the case of all gentlemen. If there 
be something stronger than virtue in too many of them, something 
that masters and subdues it; a passion, or passions, rebellious and 
lawless, which makes them neglect some high relations, and take the 
throne from God and reason; gaming, drinking, keeping; yet there are 
very many exceptions, I am sure. I know several, who have an equal 
affection to goodness, and were my acquaintance in the world larger 
than it is, I believe I could name a large number, who would not 
prefer indulgence to virtue, or resign her for any consideration. 
There are men, madam, and young men, who allow a partial regard to 
rectitude is inconsistent and absurd, and are sensible, it is not 
certain, that there is absolutely nothing at all in the evidences of 
religion: that if there was but even a chance for obtaining 
blessings of inestimable worth, yet a chance for eternal bliss is 
worth securing, by acting as the spotless holiness of the Deity 
requires from us, and the reason and fitness of things makes 
necessary, in respect of every kind of relation and neighbour. This 
is the case of many men. They are not so generally bad as you seem 
to think.

"On the other hand, I would ask, if there are no unhappy marriages 
by the faults of women? Are all the married ladies consistently and 
thoroughly good, that is, effectually so? Do they all yield 
themselves entirely and universally to the government of conscience, 
subdue everything to it, and conquer every adverse passion and 
inclination? Has reason always the sovereignty, and nothing wrong to 
be seen? Are truth, piety, and goodness, the settled prevailing 
regard in the hearts and lives of all the married ladies you know? 
Have you heard of no unhappy marriages by the passions and vices of 
women, as well as by the faults of men? I am afraid there are too 
many wives as subject to ill habits as the men can be. It is 
possible to name not a few ladies who find their virtuous exercises, 
the duties of piety, and the various offices of love and goodness, 
as distasteful and irksome to them as they can be to a libertine or 
a cruel man. I could tell some sad stories to this purpose: but all 
I shall say more is, that there are faults on both sides, and that 
it is not the ladies only run a hazard of being ruined by marrying. 
I am sure, there are as many men of fortune miserable by the manners 
and conduct of their wives, as you can name ladies who are sufferers 
by the temper and practice of their husbands. This is the truth of 
the case, and the business is, in order to avoid the miseries we 
both have seen among married people, to resolve to act well and 
wisely. "This is the thing to be sure," replied Miss SPENCE. "This 
will prevent faults on either side. Such a course as virtue and 
piety require must have a continued tendency to render life a scene 
of the greatest happiness; and it may gain infinitely hereafter. 
Call upon me then at Cleator as soon as you can," she concluded, 
with her face in smiles, "and we will talk over this affair again." 
Thus we chatted as we dined together in private, and early the next 
morning Miss SPENCE left the Wells.

Miss SPENCE being gone from Harrogate, and finding myself very ill 
from having drank too hard the preceding night, I mounted my horse, 
and rode to Oldfield-Spa, a few miles off, as I had heard an 
extraordinary account of its usefulness after a debauch. There is 
not so much as a little ale-house there to rest at, and for six days 
I lodged at the cottage of a poor labouring man, to which my 
informer directed me. I lived on such plain fare as he had for 
himself. Bread and roots, and milk and water, were my chief support; 
and for the time, I was as happy as I could wish.

O Nature! Nature! would man be satisfied with thee, and follow thy 
wise dictates, he would constantly enjoy that true pleasure, which 
advances his real happiness, and very rarely be tormented with those 
evils, which obstruct and destroy it; but, alas! instead of 
listening to the voice of reason, keeping the mind free of passions, 
and living as temperance and discretion direct, the man of pleasure 
will have all the gratifications of sense to as high a pitch, as an 
imagination and fortune devoted to them can raise them, and diseases 
and calamities are the consequence. Fears, anxieties and 
disappointments are often the attendants, and too frequently the 
ruin of health and estate, of reputation and honour, and the lasting 
wound of remorse in reflection, follow. This is generally the case 
of the voluptuary. Dreadful case! He runs the course of pleasure 
first, and then the course of produced evils succeed. He passes from 
pleasure to a state of pain, and the pleasure past gives a double 
sense of that pain. We ought then surely, as reasonable beings, to 
confine our pleasure within the bounds of just and right.

As to the place called Oldfield-Spa, it is seven miles from 
Harrogate, and four from Rippon, lies on a rising ground, between 
two high hills, near an old abbey, about five yards from a running 
stream, and in a most romantic delightful situation, which resembles 
Matlock in Derbyshire, so very much, that one might almost take it 
for the same place, if conveyed there in a long deep sleep. The same 
kind of charms and various beauties are everywhere to be seen; rocks 
and mountains, groves and valleys, tender shrubs and purling 
currents, at once surprise and please the wandering eye.

As to the mineral water at Oldfield-Spa, it is an impetuous spring, 
that throws out a vast quantity of water, and is always of the same 
height, neither affected by rain or drought. It is bright and 
sparkling, and when poured into a glass, rises up in rows like 
strings of little beads. It has an uncommon taste, quite different 
from all other mineral waters that ever came in my way; but it is 
not disagreeable. What impregnates it I know not. Dr. Rutty I 
suppose never heard of this water, for it is not in his valuable 
quarto lately published; and Dr. Short, in his excellent History of 
Mineral Waters, printed in two quarto volumes in 1734, says little 
more than that there is a medicinal spring there. What I found upon 
trial is, that two quarts of it, swallowed as fast as I could drink 
it in a morning, vomits to great advantage; and that four quarts of 
it, drank by degrees, at intervals, works off by siege or stool, and 
urine, in a very beneficial manner. I was apprehensive of a high 
fever from my night's hard drinking at Harrogate, which I could not 
avoid; and the Oldfield-water, operating as related, carried off the 
bad symptoms, and restored me to sanity<166> in two days' time. This 
is all I can say of this fine water. It is very little in respect of 
what it deserves to have said of it.

By the way, it is to me a matter of great admiration, that so many 
rich and noble persons not only endure the fatigues and hazards of 
sailing and travelling to remote countries, but waste their money, 
to drink spa-waters abroad, when they can have as good of every kind 
in England, by riding a few miles to the most delightful places in 
the world, in summer time. Our own country has healing waters equal 
to the best in France, Italy, and Westphalia. Harrogate-water, in 
particular, has all the virtues of the famous baths of Aponus, 
within a mile of Padua in Italy, and is in every respect exactly 
alike. See the analysis of Aponus-water by Fallopius and Baccius, 
and the analysis of the English sulphur-spa by Dr. Rutty. It is 
injustice then to our country to visit foreign nations upon this 
account.

The mineral waters called Moffat-waters, which are as good as any in 
the known world, are found at the distance of a long mile northward 
from Moffat, a village in Annandale, thirty-five miles S. W. of 
Edinburgh. The springs are situated on the declivity of a hill, and 
on the brow of a precipice, with high mountains at a distance, and 
almost on every side of them. The hill is the second from Hartfield, 
adjoining the highest hill in Scotland.

A vein of spar runs for several miles on this range of hills, and 
forms the bottom and lower sides of the wells. It is of a greyish 
colour, having polished and shining surfaces of regular figures, 
interspersed with glittering particles of a golden colour, which are 
very copious and large.

There are two medicinal springs or wells, which are separated from 
one another by a small rock, the higher well lies with its mouth 
south east. It is of an irregular square figure, and about a foot 
and a half deep. The lower well is surrounded with naked rocks, 
forming a small arch of a circle. Its depth is four feet and a half, 
and by a moderate computation, the two springs yield forty loads of 
water in twenty-four hours, each load containing sixty-four or 
sixty-eight Scotch pints; a Scotch pint is two English quarts. The 
higher shallow well is used for bathing, as it is not capable of 
being kept so clean as the lower well, on account of the shallowness 
and the looseness of its parts.

These waters are strongly sulphureous, and resemble the scourings of 
a foul gun, or rotten eggs, or a weak solution of sal polychrestum, 
or hepar sulphuris.<167> The colour of the water somewhat milky or 
bluish. The soil on every side of the wells is thin, and the hills 
rocky, only just below the wells there is a small moss, caused by 
the falling of water from the hill above it.

Great is the medicinal virtue of these waters, in relieving 
inwardly, colics, pains in the stomach, griping of the guts; 
bilious, nephritic, nervous and hysteric colics; the gravel, by 
carrying off the quantities of sand, though it does not dissolve the 
slimy gravel, clearing the urinary passages in a wonderful manner; 
curing ischuries,<168> and ulcerated kidneys; the gout, the palsy, 
obstructions of the menses, old gleets,<169> and barrenness; it is a 
sovereign remedy in rheumatic and scorbutic pains, even when the 
limbs are monstrously swelled, useless, and covered with scales. 
Outwardly, ulcers, tumours, itch, St. Anthony's fire,<170> and 
King's evil.<171>

The waters are used by bathing and drinking: to drink in the morning 
three chopins, i. e. six pints or a Scotch quart, four English 
quarts, at most, between the hours of six and eleven. After dinner 
to drink gradually.

Medicines commonly used during the drinking of the waters are, an 
emetic or two at first, and a few cathartic doses. The doses sal 
Glauberi<172> and polychrestum: syrup of buckthorn, and sulphur, is 
used along with the water.

But the cathartic prescription most in use, which was given by an 
eminent physician, for a general recipe, to be taken by all who 
should at any time use the water, is pills that are a composition of 
gambozia<173>, resin of jalap, aloes, and scammony;<174> these to 
all intents are a strong hydragogue.<175

The large vein of spar three feet thick, runs in one direction for 
six miles to the wells, crosses obliquely the rivulet at the bottom 
of the precipice, and ascends the hill on the opposite side. Small 
veins of the same spar which appears on the precipices, are on the 
side of the rivulet, and six small gushes of water of the mineral 
kind proceed from them. The rocks and stones about the tops of the 
wells, and in other parts of the hill and precipices, differ not 
from common stones, no more than the water of the small springs in 
the neighbourhood with the common water.

The virtue of this water was discovered by Miss Whiteford, daughter 
of bishop Whiteford, in 1632. She had been abroad, and all over 
England, drinking mineral waters for the recovery of her health, but 
found little benefit, till by accident she tasted these waters in 
her neighbourhood, and finding they resembled those she had used 
elsewhere, made a trial of them, and was cured of all her disorders.

Upon this she recommended the use of them to others, and employed 
workmen to clear the ground about the springs, their overflowing 
having made a small morass, that the poor and the rich might come. 
and make use of a medicine, which nature had so bounteously offered 
to them.



CHAPTER XIX.

The 19th of May, 1731, at that hour, when the break of day offers 
the most magnificent sight to the eyes of men, though few who have 
eyes will deign to view it; I mounted my horse, and intended to 
breakfast at Knaresborough, in order to my being at Harrogate by 
dinner time, with my friends again; but the land I went over was so 
enchantingly romantic, and the morning so extremely beautiful, that 
I had a mind to see more of the country, and let my horse trot on 
where he pleased. For a couple of hours, he went slowly over the 
hills as his inclination directed him, and I was delightfully 
entertained with the various fine scenes.

The rising sun, which I had directly before me, struck me very 
strongly, in the fine situation I was in for observing it, with the 
power and wisdom of the author of nature, and gave me such a 
charming degree of evidence for the Deity, that I could not but 
offer up, in silence, on the altar of my heart, praise and adoration 
to that sovereign and universal mind, who produced this glorious 
luminary, as the bright image of his benignity, and in its circle, 
which it traces unweariedly round; not only to illustrate 
successively the opposite sides of this globe, thereby enlivening 
the animal, and supporting the vegetable world, ripening and 
preparing matter for all the purposes of life and vegetation; but, 
to enlighten and cheer surrounding worlds, by a perpetual diffusion 
of bounties, to dispel darkness and sorrow, and like the presence of 
the Deity, infuse secret ravishment and delight into the heart. This 
cannot be the production of chance. It must be the work of an 
infinitely wise and good Being. The nature, situation, and motion of 
the sun, brings the Deity even within the reach of the methods of 
sense assisted by reason, and shows such constant operations of his 
power and goodness, that it is impossible to consider the present 
disposition of the system, without being full of a sense of love and 
gratitude to the Almighty Creator—the parent of Being and of Beauty! 
By this returning minister of his beneficence, all things are 
recalled into life, from corruption and decay; and by its, and all 
the other heavenly motions, the whole frame of nature is still kept 
in repair. His name alone then is excellent, and his glory above the 
earth and heaven. It becomes the whole system of rationals to say, 
Hallelujah.

Come CHEERFULNESS, triumphant Fair, 
Shine through the painful cloud of care. 
O sweet of language, mild of mien, 
Fair virtue's friend, and pleasure's queen! 
Fond guardian of domestic life, 
Best banisher of home-bred strife; 
Nor sullen lip, nor taunting eye 
Deform the scene where thou art by: 
No sickening husband damns the hour, 
That bound his joys to female power; 
No pining mother weeps the cares, 
That parents waste on hopeless heirs: 
Th' officious daughters pleased attend; 
The brother rises to the friend: 
By thee our board with flowers is crowned, 
By thee with songs our walks resound; 
By thee the sprightly mornings shine, 
And evening hours in peace decline.

While I was thinking in this manner of the sun, and the author of 
it, I came into a silent unfrequented glade, that was finely adorned 
with streams and trees. Nature there seemed to be lulled into a kind 
of pleasing repose, and conspired as it were to soften a speculative 
genius into solid and awful contemplations. The woods, the meadows, 
and the water, formed the most delightful scenes, and the charms of 
distant prospects multiplied as I travelled on; but at last I came 
to a seat which had all the beauties that proportion, regularity, 
and convenience can give. This delightful mansion was situated in 
the midst of meadows, and surrounded with gardens, trees, and 
various shades. A fountain played to a great height before the door, 
and fell into a circular reservoir of water, that had foreign wild-
fowl swimming on its surface. The whole was very fine.

Here I walked for some time, and after roaming about, went up to the 
house, to admire its beauties. I found the windows open, and could 
see several ladies in one of the apartments. How to gain admittance 
was the question, and I began to contrive many ways; but while I was 
busied in this kind of speculation, a genteel footman came up to me, 
and let me know, his lady sent him to inform me I might walk in and 
look at the house, if I pleased. So in I went, and passed through 
several grand rooms, all finely furnished, and filled with paintings 
of great price. In one of those chambers the servant left me, and 
told me, he would wait upon me again in a little time. This 
surprised me, and my astonishment was doubled, when I had remained 
alone for almost an hour. No footman returned, nor could I hear the 
sound of any feet. But I was charmingly entertained all the while. 
In the apartment I was left in, were two figures, dressed like a 
shepherd and shepherdess, which amazed me very much. They sat on a 
rich couch, in a gay alcove, and both played on the German flute. 
They moved their heads, their arms, their eyes, their fingers, and 
seemed to look with a consciousness at each other, while they 
breathed, at my entering the room, that fine piece of music, the 
masquerade minuet; and afterwards, several excellent pieces. I 
thought at first, they were living creatures; but on examination, 
finding they were only wood, my admiration increased, and became 
exceeding great, when I saw, by shutting their mouths, and stopping 
their fingers, that the music did not proceed from an organ within 
the figures. It was an extraordinary piece of clockwork, invented 
and made by one JOHN NIXON, a poor man.

At length however, a door was opened, and a lady entered, she was 
vastly pretty, and richly dressed beyond what I had ever seen, and 
had diamonds enough for a queen. I was amazed at the sight of her, 
and wondered still more, when, after being honoured with a low 
courtesy, on my bowing to her, she asked me in Irish, how I did, and 
how long I had been in England. My surprise was so great I could not 
speak, and upon this, she said, in the same language, "I see, Sir, 
you have no remembrance of me. You cannot recollect the least idea 
of me. You have quite forgot young IMOINDA, of the county of Galway 
in Ireland; who was your partner in country dances, when you passed 
the Christmas of the year 1715, at her father's house." "What, Miss 
Wolf of Balineskay? O my IMOINDA!" I exclaimed, and snatching her to 
my arms, I almost stifled her with kisses. I was so glad to see her 
again, and in the situation she appeared in, that I could not help 
expressing my joys in that tumultuous manner, and hoped she would 
excuse her Valentine, as I then remembered I had had that honour 
when we were both very young.

This lady, who was good humour itself in flesh and blood, was so far 
from being angry at this strange flight of mine, that she only 
laughed excessively at the oddness of the thing; but some ladies who 
came into the apartment with her seemed frightened, and at a loss 
what to think, till she cleared up the affair to them, by letting 
them know who I was, and how near her father and mine lived to each 
other in the country of Ireland. She was indeed extremely glad to 
see me, and from her heart bid me welcome to Clankford. Our meeting 
was a vast surprise to both of us. She thought I had been in the 
Elysian fields, as she had heard nothing of me for several years, 
and I little imagined, I should ever find her in England, in the 
rich condition she was in. She asked me by what destiny I was 
brought to Yorkshire; and in return for my short story, gave me an 
account of herself at large. Till the bell rung for dinner, we sat 
talking together, and then went down to as elegant a repast as I had 
ever seen. There were twelve at table, six young ladies, all very 
handsome, and six gentlemen. Good humour presided, and in a rational 
delightful cheerfulness, we passed some hours away. After coffee, we 
went to cards, and from them to country dances, as two of the 
footmen played well on the fiddle. The charming IMOINDA was my 
partner, and as they all did the dances extremely well, we were as 
happy a little set as ever footed it to country measure. Two weeks I 
passed in this fine felicity. Then we all separated, and went 
different ways. What became of Miss WOLF after this, the 
extraordinary events of her life, and the stories of the five ladies 
with her, I shall relate in the second volume of my Memoirs of 
several Ladies of Great Britain. Four of them were Mrs CHESLIN, Mrs 
FANSHAW, Mrs CHADLEY, and Mrs BISSEL; the fifth was Miss FARMOR; all 
mentioned in the Preface to the first volume of my Memoirs 
aforesaid.

A fortnight, as said, I stayed with Miss WOLF, that was; but, at the 
time I am speaking of, the relict of Sir LOGHLIN FITZGIBBONS, an old 
Irish knight, who was immensely rich, and married her when he was 
creeping upon all fours, with snow on his head, and frost in his 
bones, that he might lie by a naked beauty, and gaze at that awful 
spot he had no power to enjoy. I did intend, on leaving this lady, 
to be at Knaresborough at night; but the fates, for a while, took me 
another way. At the inn where I dined, I became acquainted with a 
gentleman much of my own age, who was an ingenious agreeable man. 
This was OLIVER WINCUP, Esq:; who had lately married Miss HORNER of 
Northumberland, a fine young creature, and a great fortune. This 
gentleman, by his good humour, and several

good songs, pleased me so much, that I drank more than I intended, 
and was easily prevailed on to go with him, in the evening, to 
Woodcester, the name of his seat; which was but ten miles from the 
house we had dined at. We came in just as they were going to tea. 
There was a great deal of company, at least a dozen ladies, besides 
half a score gentlemen, and all of them as gay and engaging as the 
best-bred young mortals could be.

The vill here was very odd, but a charming pretty thing. The house 
consisted of, I think, ten several ground rooms, detached from one 
another, and separated by trees and banks of flowers. They were 
entirely of wood, but finely put together, and all disposed with the 
greatest symmetry and beauty. They were very handsome on the 
outside, and the inside was furnished and adorned with the finest 
things the owner could get for money. Easy hills, little valleys, 
and pretty groves, surrounded the sweet retreat, and the valleys 
were watered with clear streams. The whole had a fine appearance. 
The varied scenes for ever pleased.

At this delightful place I stayed ten days, and was very happy 
indeed. We drank, we laughed, we danced, we sung, and chatted; and 
when that was done, 'twas night. But country-dances were the chief 
diversion; and I had a partner, who was not only a wonder in face 
and person, being divinely pretty; but did wonders in every motion. 
This was Miss VEYSSIERE of Cumberland: the dear creature! Reader, 
when I was a young fellow, there were few could equal me in dancing. 
The famous PADDY MURPHY, an Irish member of the House of Commons, 
commonly called the Little Beau, well known at Lucas's coffee-house 
in Dublin, in 1734; and LANGHAM, the miller, who danced every night 
at the renowned Stretch's puppet-show, before the curtain was drawn 
up, danced one night, that I was at the Castle, before the late Duke 
of Dorset and his Duchess, at their grace's request; and were both 
deservedly admired for their performance in the hornpipe; yet they 
were nothing to me in this particular; Miss VEYSSIERE however out-
did me far; her steps were infinite, and she did them with that 
amazing agility, that she seemed like a dancing angel in the air. We 
footed it together eight nights, and all the company said, we were 
born for each other. She charmed me exceedingly, and I should have 
asked her the question, to try her temper, if WINCUP had not told 
me, her father intended to sacrifice her to a man old enough to be 
her grandfather, for the sake of a great jointure; and in a week or 
two she was to dance the 'Reel of Bogie' with an old monk. "Poor 
Miss VEYSSIERE!" Said I, What connexion can there be between the 
hoary churl and you:-

While side by side the blushing maid 
Shrinks from his visage, half afraid?

I do not wish you may feather him, but may you bury him very 
quickly, and be happy.

Another of our diversions at Woodcester, was a little company of 
singers and dancers WINCUP had hired, to perform in a sylvan theatre 
he had constructed in his gardens. These people did the mime, the 
dance, the song, extremely well. There was among them one Miss 
HINXWORTH, a charming young creature, who excelling in everything, 
singing especially, had no equal I believe in the world. She was a 
gentleman's daughter, and had been carried off by one O'REGAN, an 
Irishman, and dancing-master, and who was the head of this company. 
He was the most active fellow upon earth, and the best harlequin I 
have ever seen. Every evening we had something or other 
extraordinary from these performers. He gave us two pieces which so 
nearly resembled to two favourite entertainments called Harlequin 
Sorcerer, and The Genii, though in several particulars better; that 
I cannot help thinking Rich owed his Harlequin Sorcerer to O'Regan: 
and that The Genii of Drury-Lane was the invention of this Irishman.

You know, reader, that in the first scene of Harlequin Sorcerer, 
there is a group of witches at their orgies in a wilderness by 
moonlight, and that Harlequin comes riding in the air between two 
witches, upon a long pole: Here O'Regan did what was never attempted 
at Covent-Garden house, and what no other man in the world I believe 
did ever do. As the witches danced round and round, hand in hand, as 
swift as they could move, O'Regan leaped upon the shoulder of one of 
them, and for near a quarter of an hour, jumped the contrary way as 
fast as they went, round all their shoulders. This was a fine piece 
of activity. I think it much more wonderful, than to keep at the top 
of the out-wheel of a water-mill, by jumping there, as it goes with 
the greatest rapidity round. This MUN. HAWLEY, of Loch-Gur in the 
county of Tipperary, could do. He was a charming fellow in body and 
mind, and fell unfortunately in the twenty-second year of his age, 
in a plain field, by a trip of his horse, he came down, and 
fractured his skull. He did not think he was hurt, but at night as 
soon as he began to eat, it came up. A surgeon was sent for to look 
at his head. It was cracked in several places, and he died the next 
day. He and I were near friends.

The first of June, 1731, at five in the morning, I took my leave of 
honest WINCUR, as cheerful and worthy a fellow as ever lived, and 
set out for Knaresborough; but lost my way, went quite wrong, and in 
three hours' time, came to a little blind alehouse, the sign of the 
Cat and Bagpipe, in a lone silent place. The master of this small 
inn was one Tom CLANCY, brother to the well-known MARTIN CLANCY in 
Dublin. He came to England to try his fortune, as he told me, and 
married an old woman, who kept this public-house, the sign of the 
Cat, to which Tom added the Bagpipe. As he had been a waiter at his 
brother's house, he remembered to have seen me often there, and was 
rejoiced at my arrival at the Cat and Bagpipe. He got me a good 
supper of trouts, fine ale, and a squib of punch, and after he had 
done talking of all the gallant fellows that used to resort to his 
brother MARTIN'S, Captain MACCAN of the county of Kerry, and many 
more, the heroes of Trinity-college, Dublin, he let me go to sleep.

The next morning, betimes, I was up, and walked into a wood 
adjoining to Clancy's house. I sauntered on for about an hour easily 
enough, but at last came to a part of the forest that was almost 
impenetrable. Curiosity incited me to struggle onwards, if possible, 
that I might see what country was before me, or if any house was to 
be found in this gloomy place; this cost me a couple of hours, much 
toil, and many scratches; but at length, I arrived at the edge of a 
barren moor, and beyond it, about a quarter of a mile off, saw 
another wood. Proud to be daring, on I went, and soon came to the 
wood in view, which I found cut into walks, and arrived at a 
circular space surrounded with a forest, that was above a hundred 
yards every way. In the centre of this was a house, enclosed within 
a very broad deep moat, full of water, and the banks on the inside, 
all round, were so thick planted with trees, that there was no 
seeing anything of the mansion but the roof and the chimneys. Over 
the water was one narrow draw-bridge, lifted up, and a strong door 
on the garden side of the moat. Round I walked several times, but no 
soul could I see: not the least noise could I hear; nor was there a 
cottage anywhere in view. I wondered much at the whole, and if I had 
had my lad O'FIN with me, and my pole, I would most certainly have 
attempted to leap the fosse, broad as it was, and if it was 
possible, have known who were the occupants of this strange place. 
But as nothing could be done, nor any information be had, I returned 
again to the Cat and Bagpipe.

It was ten by the time I got back, and at breakfast I told CLANCY, 
my landlord, where I had been, and asked him if he knew who lived in 
that wonderful place. "His name," he replied, "is COCK, an old 
lawyer and limb of the Devil, and the most hideous man to behold, 
upon the face of the earth. Everything that is bad and shocking is 
in his compound; he is to outward appearance a monster, and within, 
the miser, the oppressor, and the villain. He is despised and 
abhorred, but so immensely rich, that he can do anything, and no one 
is able to contend with him. I could relate," said TOM, "a thousand 
instances of his injustice and cruelty; but one alone is sufficient 
to render his memory for ever cursed. Two gentlemen of fortune, who 
had employed him several years in their affairs, and had a good 
opinion of him, on account of a canted uprightness and seeming 
piety, left him sole guardian of a daughter each of them had, and 
the management of fifty thousand pounds a-piece, the fortune of 
these girls, with power to do as he pleased, without being subject 
to any control, till they are of age. These ladies, as fine 
creatures as ever the eye of man beheld, he has had now a year in 
confinement in that prison you saw in the wood; and while he lives, 
will keep them there to be sure, on account of the hundred thousand 
pounds, or till he shall be able to dispose of them to his own 
advantage, some way or other. He intends them, it is said, for two 
ugly nephews he has, who are now at school, about fourteen years 
old, and for this purpose, or some other as bad, never suffers them 
to stir out of the garden surrounded by the moat, nor lets any human 
creature visit them. Greatly as they are to be pitied, they bear his 
severe usage wonderfully well. Miss MARTHA TILSTON, the eldest, is 
in her twentieth year; and the other, Miss ALITHEA LLANSOY, in her 
nineteenth. They are girls of great sense, and would, if any kind of 
opportunity offered, make a brave attempt to escape, but that seems 
impossible. They are not only so strictly confined, and he for ever 
at home with them, except he rides a few miles; but they are 
attended continually in the garden, when they walk, by a servant who 
is well paid, and devoted to the old man her master. This makes them 
think their state is fixed for life, and to get rid of melancholy, 
they read, and practice music. They both play on the fiddle, and do 
it extremely fine."

Here CLANCY had done, and I was much more surprised at his relation 
than at the place of their residence which I had seen. I became very 
thoughtful, and continued for some time with my eyes fixed on the 
table, while I revolved the case of these unfortunate young ladies. 
"But is all this true, or only report?" said I, "How did you get 
such particular information?" "I will tell you," answered Tom, "Old 
COCK is my landlord, and business often brings me to his house in 
the wood, to pay my rent, or ask for something I want. Besides, I 
sometimes take a fat pig there, and other things to sell. My 
daughter, likewise, has sometimes a piece of work in hand for the 
ladies, and she and I take a walk with it there by a better and 
shorter way than you went. You cannot think how glad they are to see 
us, and then acquaint us with all their perplexities and distress."

On hearing this, a sudden thought of being serviceable to these 
ladies came into my head, and I was about to ask a question in 
relation to it, when two horsemen rode up to the door, and one of 
them called "House!" "This" says my landlord, "is old COCK and his 
man;" and immediately went out to him, to know his will. He told 
him, he came for the ride's sake himself, to see if any letters were 
left for him by that day's post at his house, and would dine with 
him if he had anything to eat. "I have" said Tom "as fine a fowl, 
bacon and greens, as ever was served up to any table, and only one 
gentleman, a stranger and traveller, to sit down to it." COCK upon 
this came into the room I was sitting in, and after looking very 
earnestly at me, said "Your servant, Sir." I told him I was his 
"most humble," and right glad to meet with a gentleman for society 
in that lone place. I immediately began a story of a cock and a 
bull, and made the old fellow grin now and then. I informed him 
among other things, that I was travelling to Westmoreland, to look 
after some estates I had there, but must hurry back to London very 
soon, for my wife was within a few weeks of her time. "You are a 
married man then, Sir," he replied. "Yes, indeed, and so supremely 
blest with the charms and perfections, the fondness and obedience of 
a wife, that I would not be unmarried for all the world: few men 
living so happy as I am in the nuptial state." Here dinner was 
brought in, and to save the old gentleman trouble, I would cut up 
the fowl. I helped him plentifully to a slice of the breast, and the 
tips of the wings, and picked out for him the tenderest greens. I 
was as complaisant as it was possible, and drank his health many 
times. The bottle after dinner I put about pretty quick, and told my 
old gentleman, if affairs ever brought him up to London, I should be 
glad to see him at my house in Golden-Square, the very next door to 
Sir John Heir's; or, if I could be of any service to him there, he 
would oblige me very much by letting me know in what way. In short, 
I so buttered him with words, and filled him with fowl and wine, 
that he seemed well pleased, especially when he found there was 
nothing to pay, as I informed him it was my own dinner I had 
bespoke, and dined with double pleasure in having the satisfaction 
of his most agreeable company. I further said, he was a fine 
politician, and talked extremely well of the government and the 
times; that I had received more true knowledge from his just 
notions, than from all I had read of men and things, or from 
conversing with anyone. The glass during this time was not long 
still, but in such toasts as I found were grateful to his Jacobite 
heart, drank brimmers as fast as opportunity served; and he pledged 
me and cottoned in a very diverting way. He grew very fond of me at 
last, and hoped I would spare so much time, as to come and dine with 
him the next day. This honour I assured him I would do myself, and 
punctually be with him at his hour. He then rode off, brim full, and 
I walked out to consider of this affair. But before I proceed any 
farther in my story, I must give a description of this man.

COCK, the old lawyer and guardian, was a low man, about four feet 
eight inches, very broad, and near seventy years old. He was humped 
behind to an enormous degree, and his belly as a vast flasket of 
garbage projected monstrously before. He had the most hanging look I 
have ever seen. His brows were prodigious, and frowning in a 
shocking manner; his eyes very little, and above an inch within his 
head; his nose hooked like a buzzard, wide nostrils like a horse, 
and his mouth sparrow. In this case, was a mind quite cunning, in 
the worst sense of the word, acute, artful, designing and base. 
There was not a spark of honour or generosity in his soul.

How to circumvent this able one, and deliver the two beauties from 
his oppressive power, was the question: it seemed almost impossible; 
but I resolved to do my best. This I told CLANCY, and requested, as 
I was to dine with COCK the next day, that he would be there in the 
morning, on some pretence or other, and let the ladies know, I 
offered them my service, without any other view than to do them 
good; and if they accepted it, to inform me by a note, slipped into 
my hand when they saw me, that if they could direct me what to do, I 
would execute it at any hazard, or let them hint the least 
particular that might have any tendency to their freedom in some 
time to come, though it were three months off, and I would wait for 
the moment, and study to improve the scheme. This my landlord very 
carefully acquainted them with, at the time I mentioned; and by two 
o'clock I was at COCK's house, to see these beauties, and know what 
they thought of the service offered them. The old man received me 
much civiler than I thought he would do when he was sober, and had, 
what my landlord told me was a very rare thing in his house, to wit, 
a good dinner that day. Just as it was brought in the ladies 
entered, two charming creatures indeed, and made me very low 
courtesies, while their eyes declared the sense they had of the good 
I intended them. Cock said, "these are my nieces, Sir," and as I had 
saluted them, we sat down to table. The eldest carved, and helped me 
to the best the board afforded, and young as they were, they both 
showed by their manner, and the little they said, that they were 
women of sense and breeding. They retired, a few minutes after 
dinner, and the youngest contrived, in going off, to give me a 
billet in an invisible manner. I then turned to COCK entirely, heard 
him abuse the government in nonsense and falsehoods, as all 
Jacobites do; and after we had drank and talked for better than an 
hour, took my leave of him very willingly, to read the following 
note.

SIR, 

"As you can have nothing in view but our happiness, in your 
most generous offer of assistance, we have not words to 
express our grateful sense of the intended favour. What is to 
be done upon the occasion, as yet we cannot imagine, as we are 
so confined and watched, and the doors of the house locked and 
barred in such a manner every night that a cat could not get 
out at any part of it,—You shall hear from us however soon, if 
possible, to some purpose; and in the meantime we are. 

SIR, 

Your ever obliged servants, 

M. T. 

A. L."

What to do then I could not tell; but as I rode back I consulted 
with my lad O'FIN, who was a very extraordinary young man, and asked 
him what observations he had made on the servants and place. He 
said, he had tried the depth of the water in the moat all round, and 
found it fordable at one angle, waist high, and the rock he trod on 
about two feet broad. He had stripped, and walked it over to be sure 
of the thing. As to the people, he fancied there was one young man, 
a labourer by the year under the gardener, who would, for a 
reasonable reward for losing his place, be aiding in the escape of 
the ladies; for he talked with pity of them, and with great severity 
of his master: that if I pleased, he would sound this man, and let 
me know more in relation to him: that if he would be concerned, he 
could very easily carry the ladies on his back across the water, as 
he was a tall man, and then we might take them behind us to what 
place we pleased; or, if it was not safe trusting this man, for fear 
of his telling his master, in hopes of more money on that side, 
then, he would himself engage to bring the ladies and their clothes 
over, on his own back, with wetting only their legs, if they could 
be at the water-side some hour in the night. This was not bad to be 
sure, but I was afraid to trust the man; for, if he should inform 
old COCK of the thing, they would be confined to their chambers, and 
made close prisoners for the time to come. It was better therefore 
to rely entirely upon O'FIN, if they could get into the garden in 
the night.

In answer then to another letter I had from the ladies by my 
landlord's daughter the next morning in which they lamented the 
appearing impossibility of an escape, I let them know immediately 
the state of the water, and desired to be informed what they thought 
of the gardener's man; or, if he would not do, could they at any 
particular hour, get to that angle of the moat I named, to be 
brought over on my man's back, and then immediately ride off behind 
us on pillions, which should be prepared. Their answer was, that 
they dared not trust any of their guardian's men, but thought my own 
servant would do, and the scheme reasonable and seemingly safe, if 
they could get out. They gave me a motion of thanks for my amazing 
care of them, and called the immortal powers to witness the high 
sense they had of their unutterable obligation to me.

Waiting then for them, I stayed at the little inn three days longer, 
and at last received a billet to let me know, that at twelve o'clock 
that night, which was the sixth of June, they could, by an accident 
that had happened, be at the appointed place, and ready to go 
wherever I pleased. To a minute my man and I were there, and in a 
few moments, O'FIN brought them and their clothes over safe. In an 
instant after they were behind us, and we rode off as fast as we 
could. Six hours we travelled without stopping, and in that time, 
had gone about thirty miles. We breakfasted very gaily at our inn, 
and when the horses had rested a couple of hours, we set out again, 
and rode till three in the afternoon, when we baited at a lone house 
in a valley, called Straveret Vale, which had every rural charm that 
can be found in the finest part of Juan Fernandes. A young couple, 
vastly civil kept here a small clean public house, the sign of the 
Pilgrim, on the very margin of a pretty river, and the plain things 
they had were as good as we could desire. Their bread, their drink, 
their fowl, their eggs, their butter, cheese, vegetables, and bacon, 
were excellent, and as they had good beds, I thought we could not do 
better than lie by for two or three days in this charming place, 
till it was determined, where the ladies should fix. We were at 
least sixty miles from old COCK's house, and in an obscurity that 
would conceal us from any pursuers; for we had kept the cross roads 
and by-ways, and were on the confines of Westmoreland. Here then we 
agreed to rest for a little time. In reality, it was just as I 
pleased. The ladies were all acknowledgment for what I did to 
deliver them, and all submission to my direction. They had each of 
them thirty guineas in their purses, as they showed me, but what to 
do after that was gone, or where to go while it lasted, to be in 
safety, they could not tell.

The affair perplexed me very much, and I turned it a thousand ways, 
without being able to settle it as I would. I had two young 
heiresses on my hands, who wanted more than a year of being at age, 
and I must support them, and place them in some spot of decency, 
security, and peace, since I had gone thus far, or I had injured 
them greatly, instead of serving them, in bringing them from their 
guardian's house. This took up all my thoughts for three days. I 
concealed however my uneasiness from them, and endeavoured to make 
the house and place quite pleasing to them. I kept up a cheerfulness 
and gaiety, and we sat down with joy and pleasure to breakfast, 
dinner, and supper. Within doors, we played at cards, we sung, and I 
entertained than with my German flute. Abroad, we walked, fished, 
and sometimes I rowed them up the river in a boat which the man of 
the house had. The whole scheme was really delightful, and as the 
girls had great quickness and vivacity, and were far from being 
ignorant, considering their few years, I could have wished it was 
possible to stay there much longer; but it was no place for them, 
and I was obliged to call at Claytor, in a little time. I could not 
forget my promise to the lovely Miss SPENCE. My honour was engaged, 
and there was no time to lose. It is true, if I had not been 
engaged, I might immediately have married either the beautiful Miss 
TILSTON, or the more beautiful Miss LLANDSOY, then become my wards; 
but as they were minors, if such a wife died under age, could be no 
gainer, and might have children to maintain without any fortune. All 
these things sat powerfully on my spirits, and I was obliged at last 
to make the following declaration to the ladies, which I did the 
third day after dinner.

"Miss TILSTON, Miss LLANDSOY, I am sensible you have too high an 
opinion of what I have done to serve you, and think there is more 
merit in it than there really is; for a man of any generosity and 
ability would, I imagine, do all that was possible to deliver two 
young ladies of your charms and perfections, from the slavery and 
misery your guardian kept you in: I am likewise sure you believe I 
would do everything in my power, to secure your happiness, and give 
you the possession of every blessing of time, I honour, I admire, I 
regard you both, to a high degree; and if I were some powerful 
genie, I would crown your lives with stable felicity and glory. But 
nature, ladies, has irrevocably fixed limits, beyond which we cannot 
pass, and my sphere of action is far from being large. My fortune is 
not very great, and thereby prevents my being so useful a friend to 
you as I would willingly be. However, though it is not in my power 
to do according to my inclination, in regard to your case, and with 
security place you in some station fit for your rank and worth, yet 
I can bring you to a spot of tranquillity, and in still life enable 
you to live without perplexity or care of any kind. You shall have 
peace and little, and may perhaps hereafter say, you have enjoyed 
more real happiness, for the time you had occasion to reside there, 
than you could find in the tumult, pomp, and grandeur of the world."

Here I gave the ladies an account of Orton Lodge, in the northern 
extremity of Westmoreland, where I had lived a considerable time, 
told them the condition it was in, the goods, the books, the 
liquors, and other necessaries and conveniencies that were there, 
and if, in that charming romantic spot, where no mortal could come 
to hurt them, they could bear to live for a while, I would settle 
them there, and get a man-servant to work in the garden, and a 
couple of maids. I would likewise procure for them two cows, a few 
lambs, some poultry, and corn, and seeds for the ground: in short, 
that they should have everything requisite in such a place; I would 
return to them as soon as possible; I would write to them often, 
directing my letters to the nearest town, to be called for by their 
man. "What do you say, ladies, to this proposal? In London it is not 
possible for you to be: at a farm-house you might have no 
satisfaction: and anywhere that was known and frequented, you may be 
liable to discovery, as COCK, your guardian, will enquire 
everywhere; and if he hears of you, you will be carried home most 
certainly to his dismal habitation, and be used ten times worse than 
before. What do you think then of this scheme?"

"Sir," they both replied, "you are to us a subaltern power, by 
heaven sent to deliver us from misery, and secure our happiness in 
this world. We have not words to express the gratitude of our souls 
for this further instance of your goodness in the offer, you make 
us, nor can it ever be in our power . to make you the return it 
deserves. You will he pleased to accept our grateful thanks, and all 
we have to add at present, our prayers for your preservation and 
health. Conduct us, we beseech you, immediately to that sweet spot 
of peace you have described."

This being agreed on, the next thing to be done was to get two 
horses for the ladies, for mine were not able to carry double any 
further, if there had been a turnpike road before us; then up the 
mountains we were to go, where no double horse could travel; and 
when they were at the Lodge, they would want horses to ride 
sometimes, or to remove, if the necessity of their case should 
happen to require it: to my landlord therefore I applied upon the 
occasion, and he very quickly got me not only two pretty beasts, but 
a young labouring man, and two country girls to wait upon the 
ladies. I then sent to the next town for a couple of side-saddles, 
gave the servants directions to go to the Rev. Mr FLEMING'S house, 
to wait there till they heard from me, and then we set out for Orton 
Lodge. Two days we spent in travelling there, feeding on cold 
provisions we had with us, and lying a night on the fern of the 
mountains. The second evening we arrived at the Lodge. There I found 
everything safe, and the place as I had left it. I opened my various 
store-houses, to the surprise of the young ladies, and brought them 
many good things; biscuits, potted char, potted black-cocks, 
sweetmeats, and liquors of various kinds; O'FIN likewise got us a 
dish of trouts for supper, and the two beauties and I sat down with 
cheerfulness to our table. Vastly amazed they were at all they saw. 
Everything was so good, and the wild charms of the place so 
pleasing, that they could not but express the transports they were 
in at their present situation. The whole they said, was charming as 
enchantment, and in language there was not a force sufficient to 
express their grateful sentiments upon the occasion. This gave me 
much pleasure, and till the end of June, I lived a very happy life 
with these fine young creatures. They did all that was possible to 
show their esteem and gratitude. Exclusive of their amazing fine 
faces, and persons, they were ingenious, gay, and engaging, and made 
every minute of time delightful. If I had not been engaged to Miss 
SPENCE, I should certainly have sat down in peace with these two 
young ladies, and with them connected, have looked upon Orton Lodge 
as the Garden of Eden. They were both most charming women. Miss 
LLANDSOY was a perfect divinity!

On the first of July, just as the day was breaking, I mounted my 
horse, and again left Orton Lodge. The morning being extremely fine, 
and everything appearing in the loveliness of Nature, rode on softly 
for three or four hours, and was so delighted with the beauty and 
infinite variety of enchanting objects my eyes were feasted with, 
that heedlessly instead of coming to the turning that was my road, I 
got into a bending valley, which ended at a range of rocky 
mountains. For half an hour I travelled by the bottom of these 
frightful hills, and came at length to a pass through them, but so 
narrow, that the beasts had not above an inch or two to spare on 
each side. It was dark as the blackest night in this opening, and a 
stream came from it, by the waters falling in several places from 
the top of the high inclosing precipices. It was the most shocking 
foot-way I had ever seen, and therefore requested O'FIN, as the 
bottom was hard, to try where the pass ended and let me know what 
kind of country and inhabitants were beyond it? "That I will," said 
O'FIN, and immediately entered the cleft or crevice between the 
mountains. A couple of hours I allowed my adventurer to explore this 
dark way, but if in that time he could make nothing of it, then his 
orders were to return: but there was no sign of him at the end of 
six hours, and I began to fear he had got into some pound. After him 
then I went, about one o'clock, and for near half a mile, the narrow 
way was directly forward, a rough bottom, and ankle deep in water; 
but it ended in a fine flowery green of about twenty acres, 
surrounded with steep rocky hills which it was impossible to ascend. 
In walking up to the precipice before me, I found many caverns, 
which extended on either hand, and onwards, into a vast variety of 
caves; some of them having high arched openings for entrance, and 
others only holes to creep in at; but all of them spacious within, 
and high enough for the tallest man to walk in.

In these dismal chambers I apprehended my fellow had lost himself, 
and therefore went into them as far as I could venture, without 
losing sight of day, and cried out FIN! FIN! but could hear no sound 
in return. This was a great trouble to me, and I knew not what to 
do. Back however I must go to my horses, and after I had spent two 
hours in searching, shouting, and expecting my lad's return, by some 
means or other, I was just going to walk towards the crevice, or 
dark narrow pass I had come through to this place, when casting my 
eyes once more towards the caverns in the mountains, I saw my boy 
come out, leaping and singing for joy. He told me, he never expected 
to see the day-light more: for after he had foolishly gone too far 
into the caves, till he was quite in the dark, in hopes of finding a 
passage through the mountain to some open country, he was obliged to 
wander from chamber to chamber, he knew not where, for many hours, 
without one ray of light, and with very little expectation of 
deliverance; that he did nothing but cry and roar, and was hardly 
able to stand on his. legs any longer, when by a chance turn into a 
cave, he saw some light again, and then soon found his way out. Poor 
fellow! he was in a sad condition, and his escape was very 
wonderful.

After this, we made what haste we could to our horses, which we had 
left feeding in the vale; and O'FIN brought me some cold provisions 
from his wallet for my dinner. I dined with great pleasure, on 
account of the recovery of my lad, and when we had both recruited 
and rested sufficiently, on we went again. We found the valley 
winded about the mountains for three miles, and then ended at the 
highest hill I had ever seen, but which it was possible to ascend. 
With great difficulty we and our horses got to the top of it, and 
down on the other side. Six mountains of the same height, whose tops 
were above the clouds, we had to cross, and then arrived at a 
bottom, which formed a most delightful scene.

The Vale of Keswick, and Lake of Derwentwater, in Cumberland, are 
thought by those who have been there, to be the finest point of view 
in England, and extremely beautiful they are, far more so than the 
Rev. Dr. Dalton has been able to make them appear in his Descriptive 
Poem,<176> addressed to two ladies, the late excellent Lord 
Lonsdale's charming daughters, on their return from viewing the 
coal-mines, near Whitehaven; or than the Doctor's brother, Mr 
Dalton, has painted them in his fine drawings; and yet they are 
inferior in charms to the vale, the lake, the brooks, the shaded 
sides of the surrounding mountains, and the tuneful falls of water, 
to which we came in Westmoreland. In all the world, I believe, there 
is not a more glorious rural scene to be seen, in the fine time of 
the year.

In this charming vale, I found one pretty little house, which had 
gardens very beautifully laid out, and usefully filled with the 
finest dwarf fruit trees and evergreens, vegetables, herbs, and 
shrubs. The mansion, and the improved spot of ground, were at the 
end of the beautiful lake, so as to have the whole delightful piece 
of water before the door. The projecting shaded fells seemed to nod 
or hang over the habitation, and on either hand, a few yards from 
the front of the house, cascades much higher than that of dread 
Lodore, in Cumberland, fell into the lake. There is not anything so 
beautiful and striking as the whole in any part of the globe that I 
have seen: and I have been in higher latitudes, north and south, 
than most men living. I have conversed with nations who live many 
degrees beyond the poor frozen Laplander; and have travelled among 
the barbarians who scorch beneath the burning zone.

Who lived in this delightful valley, was, in the next place, my 
enquiry, after I had admired for an hour the amazing beauties of the 
place. I walked up to the house, and in one of the parlour windows, 
that had a view up the loch, I saw a young beauty sitting with a 
music-book in her hand, and heard her sing in a masterly manner. She 
could not see me, but I had a full view of her fine face, and as I 
remembered to have seen her somewhere, I stood gazing at her with 
wonder and delight, endeavouring to recollect where I had been in 
her company, when another young one came into the room, whom I had 
reason to remember very well, on account of an accident, and then I 
knew they were the two young ladies I had seen at Mr Harcourt's, and 
admired very greatly for the charms of their persons, and the 
beauties of their minds. Upon this I walked up to the window, and 
after a little astonishment at seeing me, they behaved with the 
greatest civility, and seemed to be highly pleased with the 
accidental meeting. While we were talking, their mamma came into the 
apartment, and on their letting her know who I was, and where they 
had been acquainted with me, the old lady was pleased to ask me to 
stay at her house that night, and to assure me she was glad to see 
me, as she had often heard her daughters speak of me. Three days I 
passed with great pleasure in this place, and then with much regret 
took my leave.

The 5th of July I left Mrs THURLOE'S, and by the assistance of a 
guide, had a fine ride to the house of Friar FLEMING, in 
Richmondshire, where I arrived by noon. I dined with this good 
Franciscan, and should have lain there that night, but that I could 
not help being melancholy, on missing my dear friend Tom, the monk's 
brother, who died of a fever, as before related. From him then I 
parted in the evening, and rode to a Carthusian monastery, which 
consisted of seven monks, men of some estate, who had agreed to live 
together in this remote place, and pass their lives in piety, study, 
and gardening. I had a letter from FLEMING to one of these 
gentlemen, the superior, letting him know I was his near friend, and 
desiring he would receive me as himself; that, although a 
protestant, I was of no party, but in charity with all mankind. This 
letter procured me all the kindness and honours these gentlemen 
could show me. They behaved with great civility and tenderness, and 
gave me the best they had, good fish, good bread, good wine, 
excellent fruit, and fine vegetables: for as to flesh, they never 
eat any, by their rule.

They were all learned and devout men, very grave and silent for the 
most part, except when visited, but without anything stiff or morose 
in their manner. They had a large collection of books, and seemed to 
understand them well. What time they had to spare from the hours of 
divine service, and working in their gardens, according to the rule 
of St. BRUNO, which they follow, they give to study, and had many 
volumes of their own writing; but mostly old manuscripts which they 
had transcribed, in Greek, Latin, and French. Making such copies was 
their principal work in the closet.

I stayed two days with these gentlemen, and had a good deal of 
useful conversation with them, on various subjects. On looking into 
the writings of the Rabbies, which I saw in their library, I told 
one of these Chartreux, that it was a wonder to me, that anyone read 
such extravagant fabulous relations and despicable fictions as these 
books contained, and should be glad to know, what good could be 
extracted from them.

The Friar replied, that notwithstanding their being fictitious and 
extravagant to a high degree, yet great use might be made of the 
works of the Rabbies, and especially of the Talmud of Babylon.<177> 
We obtain from thence a knowledge of the customs and opinions of the 
Jews, which afford some benefit. In the next place, they serve to 
the confirmation of the history of Jesus Christ; for it appears by 
the Babylonish Talmud, that there was one Jesus, who had disciples, 
lived in such and such a place, and did and said divers things; and 
in the Bible many texts relating to the Messias are confirmed and 
explained by these books of the Rabbies, though not by them 
intended. This I have since found to be the truth of the case. I 
have read the works of the Rabbins since, and find it to be as the 
Carthusian said. For example;

It is said in Genesis ch. iii. v. 15. "I will put enmity between thy 
seed and her seed. It shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise 
his heel." Now the Targum of Onkelos gives the sense thus: The man 
shall be mindful of, or remember, what thou (Satan) hast done to him 
in times past, and thou shalt observe, watch or haunt him till the 
end of days; that is, the serpent or Devil should pursue and have 
dominion over the world till the last days, and then the prince of 
this world should be cast out, and the works of the Devil destroyed. 
Beacharith Heyamim, the end of days, or last days, is, by a general 
rule, given by the most learned Rabbins, meant of the Messias. So 
Kimchi on Isaiah, ch. ii. v. 2.——and Abarbriel and R. Moses Nachm on 
Genesis, xlix. v. 1. inform us.

It is likewise very remarkable, that the Targum of Jerusalem, and 
that of Jonathan Ben Thiel, apply this place to the coming of the 
Messias. They give the words the following sense. I will put enmity 
between thy seed and her seed: when the sons of the woman keep my 
law, they shall bruise thy head, and when they break my law, thou 
shalt bruise their heel; but the wound given to the seed of the 
woman, shall be healed, but thine shall be incurable; they shall be 
healed in the last days, in the days of the Messias. Such is the 
opinion of the most learned Jews: and from thence it follows, that 
the Christians have not put their sense upon the text I have cited 
to serve their own turn; the Rabbins, we see, give the very same 
meaning to the place.

Again in Numbers, ch. xxiv. v. 17. we have the famous prophecy of 
Balaam: "There shall come a star out of Jacob, and a sceptre shall 
rise out of Israel," and in Isaiah, ch. xi. v. 1. it is written. 
"And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a 
branch shall grow out of his roots, and the spirit of the Lord shall 
rest upon him." And in Jeremiah, ch. xxiii. v. 5, 6. "Behold the 
days shall come, saith the Lord, that I will raise unto David a 
righteous branch,—and this is his name whereby he shall be called, 
The Lord our Righteousness." That the Christians apply these texts 
to the Messias, I need not inform the reader: but it must be 
grateful to observe, that the paraphrases of Onkelos, Jonathan, and 
Jerusalem, all of them expressly attribute the prophecy of Balaam to 
the Messias. And Rabbi Moses Hadarsan and Maimon, say, he is here 
called a Star, which signifies what Malachi expresses by the Sun of 
Righteousness. Mal. ch. iv. v. 2, and Zachariah by the East. "I will 
bring forth my servant the East." Zach. ch. iii. v. S. as it is 
translated in the Vulgate, Septuagint, Arabic, and Syriac, is here, 
say these Rabbins, called a Star, because he should come and destroy 
idolatry, among the heathen nations, by becoming a light to the 
gentiles, and the glory of Israel.

As to the other two texts, the Jews do likewise attribute them to 
the Messias. Rabbi Joseph Albo, speaking of the words, "The Lord our 
Righteousness," in particular, says expressly, that this is one name 
given to the Messias. Albo, Sep. ikker. lib. 2. c. 28. Thus do the 
Jews concur with us in the application of texts to the Messias. But 
what is become of this Messias, they cannot tell. They are amazed, 
perplexed, and confounded about him. They dispute on the article, 
and have the wildest fancies in relation to it. Whereas the 
Christians give a clear and consistent account of the Messias, and 
by every argument that can be desired by a rational, prove the truth 
of Christianity.

Again: in Isaiah ch. ix. v. 6. we have these words; "Unto us a child 
is born, unto us a son is given, and the government shall be upon 
his shoulders: and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, 
the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace." Or as 
the Alexandrian Manuscript heath it, "He shall call his name the 
Angel, Wonderful, Counsellor, Mighty, the Governor, the Prince of 
Peace, the Father of the age to come." This is thought by all 
Christians to be a plain declaration of the Messias; for to apply it 
to any mere mortal, as to Hezekiah, or Isaiah's son, cannot be done 
without the greatest absurdity: and therefore Ben Maimon, Epist. ad 
Afric. fairly yields that these words belong to the Messias, and so 
doth Jonathan Ben Uziel in his Chaldee paraphrase. The Talmud itself 
allows it, Tract. Sanhedrim. that it relates to a person not come in 
the time of the prophets, but to the man, whose name is the "Branch, 
which was to come forth out of the stem of Jesse, and to grow out of 
his roots. My servant the Branch. Behold the man whose name is the 
Branch." Zach. ch. iii. v. 8. and ch. xii. and Isaiah ch. iv. v. 1. 
"Even the person that shall be sent;" Shiloh, that remarkable person 
God had promised to his people. So says the Talmud.

But further; as to the birth of the Messias, in respect of the 
manner and the place, it is thus set down by the prophet Micah, v. 
2." And thou Bethlehem Ephrata, though thou be little among the 
thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall come forth unto me, that 
is to be ruler in Israel; whose goings forth have been of old, even 
from everlasting." And in Isaiah, ch. vii. v. 14. are these words, 
"Behold a virgin shall conceive, and bring forth a son, and call his 
name Immanuel." In these two texts, the Christians say, the place of 
the birth of the Messias, and the manner of it, are as plainly 
described as words can do; and if they cannot, without absurdity, be 
explained as relating tCo any other person, then it must be 
perverting the meaning of the records, to oppose this explication: 
but this the Jews are far from doing. The place is acknowledged in 
the Talmud, in the Chaldee paraphrase of Jonathan, and all their 
most famous masters declare with one voice, that Bethlehem 
indisputably belongs to the Messias. "Exte Bethlehem coram me 
prodibit Messias, ut sit dominium exercens in Israel, cujus nomen 
dictum est ab aeternitate, a Diebus seculi."<177> Talmud. lib. 
Sanhedrin, et Midrasch. The Hellenic Rabbi Selemoh, Paraph. Jonath. 
in Loc. Rabbi David Kimchi. And as to the manner, though it be true 
that some Jews say, the Hebrew word Gnalmah signifies a young woman 
as well as a virgin; vet Kimchi, Jarchi, and Selemoh, three of their 
greatest Rabbins, confess that here is something wonderful presaged 
in the birth and generation of this person, and that he was not to 
be born as other men and women are born. What can we desire more, in 
the case, from an enemy? And in truth, the behold, or wonder, with 
which the text begins, would be nothing, if it was only that a young 
woman should have a child: and as to the Hebrew word Gnalmah, if it 
ever does signify a young woman, which I very much doubt, yet in the 
translation of the Seventy, who well understood the original surely, 
they render the word by parthenos in Greek which always signifies a 
virgin in the strict propriety of the phrase. And in the Punic 
language, which is much the same as the Hebrew, the word Alma 
signifies a virgin, "Virgo intacta," and never means a young woman.

Such are the advantages we may gain by reading the books of the 
Rabbins; and to me it is pleasing to see these great Hebrew masters 
granting so much to us for our Messias, while they hate our holy 
religion beyond everything. Even the gay among the Jews, if I have 
been truly informed by one who danced a night with them; have, in 
contempt and abhorrence of our faith, a country-dance called "The 
Little Jesus."

The eighth of July, I left the little Chartreuse, and went from 
thence to Knaresborough, where I arrived that night, and resided 
three days. It is a fine old town, and borough by prescription, in 
the West-Riding of Yorkshire, and Wapentake of Claro. The vast hills 
of Craven look beautifully wild in its neighbourhood, and the rapid 
river Nid, which issues from the bottom of those mountains, almost 
encompasses the town. It is a hundred and seventy-five measured 
miles from London, and the best way to it is from Ferrybridge to 
Wetherby, by the left-hand road, where there is an excellent inn, 
and from that to Knaresborough.

When this very ancient town passed from the posterity of Surlo de 
Burgh, the founder of it, we know not, but we find that Henry III, 
granted the honour, castle, and manor, to the Earl of Kent, Margaret 
his wife, and their issue and heirs, and that on failure of issue 
and right heirs, it returned again to the crown; for Edward II. 
among other lands, gave this lordship of Knaresborough to his 
favourite Pierse de Gaveston, Earl of Cornwall, and his heirs. 
Gaveston was taken not long after by the Barons, in Scarborough 
castle, after a short siege, and was beheaded on Gaversly-heath, 
near Warwick, by order of the Earl of Warwick, June 20, 1312. On the 
fall of the insolent Gaveston, who had been banished by Edward I. 
but recalled ere that monarch's funeral rites were performed, by the 
weak and inefficient Edward II. whose interest becoming blended with 
that of his favourite, rendered the public displeasure against 
Gaveston the want of duty to the prince, and which eventually in his 
death involved the ruin of his Sovereign; Knaresborough again 
reverted to the Crown, and so continued till the forty-fourth of 
Edward III. when this king made a grant of the honour, castle, and 
manor of the town, and the cell of St. Roberts, to John of Gaunt, 
the king's fourth son, who was Earl of Richmond, and created Duke of 
Lancaster, on his having married one of the co-heiresses of Henry 
Duke of Lancaster. Other great estates were likewise given at the 
same time to this fourth son of Edward, that he might maintain his 
grandeur: and ever since, this town has belonged to the dutchy of 
Lancaster. It is an appendage to the crown.

Not far from this town are two wells, as strong of sulphur as 
Harrogate-water, and as valuable, though no one takes any notice of 
them. One lies in the way to Harrogate, in a low ground by a brook-
side. The other is Bitton-spa, in a park by Mr Staughton's house.

As to the famous dropping-well or petrifying water, it lies on the 
west side of the town and river, about twenty-six yards from the 
bank of the Nid, and it rises fifteen yards below the top of a 
mountain of marl stone, and in four falls, of about two yards each 
fall, comes to an easy ascent, where it spreads upon the top of an 
isthmus of a petrified rock, generated out of the water, which falls 
down round it. This isthmus or rock is ten yards high, and hangs 
over its base or bottom about five yards. It is near sixteen yards 
long and thirteen broad, and as it started from the bank about fifty 
years ago, leaves a chasm between them, that is about three yards 
wide. In this chasm, you will find petrified twigs of trees, shrubs, 
and grass-roots, hanging in most beautiful pillars, all interwoven, 
and forming many charming figures; and on the common side are whole 
banks like stalactites, hard and inseparable from the rock, where 
the water trickles down. These petrifactions, the falling water, and 
the little isthmus or island being beautifully clothed with ash, 
osier, elm, sambucus, servicana major, geraniums, wood-mercury, 
hart's-tongue, sage, ladies' mantle, cowslips, wild angelica, &c. 
form altogether a delightful scene. The first spring of this water 
is out of a small hole on the little mountain, in the middle of a 
thick-set of shrubs. It sends out twenty gallons in a minute of the 
sweetest water in the world, and twenty-four grains in a pint 
heavier than common water.

Most people are of opinion, that petrifying water is dangerous 
drink, and may produce abundance of mischief, in causing the stone 
and gravel in the body: the original particles or principles of the 
stony substance called spar, which are in abundance suspended in 
this kind of water, must get into the flood-gates of the kidneys and 
ureters, as they opine, and create great misery in a little time.

But this fear of petrifactions in living animal bodies is grounded 
upon neither reason nor experience; for the spar in these waters 
forms no petrifactions, whilst in a brisk motion, or in a temperate 
season, or on vegetables while they preserve their vegetating life. 
While there is warmth and circulation of juices, there can be no 
incrustation or petrifaction from the suspended stony particles. 
Besides, if the minims of spar are not within the spheres of 
sensible attraction, whilst in motion; much less are they so when 
mingled with the fluids of the human body: you may therefore very 
safely drink these limpid petrifying waters at all times, as a 
common fluid, if they come in your way, as the best, and most 
grateful or pleasant water in the world, on account of the 
infinitesimals, or original leasts, of spar that are in them, in 
vast quantities, but infinitely small particles: and if you are 
sick, in many cases they are the best of medicines. Human invention 
has nothing equal to them for fluxes of any part of the body, or 
colliquations from an acid salt. So far are they from being in the 
least dangerous, that in all unnatural discharges, by spitting, 
stool, or urine; by excessive menstrual or haemmorrhoidal fluxes, in 
the fluor albus,<179> diabetes, profuse sweatings; in the diarrhoea, 
dysentry, or lienteria where the springs are not quite worn out; in 
ulcers of the viscera, hectic fevers, atrophy, and colliquations or 
night sweats, there is not anything in physic more profitable or 
pleasant, to recover a patient. Let your dose, in such cases, be 
three half-pints of Knaresborough dropping-well in the forenoon; and 
before you begin to drink this water, remember to take two doses of 
rhubarb, to cleanse off the excrements of the first viscera. You 
must not drink ale, drams, or punch, during a course of these 
waters: and take but very little red port. You must likewise have a 
strict regard to diet. Let it be milk, eggs, jellies, barley-broth, 
chickens, kid, lamb, and the like. You must avoid all salt, sharp, 
stimulating things, day-sleep, and night-air; but agreeable 
conversation, and diversions that require very little exercise, 
conduce to the success of this kind of water, in the distempers I 
have mentioned. If such diseases are curable, you may expect a 
restoration of health.

But, in the dropsy, jaundice, diminished or irregular menses, in 
hyppo, melancholy, stuffings of the lungs, obstructions of the 
viscera, stoppages of the lacteals and mesentery, glandular 
swellings, King's evil, or any case, where thinning, relaxing, 
opening, deterging, attenuation or stimulation are wanting, such 
water is death.

Note, reader, there is another excellent petrifying-water at Newton-
Dale in Yorkshire, N. R. thirteen miles from Scarborough. Another 
near Castle Howard, the fine seat of the Earl of Carlisle, ten miles 
from York. Another, near Skipton, in that rough, romantic, wild and 
silent country, called Craven, in the West-riding of Yorkshire. And 
one, called Bandwell, at Stonefield in Lincolnshire, west of 
Horncastle, which is a hundred and twenty-two miles from London. 
These springs, and many that are not to be come at among the vast 
fells of Westmoreland, and the high mountains of Stanemore, have all 
the virtues of Knaresborough dropping-well; though Knaresborough-
water is the only one resorted to by company: and as to this spring, 
I can affirm from my own knowledge, that it is as excellent, and 
truly medicinal, as the famous petrifying-water at Clermont. There 
is no manner of need for Britons going to the mountain Gregoire in 
Basse-Auvergne.



A POSTILLA, 
Containing an Account of Wardrew Sulphur-water; Claudius Hobart; and 
A Dissertation on Reason and Revelation.

In my account of sulphur-waters, I forgot to mention one very 
extraordinary spring of this kind, and therefore, make a 
postilla<181> of it here, that the reader may find in one section 
all I have to say on mineral waters. And as I found by the side of 
this water, a man as extraordinary as the spring, I shall add his 
life, to my account of the water, and a couple of little pieces 
written by him.

In Northumberland, on the borders of Cumberland, there is a place 
called Wardrew, to the northwest of Thirlwall-castle, which stands 
on that part of the Picts-Wall, where it crosses the Tippel, and is 
known by the name of Murus Perforatus in Saxon Thirlwall, on account 
of the gaps made in the wall at this place for the Scots' passage. 
Here, as I wandered about this wild, untravelled country, in search 
of Roman antiquities, I arrived at a sulphur-spring, which I found 
to be the strongest and most excellent of the kind in all the world. 
It rises out of a vast cliff, called Arden-Rock, over the bank of 
the river Arde or Irthing, six feet above the surface of the water, 
and comes out of a chink in the cliff by a small spout. The 
discharge is fifty gallons in a minute from a mixture of limestone 
and ironstone; and the water is so very foetid, that it is difficult 
to swallow it. The way to it is not easy, for there is no other 
passage than along a very narrow ledge, about nine inches broad, 
which has been cut off the rock over the deep river, and if you 
slip, as you may easily do, having nothing to hold by, down you go 
into a water that looks very black and shocking, by the shade of the 
hanging precipice, and some aged trees which project from the vast 
cliff.

This dangerous situation, and its remoteness, will prevent its being 
ever much visited, admirable as the spa is; yet the country-people 
thereabout make nothing of the ledge, and drink plentifully of the 
water, to their sure relief, in many dangerous distempers. It is to 
them a blessed spring.

The land all round here was one of the finest rural scenes I have 
seen, and made a pensive traveller wish for some small public-house 
there, to pass a few delightful days. Its lawns and groves, its 
waters, vales, and hills, are charming, and form the sweetest, 
softest region of silence and ease. Whichever way I turned, the 
various beauties of nature appeared, and nightingales from the 
thicket enchantingly warbled their loves. The fountains were 
bordered with violets and moss, and near them were clumps of pine 
and beech, bound with sweet-briar, and the tendrils of woodbine. It 
is a delightful spot: a paradise of blooming joys, in the fine 
season of the year.

One inhabitant only I found in this fine solitude, who lived on the 
margin of the river, in a small neat cottage. that was almost hid 
with trees. This was CLAUDIUS HOBART, a man of letters, and a 
gentleman, who had been unfortunate in the world, and retired to 
these elysian fields, to devote the remainder of his time to 
religion, and enjoy the calm felicities of contemplative life. He 
was obliged by law to resign his estate to a claimant, and death had 
robbed him of a matchless mistress, of great fortune, to whom he was 
to have been married. The men who had called themselves his friends, 
and as Timon says in Lucian, honoured him, worshipped him, and 
seemed to depend on his nod, no longer knew him; iam ne agnoscor 
quidem ab illis, nec aspici ne dignantur me, perinde ut eversum 
hominis jam olim defuncti cippum, ac temporis longitudine collapsum 
pretereunt quasi ne norint quidem;<182> so true, continued HOBART, 
are the beautiful lines of Petronius;

Nomen amicitiae si quatenus expedit, haeret, 
Calculus in tabula mobile ducit opus. 
Quum fortuna manet, vultum servatis amici: 
Cum cecidit, turpi vertitis ora fuga.<183>

And so sweet Ovid says was his case,

Eandem cum Timone nostro sortem 
Expertus naso, qui sic de seipso: 
En ego non paucis quondam munitus amicis: 
Dum flavit velis aura secunda meis: 
Ut fera terribili tumuerunt aequora vento, 
In mediis lacera puppe relinquor aquis.<184>

So HOBART found it, and as his health was declining from various 
causes, and he had nothing in view before him but misery; he retired 
to Wardrew, while he had some money, built the little house I saw on 
a piece of ground he purchased, and provided such necessaries and 
comforts as he imagined might be wanting: he had a few good books, 
the Bible, some history, and mathematics, to make him wiser and 
better, and abroad he diverted himself mostly in his garden, and 
with fishing: for fifteen years past he had not been in any town, 
nor in anyone's house, but conversed often with several of the 
country people, who came to drink the mineral-water: what he had 
fresh occasion for, one or other of them brought him, according to 
his written directions, and the money he gave them, and once or 
twice a week he was sure of seeing somebody: as the people knew he 
was not rich, and lived a harmless life, they were far from being 
his enemies, and would do anything in their power to serve the 
hermit, as they called him: but he seldom gave them any trouble. His 
food was biscuit, honey, roots, fish, and oil; and his drink, water, 
with a little rum sometimes. He was never sick, nor melancholy; but 
by a life of temperance and action, and a religion of trust and 
resignation, enjoyed perpetual health and peace, and run his latent 
course in the pleasing expectation of a remove, when his days were 
past, to the bright mansions of the blessed.

Such was the account HOBART gave me of himself, which made me admire 
him much, as he was but fifty then; and to convince me his temper 
had nothing Timonean or unsocial in it from his solitary life, he 
requested I would dine with him. He entertained me with an excellent 
pickled trout and biscuit, fine fruit, and a pot of extraordinary 
honey: with as much cream of tartar as lay on a sixpence, infused in 
warm water, he made half a pint of rum into good punch, and he 
talked over it like a man of sense, breeding, and good humour. We 
parted when the bowl was out, and at my going away, he made me a 
present of the following in manuscript, and told me I might print 
it, if I could think it would he of any use to mankind. It was 
called

THE RULE OF REASON, WITH A FEW THOUGHTS ON REVELATION.

The throne of God rests upon reason, and his prerogative is 
supported by it. It is the sole rule of the Deity, the Mind which 
presides in the universe, and therefore is venerable, sacred, and 
divine. Every ray of reason participates of the majesty of that 
Being to whom it belongs, and whose attribute it is; and being 
thereby awful, and invested with a supreme and absolute authority, 
it is rebellion to refuse subjection to right reason, and a 
violation of the great and fundamental law of heaven and earth.

To this best, and fittest, and noblest rule, the rule of truth, we 
ought to submit, and in obedience to the sacred voice of reason, 
resist the importunities of sense, and the usurpations of appetite. 
Since the will of that Being, who is infinitely pure and perfect, 
rational and righteous, is obliged and governed by his unerring 
understanding; our wills should be guided and directed by our 
reason. In imitation of the wisest and best of Beings, we must 
perpetually adhere to truth, and ever act righteously for 
righteousness' sake. By acting in conformity to moral truths, which 
are really and strictly divine, we act in conformity to ourselves, 
and it is not possible to conceive anything so glorious, or godlike. 
We are thereby taught the duties of piety, our duties toward our 
fellows, and that self-culture which is subservient to piety and 
humanity.

Reason informs us there is a superior Mind, endued with knowledge 
and great power, presiding over human affairs; some original, 
independent Being, complete in all possible perfection, of boundless 
power, wisdom and goodness, the Contriver, Creator, and Governor of 
this world, and the inexhaustible source of all good. A vast 
collection of evidence demonstrates this. Design, intention, art, 
and power, as great as our imagination can conceive, everywhere 
occur. As far as we can make observations, original intelligence and 
power appear to reside in a Spirit, distinct from all divisible, 
changeable, or moveable substance; and if we can reason at all, it 
must be clear, that an original omnipotent Mind is a good Deity, and 
espouses the cause of virtue, and of the universal happiness; will 
gloriously compensate the worthy in a future state, and then make 
the vicious and oppressive have cause to repent of their 
contradicting his will. It follows then most certainly, that with 
this great source of our being, and of all perfection, every 
rational mind ought to correspond, and with internal and external 
worship adore the divine power and goodness. His divine perfections, 
creation and providence, must excite all possible esteem, love, and 
admiration, if we think at all; must beget trust and resignation; 
and raise the highest sensations of gratitude. All our happiness and 
excellency is from his bounty, and therefore not unto us, but to his 
name be the praise. And can there be a joy on earth so stable and 
transporting as that which rises from living with an habitual sense 
of the Divine Presence, a just persuasion of being approved, 
beloved, and protected by him who is infinitely perfect and 
omnipotent?

By reason we likewise find, that the excesses of the passions 
produce misery, and iniquity makes a man completely wretched and 
despicable: but integrity and moral worth secure us peace and merit, 
and lead to true happiness and glory. Unless reason and inquiry are 
banished, vice and oppression must have terrible struggles against 
the principles of humanity and conscience. Reflection must raise the 
most torturing suspicions, and all stable satisfaction must be lost: 
but by cultivating the high powers of our reason, and acquiring 
moral excellence, so far as human nature is able: by justice and the 
benevolent affections, virtue and charity, we are connected with, 
and affixed to the Deity, and with the inward applauses of a good 
heart, we have the outward enjoyment of all the felicities suitable 
to our transitory condition. Happy state surely! There are no 
horrors here to haunt us. There is no dreadful thing to poison all 
parts of life taut all enjoyments.

Let us hearken then to the original law of reason, and follow God 
and nature as the sure guide to happiness. Let the offices of piety 
and beneficence be the principal employment of our time; and the 
chief work of our every day, to secure an happy immortality, by 
equity, benignity, and devotion. By continual attention, and 
internal discipline, reason can do great things, and enable us so to 
improve the supreme and most godlike powers of our constitution, and 
so discharge the duties imposed upon us by our Creator, that when we 
return into that silence we were in before we existed, and our 
places shall know us no more, we may pass from the unstable 
condition of terrestrial affairs to that eternal state in the 
heavens, where everlasting pleasures and enjoyments are prepared for 
those who have lived in the delightful exercise of the powers of 
reason, and performed all social and kind offices to others, out of 
a sense of duty to God. Thus does truth oblige us. It is the basis 
of morality, as morality is the basis of religion.

This, I think, is a just account of moral truth and rectitude, and 
shows that it is essentially glorious in itself, and the sacred rule 
to which all things must bend, and all agents submit. But then a 
question may be asked, What need have we of revelation, since reason 
can so fully instruct us, and its bonds alone are sufficient to hold 
us;—and in particular, what becomes of the principal part of 
revelation, called redemption?

The system of moral truth and revelation, it may be answered, are 
united, and at perfect amity with each other. Morality and the 
gospel stand on the same foundation, and differ only in this, that 
revealed religion, in respect of the corrupt and degenerate state of 
mankind, has brought fresh light, and additional assistance, to 
direct, support, and fix men in their duty. We have histories which 
relate an early deviation from moral truth, and inform us that this 
disease of our rational nature spreads like a contagion. The case 
became worse, and more deplorable, in succeeding ages; and as evil 
examples and prejudices added new force to the prevailing passions, 
and reason and liberty of will, for want of due exercise, grew 
weaker, and less able to regain their lost dominion, corruption was 
rendered universal. Then did the true God, the Father of the 
Universe, and the most provident and beneficent of Beings, interpose 
by a revelation of his will, and by advice and authority, do all 
that was possible, to prevent the self-destructive effects of the 
culpable ignorance and folly of his offspring. He gave the world a 
transcript of the law of nature by an extraordinary messenger, the 
Man Christ Jesus, who had power given him to work miracles, to rouse 
mankind from their fatal stupidity, to set their thoughts on work, 
and to conciliate their attention to the heavenly declaration. In 
this republication of the original law, he gave them doctrines and 
commandments perfectly consonant to the purest reason, and to them 
annexed sanctions that do really bind and oblige men, as they not 
only guard and strengthen religion, but affect our natural 
sensibility and selfishness. Religion appears to great disadvantage, 
when divines preach it into a bond of indemnity, and a mere contract 
of interest; but exclusive of this, it must be allowed, that the 
sanctions of the gospel have a weight, awfulness, and solemnity, 
that prove to a great degree effectual. Safety and advantage are 
reasons for well-doing.

In short, the evidence of the obligation of the duties of natural 
religion is as plain and strong from reason, as any revelation can 
make it; but yet the means of rendering these duties effectual in 
practice, are not so clear and powerful from mere reason, as from 
revelation. The proof of obligation is equally strong in reason and 
inspiration, but the obligation itself is rendered stronger by the 
gospel, by superadded means or motives. The primary obligation of 
natural religion arises from the nature and reason of things, as 
being objects of our rational moral faculties, agreeably to which we 
cannot but be obliged to act; and this obligation is strengthened by 
the tendency of natural religion to the final happiness of every 
rational agent: but the clear knowledge, and express promises which 
we have in the gospel, of the nature and greatness of this final 
happiness, being added to the obligation from, and the tendency of 
reason or natural religion to the final happiness of human nature, 
the obligation of it is thereby still more strengthened. In this 
lies the benefit of Christianity. It is the old, uncorrupt religion 
of nature and reason, entirely free from superstition and 
immorality; delivered and taught in the most rational and easy way, 
and enforced by the most gracious and powerful motives.

But if this be the case, it may be asked, Where are our holy 
mysteries—and what do you think of our Redemption? If natural reason 
and conscience can do so much, and to the gospel we are obliged only 
for a little more light and influence, then Trinity in Unity, and 
the Sacrifice of the Cross are nothing. What are your sentiments on 
these subjects?

As to the Trinity, it is a word invented by the doctors, and so far 
as I can find, was never once thought of by Jesus Christ and his 
apostles; unless it was to guard against the spread of tritheism, by 
taking the greatest care to inculcate the supreme divinity of God 
the Father: but let it be a trinity, since the church will have it 
so, and by it I understand one Uncreated, and one Created, and a 
certain divine virtue of quality. These I find in the Bible, God, 
Jesus the Word, and a Divine Assistance or Holy Wind, not Holy 
Ghost, as we have translated it: called a Wind, because God, from 
whom every good and perfect gift cometh, gave the most extraordinary 
instance of it under the emblem of a Wind; and holy, because it was 
supernatural. This is the scripture doctrine, in relation to the 
Deity, the Messias, and the Energy of God; of which the Wind was 
promised as a pledge, and was given as an emblem, when the day of 
Pentecost was come; and if these three they will call a Trinity, I 
shall not dispute about the word. But to say Jesus Christ is God, 
though the apostles tell us, that God raised from the dead the Man 
Jesus Christ, whom they killed; that he had exalted him at his right 
hand, and had made him both Lord and Christ; and to affirm that this 
Ghost, as they render the word Wind; is a person distinct and 
different from the person of God the Father, and equally supreme; 
this I cannot agree to. If the scripture is true, all this appears 
to me to be false. It is a mere invention of the Monks.

As to Redemption, it may be in perfect consistence and agreement 
with truth and rectitude, if the accomplishment of it be considered 
as premial,<185> and as resulting from a personal reward: but to 
regard the accomplishment as penal, and as resulting from a 
vicarious punishment, is a notion that cannot be reconciled to the 
principle of rectitude. Vicarious punishment or suffering appears an 
impossibility: but as Jesus, by adding the most extensive 
benevolence to perfect innocence, and by becoming obedient to death, 
even the death of the cross, was most meritorious, and was entitled 
to the highest honour, and most distinguished reward, his reward 
might be our deliverance from the bonds of sin and death, and the 
restoration of immortality. This reward was worthy of the giver, and 
tended to the advancement and spread of virtue. It was likewise most 
acceptable to the receiver. It no way interfered with right and 
truth. It was in all respects most proper and suitable. These are my 
sentiments of Redemption. This appears to me to be the truth on the 
most attentive and impartial examination I have been capable of 
making.

To this, perhaps, some people may reply, that though these notions 
are, for the most part just, and in the case of redemption, in 
particular, as innocence and punishment are inconsistent and 
incompatible ideas, that it was not possible Christ's oblation of 
himself could be more than a figurative sacrifice, in respect of 
translation of guilt, commutation of persons, and vicarious 
infliction; though a real sacrifice in the sense of intending by the 
oblation to procure the favour of God, and the indemnity of sinners: 
yet, as the author appears to be a Socinian, his account is liable 
to objections. For, though the Socinians acknowledge the truth and 
necessity of the revelation of the gospel, yet, in the opinion of 
some great divines, they interpret it in such a manner, as no 
unprejudiced person, who has read the scriptures, with any 
attention, nor any sensible heathen, who should read them, can 
possibly believe. They make our Redeemer a man, and by this doctrine 
reflect the greatest dishonour on Christianity, and its Divine 
Author.

This is a hard charge. The Socinians are by these divines described 
as people who read the scriptures with prejudice, and without 
attention; men more senseless than the Heathens, and as wicked too; 
for, in the highest degree, they dishonour Christ Jesus and his 
religion. Astonishing assertion! It puts me in mind of an imputation 
of the celebrated Waterland in his second charge;—"What atheism 
chiefly aims at, is, to sit loose from present restraints and future 
reckonings; and these two purposes may be competently served by 
deism, which is a more refined kind of atheism. —Groundless and 
ridiculous calumny! True and proper deism is a sincere belief of the 
existence of a God, and of an impartial distribution of rewards and 
punishments in another world, and a practice that naturally results 
from, and is consonant to such belief; and if atheism aims to sit 
loose from restraints and reckonings, then of consequence, deism is 
the grand barrier to the purposes of atheism. The true Deist is so 
far from breaking through restraints, that he makes it the great 
business of his life to discharge the obligations he is under, 
because he believes in God, and perceives the equity and 
reasonableness of duties, restraints, and future reckonings. The 
assertion therefore demonstrates the prejudice of Dr.Waterland, in 
relation to the Deists.

And the case is the same in respect of the charge against the 
Socinians. It is the divines that are prejudiced against them; and 
not the Socinians in studying the New Testament. It is the grand 
purpose of our lives to worship God, and form our religious notions 
according to the instructions of divine wisdom. We examine the 
sacred writings, with the utmost desire, and most ardent prayer, 
that we may be rightly informed in the truest sense of the holy 
authors of those divine books: and it appears to our plain 
understandings, after the most honest labour, and wishes to heaven 
for a clear conception of holy things, that the Father is the 
supreme God, that is, the first and chief Being, and Agent; the 
first and chief Governor; the Fountain of Being, Agency, and 
Authority; that the Christian Messiah, the Man Christ Jesus, was 
sent into the world to bear witness to the truth, and preach the 
gospel of the kingdom of God, that kingdom of God which is within 
you, saith the Lord, Luke, ch. xvii. v. 21. not a kingdom of monks, 
a sacerdotal empire of power, propositions, and ceremonies. He came 
to call sinners to repentance and amendment of life, to teach them 
the law of love, and assure mankind of grace and mercy and 
everlasting glory, if they kept the commandments, and were obedient 
to the laws of heaven; laws of righteousness, peace, giving no 
offence, and unanimity in the worship of the God and Father of our 
Lord Jesus Christ: but that, if they did not repent, and cease to be 
hurtful and injurious; if they did not open their eyes, and turn 
from darkness to light, from the power of Satan unto God, and put on 
such an agreeable and useful temper and behaviour, as would render 
them a blessing in the creation, they would be numbered among the 
cursed, and perish everlastingly, for want of real goodness and a 
general sincerity of heart. This the Socinians think is what Christ 
proposed and recommended, as the only and the sure way to God's 
favour, through the worthiness of the Lamb that was slain. We say 
this is pure religion. It is true, original Christianity, and if the 
glorious design of our Lord is answered by his miracles and 
preaching, by his death, his resurrection, his ascension, and by the 
grace of the holy, blessed, and sanctifying Spirit, it could reflect 
no dishonour on Christianity, and its divine author, if our Redeemer 
was a mere man. If by the assistance of God Almighty, a mere man 
performed the whole work of our redemption, all we had to do was to 
be thankful for the mighty blessing. The love of God in this way had 
been equally inestimable. The worth of Jesus would be still 
invaluable.

But it is not the opinion of the Socinians that Christ was a mere 
man. It is plain from this assertion, that the Rev. Dr. Heathcote, 
in his Remarks on Free and Candid Disquisitions, knows nothing of 
them: the account they give of Jesus Christ, is very different. They 
say, he was a most glorious agent united to a human body, and so far 
from being a mere man, that he was superior to angels. He was the 
next in character to the necessarily existing Being. He is the 
brightness of the Father's glory, and the express image of his 
person: he has an excellency transcendent, and to the life 
represents what is infinitely great and perfect.

If they do not allow that he made the worlds, or had an eternal 
generation; if they say, he had no existence till he was formed by 
the power of God in the womb, and assert this eminency is proper to 
the Man Christ Jesus; yet they are far from affirming he was 
therefore a mere man: no; they believe he was decreed to be as great 
and glorious as possible, and that God made the world for him; that 
he was made the image of the invisible person of the Father; an 
image the most express and exact; as great as God himself could make 
it; and of consequence, so transcendent in all perfections, that 
what he says and does is the same thing as if God had spoken and 
acted. This is not making him a mere man. No: they say he is the 
first of all, and the head of all creatures, whom the infinite love 
of God produced, to promote greatness, glory, and happiness among 
the creatures, by the superlative greatness and glory of Jesus; and 
that angels, and the spirits of the just made perfect, might have 
the pleasure of beholding and enjoying the presence of this most 
glorious Image, that is, of seeing their invisible Creator in his 
Image Jesus Christ. He is not a mere man; but the brightness of the 
glory of God, the express Image of his person, and raised so much 
higher than the angels, as he has inherited from God a more 
excellent name than they, to wit, the name of Son, and is the 
appointed heir of all things.

So that this Socinianism reflects no dishonour on Christianity and 
its Divine Author. It conduces as much to the glory of God, and the 
benefit of man, as any Christianity can do. There is something 
vastly beautiful and satisfactory in the notion of Christ's being 
the most glorious Image of the invisible Father, whenever his 
existence began. The many transcendent excellencies of the Messias, 
in whom all fullness dwells, are exercised upon men to their 
happiness, and to his glory; and we learn from thence, that 
greatness and glory are the result of the exercise of virtue to the 
relief and happiness of others. The Redeemer of the world is, in 
this account, the next in dignity and power to the Great God; and 
the perfections of the Father do most eminently shine forth in him. 
We are hereby made meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the 
saints in light, and delivered from the power of darkness. 'We give 
thanks unto the Father, who hath translated us into the kingdom of 
the Son of his love.

It is certain then that the divines have misrepresented the people, 
who are injuriously called Socinians, as the religion they profess 
is Scripture-Christianity. I say injuriously, because, in the first 
place, the word Socinian is intended as a term of great reproach to 
Christians, who deserve better usage for the goodness of their 
manners, and the purity of their faith: and in the next place, that 
Socinus was so far from being the author of our religion, that he 
was not even the first restorer of it. He did not go to Poland to 
teach the people there his religious notions, but because there was 
a unitarian congregation there, with whom he might join in the 
worship of the Father, through Jesus the Mediator, as his conscience 
would not suffer him to assemble with those who worship a Being 
compounded of three divine persons.

But it is time to have done, and I shall conclude in the words of a 
good author in old French<186>. The extract must be a curious thing 
to the reader, as the valuable book I take it from is not to be 
bought.

"Nostre confession de foy até depuis la premiere predication de 
l'evangile puisque nous luy donnons la sainte ecriture pour 
fondement, mais il arrive de nous ce qu'il arrive des tous ceux qui 
se sont detachés de l'eglise Romaine aux quels le papistes donnent 
malgre eux pour autheurs de leur religion Luther, Calvin, et autres 
docteures qui font eté que les restorateurs, des dogmes a de verités 
qui s'etoyent presque perdues sous le gouvernement tyrannique de 
l'eglise Romaine pendant lequel l'écriture sainte etoit devenue un 
livre inconnu a la pluspart de chretiens la lecture en ayant ete 
defendue communement. Mais par un decrêt de la providence de Dieu le 
periode de la revolution étant venu chacun a commence a deterrer la 
verité la mieux qu'il a pu, et comme dans chaque revolution il y a 
des chefs et des gens illustrés, ainsi dans le retablissement des 
dogmes etouffés si longtemps par le papisme. Luther, Calvin, 
Arminius, et Socin, ont eté des hommes illustres et dont on a donne 
le nom aux religion. Vous scaurez donc s'il vous plaist que Socin 
bien loin d'avoir ete autheur de nostre religion n'en a pas eté meme 
la premier restaurateur car il n'etoit venu en Pologne que parce 
qu'il avoit appris s'y etoit deja formée une assemblée de gens qui 
avoyent des opinions semblables aux siennes: Je vous diray de plus, 
que la seule chose que le fait un heros dans nostre religion c'est 
qu'il en a écrit des livres, mais il n'y a presque personne qui les 
lise, car comme Socin étoit un bon jurisconsulte il est extremement 
long et ennuyeux; et outre que nous ne voulons point avoir d'autre 
livre de religion que le nouveau Testament et point d'autres 
docteurs que les apostres. C'est pourquoy, c'est bien malgré nous 
qu'un nous appelle Sociniens ou Arriens: ce sont des noms dont la 
malignite de nos ennemys nous couvre pour nous rendre odieux. Nous 
appellons entre nous du simple nom de Chretiens. Mais puisque dans 
cette desunion de la chretienté, on nous dit ne suffit pas de porter 
ce nom universel, mais qu'il encore necessairement se distinguer par 
quelque appellation particuliere, nous consentons donc de porter le 
nom de chretiens unitaires pour nous distinguer de chretiens 
trinitaires. 

Ce nom de chretiens unitaires nous convient fort bien comme a ceux 
qui ne voulant en aucune facon encherye sur la doctrine de Jesus 
Christ, n'y y subtiliser plus qu'il ne faut, attachent leur croyance 
et leur confession positivement a cette instruction de Jesus Christ 
qui se trouve dans le 17 chap. de l'evangile de St. Jean, quand il 
dit "Mon pere l'heure est venue, glorifiez vostre fils afin que 
vostre fils vous glorifie, comme vous luy avez donne puissance sur 
tous les hommes a fin qu'il donne la vie eternelle a tous ceux que 
vous luy avez donné; or la vie eternelle consiste a vous connoistre, 
vous qui estes le seul Dieu veritable, et Jesus Christ que vous avez 
envoyé. La meme leçon nous donne l'apostre St. Paul dans le 8 chap. 
aux Cor. disant, qu'il n'y a pour nous qu'un seul Dieu qui est la 
pere duquel sont toutes choses et nous pour luy, et il n'y a qu'un 
seul seigneur qui est Jesus Christ, par lequel sont toutes choses et 
nous par luy. C'est donc a cause de cette confession que nous nous 
appellons chretiens unitaires par ce que nous croyons n'y a qu'un 
seul Dieu, pere et Dieu de nostre seigneur Jesus Christ, celuy que 
Jesus Christ nous a appris d'adorer, et lequel il a aussy adore luy 
même, l'appellent non seulment nostre Dieu mais son Dieu aussy selon 
qu'il a dit, je m'en vay a mon pere et vostre pere, a mon Dieu et a 
vostre Dieu.

"Ainsy vous voyez que nous nous tenons aux verités divines. Nous 
avons la religieuse veneration pour la sainte écriture. Avec tout 
cela nous sommes serviteurs tres humble des messieurs les 
trinitaires,—penes quos mundanae fabulae actio est; et il ne tient 
pas a nous que nous ne courrions de tout nostre coeur a leurs 
autels, s'ils vouloyent nous faire la grace de souffrir nostre 
simplicité en Jesus Christ, et de ne pas vouloir nous obliger a la 
confession de supplemens a la sainte ecriture."<187>

The great and excellent Faustus Socinus was born at Sienna, in the 
year 1539, and died at Luclavie, the third of March, 1604, aged 
sixty-five.

His book in defence of the authority of the sacred scriptures is a 
matchless performance; and if he had never written anything else, is 
alone sufficient to render his memory glorious, and precious to all 
true Christians. Get this book, if you can. It is the finest defence 
of your Bible that was ever published. Steinfurti, 1611. edit. 
Vorst. And yet, such is the malignity of orthodoxy, that a late 
great prelate, Dr. Smalbroke, Bishop of Litchfield and Coventry, who 
died in 1749; in his Second Charge to the Clergy of St. David's, p. 
34; could not help blackening the author when he mentioned the work: 
his words are these, "And if Grotius was more especially assisted by 
the valuable performance of a writer, otherwise justly of ill fame, 
I mean, Faustus Socinus's little book De Auctoritate S. Scriptura, 
this assistance," &c. Here the admirable Socinus, a man of as much 
piety and as good morals, as hath lived since the apostles' time, 
who truly and godly served the Almighty and everlasting God, through 
our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, is painted by this eminent hand 
"a man of ill fame;" and for no other reason but because his 
heavenly religion made him oppose the orthodox heresy of three Gods, 
as taught in the creed of Athanasius; and piously labour, by the 
purity of his doctrine and example, to keep the world from 
corruption.

Let us then be careful to confess the holy Unitarian faith. Let us 
take the advice of Socinus, and be original Christians. Let there 
not be in our religion a God compounded of three supreme spirits, 
equal in power and all possible perfections. Let us worship the 
Invisible Father, the first and chief Almighty Being, who is one 
supreme universal Spirit, of peerless Majesty; and, as the inspired 
apostles direct, let us worship him through his most glorious Image, 
the Man Christ Jesus; our Redeemer and Mediator, our King and our 
Judge.

N. B. Though the reverend Dr. Heathcote hath been very unfriendly in 
his account of the Christians he calls Socinians, in his 
observations before mentioned, yet you are not from thence to 
conclude that he belongs to the Orthodox Party. He is far from it, 
and therefore I recommend to your perusal not only his Cursory 
Animadversions upon Free and Candid Disquisitions, and his finer 
Boyle-Lecture Sermons on the Being of God, but also his Cursory 
Animadversions upon the Controversy, concerning the Miraculous 
Powers, and his Remarks on Chapman's Credibility of the Father's 
Miracles. They are three excellent pamphlets. The first is against 
the scholastic Trinity. And the others on the side of Dr. Middleton, 
against the miracles of the Fathers.

Note, Reader, Dr. Heathcote's two pamphlets on the side of Dr. 
Middleton, and the Rev. Mr Toll's admirable pieces in vindication of 
the Doctor against the miracles of the Fathers, will give you a just 
and full idea of the late controversy. Mr Toll's pieces are called, 
A Defence of Dr. Middleton's Free Enquiry; Remarks upon Mr Church's 
Vindication; and his Sermon and Appendix against Dr. Church's 
Appeal.

If you would see all that can be said in relation to this matter, 
get likewise Dr. Syke's Two Previous Questions: and The Two Previous 
Questions impartially Considered; by the same author.

Remarks on two Pamphlets against Dr. Middle-ion's Introductory 
Discourse; Two Letters to the Rev. Mr Jackson, in Answer to his 
Remarks on Middleton's Free Inquiry; and A View of the Controversy, 
concerning the Miraculous Powers, supposed to have subsisted in the 
Christian Church through several successive Centuries. These 
pamphlets will bind into two large octavo volumes, and make a 
valuable collection of critical religious learning.

Note, Reader, of that admirable work, called Bibliotheca Fratrum 
Polonorum, by Socinus, Crellius, Sclichtingius, and Wolzogenius, six 
volumes, printed in Irenopoli, 1656, folio. The first and second 
volumes are the writings of Socinus; the third and fourth by 
Crellius; the fifth by Sclichtingius; and the sixth by Wolzogenius: 
they are all well worth your reading, as they contain the most 
valuable and excellent learning; and especially Socinus and 
Crellius. In another place, where you will find me alone in a 
solitude; I shall give some curious extracts from the works of these 
great, injured men, and a summary of their lives.



CHAPTER XX.

But to return to my narrative, from Knaresborough, I went to 
Harrogate again, and there found the following letter, of an old 
date, left for me.

"SIR, 

"As you told me, you intended to go to London soon, and 
business obliges me to ride up to the capital a few weeks 
hence, I should take it as a great favour, if you would make 
Westmoreland your way, and through Lancashire to the Chester 
road, that I may have your protection and guidance in this 
long journey. 

I am, Sir, 

Your humble servant, 

MARIA SPENCE." 

Cleator, six miles to the southwest of Wharton-Hall.

This letter surprised me. Yes, dear creature, I said, I will make 
Westmoreland my way to London. At four in the morning I mounted my 
horse, and rode to Cleator. I arrived there at six in the evening, 
and had travelled that day seventy-five miles; to wit, from 
Harrogate to Boroughbridge, eight; from thence to Catarric, twenty-
two; to Gretabridge, fifteen; to Bows, six; to Brugh in 
Westmoreland, twelve; to Kirkby-Steven, near Wharton-Hall, six; to 
Cleator, six; in all, seventy-five miles. I dined at Catarric on a 
hot pigeon-pie just drawn, and ale of one ear, that is, admirable, 
as Rabelais means by the phrase, "We had wine of one ear," alluding 
to the one shake of the head to the right shoulder, when a thing is 
excellent; and I gave the horses another feed of corn at Bows, at 
the George, kept by RAILTON, the Quaker; an excellent inn, and the 
master of it an instructive and entertaining orator.<188>

I mention these things for your benefit, reader, that you may know 
where to stop to advantage, if you should ever ride over the same 
ground I went that day.

When I came to Miss SPENCE'S door, I sent in my name by a servant, 
and immediately MARIA came out herself to welcome me to Cleator. She 
told me she was glad to see me, and extremely obliged to me, for 
riding so many miles out of my way, to travel up with her to London; 
but as she had never been further from home than Harrogate, and was 
afraid of going such a journey by herself, she had written to me, in 
hopes curiosity and my great complaisance to the ladies, might 
induce me to take Cleator in my way to town, though so much about: 
but as so many weeks had passed since she came away from the Wells, 
and she heard nothing of me, she had laid aside all expectation of 
my coming, though this made the visit the more pleasing.

In answer to this, I replied, that if I had got her letter sooner, I 
would have been with her long before: but that was not possible, as 
I had been at a little lodge and farm of mine in the northern 
extremity of Westmoreland, to settle things there, and returned to 
Harrogate but yesterday, when I had the honour of receiving your 
letter, and upon reading it, set out at day-break this morning to 
kiss your hand, and execute any commands.

Here an excellent hot supper was brought in, and after it, Miss 
SPENCE said, she was surprised to hear I was an inhabitant of 
Westmoreland, as she had never heard of me in the north, nor seen me 
at Harrogate before the other day.

I told her I was a stranger in the country, and by a wonderful 
accident, as I travelled a few years ago out of curiosity, and in 
search of a friend, up Stanemore hills, I became possessed of a 
lodge I had on the northern edge of Westmoreland, where I lived a 
considerable time, and once imagined I should never leave it, as it 
is the most romantic and the most beautiful solitude in the world,

While I was giving this short relation, Miss SPENCE seemed greatly 
amazed, and her uncle, an old clergyman, who had looked with great 
attention at me, hoped it would be no offence to ask me how old I 
was.

"None at all, Sir," I replied. "I want some months of twenty-six; 
and though I dance and rattle at the Wells, and am now going up to 
London, where all is tumult and noise, yet my passion for still life 
is so great, that I prefer the most silent retreat to the pleasures 
and splendours of the greatest town. If it was in my power to live 
as I please, I would pass my days unheard of and unknown, at Orton 
Lodge, so my little silent farm is called, near the southern 
confines of Cumberland, with some bright partner of my soul. I am 
sure I should think it a complete paradise to live in that distant 
solitude with a woman of Miss SPENCE'S form and mind."

"But tell me, I request," said MARIA, "how did you get to the 
confines of Westmoreland over Stanemore hills, and what was that 
accident that put you in possession of Orton Lodge? It must be a 
curious account, I am sure."

"This," I replied, "you shall hear to-morrow morning after 
breakfast; there is not time for it now. All I can say at present 
is, that it was love kept me among the mountains for some years, and 
if the heaven-born maid, vastly like you, Miss SPENCE, she was, had 
not, by the order of heaven, been removed to the regions of 
immortality and day, I should not have left the solitude, nor would 
you ever have seen me at Harrogate: but destiny is the dirigent: 
mutable is the condition of mortals, and we are blind to futurity 
and the approaches of fate. This led me over the vast mountains of 
Stanemore, enabled me to cross the amazing fells of Westmoreland, 
and brought me to that spot, where I had the honour and happiness of 
becoming acquainted with Miss SPENCE." Thus did we chat till eleven, 
and retired to our chambers.

But the old gentleman, the doctor, when he came with me into my 
apartment, told me we must have one bottle more, for it was his 
nightcap, without which he could not sleep: he then bid the servant 
make haste with it, and when that was out, we had another. He was a 
sensible agreeable man, and pleased me very much, as he appeared a 
zealous friend to the illustrious house of Hanover; whereas almost 
all the clergymen I had been in company with since I came to 
England, were violent Jacobites.

I remember, among other things, I asked this Divine, over our wine, 
If popery is ever so corrupt, could men be debarred of their rights 
for an attachment to it? Are not crowns hereditary? And is not 
treason in our country stamped with so peculiar an infamy, as 
involving the delinquent's innocent children in the forfeitures, or 
penal consequences that await it, on purpose to check the rebellion 
of Britons by such an accumulated punishment of evil doers?

To this the doctor replied, that the exclusion of a popish prince 
must be lawful, if we ought to secure our property and religion, 
and, as in duty bound, oppose his trampling upon the laws, and his 
own solemn declarations. If the people have privileges and 
interests, they may defend them, and as justifiably oppose notorious 
domestic oppressions. as foreign invasions. The head of the 
community, has no more a licence to destroy the most momentous 
interests of it, than any of the inferior members, or than any 
foreign invader. If a king has no passion to indulge, incompatible 
with the welfare of his people, then, as protection and obedience 
are reciprocal, and cannot subsist, the one without the other, it 
must be a crime in the people not to honour, and obey, and assist 
the royal authority. It is not only the interest but the duty of the 
subject to obey the prince, who is true to the important trust 
reposed in him, and has the welfare of the people at heart. But such 
a king cannot be a papist. The Romish prince will not only stretch a 
limited prerogative into lawless power, and grasp at absolute 
monarchy; but will break through the most sacred ties, and subvert 
the rights he was sworn to guard, to re-establish popery in this 
kingdom. Could James II. have kept the seat of government, and 
baffled all opposition, we may conclude from what he did, from his 
trampling upon the laws, and his own solemn declarations; from his 
new court of inquisition, the high commission court; to subvert the 
constitution of the church of England, and to lay waste all its 
fences against popery; from that furious act of his power, which 
fell on Magdalen-college, and his two cruel acts of parliament in 
Ireland, the repeal of the act of settlement, by which the 
protestant gentlemen were deprived of their estates; and the act of 
attainder, by which they were to be hanged, for going to beg their 
bread in another country, after they had been robbed of all in their 
own by their king, who had sworn to protect them; from hence, I say, 
it is plain, that if James could have sat firm upon the throne, his 
misguided conscience would have induced him to the most inhuman acts 
of violence. He would have proceeded to the barbarities, and 
rekindled the flames of Mary. Had he continued to reign over these 
kingdoms, it is most certain, that instruction and persuasion only 
would not have been the thing, but where instruction and persuasion 
failed, imprisonments, tortures, death, would have been used, to 
compel us to believe all the gross absurdities of Rome, their 
impieties to God, and contradictions to common sense. We must throw 
away our reason and our bibles, the noblest gifts of heaven, and 
neither think nor speak, but as we are bid by men no wiser than 
ourselves; or, we must expire under torments as great as the Devil 
and the monks could devise. It was therefore necessary, for the 
preservation of our church and state, to exclude James and his 
popish heirs. The common welfare required this salutary precaution. 
The collected interest of the community is the primary end of every 
law.

All this, I said, seems quite right. To be sure, during that short 
twilight of power, which dawned upon popery in England in the years 
1689 and 1690, its rage was imprudent. It did discover its fury and 
resentment. In one of the Irish acts you have mentioned, more than 
two thousand people were attainted, and some of them the most noble 
and venerable characters in Ireland. Yet had success attended the 
arms of James, this would have been but the beginning of sorrows. 
And probably a son of Christian Rome would have proscribed more in 
these two islands, than in heathen Rome, out of the whole vast Roman 
empire, were given up to destruction for their virtue, by the cruel 
triumvirate, Augustus, Antony, and Lepidus. And of consequence, 
since dear experience convinced, it was equally absurd and vain, to 
imagine that a popish head would govern a protestant church by any 
councils, but those of popish priests, as it was to imagine that a 
popish king would govern a protestant state by any councils, but 
those of popish counsellors; it must therefore be owned, that the 
Lords, and others, assembled at Nottingham, were just in declaring, 
"that King James's administrations were usurpations on the 
constitution; and that they owned it rebellion to resist a king that 
governed by law; but to resist a tyrant, who made his will his law, 
was nothing but a necessary defence." This, to be sure, is just. But 
still, if crowns are hereditary, and one severe punishment of 
treason was intended to check all rebellion, were we not a little 
too hasty in the affair of the Revolution? And might we not have 
expected something better from the good sense and good nature of 
James, if we had waited a while, till he could see the folly of his 
proceedings?

To this the Doctor replied, that as to James's good sense, it never 
appeared he had any: and in respect of his many real good qualities, 
they were extinguished by his bigotry, and could never be of service 
to a protestant spirit, the spirit of freemen: it was therefore 
incumbent on them, who knew and loved the invaluable blessings they 
enjoyed, to act as they did; that is, as the wisdom of our 
constitution requires in such cases.

As to the crown being hereditary, and the severe punishment of 
treasons; in respect of the first particular, there is no natural or 
divine law declares crowns hereditary. If a certain rule of 
succession has been established in most kingdoms, the single point 
of view in it was public good, or a prevention of those intestine 
commotions, which might attend an election: But as every rule is 
dispensable, and must give way when it defeats the end for which it 
was appointed; should the customary succession in a kingdom prove at 
any time productive of much greater evils than those it was intended 
to obviate, it may questionless be superseded occasionally. This 
point is evident from reason. Though the crown in our own country is 
generally hereditary, yet that right is to be set aside, if the 
security of our civil and religious liberty requires it. If the 
pretence of James was a right to dominion, in opposition not only to 
the sense of the legislature, but to that of the nation, then the 
popish prince was justly excluded, for denying the public good to be 
the supreme law. Had the right he claimed been established, then our 
religion, our liberties, and the safety of our fortunes, had been no 
longer our own. In case of such establishment, the glory of our 
constitution was no more. The sum of the matter is, the royal family 
of the Stuarts being Roman Catholics, makes their case similar to an 
extinction of it.

And as to the accumulated punishment of treason in Great Britain, 
that can only he designed as a powerful check to rebellion, against 
a king whose darling view is the welfare of the people. No infamy, 
forfeitures, or death, can be too severe for the man, who rebels 
against a prince that governs for the good of the people, and 
endeavours to transmit our state safe to posterity. To plot against 
such a sovereign is a great crime indeed. To conspire against a 
prince, whose life is of the utmost consequence to the community, is 
an enormity that ought to be stamped with a peculiar infamy, and 
punished in the severest manner. But it can be no treason to act 
against a papist, who violates every maxim of our constitution, and 
by every maxim of popery labours to destroy our religion and 
liberties. Every man may repel unlawful attempts upon his person and 
property, and is armed by God with authority for self-defence.

To this it was replied, that I thought the Doctor quite right, and 
for my own part was determined to oppose a popish prince, whenever 
he comes on with his unalienable and indefeasible claim, to 
introduce his absurd and cruel religion, to deprive us of our 
rational Christianity, and make us slaves, instead of free-born 
subjects. No popish James, to write our themes, but (filling a 
bumper) may this nation be ever happy in a king whose right is 
founded upon law, and who has made it the rule of his government. 
May Britons ever remember the merciless rage of popery, and the 
envious malice of France; each ready to lay waste the whole fabric 
of our excellent constitution, and cry aloud, with all the 
embittered sons of Edom, Down with it, down with it, even to the 
ground. Here the clock struck one, and we parted.

Early the next morning I was up, according to my wont, and walked 
out, to look at the place. Cleator is one of the finest spots that 
can be seen, in a wild romantic country. The natural views are 
wonderful, and afford the eye vast pleasure. The charming prospects 
of different kinds, from the edges of the mountains, are very fine. 
The winding hills, pretty plains, vast precipices, hanging woods, 
deep vales, the easy falls of water in some places, and in others 
cataracts tumbling over rocks, form all together the most beautiful 
and delightful scenes. All the decorations of art are but foils and 
shadows to such natural charms.

In the midst of these scenes, and in a theatrical space of about two 
hundred acres, which the hand of nature cut, or hollowed out, on the 
side of a mountain, stands Cleator Lodge, a neat and pretty mansion. 
Near it were groves of various trees, and the water of a strong 
spring murmured from the front down to a lake at the bottom of the 
hill.

This was Miss SPENCE'S country-house. Here the wise and excellent 
MARIA passed the best part of her time, and never went to any public 
place but Harrogate once a year. In reading, riding, fishing, and 
some visits to and from three or four neighbours now and then, her 
hours were happily and usefully employed. History and Mathematics 
she took great delight in, and had a very surprising knowledge in 
the last. She was another of those ladies I met with in my travels, 
who understood that method of calculation, beyond which nothing 
further is to be hoped or expected; I mean the arithmetic of 
fluxions.

Very few men among the learned can consider magnitudes as generated 
by motion, or determine their proportions one to another from the 
celerities of the motion by which they are generated. I question if 
the Critical Reviewers can do it; I am sure they cannot, though they 
have made so licentiously free with me. They may however pretend to 
know something of the matter, and so did Berkeley the late Bishop of 
Cloyne in Ireland; yet that prelate, in reality, understood no more 
of the method than a porter does, though he presumed to write 
against it, and the divine Newton, the inventor of it. But MARIA 
SPENCE, in the twenty-fourth year of her age, was at this time a 
master in the fluxionary way. She had not only a clear and adequate 
notion of fluxions, but was able to penetrate into the depths of 
this science, and had made sublime discoveries in this incomparable 
method of reasoning. She astonished me. I thought Mrs BURCOTT and 
Mrs FLETCHER, mentioned in my first volume, were very extraordinary 
women, on account of their knowledge in algebra, and the fine 
answers they gave to the most difficult problems in universal 
arithmetic: but this sort of reasoning is far inferior to the 
fluxionary method of calculation; as the latter opens and discovers 
to us the secrets and recesses of nature, which have always before 
been locked up in obscurity and darkness. By fluxions, such 
difficulties are resolved, as raise the wonder and surprise of all 
mankind, and which would in vain be attempted by any other method 
whatsoever. What then must we think of a young woman well skilled in 
such work; not only able to find the fluxions of flowing or 
determinate quantities, that is, the velocities with which they 
arise or begin to be generated in the first moments of formation, 
called the velocities of the incremental parts, and the velocities 
in the last ratios, as vanishing or ceasing to be; but from given 
fluxions to find the fluents; and be ready in drawing tangents to 
curves; in the solution of problems de maximis et minimis, that is, 
the greatest or least possible quantity attainable in any case; in 
the invention of points of inflection and retrogression; in finding 
the evoluta of a given curve; in finding the caustic curves, by 
reflection and refraction, &c. &c. this was amazing beyond anything 
I had seen; or have ever seen since, except Mrs BENLOW of 
Richmondshire, with whom I became acquainted in 1739.<189> With 
astonishment I beheld her. I was but a young beginner, or learner, 
in respect of her, though I had applied so close to fluxions after I 
had learned algebra, that my head was often ready to split with 
pain; nor had I the capacity, at that time, to comprehend thoroughly 
the process of several operations she performed with beauty, 
simplicity, and charming elegance. Admirable MARIA! No one have I 
ever seen that was her superior in this science: one equal only have 
I known, the lady a little before mentioned. And does not this 
demonstrate, that the faculties and imagination of women's minds, 
properly cultivated, may equal those of the greatest men? And since 
women have the same improvable minds as the male part of the 
species, why should they nor be cultivated by the same method? Why 
should reason be left to itself in one of the sexes, and be 
disciplined with so much care in the other. Learning and knowledge 
are perfections in us not as we are men, but as we are rational 
creatures, in which order of beings the female world is upon the 
same level with the male. We ought to consider in this particular, 
not what is the sex, but what is the species they belong to. And if 
women of fortune were so considered, and educated accordingly, I am 
sure the world would soon be the better for it. It would be so far 
from making them those ridiculous mortals Moliere has described 
under the character of learned ladies; that it would render them 
more agreeable and useful, and enable them by the acquisition of 
true sense and knowledge, to be superior to gayety and spectacle, 
dress and dissipation. They would see that the sovereign good can be 
placed in nothing else but in rectitude of conduct; as that is 
agreeable to our nature; conducive to well-being; accommodate to all 
places and times; durable, self-derived, indeprivable; and of 
consequence, that on rational and masculine religion only they can 
rest the sole of the foot, and the sooner they turn to it, the 
happier here and hereafter they shall be. Long before the power of 
sense, like the setting sun, is gradually forsaking them, that power 
on which the pleasures of the world depend, they would, by their 
acquired understanding and knowledge, see the folly of pleasure, and 
that they were born not only to virtue, friendship, honesty, and 
faith, but to religion, piety, adoration, and a generous surrender 
of their minds to the supreme cause. They would be glorious 
creatures then. Every family would be happy.

But as to Miss SPENCE, this knowledge, with a faultless person, and 
a modesty more graceful than her exquisite beauty, were not the 
things that principally charmed me: nor was it her conversation, 
than which nothing could be more lively and delightful: nor her fine 
fortune. It was her manners. She was a Christian Deist, and 
considered Benevolence and Integrity as the essentials of her 
religion. She imitated the piety and devotion of Jesus Christ, and 
worshipped his God and our God, his Father and our Father, as St. 
John expressly styles the God of Christians, ch. xx. v. 17. She was 
extremely charitable to others, and considered conscious virtue as 
the greatest ornament and most valuable treasure of human nature. 
Excellent MARIA!

With this young lady, and her two servants, her footman and her 
woman, I went up to London. We set out from Cleator the 31st day of 
July, and without meeting with any mischief in all that long way, 
came safe to London. We were nine days on the road; and as the 
weather was fine, and our horses excellent, we had a charming 
journey. My companion was so agreeable, that had it been two 
thousand miles from Cleator to London, instead of two hundred and 
seventy two, I should still have thought it too short. Her 
conversation was so various and fine, that no way could seem 
tiresome and tedious to him that travelled with her. Her notions and 
remarks were ever lively and instructive. It was vast pleasure to 
hear her, even on the driest and most abstruse subjects, on account 
of the admiration her discourse raised, and the fine knowledge it 
communicated, to one who understood her. I will give an instance.

In riding over the mountains the first day, we missed the road in 
the evening, and instead of getting to a very good inn, where we 
intended to rest, we were forced to stop at a poor little public 
house, and right glad to get in there, as the evening was 
tempestuous and wet, dark and cold. Here we got some bacon and fresh 
eggs for supper, and the ale was good, which amused us well enough 
till nine o'clock. We then proposed to play at cribbage for an hour, 
and called for a pack of cards; but they had none in the house, and 
we were obliged to divert ourselves with conversation, till it was 
time to retire. Miss SPENCE began in the following manner.

"Was Newton, Sir, or Leibnitz, the author of that method of 
calculation, which lends its aid and assistance to all the other 
mathematical sciences, and that in their greatest wants and 
distresses? I have heard a foreigner affirm, that the German was the 
inventor of fluxions."

"That cannot be," I replied. "In 1696, Dr. Barrow received from 
Newton a demonstration of the rule of the quadrature of curves, 
which the Doctor communicated to Collins; and as this is the 
foundation of fluxions, and the differential calculus, it is evident 
Newton had invented the method before that time.

"In the beginning of 1673, Leibnitz was in England, again in 
October, 1676; and the interval of this time he spent in France, 
during which he kept a correspondence with Oldenburgh, and by his 
means with Collins; and sometimes also with Newton, from the last of 
whom he received a letter, dated June 13th, 1676, wherein is taught 
the method of reducing quantities into infinite series, that is, of 
exhibiting the increments of flowing quantities. This method was 
utterly unknown to Leibnitz, before he received the above-said 
letter of Newton's, as he himself acknowledges in a letter to 
Oldenburgh, dated August 27th, 1676; for before that time, he says 
in his letter, he was obliged to transform an irrational quantity 
into a rational fraction, and then by division, after the method of 
Mercator, to reduce the fraction into a series.

It is likewise certain, that Leibnitz did not then understand these 
series, because, in the same letter, he desires Newton would explain 
to him the manner how he got these series. And again in a second 
letter from Newton to Leibnitz, dated October 24th, 1676, he gives 
yet clearer hints of his method, and illustrates it by examples, and 
lays down a rule, by which, from the ordinates of certain curves, 
their areas may be obtained in finite terms, when it is possible.

"By these lights, and assisted by such examples, the acute Leibnitz 
might have learned the Newtonian method, and indeed it is plain he 
did so; for in 1684, he first published, in the Leipsic Acts, his 
Elements of the Differential Calculus, without pretending to have 
had the method before the year 1677, in which he received the two 
letters from Newton: and yet, when Sir Isaac published his books of 
the number of curves of the first kind, and of the quadrature of 
figures, the editors of the Acts said Leibnitz was the first 
inventor of the differential calculus, and Newton had substituted 
fluxions for differences, just as Honoratus Faber, in his Synopsis 
Geometrica, had substituted a progression of motion for 
Cavallerius's method of indivisibles; that is Leibnitz was the first 
inventor of the method. Newton had received it from his Elements of 
the Differential Calculus, and had substituted fluxions for 
differences; but the way of investigation in each is the same, and 
both centre in the same conclusions.

This excited Keill to reply, and he made it appear very plain from 
Sir Isaac's letters, published by Dr. Wallis, that Newton was the 
first inventor of the algorithm, or practical rules of fluxions; and 
Leibnitz did no more than publish the same, with an alteration of 
the name, and manner of notation. This however did not silence 
Leibnitz, nor satisfy the foreigners who admired him. He abused Dr. 
Keill, and appealed to the Royal Society against him; that they 
would be pleased to restrain the Doctor's vain babblings and unjust 
calumniations, and report their judgment as he thought they ought to 
do, that is, in his favour. But this was not in the power of the 
Society, if they did justice; for it appeared quite clear to a 
committee of the members, appointed to examine the original letters, 
and other papers, relating to the matter, which were left by 
Oldenburgh and Collins, that Sir Isaac Newton was the first inventor 
of fluxions; and accordingly they published their opinion. This 
determines the affair. When this is the case, it is senseless for 
any foreigner to say Leibnitz was the author of fluxions. To the 
divine Newton belongs this greatest work of genius, and the noblest 
thought that ever entered the human mind."

"It must be so," replied MARIA. "As the case is stated, Sir Isaac 
Newton was most certainly the inventor of the method of fluxions: 
and supposing Leibnitz had been able to discover and work the 
differential calculus, without the lights he received from Newton, 
it would not from thence follow, that he understood the true method 
of fluxions: for, though a differential has been, and to this day 
is, by many, called a fluxion, and a fluxion a differential, yet it 
is an abuse of terms. A fluxion has no relation to a differential, 
nor a differential to a fluxion. The principles upon which the 
methods are founded show them to be very different, notwithstanding 
the way of investigation in each be the same, and that both centre 
in the same conclusions: nor can the differential method perform 
what the fluxionary method can. The excellency of the fluxionary 
method is far above the differential."

This remark on the two methods surprised me very much, and 
especially as it was made by a young lady. I had not then a notion 
of the difference, and had been taught by my master to proceed on 
the principles of the Differential Calculus. This made me request an 
explication of the matter, and MARIA went on in the following 
manner.

"Magnitudes, as made up of an infinite number of very small 
constituent parts put together, are the work of the Differential 
Calculus; but by the fluxionary method, we are taught to consider 
magnitudes as generated by motion. A described line in this way, is 
not generated by an apposition of points, or differentials, but by 
the motion or flux of a point; and the velocity of the generating 
point in the first moment of its formation, or generation, is called 
its fluxion. In forming magnitudes after the differential way, we 
conceive them as made up of an infinite number of small constituent 
parts, so disposed as to produce a magnitude of a given form; that 
these parts are to each other as the magnitudes of which they are 
differentials; and that one infinitely small part, or differential, 
must be infinitely great, with respect to another other 
differential, or infinitely small part: but by fluxion, or the law 
of flowing, we determine the proportion of magnitudes one to 
another, from the celerities of the motions by which they are 
generated. This most certainly is the purest abstracted way of 
reasoning. Our considering the different degrees of magnitude, as 
arising from an increasing series of mutations of velocity, is much 
more simple, and less perplexed than the other way; and the 
operations founded on fluxions, must be much more clear, accurate, 
and convincing, than those that are founded on the Differential 
Calculus. There is a great difference in operations, when quantities 
are rejected, because they really vanish; and when they are 
rejected, because they are infinitely small: the latter method, 
which is the differential, must leave the mind in ambiguity and 
confusion, and cannot in many cases come up to the truth. It is a 
very great error then to call differentials, fluxions, and quite 
wrong to begin with the differential method, in order to learn the 
law or manner of flowing."

With amazement I heard this discourse, and requested to know by what 
master, and what method, she obtained these notions; for they were 
far beyond everything on the subject that I had ever met with. What 
she said concerning the nature and idea of fluxions, I thought just 
and beautiful, and I believe it was in her power, to show the bases 
on which they are erected.

"My master, Sir," said MARIA, "was a poor traveller, a Scotchman, 
one MARTIN MURDOCH, who came by accident to my father's house, to 
ask relief, when I was about fifteen years old. He told us, he was 
the son of one of the ministers of Scotland, and came from the 
remotest part of the Highlands: that his father taught him 
mathematics, and left him, at his death, a little stock on a small 
farm; but misfortunes and accidents obliged him in a short time to 
break up house, and he was going to London, to try if he could get 
anything there, by teaching arithmetic of every kind. My father, who 
was a hospitable man, invited him to stay with us a few days, and 
the parson of our parish soon found, that he had not only a very 
extraordinary understanding, but was particularly excellent at 
figures, and the other branches of the mathematics. My father upon 
this agreed with him to be my preceptor for five years, and during 
four years and nine months of that time, he took the greatest pains 
to make me as perfect as he could in arithmetic, trigonometry, 
geometry, algebra, and fluxions. As I delighted in the study above 
all things, I was a great proficient for so few years, and had 
MURDOCH been longer with me, I should have been well acquainted with 
the whole glorious structure: but towards the end of the fifth year, 
this poor Archimedes was unfortunately drowned, in crossing one of 
our rivers, in the winter time, and went in that uncomfortable way, 
in the thirty-sixth year of his age, to the enjoyment of that 
felicity and glory, which God has prepared for a virtuous life and 
honest heart. Why such men, as the poor and admirable MURDOCH, have 
often such hard measure in this world, is not in my power to account 
for, nor do I believe anyone can; but what I tell you is one of 
those surprising things, and I lamented not a little the loss of 
such a master. Still however I continued to study by many written 
rules he had given me, and to this day, mathematics are the greatest 
pleasure of my life.

"As to our method, my master, in the first place, made me perfectly 
understand arithmetic, and then geometry and algebra, in all their 
parts and improvements, the methods of series, doctrine of 
proportions, nature of logarithms, mechanics, and laws of motion: 
from thence we proceeded to the pure doctrine of fluxions, and at 
last looked into the differential calculus. In this true way my 
excellent master led me, and in the same difficult path everyone 
must go, who intends to learn fluxions. It would be but lost labour 
for any person to attempt them, who was unacquainted with these 
Precognita.

"When we turned to fluxions, the first thing my master did, was to 
instruct me in the arithmetic of exponents, the nature of powers, 
and the manner of their generation. We went next to the doctrine of 
infinite series; and then, to the manner of generating mathematical 
quantities. This generation of quantities was my first step into 
fluxions, and my master so amply explained the nature of them, in 
this operation, that I was able to form a just idea of a first 
fluxion, though thought by many to be incomprehensible. We proceeded 
from thence to the notation and algorithm of first fluxions; to the 
finding second, third, &c. fluxions; the finding fluxions of 
exponential quantities; and the fluents from given fluxions; to 
their uses in drawing tangents to curves; in finding the areas of 
spaces; the valves of surfaces; and the contents of solids; their 
percussion, oscillation, and centres of gravity. All these things my 
master so happily explained to my understanding, that I was able to 
work with ease, and found no more difficulty in conceiving an 
adequate notion of a nascent or evanescent quantity, than in forming 
a true idea of a mathematical point. In short, by the time I had 
studied fluxions two years, I not only understood their fundamental 
principles and operations, and could investigate, and give the 
solution of the most general and useful problems in the mathematics; 
but likewise, solve several problems that occur in the phenomena of 
nature."

Here MARIA stopped, and as soon as astonishment would permit me to 
speak, I proposed to her several difficult questions, I had heard, 
but was not then able to answer. I requested her, in the first 
place, to inform me, how the time of a body's descending through any 
arch of a cycloid was found: and if ten hundredweight avoirdupois, 
hanging on a bar of steel perfectly elastic, and supported at both 
ends, will just break the bar, what must be the weight of a globe, 
falling perpendicular 185 feet on the middle of the bar, to have the 
same effect? My next questions were, how long, and how far, ought a 
given globe to descend by its comparative weight in a medium of a 
given density, but without resistance, to acquire the greatest 
velocity it is capable of in descending with the same weight, and in 
the same medium, with resistance?—And how are we to find the value 
of a solid formed by the rotation of this curvilinear space, A C D 
about the axis A D, the general equation, expressing the nature of 
the curve, being
 <Formula> 
?
How is the centre of gravity to be found of the space enclosed by an 
hyperbola, and its asymptote? And how are we to find the centre 
oscillation of a sphere revolving about the line P A M, a tangent, 
to the generating circle F A H, in the point A, as an axis? These 
questions MARIA answered with a celerity and elegance that again 
amazed me, and convinced me that, notwithstanding the Right Rev. 
metaphysical disputant, Dr. Berkeley, late Bishop of Cloyne in 
Ireland, could not understand the doctrine of fluxions, and 
therefore did all he could to disgrace them, and the few 
mathematicians who have studied magnitudes as generated by motion; 
yet, the doctrine, as delivered by the divine Newton, may be clearly 
conceived, and distinctly comprehended; that the principles upon 
which it is founded, are true, and the demonstrations of its rules 
conclusive. No opposition can hurt it.

When I observed, that some learned men will not allow that a 
velocity which continues for no time at all, can possibly describe 
any space at all: its effect, they say, is absolutely nothing, and 
instead of satisfying reason with truth and precision, the human 
faculties are quite confounded, lost, and bewildered in fluxions. A 
velocity or fluxion is at best we do not know what; whether 
something or nothing: and how can the mind lay hold on, or form any 
accurate abstract idea of such a subtle, fleeting thing.

"Disputants," answered Maria, "may perplex with deep speculations, 
and confound with mysterious disquisitions, but the method of 
fluxions has no dependence on such things. The operation is not what 
any single abstract velocity can generate or describe of itself, but 
what a continual and successively variable velocity can produce in 
the whole. And certainly, a variable cause may produce a variable 
effect, as well as a permanent cause a permanent and constant 
effect. The difference can only be, that the continual variation of 
the effect must be proportional to the continual variation of the 
cause. The method of fluxions therefore is true, whether we can or 
cannot conceive the nature and manner of several things relating to 
them, though we had no ideas of perpetually arising increments, and 
magnitudes in nascent or evanescent states. The knowledge of such 
things is not essential to fluxions. All they propose is, to 
determine the velocity or flowing wherewith a generated quantity 
increases, and to sum up all that has been generated or described by 
the continually variable fluxion. On these two bases fluxions 
stand."

This was clear and just, and showed that the nature and idea of 
fluxions is agreeable to the nature and constitution of things. They 
can have no dependence upon any metaphysical speculations, such 
speculations as that anti-mathematician. my Lord of Cloyne, brought 
in, to cavil and dispute against principles he understood nothing 
of, and maliciously run the account of them into the dark; but are 
the genuine offspring of nature and truth. An instance or two may 
illustrate the matter.

I1. A heavy body descends perpendicularly 16 feet in a second, and 
at the end of this time, has acquired a velocity of 32 feet in a 
second, which is accurately known. At any given distance then from 
the place the body fell, take the point A in the right line, and the 
velocity of the falling body in the point may be truly computed: but 
the velocity in any point above A, at ever so small a distance, will 
be less than in A; and the velocity at any point below A, at the 
least possible distance, will be greater than in A. It is therefore 
plain, that in the point A, the body has a certain determined 
velocity, which belongs to no other point in the whole line. Now 
this velocity is the fluxion of that right line in the point A; and 
with it the body would proceed, if gravity acted no longer on the 
body's arrival at A.

2. Take a glass tube open at both ends whose concavity is of 
different diameters in different places, and immerse it in a stream, 
till the water fills the tube, and flows through it. Then, in 
different parts of the tube, the velocity of the water will be as 
the squares of the diameters, and of consequence different. Suppose 
then, in any marked place, a plane to pass through the tube 
perpendicular to the axis, or to the motion of the water, and of 
consequence, the water will pass through this section with a certain 
determinate velocity. But if another section be drawn ever so near 
the former, the water, by reason of the different diameters, will 
flow through this with a velocity different from what it did at the 
former, and therefore to one section of the tube, or single point 
only, the determinate velocity belongs. It is the fluxion of the 
space which the fluid describes at that section; and with that 
uniform velocity the fluid would continue to move, if the diameter 
was the same to the end of the tube.

3. If a hollow cylinder be filled with water to flow freely out 
through a hole at the bottom, the velocity of the effluent will be 
as the height of the water, and since the surface of the incumbent 
fluid descends without stop, the velocity of the stream will 
decrease, till the effluent be all out. There can then be no two 
moments of time, succeeding each other ever so- nearly, wherein the 
velocity of the water is the same; and of consequence, the velocity, 
at any given point, belongs only to that particular indivisible 
moment of time. Now this is accurately the fluxion of the fluid then 
flowing; and if, at that instant, more water was poured into the 
cylinder, to make the surface keep its place, the effluent would 
retain its velocity, and still be the fluxion of the fluid. Such are 
the operations of nature, and they visibly confirm the nature of 
fluxion. It is from hence quite clear, that the fluxion of a 
generated quantity, cannot retain any one determined value for the 
least space of time whatever, but the moment it arrives at that 
value, the same moment it loses it again. The fluxion of such 
quantity can only pass gradually and successively through the 
indefinite degrees contained between the two extreme values, which 
are the limits thereof, during the generation of the fluent, in case 
the fluxion he variable. But then, though a determinate degree of 
fluxion does not continue at all, yet, at every determinate 
indivisible moment of time, every fluent has some determinate degree 
of fluxion; that is, every generated quantity has everywhere a 
certain rate of increasing, a fluxion whose abstract value is 
determinate in itself, though the fluxion has no determined value 
for the least space of time whatever. To find its value then, that 
is, the ratio one fluxion has to another, is a problem strictly 
geometrical; notwithstanding the Right Rev. anti-mathematician has 
declared the contrary, in his hatred to mathematicians, and his 
ignorance of the true principles of mathematics.

If my Lord of Cloyne had been qualified to examine and consider the 
case of fluxions, and could have laid aside that unaccountable 
obstinacy, and invincible prejudice, which made him resolve to yield 
to no reason on the subject; not to regard even the great 
Maclaurin's answer to his Analyst, he would have discovered, that it 
was very possible to find the abstract value of a generated 
quantity, or the contemporary increment of any compound quantity. By 
the binomial theorem, the ratio of the fluxion of a simple quantity 
to the fluxion of that compound quantity, may be had in general, in 
the lowest terms, and as near the truth as we please, whilst we 
suppose some very small increment actually described. And whereas 
the ratio of these fluxions is required for some one indivisible 
point of the fluid, in the very beginning of the increment, and 
before it is generated, we make, in the particular case, the values 
of the simple increments nothing, which before was expressed in 
general: then all the terms wherein they are found vanish, and what 
is left accurately shows the relation of the fluxions for the point 
where the increment is supposed to commence. As the abstract value 
of the fluxion belongs only to one point of the fluent, the moments 
are made to vanish, after we have seen by their continual 
diminution, whither the ratio tends, and what it continually verges 
to; and this becomes as visible as the very character it is written 
in.

But Bishop Berkeley was unacquainted with mathematical principles, 
and out of his aversion to these sciences, and zeal for orthodoxy, 
cavilled and disputed with all his might, and endeavoured to bring 
the matter to a state unintelligible to himself, and everybody else. 
Here MARIA had done, and for near a quarter of an hour after, I sat 
silently looking at her, in the greatest astonishment.

But as to our travels, the 10th of August we got safe to London, and 
the consequence of the journey was, that the last day of the same 
month, I had the honour and happiness of being married to this young 
lady.

Wise is the man, who prepares both for his own death and the death 
of his friends; who makes use of the foresight of troubles, so, as 
to abate the uneasiness of them, and puts in practice the resolution 
of the philosopher Cleanthes.<190> "I am thinking with myself every 
day, says one of the philosophers, how many things are dear to me; 
and after I have considered them as temporary and perishable, I 
prepare myself, from that very minute, to bear the loss of them 
without weakness." I thought of this the morning I married the 
beautiful and ingenious Miss SPENCE, and determined if I lost her, 
to make the great affliction produce the peaceable fruits of 
righteousness. The man must feel, in such a case: the Christian will 
submit. Before the end of six months, she died, and I mourned the 
loss with a degree of sorrow due to so much excellence, endearment 
and delight. My complaint was bitter, in proportion to the desires 
of nature. But as nature says, "let this cup pass:" Grace says, "let 
thy will be done." If the flower of all my comfort was gone, the 
glory departed! yet thy glory is, O man, to do the will of God, and 
bear the burthen he lays upon thee! Let nature, grace, and time, do 
their part, to close the wound, and let not ignorance impeach the 
wisdom of the Most High. The cup which my Father heath given me: 
shall I not drink? I will. I will not quarrel with Providence. In 
short, I resigned, and not long after I had buried this admirable 
woman, who died at her seat in Westmoreland, I went into the world 
again, to relieve my mind, and try my fortune once more. What 
happened there, I will report, when I have related the extraordinary 
case of my wife Miss SPENCE, and the four physicians I had to attend 
her. It is a very curious thing.

This young lady was seized with that fatal distemper, called a 
malignant fever: Something foreign to nature got into her blood, by 
a cold, and other accidents, it may be, and the luctus<191> or 
strife to get clear thereof become very great. The effervescence or 
perturbation was very soon so violent as to show, that it not only 
endangered, but would quickly subvert the animal fabric, unless the 
blood was speedily dispersed, and nature got the victory by an 
exclusion of the noxious shut-in particles. The thirst, the dry 
tongue, the coming causus, were terrible, and gave me too much 
reason to apprehend this charming woman would sink under the 
conflict. To save her, if possible, I sent immediately for a great 
physician, Dr. Sharp, a man who talked with great fluency of 
medicine and diseases.

This gentleman told me, the alkaline was the root of fevers, as well 
as of other distempers, and therefore, to take off the effervescence 
of the blood in the ebullitions of it, to incide<192> the viscous 
humour, to drain the tartarous salts from the kidneys, to allay the 
preternatural ferment, and to brace up the relaxed tones, he ordered 
orange and vinegar in whey, and prescribed spirit of sulphur, and 
vitriol, the cream, crystals, and vitriolate tartar in other 
vehicles. If anything can relieve, it must be plenty of acid. In 
acidis posita est omni curatio<192>. But these things gave no relief 
to the sufferer.

I sent then in all haste for Dr. Hough, a man of great reputation, 
and he differed so much in opinion from Sharp, that he called an 
acid the chief enemy. It keeps up the luctus or struggle, and if not 
expelled very quickly, will certainly prove fatal. Our sheet anchor 
then must be the testacea,<194> in vehicles of mineral water, and 
accordingly he ordered the absorbent powers to conflict with this 
acidity, the principal cause of all diseases. Pearl and coral, 
crab's eyes, and crab's claws, he prescribed in diverse forms; but 
they were of no use to the sick woman. She became worse every hour.

Dr. Pym was next called in, a great practitioner, and learned man. 
His notion of a fever was quite different from the opinions of Sharp 
and Hough. He maintained that a fever was a poisonous ferment or 
venom, which seized on the animal spirits: it breaks and smites 
them; and unless by alexipharmics<195> the spirits can be enabled to 
gain a victory in a day or two, this ferment will bring on what the 
Greeks call a synochus, that is, a continual fever. In that state, 
the venom holds fast the animal spirits, will not let them expand, 
or disengage themselves, and then they grow enraged, and 
tumultuating, are hurried into a state of explosion, and blow up the 
fabric. Hence the inflammatory fever, according to the diverse 
indoles<196> of the venom; and when the contagious miasmas arrive at 
their highest degree, the malignant fever ariseth. The spirits are 
then knocked down, and the marks of the enemies' weapons, the spots, 
&c. appear. This, continued the doctor, is the case of your lady, 
and therefore the thing to be done is, to make the malignant tack 
about to the mild, and produce an extinction of the ferment, and 
relief of the symptoms. This I endeavour to do by alexipharmics and 
vesicatories,<197> and by subduing the poison by the bark and the 
warmer antidotes. Thus did my doctor marshal his animal spirits, 
fight them against the enemy venom, to great disadvantage. If his 
talk was not romance, it was plain his spirits were routed, and 
venom was getting the day. His alexipharmics and warm antidotes, 
were good for nothing. The malady increased.

This being the case, I sent again in haste for a fourth doctor, a 
man of greater learning than the other three, and therefore, in 
opinion, opposite, and against their management of the fever. This 
great man was Dr. Frost. He was a mechanician, and affirmed that, 
"the solid parts of the human body are subjected to the rules of 
geometry, and the fluids to the hydrostatics; and therefore, to keep 
the machine in right order, that is, in a state of health, an 
equilibrium must be maintained; or restored, if destroyed. The 
balance must not turn to one side or the other. To restore sanity in 
acute cases, and in chronic too, our business is to prevent the 
vessels being elevated or depressed beyond the standard of nature: 
when either happens, the division of the blood is increased, the 
motion is augmented, and so beget a fever. There cannot be an 
inordinate elevation of the oily or fiery parts of the blood, till 
the vessels vibrate above the standard of nature.

"In a slight fever, the blood increases but little above the 
balance; but if more than one day, turns to a synochus, which is but 
the same fever augmented beyond the balance of nature. This turns to 
a putrid synochus, and this to a causus. This is the case of your 
lady. From an elevated contraction, the Doctor continued, to my 
amazement, her blood obtains a greater force and motion; hence 
greater division, hence an increase of quantity and fluidity: and 
thus from greater division, motion and quantity increased, arises 
that heat and thirst, with the other concomitant symptoms of her 
fever; for the blood dividing faster than it can be detached through 
the perspiratory emunctories<198> of the skin, is the immediate 
cause of the heart's preternatural beating: and this preternatural 
division of the blood arises from the additional quantity of 
obstructed perspirable matter, added to the natural quantity of the 
blood.

"Things being so," the Doctor went on; "and the fever rising by the 
blood's dividing faster than can be detached by the several 
emunctories; and this from an elevation of the solids above the 
balance, we must then strive to take off the tension of the solids, 
and subtract the cause. This makes me begin in a manner quite 
contrary to the other physicians, and I doubt not but I shall soon 
get the better of the fury and orgasm, make an alteration in the 
black scabrous tongue, and by according with the modus of nature, 
throw forth the matter of the disease. I will enable nature to 
extricate herself. I hope to disentangle her from the weight."

Thus did this very learned man enlarge; and while he talked of doing 
wonders, the dry and parched skin, the black and brushy tongue, the 
crusty fur upon the teeth, and all the signals of an incendium<199> 
within, declared her dissolution very near. As the serum diminished 
fast, and the intestine motion of the crassamentum<200> increased, 
nature was brought to her last struggles. All the dismal harbingers 
of a general wreck appeared, to give the by-standers notice of 
approaching death. She died the ninth day, by the ignorance of four 
learned physicians. Had these Gentlemen considered the fever no 
otherwise than as a disease arising from some unusual ferment, 
stirred up among the humours of the blood, disturbing both those 
natural motions and functions of the body, hindering perspiration, 
and thereby giving quick and large accession to such parts of the 
aliment or liquors taken down, as are disposed to ferment; and there 
is always a strong disposition that way; for the blood has a three-
fold motion, fluidity, common to all liquors, protrusive, from the 
impulse of the heart and arteries, and fermentative, that is, a 
motion throughout of all its parts, which quality is owing to the 
dissimilar parts of the blood; for being a compound of various 
particles, there must be a colluctation<201> when they occur, and of 
consequence, a continual fermentation. As this is just and moderate, 
it is for the good of the animal, and purifies the blood: if it is 
too much, it tends to a fever; if it still increases, it produces 
the burning causes. Hard is the struggle then, and if nature cannot 
dispume,<202> even helped by art, the patient has no hazard for 
life. Hence it is, that we are so subject to fevers, and that it 
carries away more people than all the rest of the diseases. Out of 
every forty-two that have it, twenty-five generally die. It was so 
in the time of Hippocrates, 430 years before Christ. And so Dr. 
Sydenham and Dr. Friend found it, in their practice. But had my four 
doctors considered the fever as I have plainly stated it, without 
vainly pretending to be so wise as to know the essential causes of 
it; and in the beginning of it, before the terrible appearances, the 
vigil, delirium, subsultus<203>, the dry black tongue, the furred 
teeth, and the pale, unconcocted urine, had caused a depletion by 
large bleeding, had opened the pores by a mild sudorific, had then 
given a vomit, Rad. Ipecacuanha<204> in small sack-whey or chicken-
water, and let the sufferer indulge in that thin diluting liquor, an 
emulsion of the seeds and almonds in barley water, and if the 
patient required it, a draught of table-beer with a toast, between 
whiles; had this been done very soon, there might be relief as 
quickly; or if the fever still run high, to bleed again, and wash 
down some proper alexipharmic powder with a proper cordial julep, it 
is possible nature would have been able to accomplish the work, and 
health had been again restored. I use the word proper alexipharmic, 
and proper cordial julep, because the Theriaca and Mithridatium of 
the shops, which are commonly, almost always ordered as an 
alexipharmic bole<205>, are rather poisons than useful in a fever; 
and because the tincture and syrup of saffron, the treacle-water, or 
any other distilled compound, are not fit cordials in the case; but 
it should be the conserva lujulae in an emulsion ex sem. fr. cum 
amygd. in aq. hordei.<206>

This is the true alexipharmic, and the only cordial, to be given in 
a fever. But it was the destructive alexipharmics and cordials of 
the shops they forced down Maria's throat, and this, with the other 
bad prescriptions and management, killed one of the finest and most 
excellent women that ever lived.

And now to give the world a better idea of this admirable woman than 
any description of mine can exhibit, I shall here place a few 
religios little Pieces, which she wrote while Miss SPENCE, and which 
I found among her papers.



MORAL THOUGHTS. 
Written by Miss Spence.

MORALITY.

Abstract, mathematical, or physical truth, may be above the reach of 
the bulk and community of mankind. They have neither the leisure, 
nor the necessary helps and advantages to acquire the natural 
knowledge of arts and sciences. The many calls and importunities of 
the animal kind, take up the greatest part of their time, thoughts, 
and labour, so that the more abstract speculations, and experimental 
disquisitions of philosophy, are placed by Providence quite out of 
their reach, and beyond their sphere of action.

On the contrary, moral truth, right and wrong, good and evil, the 
doing as we would be done by, and acting towards all men as they 
really are, and stand related in society; these things are as 
evident to the understanding, as light and colours are to the eye, 
and may be called the intellectual, moral sense. Here needs no deep 
learning, or trouble and expense of education, but the same truths 
are as evident, and as much seen and felt by the learned, and 
unlearned, the gentleman and the ploughman, the savage or wild 
Indian, as by the best instructed philosopher. The divine 
perfections shine through all nature, and the goodness and bounty of 
the Creator to all his creatures, impress the obligation of 
imitating this wisest and best of Beings upon every man's heart and 
conscience.

But notwithstanding the maxims of morality are thus solidly 
established, and adapted to all capacities; and though every man has 
a happiness to seek, and a main end to secure, which must be 
infinitely preferable to any concerns of life, yet here it is we 
find, that mankind in general have been most lost and bewildered, as 
if Providence had placed their own happiness, and the way to it, 
more out of their power than anything else. How this should happen, 
might seem unaccountable at first sight, and yet it can be no great 
mystery to any man tolerably acquainted with the world and human 
nature. It is no difficult matter to discover the reasons hereof, 
and it is withal highly useful to give them their due consideration.

I. The principal cause I take to be the prevailing strength and bias 
of private, corrupt, animal affection, and desires. Reason is 
silenced and borne down by brutal appetite and passion. They resolve 
to gratify their sensual appetites and desires, and will therefore 
never taste or try the superior pleasures and enjoyments of reason 
and virtue. But such men as these having declared open war against 
their own reason and conscience, and being resolved at all risks to 
maintain the combat, must be self-condemned, and cannot plead 
ignorance, or error of judgment in the case.

2. Another fundamental cause of moral error, is the prejudice and 
prepossession of a wrong education. False principles and absurd 
notions of God and religion, wrought early into the tender, 
unexperienced mind, and there radicated<207> and confirmed from time 
to time, from youth to riper age, by parents, teachers, our most 
intimate friends and acquaintance, and such as we have the best 
opinion of, and confide most in; such causes make such strong 
impressions, that the grossest errors, thus riveted and fixed, are 
with the greatest difficulty ever conquered or cleared off. In this 
case, men turn out well-grounded believers, and are well-armed 
against conviction. Circumcision or baptism fixes their religion in 
their infancy, and their church is as natural to them as their 
country. Free enquiry is with them an apostasy from the orthodox 
party, and as the great and sure trial of their faith and fortitude, 
they will hear no reasonings about the holy religion they have taken 
upon trust.

3. Then the few, who have applied themselves to the study of 
morality, have done it for the most part in a manner confused; and 
superficial enough: and often so, as even to build upon principles 
either entirely false, or obscure and uncertain; either foreign to 
its proper business, or mixed up with gross errors, and absurdities. 
From whence it comes to pass, that in all languages, the terms of 
morality, both in common discourse, and in the writings of the 
learned, are such as have the most obscure, confused, undetermined, 
and unfixed ideas, of any other terms whatever; men for the most 
part despising the things which are plain and ordinary, to run after 
such as are extraordinary and mysterious; and that they either will 
not know, or reject even truth itself, unless she brings some charm 
with her, to raise their curiosity, and gratify their passion for 
what is marvellous and uncommon.

In sum, the prejudices of the understanding, the illusions of the 
heart, and the tyranny established in the world with relation to 
opinions, form a grand obstacle to the serious study of morality; 
and to the attainment of a more exact knowledge of our duty. Nor is 
it to be expected that any will very much apply themselves to make 
discoveries in these matters, whilst the desire of esteem, riches, 
or power, makes men espouse the well-endowed opinions in fashion, 
and then seek arguments either to make good their beauty, or varnish 
over and cover their deformity. Whilst the parties of men, cram 
their tenets down all men's throats, whom they can get into their 
power, without permitting them to examine their truth and falsehood; 
and will not let truth have fair play in the world, nor men the 
liberty to search after it; what improvements can be expected of 
this kind? What greater light can be hoped for in the moral 
sciences? The subject part of mankind in most places might, instead 
thereof, with Egyptian bondage, expect Egyptian darkness, were not 
the candle of the Lord set up by himself in men's minds, which it is 
impossible for the breath of man wholly to extinguish; how much 
soever the infallible guides of one church, and the orthodox rulers 
of another, may scheme and labour to subject conscience to human 
jurisdiction, and bring the inward principle and motive of action 
within the cognizance of their political theocracy, or theocratic 
policy.

After all this, is it to be wondered at, that such, whose 
occupations and distractions of life, or want of genius and outward 
helps, do not allow them to engage in long and profound meditations, 
are found to have generally understandings so short and narrow, and 
ideas so false or confused, in matters of morality.

And since this is the case of the greatest part of mankind, it has 
no doubt been always God's will, that they, who had the greatest 
light, and whom his providence had furnished with the greatest 
helps, should communicate their knowledge to such as were not able 
of themselves to acquire it so easily, or in so great a degree.

RELIGION.

What is religion? The true, eternal, immutable religion of God and 
nature, consists, as I opine, in the filial love and fear of God, 
and the brotherly love of mankind; in the practice of all those 
moral duties of truth and righteousness, which result from it, under 
a fiducial trust in, and dependence on God, and the constant sense 
of his power and presence in all our actions, as the rewarder of 
good and punisher of bad men. This is the religion founded in nature 
and reason, and which must be at all times and everywhere the same. 
As this religion was in a great measure lost, and neglected, amidst 
the general ignorance, superstition, and idolatry of the world, it 
was the great business and design of revelation to restore it, and 
set moral truth and reason in its original light, by bringing 
mankind to the right use of their reason and understanding in such 
matters.

After Epicurus and Zeno, there were no new succeeding schemes of 
morality, but each man betook himself to that sect, where he found 
what most suited his own sentiments.

In the reign of Augustus, Potamo of Alexandria introduced a manner 
of philosophising, which was called the Eclectic, because it 
consisted in collecting from all the tenets of preceding 
philosophers, such as appeared most reasonable; out of which they 
formed each man his own system of philosophy. It appears from 
Cicero's works that he was an Eclectic.

And why should it not be good in religion, as well as in philosophy? 
I own I am an Eclectic in divinis. And the sum of my religion is, 
without regard to modes or parties, so to live to the glory of the 
Father, without attachment to the creature, for the sanctification 
and happiness of mankind; that when this fleeting scene of sin and 
sorrow shall vanish, and pass away from sight, the angels of God may 
give my soul a safe transition to that heavenly happiness, which no 
thought can lay hold on, and which no art can describe.

The practice of reason and truth is the rule of action to God 
himself, and the foundation of all true religion. It is the first 
and highest obligation of all rational beings, and our divine Lord 
came down from heaven to earth to teach it to mankind. Christ 
preached a plain doctrine to men, fitted to reform their hearts and 
lives, intended to make them perfect in self-denial, humility, love, 
goodness, and innocence; and to enable them, with hearts raised 
above the world, to worship the Father in spirit and in truth.

But this glorious religion the Romish priests have perverted into a 
system of mysteries, and staring contradictions, the better to 
support the worst and most deplorable purposes of temporal wealth, 
power, pride, malice, and cruelty. In direct opposition to reason 
and common sense, we must commence generous believers in an 
ecclesiastical Christianity, and confess the symbol of their holy 
Athanasius, though it be no more, or better, than the effects of a 
luxuriant fancy, without likeness and correspondency, in the real 
nature and reason of things; 17, 4, and 19 are 41, says convocation 
to his believers, and your religion, my brethren, is all a 
tremendous mystery: You must adore as such, what the infidels 
renounce as a contradiction.

Thus shamefully do these priests sink the credibility of our gospel, 
and impose upon the silly people, a ball of wax for the religion of 
Jesus; making them believe contrary to knowledge, and prefer a 
system that is a lye against the light of nature, and the gospel.

But the chief end, duty, happiness, and highest perfection that man 
can arrive at, consists, and is found, in a perfect exercise of 
human reason.

We read in Chronicles, that Hezekiah began his good reign with the 
revival of religion, which had long suffered by the neglect and 
profanation, or through the neglect and omission of his 
predecessors. To this purpose he opened the doors of the house of 
the Lord, and issued a decree, that all Israel should come to keep 
the Passover, which they had not done of a long time. But as the 
legal cleansing and purifying, could not be performed by great 
numbers that did eat the Passover, by the appointed time, on account 
of many things, and particularly the force of long interval and 
disuse; therefore this irregularity employed the devotion of the 
good king, as the canon of the Passover, under the strictest 
prohibition, and the severest penalty, forbid anyone to eat, that 
did not come with outward and legal purity. No unclean person shall 
eat of it: and he prayed for the people, saying, The good Lord 
pardon everyone that prepareth his heart to seek God, the Lord God 
of their fathers, though he be not cleansed according to the 
purification of the sanctuary; and the Lord hearkened unto Hezekiah, 
says the next verse, and healed the people, that is, took off the 
penalties of the canon, and gave them the benefit of the rite. From 
hence it follows, that, however defective we may be in outward rites 
and ceremonies of a church, yet inward truth and purity will be 
accepted in default of outward things. Inward disposition is the 
substance of religion, and may compound for the want of outward 
matters; but outward service can never he accepted instead of inward 
purification.

And it farther follows, if the outward solemnities of religion 
cannot be obtained upon lawful terms, which is the case of many, in 
respect of Popery and Athanasian worship; then will the good Lord 
pardon and be propitious to those who prepare their heart to seek 
him, though they be not cleansed according to the solemn 
institution, and ritual purification.

This text is in the vulgar Latin, Dominus bonus propitiabitur 
cunctis qui in toto corde requirunt Dominum, Deum patrum suorum, et 
non imputabit eis quod minus sanctificati sunt. "The good Lord will 
be propitious to all those, who in their whole heart seek the Lord 
God of their fathers, and will not impute to them their being less 
sanctified than they ought."

Histories in all ages are full of the encroachments of the 
clergy,<208> yet they all omit one of the most successful stratagems 
to engross money. We are indebted to our statute-book for informing 
us of one of the most notorious pieces of priestcraft that ever was 
practised. Would one believe, that there is a country, and in Europe 
too, where the clergy gained such an ascendant over the minds of the 
people, as tamely to suffer the moveable estate of every man who 
died intestate, to be swallowed up by them; yet so prevalent was 
superstition in our country, that it produced a law preferring the 
Bishop to the next of kin; and in its extension excluding the 
children, the wife, and the relations of the deceased, nay the 
creditor; and giving all to the Bishop per aversionem. Such was the 
shameful rapacity of the clergy here for ages. Such a monstrous 
practice was established upon this foundation, that the moveable 
effects of every deceased person, his own appointment failing, ought 
to be laid out for promoting the good of his soul; and so the 
Ordinary<209> took possession, without deigning to account with any 
mortal. This began temp. Hen. I. when the Ordinary, for the good of 
the soul of the deceased, obtained a directing power, and was in the 
nature of an overseer, and somewhat more. In the time of King John, 
the Ordinary drew blood, as Bacon well expresses it;<210> for though 
the possession was as formerly, yet the dividend must be in the view 
of the church, and by which means, the dividers were but mere 
instruments, and the right was vanished into the clouds. But temp. 
Hen. it was settled, the Ordinary had not only gotten the game, but 
gorged it. Both right and possession were now become the clergy's, 
the Ordinary was to distribute it according to pious uses, and no 
use seemed so pious as to appoint to himself and his brethren.

The first statute that limited the power of the Ordinary was 13 Edw. 
I. c. 19. By this the Ordinary was obliged to satisfy the 
intestate's death so far as the goods extended. And 31 Edw. III. 
cap. 2, the actual possession was taken from the Ordinary, by 
obliging him to give a deputation to the next and most lawful 
friends of the intestate, for administrating his goods. But this 
statute proved but a weak check to the avarice of the clergy. Means 
were fallen upon to elude it, by preferring such of the intestate's 
relations, who were willing to offer the best terms: this corrupt 
practice was suffered in the days of Hen. VIII. when the clergy 
losing ground, the statute 21 Hen. VIII. was enacted, bearing "That 
in case any person die intestate, or the executors refuse to prove 
the testament, the Ordinary shall grant administration to the widow, 
or to the next of kin, or to both, taking surety for true 
administration."

This statute, as it points out the particular persons who are 
entitled to letters of administration, without leaving any choice to 
the Ordinary, was certainly intended to cut him out of all hope of 
making gain of the effects of persons dying intestate. But the 
church does not easily quit its hold. Means were fallen upon to 
elude this law also. Though the possession given by this statute was 
wrested out of the hands of the Ordinary, yet his pretensions 
subsisted entire, of calling the administrator to account, and 
obliging him or her to distribute the effects to pious uses. This 
was an admirable engine in the hands of a churchman for squeezing 
money. An administrator who gave any considerable share to the 
Bishop, to be laid out by him, without doubt, in pious uses, would 
not find much difficulty in making his accompt. This rank abuse 
moved the judges solemnly to resolve, that the Ordinary, after 
administration granted by him, cannot compel the administrator to 
make distribution<211>. And at last, the right of the next of kin 
was fully established by statute 22 and 23 Car. II. cap. 10. This 
cut out the Ordinary entirely.

If I thought the Athanasian creed was a part of the religion of 
Jesus, I should be induced to entertain a hard thought of 
Christianity. I should think it enjoined a slavish submission to the 
dictates of designing men: and instead of a reasonable service, 
required us to renounce our understandings, to apostatize from 
humanity, and degenerate into brutes, by giving up our reason, which 
alone dis tinguishes us from them. Most unjust charge upon our holy 
religion! A religion, which enlarges our rational faculties, filling 
the mind with an astonishing idea of an eternal duration, and 
thereby giving us a contempt of the mean, transient pleasures of 
this life, and which we and the brutes enjoy in common: a religion 
that requires only the highest degree of reverence towards the MOST 
HIGH, the most refined purity of heart and mind, and the most noble 
and diffusive charity towards all mankind. In short, that 
establishes righteousness upon earth, and entire obedience to the 
will of God; that so having put the oil into our lamp, according. to 
the gospel parable, it may not only measure the course of time, but 
light us beyond it, to the coming of the bridegroom, and the morning 
of eternity.

But this will not do for the Doctors, they must, have established 
Credenda for judgments of all sizes, they must have a formulary of 
dogmatic theology, an Athanasian jumble, to support the Holy Church; 
though their creed burlesques mathematical certainty, and renders 
their ecclesiastical Christianity inferior to the ancient pagan 
religion. A trinity is the ecclesiastical God; but whether three 
distinct conscious beings of co-ordinate power, equal independency, 
and unorigination, and so three proper Deities; or, only three 
symbols of natural powers. In this the Doctors are not agreed; but 
the majority are for the three proper Deities: this heresy of three 
Gods we must subscribe to, or the priests will number us with the 
infidels, and do us all the mischief they can. Hence it comes to 
pass, that humanity, sweetness of temper, and moderation, are 
banished from society; religion, like a cloak, is made use of to 
authorise hatred, violence, and injustice; and the Christian 
religion, as the priests have forged it, and show it off, that is, 
upon its present footing, as an establishment, is pernicious to 
mankind, and ought to go, that the people may be restored again to 
Christ's religion, and be led to attend to the command of God; which 
is to believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and to love one 
another.

FAITH.

"Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things 
not seen;" Hebrews, ch. xi. v. 1. that is, faith is such a firm 
persuasion as gives, as it were, a substance or present existence to 
the good things which we hope for, and which are not yet in being, 
and as engages us to depend upon the truth of unseen things, as 
really, as upon ocular demonstration.

"He endured, as seeing him who is invisible;" ver. 27, that is, 
Moses as really believed the being and attributes of the invisible 
God, as if he had seen him with his eyes; and fully depended upon 
his conduct and assistance.

The better thing provided for Christians.

"And these all having obtained a good report through faith, received 
not the promise, God having provided some better thing for us, that 
they without us should not be made perfect;" Hebrews, ch. xi. v. 39. 
40, that is, though the upright under the law have a good character 
in Scripture, and of consequence were accepted of God upon the 
account of their faith in the divine power and goodness, yet they 
received not the promised reward of another life, immediately on 
their leaving this world: God provided this better thing for us 
Christians, that we should be made happy immediately, as soon as we 
leave this world, that so they might not be made happy in heaven, 
till Christianity commenced, and Christians should be there received 
to happiness with them.

Note I. It is plain from what the Apostle says before, that the 
thing promised is the better and more enduring substance in heaven.

2. The better thing provided for Christians, cannot be the 
resurrection from the dead, and the being, after that, received into 
the heavenly Jerusalem; since herein we shall have nothing better 
than the good people who lived under the law: therefore better 
things can only mean our enjoyment of God immediately upon our 
leaving this world.

It is strange then that Bishop Fell, and Whitby say, the better 
thing means the Messiah, or the heavenly country to be fully 
possessed at the end of the world.

Of the same opinion is Pyle. He says, our pious ancestors under the 
law, though in a state of rest and happiness, after death, yet 
received not the full and complete enjoyment of celestial glory, 
that being deferred till the last and great dispensation of the 
Messiah be past, that so they and sincere Christians, may be all 
rewarded and crowned together, with the happiness both of body and 
soul, at the final day of judgment: but if so, tell me Mr Pyle, 
where is the better thing provided for us Christians?

3. Besides, if the Apostle may be his own interpreter, the word 
perfect means the intermediate state of good souls in paradise, and 
not the complete state after the resurrection. In the next chapter, 
he speaks of the spirits of the just made perfect, by which he means 
undoubtedly the separate souls now in glory.

In a word, the design of the Apostle was to prove that, since God 
has provided some better thing for us, we appear to be more in his 
favour; and therefore the argument from their being justified to our 
being justified by faith, is stronger, that is, such a faith as has 
an operative influence, by rendering our lives a comment upon the 
blessed nature of God.

And that this was the meaning of the Apostle in the something better 
provided for us Christians, appears yet plainer from the consequence 
drawn by the inspired writer, to wit, that we ought with the greater 
patience and courage to endure persecution, since God has provided 
something better for us than for them. If the ancient believers held 
out, who expected but a state of sleep, till the time of the general 
resurrection: much more should we patiently suffer affliction, and 
even death itself, for the sake of truth, and of the gospel, when we 
know, that God has promised us something better; to wit, that we 
shall be conducted to paradise immediately after death, and be there 
spirits of just men made perfect, and be with Christ, which is far 
better than either to sleep after death, or to live longer in this 
world.

Let us lay aside then every weight, and the sin which doth so easily 
beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before 
us. Let us put away everything from us, that would hinder us from 
improving in virtue and goodness; looking to and imitating Jesus, 
the leader and captain of the faithful, and an example of spotless 
virtue and perfect obedience. The love of the world is enmity with 
God, and to place our affections here, is to vilify that better 
provision which he has made for us. We are but strangers and 
pilgrims here. The human state is but a passage, not a place of 
abode. It is a station of exercise and discipline, and was not 
designed for the place of enjoyment. That happy country is before 
us.

AVOIDINGS.

Avoid all indirect arts in the pursuit of a fortune. All unlawful 
methods of self-preservation. And every gratification that militates 
with reason and benevolence.

The Offices of a Christian.

These are heavenly-mindedness, and contempt of the world, and 
choosing rather to die than commit a moral evil. Such things, 
however, are not much esteemed by the generality of Christians: Most 
people laugh at them, and look upon them as indiscretions; therefore 
there is but little true Christianity in the world. It has never 
been my luck to meet with many people that had these three necessary 
qualifications. And as for the people, exclusive of their going to 
church to make a character, or to ogle one another, or out of 
superstition to perform so much opus operatum, a job of lip service, 
which they idly fancy to be religion, they, I mean the great and the 
small, might as well be Heathens as Christians, for any real 
Christian purpose they answer, in a strict adherence to the three 
offices aforementioned. The name of Christian sounds over Europe, 
and large parts of Asia, Africa, and America: but if a Christian is 
what St. Paul defines it, to wit, a man that is heavenly-minded, 
that contemns the world, and would die rather than commit a moral 
evil, then is the number of Christians very small indeed.

The meaning of John, ch. vi. v. 44. "No man can come to me, except 
the Father draw him."

That is, no one can be a Christian, unless his regard for the Deity 
and natural religion inclines him to receive a more improved scheme 
of religion. But Dr. Young, in one of his sermons, explains this 
text in the following manner. No one can live up to the religion of 
Jesus, and reach Christian perfection, unless the Father enlightens 
and enables him, by the operative influence of his holy spirit. We 
can do nothing, in respect of what ought to be done, to be more than 
nominal Christians, without the inward principle of sanctification. 
This I think is mere Methodism. The excellent Dr. Lardner expounds 
the text in the following words: "No man will come to me, and 
receive my pure, sublime, and spiritual doctrine, unless he have 
first gained some just apprehensions concerning the general 
principles of religion. And if a man have some good notions of God, 
and his perfections, and his will as already revealed, he will come 
unto me. If any man is well disposed, if he has a love of truth, and 
a desire to advance in virtue, and religious knowledge; he will 
readily hearken to me, and believe in me." Sermons, vol. i. p. 303.

Of Baptism, in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.

What is the meaning of baptizing them into the name of the Father, 
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost?

It signifies receiving men by baptism to the profession and 
privileges of that religion, which was taught by the Father, Son, 
and Spirit, that is, which the Father taught by the Son, in his 
lifetime, and by the Spirit, after his ascension. Or, to be 
baptized, is solemnly to profess our resolution to adhere to that 
holy doctrine, which is the mind and will of God the Father, 
published to the world by his Son, whom he sent from heaven for that 
purpose, and confirmed by the power of the Holy Ghost.

Note, An able writer, St. Hillary de Trinitate, lib. 2. ad calcem on 
Matt. ch. xxviii. v. 19, says that baptising in the name of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, signifies, In 
confession of the author of all things, and of the only begotten, 
and of the gift.

Of Christian Idolatry.

What a surprising incident is idolatry in the church of Christ! that 
after the religion of Jesus had accomplished its glorious design, 
and subverted idolatry and superstition throughout the world, it 
should itself be wounded almost to death, by the enemy it had 
subdued! This is the case all over the realms of popery. And can 
they be said to have any true religion among them, where the 
theology of Athanasius prevails?

Churchism and Creeds.

I have no very good opinion of creeds. Jesus Christ came with a 
legatarian power from God, the Supreme Being, to declare his will to 
mankind; and the great work to be done, so far as I can find in the 
gospel, is, the perfecting our minds in all that is truly excellent; 
by labouring to excel in all the virtues of the gospel, by loving 
the whole race of mankind with an universal charity, and striving to 
add to the satisfaction and happiness of all about us, and with whom 
we have any connexion.



CHAPTER XXI.

Having lost MARIA, I went up to London, and on my way to the 
metropolis, dined at a pleasant village, not far from Nottingham, 
where I saw two gentlemen well worth mentioning. They were sitting 
in a room the waiter showed me into, and had each of them a 
porringer of mutton broth. One of them seemed a little consumptive 
creature, about four feet six inches high, uncommonly thin, or 
rather exsiccated to a cuticle. His broth and bread however he 
supped up with some relish. He seemed to be past threescore. His 
name was RIBBLE.

The other was a young man, once very handsome, tall and strong, but 
so consumed and weak, that he could hardly speak or stir. His name 
was RICHMOND. He attempted to get down his broth, but not above a 
spoonful or two could he swallow. He appeared to me to be a dying 
man.

While I beheld things with astonishment, the servant brought in 
dinner, a pound of rump steaks, and a quart of green peas; two cuts 
of bread, a tankard of strong beer, and pint of port wine: with a 
fine appetite, I soon dispatched my mess, and over my wine, to help 
digestion, began to sing the following:

Tell me, I charge you, O ye sylvan swains, 
Who range the mazy grove, or flowery plains, 
Beside what fountain, in what breezy bower, 
Reclines my charmer in the noon-tide hour?

Soft, I adjure you, by the skipping fawns, 
By the fleet roes, that bound along the lawns; 
Soft tread, ye virgin daughters of the grove, 
Nor with your dances wake my sleeping love.

Come, Rosalind, O come, and infant flowers 
Shall bloom and smile, and form their charms by yours; 
By you the lily shall her white compose, 
Your blush shall add new blushes to the rose.

Hark! From yon bowers what airs soft warbled play! 
My soul takes wing to meet th'enchanting lay. 
Silence, ye nightingales! Attend the voice! 
While thus it warbles, all your songs are noise.

See! From the bower a form majestic moves, 
And smoothly gliding, shines along the groves; 
Say, comes a goddess from the golden spheres? 
A goddess comes, or Rosalind appears.


While I was singing, and indeed all the while I was at dinner, the 
gentlemen looked with wonder at me, and at last, as soon as I was 
silent, old RIBBLE expressed himself in the following words: "You 
are the most fortunate of mortals to be sure, Sir. A happy man 
indeed. You seem to have health and peace, contentment and 
tranquillity, in perfection. You are the more striking, when such 
spectacles as my cousin RICHMOND (pointing to the dying gentleman in 
the room) and I are in contrast before you. I will tell you our 
stories, Sir, in return for your charming song, and hope what I am 
going to say may be of service to you, as you are coming on, and we 
going off from this world.

"My kinsman there, the dying RICHMOND, in that chair, was once a 
Sampson, and the handsomest man of his time, though the remains of 
beauty or strength cannot now be traced. By drinking and whoring he 
brought himself to what you see; to a state that eludes all the arts 
of medicine. He has an aggravated cough, which produces a filthy pus 
of an ash-colour, streaked with blood, and mixed with filaments torn 
from his lungs and membranes, and with the utmost difficulty he 
respires. He has a perpetual violent pain in his breast, a pricking 
soreness in his paps when he coughs, and defects in all his 
functions. He has that flux of the belly, which is called a 
lientery, and the fluids of his body are wasted in colliquative 
sweats. A stretching pain racks him if he lies on either side, by 
reason of some adhesion of the lungs to the pleura. His hair is 
fallen off, and his nails you see are dead-coloured, and hooked. His 
countenance, you observe, is Hippocratical, the very image of death: 
his face a dead pale, his eyes sunk, his nose sharp, his cheeks 
hollow, his temples fallen, and his whole body thin like a skeleton. 
What a figure now is this once curled darling of the ladies: it was 
done, good Sir, by the hand of intemperance.

"As to myself," he continued, "I brought a consumption into the 
world with me, and by art have supported under it. I was born with 
the sharp shoulders you see, which are called pterogoides, or wing-
like, and had a contracted thorax, and long chest, a thin and long 
neck, a flaccid tone of all the parts about the breast, and a very 
flabby contexture of the muscles all over my body: but nevertheless, 
by a strict temperance all my life, and by following the directions 
of Dr. Bennet in his Theatrum Tabidorum, I have not only made life 
tolerable, but so removed the burden of stagnant phlegm from the 
thorax, by throwing it down by stool, and up by expectoration, 
exhaling it sometimes through the skin, and at other times digesting 
it with fasting, that I contrive more useful hours to myself than 
the strong and young can enjoy in their continued scenes of 
dissipation and riot. In me is seen the wonderful effect of rule and 
sobriety. I am now past fifty by several years, notwithstanding my 
very weak and miserable constitution, and by attending to nature, 
and never indulging in gratification or excess, am not only able to 
live without pain, but to divert life by experimental philosophy. I 
came down to this pleasant place, chiefly for the benefit of poor 
Richmond, my kinsman, whom you see with his eyes shut before you, 
the very picture of death; and also, with a view to do some good to 
myself, as it is the finest air in the world. I took a house in the 
village to live the more easily, as the lodging-houses are all 
crowded here, and resolved to amuse the days I have left in 
cultivating the science of chemistry; not in order to finish what 
nature has begun, do you see me, as the alchemists talk, and procure 
to the imperfect metals the much desired coction;<212> but to 
examine substances, and by the examination, obtain ideas of the 
bodies capable of the three degrees of fermentation, spirituous, 
acetous, and putrid; and of the products of those fermentations, to 
wit, ardent spirits, acids analogous to those of vegetables and 
animals, and volatile alkalis.

"To this purpose, I made for myself a laboratory, and about a year 
ago, began to employ my vessels and furnaces in various processes. A 
vast variety of entertaining things have since occurred, and my life 
is thereby made agreeable and pleasing; though to look at my poor 
frame, one would think me incapable of any satisfactions. I will 
give you an instance or two of my amusements, and do you judge, if 
they may not afford a mind more than the tumultuous joys of love and 
wine, horse-racing, cock-fighting, hunting, and other violent 
pleasures can yield.

"You know, good Sir, I suppose, that there are six metals, two 
perfect, and four imperfect. Gold and silver, perfect: the others, 
copper, tin, lead, and iron. Quicksilver is by some called a seventh 
metal: but that I think cannot be, as it is not malleable. Yet it is 
not to be confounded with the semi-metals, as it differs from the 
metals no otherwise than by being constantly in fusion; which is 
occasioned by its aptness to flow with such a small degree of heat, 
that be there ever so little warmth on earth, there is still more 
than enough to keep mercury in fusion. It must be called then, in my 
opinion, a metallic body of a particular kind: And the more so, let 
me add, as art has not yet found out a way of depriving it wholly of 
its phlogiston.

"I must observe to you, good Sir, in order to be intelligible in 
what I am saying, that the phlogiston in metals is the matter of 
fire as a constituent principle in bodies. It is the element of fire 
combined with some other substance, which serves it as a basis for 
constituting a kind of secondary principle; and it differs from pure 
fixed fire in these particulars, that it communicates neither heat 
nor light, it causes no change, but only renders body apt to fuse by 
the force of a culinary fire, and it can be conveyed from body to 
body, with this circumstance, that the body deprived of the 
phlogiston is greatly altered, as is the body that receives it.

"As to the semi-metals, which I mentioned, you will be pleased to 
observe, that they are regulus of antimony, bismuth, zinc, and 
regulus of arsenic. They are not malleable, and easily part with 
their phlogiston. Zinc and bismuth are free from the poisonous 
quality, but arsenic is the most violent poison; especially the 
shining crystalline calx of it, or flowers raised by the fire, and 
named white arsenic; regulus of antimony is likewise a poison, not 
in its nature, but because it always contains a portion of arsenic 
in its composition.

"Antimony is of a pretty white bright colour, and has the splendour, 
opacity, and gravity of a metal, but under the hammer crumbles to 
dust. A moderate heat makes it flow, and a violent fire dissipates 
it into smoke and white vapours. They adhere to cold bodies, and 
when the farina is collected, we call these vapours flowers of 
antimony.

"Butter of antimony, good sir, that wonderful corrosive, is a 
compound made by distilling pulverized regulus of antimony, and 
corrosive sublimate. The production, on operation, is a white 
matter, thick and scarce fluid, which is the regulus of antimony 
united with the acid of sea-salt. Here the corrosive sublimate is 
decompounded, the mercury revivified, and the acid combined with it, 
quits it to join the regulus of antimony, because its affinity with 
it is greater." Little RIBBLE, the Chemist, went on, and with 
difficulty I could refrain from laughing; not on account of the 
man's talking nonsense, for his discourse was the very reverse of 
that; but by reason of the grip he had of my arm, the pulls he gave 
me, if I happened to look another way, and the surprising eagerness 
with which he spoke; which showed, that he was chemically struck to 
an amazing degree, and following up closely, "But liver of antimony, 
good Sir," he continued, "is made of equal parts of nitre and 
antimony. On the mixture's being exposed to the action of fire, a 
violent detonation ensues, and the deflagrating nitre consumes the 
sulphur of the antimony, and even a part of its phlogiston. A 
greyish matter remains after the detonation, and this is what we 
call liver of antimony. It contains a fixed nitre, a vitriolated 
tartar, and the reguline part of antimony vitrified.

"The principal use the chemists make of antimony is to separate gold 
from the other metals. All metals, gold excepted, have a greater 
affinity with sulphur than the reguline part of antimony. As to 
gold, it is incapable of contracting any union with sulphur. If 
therefore I have a mass compounded of various metals, and want to 
get the gold out, I melt it with antimony, and as soon as it flows, 
everything in the mass which is not gold, unites with the sulphur, 
in or of the antimony, and causes two separations, that of the 
sulphur of antimony from its reguline part, and that of the gold 
from the metals with which it was mixed. This produces two new 
combinations, the metals and the sulphur, in fusion, being lighter, 
rise to the surface; and the gold and the reguline part of antimony 
being heaviest, the combination of them sinks to the bottom. Now the 
business is to part these two, and to this purpose, I expose the 
combination to a degree of fire, capable of dissipating into vapours 
all the semi-metal the mass contains. The reguline being volatile, 
goes off by the great heat, and my gold remains pure and fixed in my 
crucible.

As to the antimonial wine, made by the essence of antimony, that is, 
by impregnating the most generous white wine, with the minims or 
leasts of antimony, which the physicians have found out, it is not 
the part of a chemist to speak of that; and therefore, I shall only 
observe to you, that it is the best vomit, the best purge, and the 
best thing for a sweat, in the world. I will tell you, good Sir, 
what I heard an eminent Doctor say of it. Affirmo sanctissime, nihil 
inde melius, nihil tutius, nihil efficacius, deprehendi unquam, quam 
tritum illum, ac simplicem vini antimonialis infusum ex vino albo 
generoso, aromate aliquo stomachico adjecto. Epotus largiter maximas 
movit vomitiones, in minuta tantum quantitate, ad guttas puta 
vigenta, aut triginta, adhibitus sudores elicit benignos; paulo 
tamen majorae aleum solvit leniter. Medicamentum, paratu quidem 
facillimum, at viribus maximum.<213> And therefore, good Sir, when 
anything ails you, let me recommend the antimonial wine to you. 
Thirty drops will sweat you effectually, and about forty or fifty 
will effect a purge in a happy manner.

"But as to the second semi-metal, bismuth, it has almost the same 
appearance as regulus of antimony, but of a more dusky cast, 
inclining somewhat to red. It requires less heat than antimony to 
flow, and like it, and the other semi-metals, is volatile, by the 
action of a violent fire, and under the hammer is dust. In fusion, 
it mixes well with all metals, and whitens them by union, but 
destroys their malleability. In flowing, it loses its phlogiston 
with its metallic form. And it has a singular property, which the 
other semi-metals have not, of attenuating lead so as to make it 
amalgamatic with mercury, so perfectly as to make it pass with it 
through chamois leather. As soon as the amalgam is made, the bismuth 
goes off or separates; but the lead for ever remains united with the 
mercury.

"It is of a solution of the ore of bismuth, we make that very 
curious and useful thing called sympathetic ink, which is a liquor 
of a beautiful colour, like that of the lilac or pipe-tree blossom. 
The process in preparing this liquor is tedious and difficult by 
aqua fortis, aqua regia,<214> and fire, and therefore the ink is 
rarely to be met with. It is not to be had, unless some gentleman 
who makes chemistry his employment, gives one a present of a bottle 
of it; as I do now to you, in hopes it may some time or other be of 
singular service to you; for I have conceived a great regard for 
you, though I never saw you before, as you seem not only more 
teachable than any I have met with, but to delight in the 
information I give you relating to chemical things."

Here I returned my chemist many thanks, and professed my eternal 
obligation to him: that I could listen for years to him; and wished 
it was possible to become his disciple, that I might see him by 
experiment facilitate the study of a science, more entertaining, 
instructive, and extensively useful than any other. "But how, dear 
Sir, am I to use this ink, you are so vastly good as to give me, to 
make it more useful than any other ink could be?"

"I will tell you," replied he, "you must write with this lilac-
coloured liquor, on good well gummed paper that does not sink; and 
the singularity of the ink, consists in its property of disappearing 
entirely, and becoming invisible, though it be not touched with 
anything whatever, and this distinguishes it from all others. The 
writing must dry in a warm air, and while it is cold no colour can 
be perceived: but gently warming it before the fire, the writing 
gradually acquires a greenish blue colour, which is visible as long 
as the paper continues a little warm, and disappears entirely when 
it cools. When other sympathetic inks are made to appear by proper 
application, they do not disappear again; but this liquor from the 
ore of bismuth must have the fire or heat kept to it, to render it 
legible. If a man writes to his mistress, suppose, or to a minister 
of state, with lemon juice, once the writing has been warmed by the 
fire, and the letters by that means appear, the epistle may be 
afterwards read at any time and place; but if the lady's father 
should by accident get your letter, written in lilac-coloured 
liquor, it must still remain a secret to him, for if on getting it, 
opening the seal, he could see no writing, and therefore imagining 
it was written with lemon juice, or some other sympathetic ink, he 
should hold it himself to the fire, or had his servant hold it to 
the heat, that the letters might be produced, and made visible, yet 
the moment bismuth ink is taken away from the fire, and begins to 
cool, it is as invisible again, as a sheet of white paper. How 
serviceable this may be on various occasions, may be easily 
conceived.

"But as to our third semi-metal, called zinc, this is so like 
bismuth to appearance, that some have confounded it with zinc; 
though it differs from it essentially in its properties, and will 
unite with all metalline substances, except bismuth. It is volatile 
by fire above all things, and makes a sublimate of the metallic 
substances with which it is fused. Zinc mixed with copper in the 
quantity of a fourth part, produces brass. If the Zinc is not very 
pure, the composition proves tombac, or Prince's metal.

"Regulus of arsenic, the fourth semi-metal, has a colour resembling 
lead, unites readily with metallic substances, and renders them 
brittle, unmalleable, and volatile. The calx of it produced by fire, 
may be made volatile by more fire, and in this differs from the calx 
of all metalline substances; for all other calxes are fixed, and 
cannot be moved. It has likewise a saline character, in which its 
corrosive quality or poison consists: a quality from which the other 
metallic substances are free, when they are not combined with a 
saline matter. These things being noticed, in relation to metals, 
and semi-metals in general, I will now proceed to relate a few 
curious cases, in respect of the metals.

"Gold, our first metal, has ten sensible criterions. It is the 
heaviest and densest of all bodies: the most simple of all bodies: 
the most fixed of all bodies: the only body that cannot be turned 
into scoriae<215>, by antimony and lead; the most ductile of all 
bodies: so soft as to be scarcely elastic or sonorous: must be red 
hot to melt: is dissolvable by sea-salt and its preparations, but 
remains untouched by any other species of salts; and of consequence 
not liable to rust; as aqua regia and spirit of sea-salt do not 
float in the air, unless in laboratories, or chemists shops, where 
we find them sometimes: it unites spontaneously with pure quick-
silver, and never wastes by emitting effluvia, or exhalations. These 
are the ten sensible properties or characteristics of this metal. It 
is certainly pure gold, if it has these criterions, and they are of 
great use in life; especially to persons who have to do with that 
subtle tribe, the alchemists.

"As to the weight of gold, it is more than nineteen times heavier 
than water, bulk for bulk, and this property is inseparable from it; 
it being impossible to render gold more or less heavy; and for this 
reason, the specific gravity of gold, if it had no other criterion, 
might demonstrate real gold. To make gold, other metals must be 
rendered equiponderant to it, and therefore, if an alchemist should 
offer to obtrude a metal on you for gold, hang an equal weight of 
pure, and of suspected gold by two threads to a nice balance, and on 
immerging them in water, if the alchemist's gold be pure, the water 
will retain both pieces in equilibrio; otherwise, the adulterate 
metal will rise, and the pure descend.

"The reason is, all bodies lose some of their weight in a fluid, and 
the weight which a body loses in a fluid, is to its whole weight, as 
the specific gravity of the fluid is to that of the body. The 
specific gravity of a body is the weight of it, when the bulk is 
given; thirty-eight grains of gold weighed in the air, is not the 
true weight of it: for there it loses the weight of an equal bulk of 
air: it weighs only thirty-six grains in the water, and there it 
loses the weight of as much water, as is equal in bulk of itself, 
that is, two grains, and as the gold weighs thirty-eight grains, it 
follows, that the weight of water is to that of gold, bulk for hulk, 
as two to thirty-eight, that is, as the weight lost in the fluid is 
the whole weight.

"And so, if a piece of gold, and a piece of copper, are 
equiponderant in air, yet in water the gold will outweigh the 
copper; because their bulks, though of equal weight, are inversely 
as their specific gravities, that is, the gold must be as much less 
than the copper, as the specific gravity of gold is greater than 
that of copper: and as they must both lose weight in proportion to 
bulk in water, therefore the gold, the lesser of the two, loses less 
of its weight than the copper does, and consequently, out-weights 
the copper in water. I hope this is clear. The case is the same, in 
proportion, in pure gold, and gold mixed with other metals. The bulk 
of the pure gold must be less than that of allayed gold, and its 
weight greater in water; though both equiponderate, a pound suppose, 
in air."

"It is very plain, Sir, and I request you will proceed. You give me 
valuable information, and oblige me very much." This pleased the 
Chemist, and the ingenious little RIBBLE went on.

"As to the simplicity of gold, we mean, by simple body, that whose 
minutest part has all the physical properties of the whole mass. Now 
dissolve a grain of gold in aqua regia, and from a single drop of 
the solution, a particle of gold may be separated, and have all the 
characters of gold, except those of magnitude, though the separated 
particle of gold shall only be the millionth part of the grain. Or, 
fuse a single grain of gold with a mass of silver, and mix the whole 
together, so that the gold shall be equally distributed: then take a 
particle thereof, and you will have a particle of perfect gold; for 
dissolve the least part of the mixture in aqua fortis, and a 
quantity of gold will precipitate to the bottom. It will bear the 
same proportion to the grain, that the part dissolved did to the 
whole mass.

Having mentioned aqua regia and aqua fortis, I must to be 
intelligible, say two or three words in relation to them. Aqua regia 
is an extract by fire from sea-salt and spirit of nitre. the acid 
liquor that comes over from them into the receiver, is aqua regia. 
Aqua fortis, or spirit of nitre, is a nitrous acid separated from 
its basis, nitre, by the vitriolic acid. Aqua regia only will 
dissolve gold. Silver is not soluble by aqua regia; its proper 
solvent is the acid of nitre or aqua fortis. But if you want to 
separate a mass of gold and silver, either will do. You may dissolve 
the gold In aqua regia, and let the silver remain pure or, dissolve 
the silver by aqua fortis, and let the gold remain pure. Only note 
in this case of a mixed lump of gold and silver, the operation by 
aqua fortis is preferable, for this reason; that aqua regia in 
dissolving the gold, takes up likewise a little silver; but aqua 
fortis hath not the least effect on gold; and note further, that if 
there be equal parts of gold and silver in the mixture, they cannot 
be parted by aqua fortis. It has not then the least effect on the 
silver, which is very strange. To make aqua fortis act duly on 
silver mixed with gold, the silver must be at least in a triple 
proportion to that of the gold. The reason of the singular effect 
is, that when the gold exceeds, or the parts of both are equal in 
quantity, then, as both are intimate, united in the mass, the parts 
or minims of the gold coat over the parts of the silver, and defend 
them from the action of the aqua fortis. In this case, aqua regia 
must be used to dissolve the gold, and leave the silver pure: or, as 
aqua regia takes up a little of the silver, when it dissolves the 
gold, melt the metalline mass, and add as much silver, as will make 
it a triple proportion to the gold. Then you may by aqua fortis take 
up all your silver in the dissolution, and leave all the gold pure.

"But as to the third criterion of gold, its being the most fixed of 
all bodies, this is evident from the violence of fire having no 
effect on it. An ounce of it exposed for the space of two months, in 
the eye of a glass furnace, does not lose half a grain. It may from 
thence be said to be incorruptible.

"As to gold's resisting antimony, and not turning into scoriae by 
its force, it is most certain from hence, that if you take a mass 
consisting of gold, silver, copper, the other metals, with stones, 
&c. and fuse it with antimony, the bodies will flow on the surface, 
and be easily blown off by the bellows: the antimony all evaporates, 
and leaves the gold alone. This is called the last test of gold, to 
try the purity of it. If the remaining gold have lost nothing of its 
weight, it is allowed perfectly pure, and called gold of twenty-four 
carats; or if it be found 1/24th lighter, it is said to be twenty-
three carats fine.

"But as to the ductility of gold, this is the most extraordinary 
property of it. The arts of gold-beating and wire-drawing, show us 
things quite amazing. In leaf-gold, a grain and a quarter of the 
metal, may be made to cover an area of fifty square inches; and if 
the leaf be divided by parallel lines 1/100 part of an inch, a grain 
of gold will be divided into five hundred thousand minute squares, 
all discernible by the eye: yet this is not the most can be done by 
the hammer. A single grain of gold may he stretched into a leaf that 
will cover a house, and yet the leaf remain so compact, as not to 
transmit the rays of light, nor ever admit spirit of wine to 
transude. This however is nothing to the effects of wire-drawing.

"A gold wire is only a silver one gilt, and if you coat a silver 
cylinder of forty-eight ounces weight, with one ounce of gold, which 
is sufficient, this cylinder may be drawn out into a wire so very 
fine, that two yards thereof shall weigh only one grain, and ninety-
eight yards only forty-nine grains, so that one grain of gold gilds 
ninety-eight yards; and of course the ten thousandth part of a 
grain, is above one-third part of an inch long. And since the third 
part of an inch is yet capable of being divided into ten lesser 
parts visible to the eve, it is evident that the hundred thousandth 
part of a grain of gold, may be seen without the help of a 
microscope. And yet so intimately do its parts cohere, that though 
the gold wherewith the wire is coated, be stretched to such a 
degree, there is not any appearance of the colour of silver 
underneath. Nor is this all.

"In supergildings, that is, to make the richest lace, they employ 
but six ounces of gold, to cover or gild forty-five marks of silver, 
that is, twenty two pounds and a half avoirdupois weight, rounded 
into the form of a cylinder or roller, which hath fifteen lines in 
diameter, and twenty-two inches in length; and here the stratum of 
gold which envelopes the ingot that is to be drawn into wire, hath 
no more thickness than the fifteenth part of a line, which is 
extremely thin; as a line is the twelfth part of an inch.

"But to make the common gold-thread, they do not use more than two 
ounces of gold, and sometimes not more than one, to gild or cover 
the ingot I have mentioned, and then the enveloping stratum is not 
more in thickness, if two ounces be employed, than the forty-fifth 
part of a line; and if one ounce be used, but the ninetieth part of 
a line. Two ounces of gold are generally used, in gilding or 
covering the ingot I have mentioned, and vastly thinner must the 
stratum be, when the ingot is drawn till it surpasses the fineness 
of a hair, and the diameter is nine thousand times smaller than what 
it had in the mass. By weighing out half a dram of this thread or 
wire, it is found by measuring the length of the half dram, that the 
ingot of twenty-two pounds and a half, and twenty-two inches long, 
is changed into a length of one hundred and sixteen millions three 
thousand five hundred and twenty feet, that is, ninety-six leagues 
and one hundred and ninety-six fathom; for the half dram of wire or 
thread measures two hundred and two feet; by consequence, an ounce 
of it, three thousand two hundred and thirty-two feet; a mark of it, 
or eight ounces, twenty-five thousand eight hundred and fifty-six 
feet. And yet, astonishing as this length is, for two ounces of gold 
to be drawn to, the gold which covers the silver never ceases to 
gild it. The gold still keeps pace with the wire, stretch it to what 
length the drawers can, through the wiredrawing irons, and holes 
much smaller one than another. The silver never appears.

"It does not however rest there. Before the thread or wire is wound 
on silk, and before they spin it, it must be flatted by passing it 
between steel wheels extremely well polished, and this flatting 
increases its length to more than a seventh part, One ingot, 
therefore, of eight marks, or twenty-two and a half pounds, and 
twenty-two inches long, by this increase of a seventh part, is 
brought to the length of a hundred and a eleven leagues, that is, 
about three-hundred English miles.

"But amazing as this extent is, it is not the utmost bounds to which 
the ductility of gold may be carried. One ounce only of gold is 
sometimes used to cover one ingot, and drawn to the length I have 
mentioned, and by the time it has passed the flatting wheels, the 
gold that covers the silver lamimae, must have its thickness reduced 
to less than the millionth part of a line; that is, a twelve 
millionth of an inch. This is beyond the reach of our conception. 
Imagination cannot plumb her line so low."

"But, Sir," said I, "May not the gold be divided into small grains 
separate one from another, but yet near enough to give their colour 
to the silver? Though we may not be able to see the thing, vet I 
think it may be imagined; the gold on the laminae doth not form a 
continued leaf."

"Experience, good Sir, demonstrates the contrary, that every point 
of silver hath its cover of gold. Put a piece of this gilt wire in 
aqua fortis, the silver will be dissolved, and the gold left a 
perfect, continuous tube. It is an amazing thing! and shows the 
astonishing power of the first cause! As to the reason of this 
ductility, and why gold in such a manner adheres to silver, so as 
never to part from it, if the twenty-two and a half pounds of silver 
gilded with one ounce of gold could be extneded by art for ever, 
this is past our finding out. It is a secret of nature we cannot 
form any idea of

Calignosa nocte premit Deus."<216>

RIBBLE went on. "These are the things most remarkable in relation to 
gold; and I have only to add, that as to the manner of getting it, 
it is found sometimes in glebes or clods, consisting of gold alone; 
sometimes in a powdery form, and then called gold-dust, or sand-
gold, in the sands and mud of rivers and brooks; but most commonly 
in whitish clods, dug out of mines of vast depth, and intermixed 
with silver and various fossils. This they reduce by fire to a mass 
of metal, and by aqua regia or aqua fortis, the gold is easily taken 
out of the ore.

"As to gold's being so yielding and ductile by human art, it is to 
be observed, that in return it exerts a greater power on the human 
mind. Passive it is in its ductility, but more active in its 
influence on man. It is a greater tyrant than a slave. It drives 
repeated millions of the human race to death and hell. King of 
metals as it is, bright and glorious to behold, and what procures 
innumerable blessings to mankind; yet, without the grace of God, to 
moderate the passion for it, and to direct the mind in a true use of 
it, it is more dangerous to beings on a trial in a first state, than 
even poverty can be in this lower hemisphere. What villainies are 
daily committed to get it! What iniquities daily perpetrated by 
those who have plenty of it! Lead us not into temptation, should 
relate as well to too much of it, as to a total want of it; and it 
is well prayed, In all time of our wealth, good Lord deliver us.

"In my opinion, neither poverty nor riches, but a middle state, is 
the thing we should desire. It is in this condition, we can best 
live soberly, or with a sound mind, and conduct ourselves as those 
who have an intelligent spirit to preside in body. Too much gold 
most commonly inverts this order, and produces an apostasy that sets 
the inferior powers in the throne, and enslaves the mind to the 
body. It gives the passions the commanding influence, and makes 
reason receive law from appetite.

"If we look into the world, we find too often, in this case, that 
wealth is big with innumerable sins. The rich are filled with wine, 
wherein is excess, and show an unbridled dissoluteness of manners. 
Their eyes behold strange women, and their hearts utter perverse 
things. Instead of regarding the common good, they commit the most 
extravagant injuries. Of such a hardening nature is too much gold, 
that it tends to make conscience insensible and stupid, and renders 
it for ever unapt for impression. Then whoredom and wine, and new 
wine, take away the heart, and men are made to forget the law of 
God.

"But having neither poverty nor riches, in the calm middle state, 
having all reasonable conveniencies, we can fairly come by; a vast 
variety of creatures for our food, and wine in its season, to make 
glad the heart; we may then partake of the bounties of Providence, 
with a sober freedom, and at the same time, can best lay up for 
ourselves a good foundation, or security for the time to come, that 
we may lay hold of eternal life.

"Though it is with a prospect of difficulties, that all must enter 
upon religion, and with labour and difficulty, maintain our ground, 
and acquit ourselves like Christians, that is, resist the Devil in 
all his assaults, overcome the world in its ensnaring influence, and 
mortify the irregular inclinations of nature; yet in the happy 
middle state, where there is no poverty nor riches, that is, great 
wealth, we can make everlasting glory and felicity our governing 
aim, and bound our ambition and desires by nothing short of the 
resurrection of the dead. We may live in a full and ready submission 
of the soul to the authority of God's word. Things eternal may have 
the ascendant in our practical judgment, and then with pleasure we 
become followers of them who through faith and patience inherit the 
promises.

"Good Sir, this is all our sowing time, and whatsoever a man soweth, 
that shall he also reap. He that soweth to his flesh, shall of his 
flesh reap corruption; but he that soweth to the spirit, shall of 
the spirit reap everlasting life. And therefore, whether your lot be 
cast in the middling state, or you were born to thousands a year, 
let wisdom be your rule, and prefer that happiness which has 
everlasting duration, in the realms of light above, to any present 
good that can come in competition with it. Do not spend money for 
that which is not bread—and your labour for that which satisfieth 
not. Do not employ your pains for that which hath vanity written 
upon it, by the word of God, by the testimony of the wisest men, and 
by frequent experience: but let your principal regard be for your 
immortal soul, when nothing can be given in exchange for the soul. 
Implore the light and grace of the good spirit, and by the 
quickening influences of the Father of the universe, and the 
exertion of your whole strength, let it be the principal labour of 
your every day, to make advances in the divine life, and be a 
blessing to society wherever you come. In virtue and charity may you 
excel.

"You will pardon old RIBBLE, I hope, good Sir, and excuse his 
addressing himself to you in this manner. It is an odd conclusion, I 
own, to a discourse on metals and semi-metals; but it is from an 
extreme regard I have conceived for you, that I talk as I do, and 
presume to call upon you, (as you are a young man of fortune, I 
suppose) to consider seriously of that decree, which is the result 
of unerring wisdom, and the will of the Rector of the universe, to 
wit, that we are all under the law of death, and through that gate 
must pass, perhaps at a day's, an hour's warning, to the 
resurrection of the dead, to be adjudged to happiness or misery, as 
time has been employed, and life spent here. This is the decree of 
the Most High God, and of consequence, it is incumbent on us, to 
prepare for the awful hereafter, and endeavour by good actions, and 
a virtuous mind, by purity of conscience, and an exalted piety, to 
come off well in judgment. Happy, thrice happy they that do so."

Here little RIBBLE the Chemist had done, and I had reason to return 
him my very hearty thanks for the favour of his whole discourse. I 
was vastly obliged to him for the knowledge he had given me, in 
relation to the philosophy of metals, and taking him by the hand, 
promised him, that I would ever gratefully remember his moral 
conclusion. This pleased the old gentleman, and at four in the 
afternoon we parted.



CHAPTER XXII.

Reflecting on the wonders of the metals, which I had heard old 
RIBBLE so well discourse of, and being more intent on what had been 
told me of these things, that I might never forget such useful 
learning, I trotted on for several hours without minding the road, 
and arrived as the sun was setting in a deep and melancholy vale, 
through which a pleasant river run, that by the murmur of its 
streams, seemed to be marked out for the rendezvous of the 
thoughtful, who love the deep recesses, and embowering woods, with 
the soft thrillings of gliding streams, as much as the sprightly 
court the gayest scenes. In this sweet spot, I found a pretty 
country house, and not knowing where I was, rode up to the door, to 
enquire my way. A gentleman, who seemed to be about forty, 
immediately appeared, let me know I was at a considerable distance 
from any town, and as it was near ten, told me I had best rest with 
him that night, and I was most heartily welcome. This was humane and 
civil. I accepted the kind invitation, and immediately went in with 
him. He brought me into a decent room, and gave me a handsome meal. 
We had a couple of bottles after supper, talked of a thousand 
things, and then withdrew to wind up the machines. He would not let 
me stir the next morning, and after dinner we became well 
acquainted. Six days this gentleman prevailed with me to stay at his 
house, and then I left him with regret. He was so generous, so 
civil, and in everything so agreeable, that I could not avoid 
admiring him, and regarding him to an extreme degree. His name was 
MONCTON.

AVERY MONCTON had seen the world, when he was a young man, and by 
reading much, and thinking a great deal, had acquired an extensive 
knowledge, and a deep penetration: in him the gentleman and the 
scholar were visible. He seemed superior to folly, and his 
philosophy appeared to be an assiduous examination of his ideas, 
fancies, and opinions, in order to render them true and just. His 
religion consisted in a cheerful submission to the divine pleasure, 
with respect to all things independent of us, or absolutely external 
to us; and in a continued exertion of benevolence, in doing all the 
good he could. What the theology of sects was, and the notions of 
divines, he never minded. It was his opinion, that an active charity 
is the only thing that can liken and approve us to the original 
benevolent mind: and that it is reasonable to submit to all his 
dispensations, since the providence of an infinitely perfect Being, 
must do all for the best in the whole. This was AVERY MONCTON, Esq. 
In his person he was tall, and very thin.

This gentleman told me the following remarkable story relating to 
himself, on my asking him, if he had ever been married? "Yes, Sir," 
he replied, "When I was about five and twenty, a young lady came in 
my way, who had all the external charms that ever adorned a woman, 
and I thought, her mind as perfect in goodness of every kind, as 
minds can be on this earth. I made my addresses to her, and with 
some difficulty persuaded her to accept of a good jointure, and be a 
wife; for she had got it into her head, that Christian perfection 
consisted in a virgin life. I loved her to an extreme degree, and 
fancied myself beyond mortals happy, as her fondness seemed equal to 
my passion, and she expressed it in a most transporting way. Three 
months passed on in this delightful manner, and I should have 
thought an age but minutes, if the scene was to have no change. But 
everything must have an end in this poor state. Business called me 
one morning early into the city, and till it was late at night, I 
thought not to return; back however I was compelled to go for some 
papers, I had forgot, and designing to surprise my wife agreeably, 
came in by a key I had, at the wash-house door, and unseen went 
softly up to my chamber, where I expected to find my beloved in a 
sweet sleep. Gently I touched the lock, and intended, as my charmer 
slumbered, to give this idol of my heart a kiss. But, as I opened 
the door without being heard, I saw a man by my bedside, and my fond 
faithful wife, buttoning up his breeches. Amazement seized me, but I 
was not in a rage. I only said "Is that Louisa I see?" and shut the 
door. Downstairs I went immediately, and out again the same way I 
came in. I was done with love for ever, and from that time never saw 
my wife more. A ship being to sail the next day for Constantinople, 
I went a passenger in it, and resolved to live abroad some years.

"Six years I resided in Greece, and visited every curious place. 
Four I spent in Asia Minor, and two in Italy and France. I diverted 
myself with noting down the extraordinary things I saw, and I 
purchased several fine antiquities by the way. When done, I came 
back to my country again, and this little seat I now live at, being 
to be sold, I bought it immediately, and have resided here ever 
since. My study, my garden, and my horse, divert me fully and finely 
every day. I have all I desire in this world, and reign more happily 
over my few subjects, in this airy, silent, secret spot, than the 
greatest monarch can do on a throne. My people are only one young 
man, who is my gardener, my footman, and my groom, and two old 
women, my maids. These are ever attentive to my will, and by their 
good behaviour and management, make my lodge as agreeable, and life 
as pleasing, as can be expected in this system of things."

MONCTON'S story pleased me much, and I wondered greatly at his happy 
temper, when he saw his beloved wife buttoning up the breeches of 
the man. "But did you ever hear what became of her after? Faulty as 
she was, may there not be found an honest charming woman, to render 
your hours more delightful than study and contrivance can make them, 
without a soft partner through life? Come into the world with me, 
Sir, and I well engage to find out for you a primitive Christian of 
a woman, with all the beauties of body that Lucian gives his 
images."

"You are very good, Sir," replied MONCTON "in offering to look out 
for another wife for me, and I thank you very heartily, for your 
well-meant kindness; but as I never enquired what became of my first 
wife, from the morning I left her, and know only that she is dead, 
as her jointure has not been demanded for several years past; so 
shall I never be concerned with a second. Perhaps there are some 
honest women in the world, I hope so; but I have had enough of 
marriage. Besides, I think it time now to turn my thoughts a better 
way. In the forty-fifth year of my age, it cannot be weak, to begin 
to consider the great change before me, and fix my hopes on a good 
remove into some better and happier region. If I was unfortunate 
with a wife when a young man, I have little reason to expect better 
days with one, as age comes on. I might find myself again most sadly 
mistaken. But there can be no disappointment in making it the 
principal work of life, to prepare, in such a retirement as this, 
for that approaching hour, when we must submit to the power and 
tyranny of death and corruption. By this means, the greatest 
happiness may be secured. In everything else, there is uncertainty 
and vanity. I speak principally in respect of my time of life, who 
am hastening fast to fifty; but at every time, it is my opinion, 
that men, as rationals, and beings who take on themselves the 
honourable profession of the Christian religion, should not comply 
with the criminal liberties allowed in the world, and give into the 
illicit usages and customs of place and company, for fear of 
ridicule, or to avoid giving offence; but keep strictly to the will 
and laws of their higher country, and in all things have a special 
regard to holiness, truth, and purity.

"I do not say this by way of preaching, but that you may thereby 
have a truer idea of the man you chanced to find in a lone house on 
the vast common. Seven years have I now lived here, and in all that 
time, have not been once in London: but sometimes I ride to a 
neighbouring village, and if on the road, or at an inn, I can pick 
up a sensible agreeable man, I love to dine with him, and drink a 
pint of wine. Such a man I frequently ride in quest of, and if he be 
entirely to my mind, which is very rarely the case, I invite him 
home with me, to pass at my lodge two or three days. Far then am I 
from being unsocial, though I live in solitude; I left the world, 
because I was ill-used in it, and happen to think very differently 
from the generality of men." Here MONCKTON ended his story, and a 
little after we parted.

"I rode on for six hours without meeting with anything remarkable, 
but as I baited about three o'clock at a lone inn, the situation of 
which was so fine in forest and water, that I determined to go no 
further that day, there arrived a little after, a young lady, her 
maid, and two men servants. They were all well-mounted, and the 
lady's beast in particular, as great a beauty of its kind, as its 
mistress was among women. I thought I had seen the face before, and 
had been somewhere or other in her company; but as it must have been 
several years ago, her face and person were a little altered, and I 
could not immediately recollect her; but FIN, my lad, coming up to 
me, asked me, if I did not remember Miss TURNER of Skelsmore-vale?" 
"Miss TURNER," said I, "to be sure, now I think, it is she; but this 
lady just arrived here is much fatter, and, if it be possible, 
something handsomer." "It is her, believe me," quoth FIN, "and you 
ought to wait upon her instantly." I went. It was Miss TURNER, one 
of the beauties that adorns a gallery of pictures in the North; and 
who is with great truth in the following lines described, in a Poem 
written on this collection of paintings.

"But see! Emilia rises to the sight
In every virtue, in every beauty bright!
See those victorious eyes, that heav'nly mien! 
Behold her shine like Love's resistless Queen! 
Thou fairest wonder of thy fairest kind! 
By heav'n some image of itself design'd! 
As if in thee it took peculiar care, 
And form'd thee like some fav'rite seraph there. 
But though thy beauty strikes the ravish'd sight, 
Thy virtue shines distinguishingly bright! 
And all the graces of thy form combin'd,
Yield to the charms of thy unblemish'd mind; 
Where all is spotless, gentle, and serene, 
One calm of life untouch'd by guilt or pain! 
Could I in equal lays thy worth design, 
Or paint exalted merit such as thine! 
To latest ages should thy name survive, 
And in my verse Emilia ever live; 
Th' admiring world should listen to thy praise, 
And the fair portrait charm succeeding days."

This lady knew me at once, on my entering the room where she was, 
and we dined together. She told me, her brother, my friend, died in 
Italy, on his return home; and Miss JAQUELOT, her cousin and 
companion, was happily married; and that being thus left alone, by 
these two accidents, she was going up to London, to reside in the 
world.

"Miss TURNER," said I, "as you are now your own mistress, I may with 
justice tender you my addresses, and tell you, that from the first 
hour I saw you, I was in love with you, and am so still; that if you 
will do me the honour to be my wife, I will make the best of 
husbands. I have now some fortune, and if you will allow, that an 
honest man is the best companion for an honest woman, let us marry 
in the country, and instead of going up to that noisy tumultuous 
place London, retire to some still delightful retreat, and there 
live, content with each other, as happy as it is possible for two 
young mortals to be in this lower hemisphere. What do you say, Miss 
TURNER?"

"You shall have my answer, Sir, in a few days; but as to going up to 
London, I think I had best see it, since I am come so far. It may 
give me a new relish for still life, and make the country seem more 
charming than I thought it before. On the other hand, it may perhaps 
make me in love with the town, and put me out of conceit with the 
country. In short, on second thoughts, I will not go up to the 
capital. I will return to Skelsmore-vale. I think so now; but how I 
may think in the morning, at present I do not know. In the 
meantime," she continued, "ring, if you please, for a pack of cards, 
and let us pass the evening in play. The cards were brought in, the 
game began, and before we had played many hours, I saw this dear 
charming creature was all my own. She sat before me, like blushing 
beauty in the picture, in the gallery of Venus, enriched with 
thought, warm with desire, and with delicate sensations covered 
over: I could not help wishing for Father FLEMING, my friend, to 
qualify us for the implanted impulse, and sanctify the call. Early 
the next morning I sent FIN for him, and he was with me in a few 
days. The evening he arrived we were married. Man and wife we sat 
down to supper.

Here the morose, the visionary, and the dunce, will again fall upon 
me, for marrying a fifth wife, so quickly after the decease of the 
fourth, who had not been three months in her grave; but my answer 
is, that a dead woman is no wife, and marriage is ever glorious. It 
is the institution of heaven, a blessing to society, and therefore 
hated by the Devil and mass-priests. Satan by opposing it, promotes 
fornication and perdition. The priests by preaching against it, 
drive the human race into cloisters; destroy everything gentle, 
generous, and social; and rob the people of their property. Celibacy 
is popery and hell in perfection. It is the doctrine of devils, and 
a war with the Almighty. It is against the institutions of nature 
and providence; and therefore, for ever execrable be the memory of 
the mass-priests, who dare to call it perfection.

My dear Reader, if you are unmarried, and healthy, get a wife as 
soon as possible, some charming girl, or pretty widow, adorned with 
modesty, robed with meekness, and who has the grace to attract the 
soul, and heighten every joy continually; take her to thy breast, 
and bravely, in holy wedlock, propagate. Despise and hiss the mass-
priests, and every visionary, who preaches the contrary doctrine. 
They are foes to heaven and mankind, and ought to be drummed out of 
society.

For six weeks after our marriage, we resided at the inn, on account 
of the charms of the ground, and seemed to be in possession of a 
lasting happiness it is impossible for words to describe. Everything 
was so smooth and so round, that we thought prosperity must be our 
own for many years to come, and were quite secure from the flames of 
destruction; but calamity laid hold of us, when we had not the least 
reason to expect it, and from a fullness of peace and felicity, we 
sunk at once into an abyss of afflictions. Instead of going back to 
Skelsmore-vale, as we had resolved, my wife would go up to London, 
and pass a few weeks there, and thereabout, before she retired to 
the mountains. I was against it, but her will was my law. We set out 
for the capital, and the first day's journey was delightful: but her 
fine beast having met with an accident in the night, by a rope in 
the stable, which got about its foot, cut it deep, and rendered it 
unable to travel; we took a chariot and four to finish our way, but 
on driving by the side of a steep hill, the horses took fright, ran 
it down, overcame the carriage, and my charmer was killed. This was 
a dismal scene. She lived about an hour, and repeated the following 
fine lines from Boissard, when she saw me weeping as I kneeled on 
the ground by her,

Nil prosunt lacrumae, nec possunt fata moveri: 
Nec pro me queror; hoc morte mihi est tristius ipsa, 
Moeror Atimeti conjugis ille mihi. <217>

Just as she expired, she took me by the hand, and with the spirit of 
an old Roman, bid me adieu.

Can you form an idea, Reader, of the distress I was then in? It is 
not possible I think unless you have been exactly in the same 
situation; unless you loved like me, and have been as miserably 
separated from as charming a woman. But it was in vain for me to 
continue lamenting. She was gone for ever, and lay as the clod of 
the valley before me.

Her body I deposited in the next church-yard, and immediately after, 
rode as fast as I could to London, to lose thought in dissipation, 
and resign the better to the decree. For some days I lived at the 
inn I set up at, but as soon as I could, went into a lodging, and it 
happened to be at the house of the famous EDMUND CURLL the 
bookseller; a man well known in Pope's Dunciad, and his Letters to 
his Friends, on account of CURLL'S frauds in purchasing and printing 
stolen copies of Pope's Works. It is in relation to these tricks, 
that Pope mentions CURLL in his Dunciad and Letters. A succinct 
history of him I shall here give: but had I complied with his 
requests, it would have been a long relation, to the advantage and 
glory of this extraordinary man: for he came one morning into my 
closet, with an apron full of papers; being letters, memorandums, 
parodies, and notes, written by or concerning himself; and requested 
I would, on a good consideration, write his life, to his profit and 
honour, and make it a five shilling book. That I said was not then 
in my power to do; but I would, one time or other, give the public a 
true account of him, and make it conclude I hoped to the glory of 
his character. Here it is.

EDMUND CURLL<218> was in person very tall and thin, an ungainly, 
awkward, white-faced man. His eyes were a light-grey, large, 
projecting, goggle, and purblind. He was splay-footed, and baker-
kneed.<219>

He had a good natural understanding, and was well acquainted with 
more than the title pages of books. He talked well on some subjects. 
He was not an infidel as Mrs Rowe misrepresents him in one of her 
letters to Lady Hartford, afterwards Duchess of Somerset. He told 
me, it was quite evident to him, that the scriptures of the Old and 
New Testament contained a real revelation. There is for it a 
rational, a natural, a traditionary, and a supernatural testimony; 
which rendered it quite certain to him. He said, he no more doubted 
the truth of the Christian religion, than he did the existence of an 
independent supreme Creator; but he did not believe the expositions 
given by the divines. So far CURLL was right enough. His fault was, 
that with such a belief, he took no pains with his heart. Trusting 
entirely to the merits of the Saviour, like too many other mistaken 
Christians, he had no notion of religion as an invisible thing 
within us, called the kingdom of God: he did not even consider it as 
a good outside thing, that recommends a man to his fellow-creatures. 
He was a debauchee to the last degree, and so injurious to society, 
that by filling his translations with wretched notes, forged 
letters, and bad pictures, he raised the price of a four shilling 
book to ten. Thus, in particular, he managed Burnet's Archaeology: 
and when I told him he was very culpable in this, and other articles 
he sold, his answer was, What would I have him do? He was a 
bookseller. His translators in pay, lay three in a bed, at the 
Pewter-Platter Inn in Holborn, and he and they were for ever at 
work, to deceive the public. He likewise printed the lewdest things. 
He lost his ears for The Nun in her Smock, and another thing. As to 
drink, he was too fond of money, to spend any in making himself 
happy that way; but at another's expense, he would drink every day 
till he was quite blind, and as incapable of self-motion as a block. 
This was EDMUND CURLL, hut he died at last, as great a penitent, as 
ever expired. I think in 1748, I mention this to his glory.

As CURLL knew the world well, and was acquainted with several 
extraordinary characters, he was of great use to me at my first 
coming to town, as I knew nobody, nor any place. He gave me the true 
characters of many I saw, told me whom I should avoid, and with whom 
I might be free. He conducted me to the play-houses, and gave me a 
judicious account of every actor. He understood those things well. 
No man could talk better on theatrical subjects. He took me likewise 
to Sadler's Wells, to the night-cellars, and to Tom KING'S, the 
famous night-house in Covent Garden. As he was very knowing, and 
well-known at such places, he soon made me as wise as himself in 
these branches of learning; and, in short, in the space of a month, 
I was as well acquainted in London, as if I had been there for 
years. My kind preceptor spared no pains in lecturing.

But what of all things I thought most wonderful was the company I 
saw at the Sieur CURLL's. As he was intimate with all the high 
whores in town, many of them frequented his shop, to buy his 
dialogues, and other lively books. Some of these girls he often 
asked to dine with him, and then I was sure to be a guest. Many very 
fine women I thereby saw, but none worth mentioning, till CAROLA 
BENNET arrived, and surprised me exceedingly. Her mind and body were 
very wonderful, and f imagine a description of her, and her story 
afterward will not be ungrateful to my readers.

CAROLA BENNET was at this time in the two and twentieth year of her 
age, a dazzling beauty in the height of life and vigour. Her eyes 
were black and amazingly fine, her mouth charming, her neck and 
breast very beautiful, and her stature was just what it ought to be. 
She had a glow of health, a luscious air, and a bewitching vivacity: 
her manners were wonderfully winning, and the tone of her voice so 
sweet and insinuating, that her words and looks went directly to the 
heart. She had read many books of gaiety, wit, and humour, 
especially the French; and talked delightfully on such subjects. She 
sang to perfection, but her conversation was too free, and she 
seemed to have no sense of any religion. It was a fine entertainment 
to be in her company, as I often was, yet I could not help sighing, 
to see so many perfections on the brink of everlasting destruction. 
This young lady all of a sudden disappeared, CURLL knew not what was 
become of her; but as I rode ten years after through Devonshire, in 
the finest part of that romantic county, I saw her one morning, as I 
stopped to water my horse in a brook that ran from a park, sitting 
on a seat, under a vast beautiful cedar tree, with a book in her 
hand. I thought I was no stranger to the fine face, and as I was 
pretty near to her, I called out, and asked, if she was not Miss 
BENNET? She knew me at once, and pointing to a gate that was only 
latched, desired I would come to her. I went and found she was the 
mistress of the fine seat at a small distance off. She brought me 
into the house, would not suffer me to stir that day, and told me 
the story of her life. I think it worth placing here.

CAROLA BENNET was the daughter of JOHN BENNET, Esq. a Yorkshire 
gentleman, who died when she was in her 19th year, and left her in 
the care of her aunt, an old lady who was outwardly all saint, and 
within a devil. This CAROLA knew well, and requested her father to 
get another guardian for her, or leave her to manage herself; for 
Mrs HUNFLEET, her aunt, was far from being that primitive Christian 
he took her for, and so great a miser, that exclusive of all her 
other vices, her avarice alone was enough to ruin her niece. She 
would sacrifice the whole human race for half a thousand pounds. But 
all his daughter said was in vain. He believed his sister was 
godliness itself, in its utmost latitude and extent; that she lived 
a continued opposition to our mortal enemies, the world, sin, and 
the Devil; and that her heart was a mere magazine of universal 
honesty, probity of manners, and goodness of life and conversation. 
Integrity and rectitude, and benevolence, as he thought, were the 
bright criterions of her soul. She will teach you, CAROLA, to fast 
and pray, and make you like herself, a perfect saint.

It was to no purpose then for the daughter to remonstrate, she could 
only weep, as her father was positive, and after his death was 
obliged to go home with Mrs HUNFLEET. There, as she expected, she 
had too much of the outward bodily exercise of religion, everything 
that can be named within the circle of external worship; such as 
public and private services, fastings, macerations, bowings, 
expanded hands and lifted eyes, which Lord Halifax in his Advice to 
a Daughter, calls "the holy goggle;" but that all this accompanied 
the internal acts of the old woman's mind, and went along with her 
heart and soul, CAROLA had reason to doubt. She saw it was but 
outward profession, all hypocrisy, that her life belied her creed, 
and that her practice was a renunciation of the Christian religion. 
This appeared to be the case very quickly. The aunt sold her to one 
CANTALUPE for five hundred pounds. Under pretence of taking her to 
visit a friend, she brought her to a private bagnio, or one of those 
houses called convents.

In describing a London convent, it is but proper to observe that 
such houses stand in back courts, narrow lanes, or in the most 
private places, and seem to be uninhabited, as the front windows are 
seldom opened, or like some little friary, where a company of 
visionaries reside; but within are elegantly furnished, and 
remarkable for the best wines. The woman who keeps the house is the 
only person to be seen in them, unless it be sometimes, that a high-
priced whore, who passes for the gentlewoman's daughter, by accident 
appears.

In these brothels the Sieur CURLL was well known, and as the wine in 
them is always excellent, but a shilling a bottle dearer than at the 
tavern, and one sits without hearing the least noise, or being seen 
by anyone, I have often gone with this ingenious man to such places, 
on account of the purity of the wine, and the stillness of the 
house; as there are no waiters there, nor any well-dressed hussies 
to come in the way. You are as silent as in a cave; nor does a woman 
appear, except as before excepted, unless it be by appointment at 
this kind of meeting-house, as such places may well be called; for 
there not seldom does many a married woman meet her gallant. One 
evening that I was there with CURLL, there came in the wife of a 
very eminent merchant, a lady of as excellent a character as any in 
the world; who was never so much as suspected by any of her 
acquaintance, but allowed by everybody to be a woman of pure morals 
and unspotted chastity. She came in first with a black mask on her 
face, from her chair, and was by the woman of the house shown into a 
chamber upstairs; half an hour after, there was another soft tap at 
the door, and a gentleman was let in, who was showed up to the 
chamber the lady was in. As the door of the room CURLL and I were 
sitting in, happened to be open as this adventurer passed by, I knew 
the man. He was an Irish gentleman of large fortune, with whom I was 
well acquainted. He was ever engaged in amours, and was some years 
after this hanged at Cork, for ravishing SALLY SQUIBB, the Quaker. 
His name then can be no secret,<220> but as to the lady's name, I 
shall never tell it, as she left several children, who are now 
living in reputation; but only observe, that there are, to my 
knowledge, many women of such strict virtue in the world. If you ask 
me reader, how I came to know who she was? I will tell you. As she 
came down stairs in a mask at ten at night, in the manner she went 
up, I concluded she was a married woman of distinction, and followed 
her chair, when it went off. She changed at Temple Bar, and then 
took a hackney coach, which drove beyond the Royal Exchange; I 
followed till it stopped at a grand house, into which she went 
without a mask, and had a full view of her fine face. I enquired 
next day who lived in the house I saw her go into, and was told it 
was Mr *****, a merchant of the greatest repute. Often did I see 
this lady after this, was several times in her company, and if I had 
not known what I did, should have thought her a woman of as great 
virtue as ever lived. There was not the least appearance of levity 
or indecency in her. To all outward appearance, she was chastity and 
discretion in flesh and blood. But as to CAROLA BENNET.

Soon after her aunt and she arrived at Mrs Bedewell's, in came 
CANTALUPE as a visitor, and after tea, they went to cards. Then 
followed a supper, and when that was over, they gave the innocent 
Miss BENNET a dose, which deprived her of her senses, put her to 
bed, and in the morning she found herself ruined in the arms of that 
villain CANTALUPE. Distraction almost seized her, but he would not 
let her stir. She called, but no one came near to her relief. He 
swore a million of oaths, that it was pure love made him buy her of 
her aunt, as he heard she was going to marry another man, and if she 
would but share with him in his great fortune, since the thing was 
done, he would, by every sacred power he vowed, marry her that 
evening or the next, the first time they went out, and be the most 
true and tender husband that ever yet appeared in the world. This, 
and the situation she was in, naked and clasped in his strong arms, 
without a friend to aid her, within doors or without, made her 
sensible her resentments were in vain, and that she had better 
acquiesce, and make the man her husband, if she could, since it was 
her hard fate, and that in all probability she might conceive from 
the transactions of the night. This made her have done. She lay as 
he requested till noon, and hoped he would prove as faithful as he 
had solemnly swore to be.

But when the night came, an indisposition he feigned, made him 
unable to stir out that evening, and he requested the idol of his 
heart, whom he loved more than life, to give him leave to defer it 
till the next. For six days he put it off in the same manner, during 
which time, they never stirred out of the bagnio, and the seventh 
day he left her fast asleep in bed. A billet-doux on the dressing-
table informed her, that he was obliged to set out that morning for 
France, and as he intended to be back in a few months, he hoped she 
would not think him faithless at once. He left her a hundred pound 
bank note, which was all he had then to spare, as he had paid to her 
aunt five hundred pounds a few days before.

Thus fell the beautiful Miss BENNET by the treachery of her ever-
cursed aunt, and was made a whore very much against her will. The 
aunt, in the meantime, had shut up her house, and was gone no one 
knew where. She took several jewels with her, and a large sum of 
money, both the property of her niece. She left her but little of 
her fortune, and reported everywhere, that CAROLA had gone into 
keeping with a great man, and had before been debauched by her 
footman. In short, all that could be done this woman did, to 
impoverish and defame her niece, and as she had passed upon the 
world for a praying, virtuous old piece, her reports were thought so 
true, that all the female acquaintance Miss BENNET had, laughed at 
the story she told, and shunned her as a foul fiend. She was 
banished from all modest company. They considered her as the most 
detestable prostitute, for excusing herself, they said, by 
blackening the character of so pious and upright a woman as Mrs 
HUNFLEET, her aunt, was.

Thus did iniquity ruin and triumph over innocence, in the mask of 
religion, and a thousand times, to my own knowledge, it has done the 
same thing. I have often known wretches pretend to seek the kingdom 
of God, and his righteousness, in the first place, and by believing 
all the monks have invented, by constantly attending public worship, 
and an unnatural kind of sobriety, pass for people that were ready 
and willing to suffer everything the cause of God and truth can 
require from rationale; yet these holy mortals could make the 
service of God not only stand with unwilling infirmities, the common 
case of the best humanity, but consist with wilful and presumptuous 
sinning, and a malevolence as great as the Devil had against our 
first parents. A minister of the gospel, who passed for an admirable 
man, did his best to ruin my character for ever with my father. One 
of the holiest men in the world, cheated me of a thousand pounds, 
left in his hands for my use, for fear I should spend it myself. And 
a rich man, commonly called piety and goodness, from the seeming 
simplicity of his manners, the softness of his temper, and the holy 
goggle of his eyes in his public devotion, arrested me on a note of 
hand, one-third of which was interest thrown into the principal, and 
made me pay interest upon interest, without mercy, or waiting as I 
entreated, till it was more convenient. Many more such praying, 
sanctified villains I could mention, in respect of whom EDMUND CURLL 
was a cherubim, fond as he was of a girl and a flask. CURLL owned he 
was a sinner, and that he was led by thirst and repletion to 
indulge; but the hypocrites with professions of esteem for the pearl 
of great price, and that they have parted with their Herodias, for 
the sake of eternal life; yet wilfully disobey from a passion for 
substance, and the shrine of bright Mammon in this world, has a 
greater influence on their souls than all the joys of an everlasting 
heaven to come. What they do is a farce. Upon what they have, they 
rest their all.

But as to Miss BENNET, in this sad condition, she secreted herself 
for some months from the world, and notwithstanding her constitution 
and taste, intended to retire among the mountains of Wales, and live 
upon the little she had icft; but unfortunately for so good a 
design, the matchless Sir FREDERIC DANCER came in her way, and by 
money, and the force of love, persuaded her to be his companion 
while he lived, which was but for a short time. A young nobleman 
prevailed on her next, by high rewards, to be the delight of his 
life for a time; and at his death, she went to the arms of an Irish 
peer. She had what money she pleased from these great men, and being 
now very rich, she determined, on the marriage of her last Lord, to 
go into keeping no more, but to live a gay life among the agreeable 
and grand. She had lost all her notions of a weeping and gnashing of 
teeth to come, in the conversation of these atheistical men, and on 
account of her living as happily as she could in this world. What 
religion she had remaining, was placed in giving money to the sick 
and poor, which she did with a liberal hand; and her charity, in all 
its charms, she often showed to the most deserving men. Those who 
had much of this world's goods paid dear, but she had compassion on 
the worthy, though they could not drive in a chariot to her door. 
This was the case of CAROLA, when I saw her at CURLL'S.

But all of a sudden she disappeared, and no one could tell what was 
become of her; that I, however, learned from herself, when I chanced 
to see her under the cedar tree, in the park, as before related.

A young clergyman, one TENCH, an Irishman, of the county of Galway, 
who was very rich, and had a fine seat in Devonshire, saw her at the 
opera, and fell in love with her. He soon found out who she was, 
waited upon her, and offered to marry her, if she would reform. At 
first, she showed very little inclination to a virtuous course, and, 
as her manner was, ridiculed the interest of another life. The 
blessedness of heaven she laughed at, and made a jest of riches, 
honours, and pleasures to be found on the other side the grave. This 
did not however dishearten TENCH. He was a scholar and a man of 
sense, and as he loved her most passionately, and saw she had a fine 
capacity, he was resolved, if possible, to reclaim her, by an appeal 
to her bright understanding.

He observed to her, in the first place, as she informed me, that, 
exclusive of future happiness, godliness was profitable in all 
things, that is, even in this life, in prosperity and adversity ,in 
plenty and in want, in peace and in war, in confusion and security, 
in health, in honour and disgrace, in life and in death, and in what 
condition soever we may be. This he proved to her satisfaction, and 
made it plain to her conception, that by it only we can acquire a 
right judgment of persons and things, and have a just and due 
estimate of ourselves; that unless held in by reason and religion, 
pleasure, though innocent of itself, becomes a thing of deadly 
consequence to mortals; and if we do not use it in due time, place, 
circumstance, measure and limits, it necessarily involves us in 
difficulties and troubles, pain and infamy; if we stifle the grand 
leading principles, reason and religion, by sin and vice, and let 
desire and inclination range beyond bounds, we must not only plunge 
into various woes in this world, but as creatures degenerated below 
the beast, become the contempt and abhorrence of the wise and 
honest. To this sad condition must be annexed a reflective misery, 
as we have conscience or reason, that will examine, now and then, 
the whole procedure of life, do all we can to prevent it, and the 
remorse that must ensue, on account of our wretched and ridiculous 
conduct, is too bitter a thing for a reasonable creature to acquire, 
for the sake of illicit gratification only; and this becomes the 
more grievous in reflection, as pleasures are not forbidden by 
religion, but allowed to the most upright, and ordained for the holy 
service of God; to recruit nature, and enliven the spirits; to 
propagate the human species, and preserve the flame of love in the 
married state. If there was then no other life but this, it is most 
certainly our interest in regard to fame and advantage, to be 
governed by reason and religion.

And if we are not to be annihilated with the beast, but are to 
answer hereafter for what we have done, whether it be good or bad, 
surely the main business of life should be to govern ourselves by 
godliness, that is to be Christians in our principles, holy in our 
conversation, and upright in our behaviour. If the gospel be true, 
as has been proved a thousand and a thousand times, by the wisest 
men in the world, to the confusion and silence of infidelity, and 
the Son of God came into the world, not to make Judea the seat of 
absolute and universal empire, and establish a temporal dominion in 
all possible pomp and magnificence, as the Jews most erroneously and 
ridiculously fancied, and to this day believe, but to prepare 
greater things for us; to relieve us from the power of sin, and the 
endless and unspeakable miseries of the life which is to come; to 
propose a prize far more worthy of our expectations than the glories 
of civil power, and to secure to us the happiness both of soul and 
body to all eternity, in the kingdom of God; then certainly, in 
regard to ourselves, we ought to attend to his heavenly lessons, and 
turn from the unlawful enjoyments of this life, to the endless and 
solid happiness of a future state. As this is the case, we should 
cherish and improve a faith of invisible things, by serious and 
impartial consideration. We should attend to the evidence which God 
has given us for the truth of Christianity, evidence very cogent and 
sufficient; and then show our faith by works suited to the doctrine 
of Christ; that is, by recommending the practice of virtue, and the 
worship of one God, the Creator of the Universe.

"Consider then, Miss BENNET," said he, "that you stand on the brink 
of death, resurrection, and judgment; and it is time to begin by 
serious and humble enquiry to arrive at a faith of strength and 
activity; that by your eminence in all virtue and holiness, you may 
make the glorious attempt to be greatest in the kingdom of heaven. 
This will be a work worthy of an immortal soul. Nor will it hinder 
you from enjoying as much happiness in this lower hemisphere, as 
reason can desire. For godliness is profitable unto all things, 
having promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to 
come."

"Thus," continued Miss BENNET that was, "did this excellent young 
clergyman talk to me, and by argument and reasoning in the gentlest 
manner, by good sense and good manners, made me a convert to 
Christianity and goodness. He snatched me from the gulf of eternal 
perdition, and from the realms of darkness, and the society of 
devils, brought me into the kingdom of the Messiah. To make me as 
happy as it was possible even in this world, he married me, and 
landed me in this charming spot you found me in. For seven years, we 
lived in great happiness, without ever stirring from this fine 
solitude, and since his death, I have had no inclination to return 
to the world; I have one lady for my companion, an agreeable 
sensible woman, a near relation of Mr TENCH's, and with her, and 
some good books, and three or four agreeable neighbours, have all 
the felicity I care for in this world. When you saw me at CURLL's, I 
had no taste for anything but the comedy, the opera, and a tale of 
La Fontaine; but you found me with a volume of Tillotson in my hand, 
under that aged and beautiful cedar, near the road; and in those 
sermons I now find more delight, in the solemn shade of one of those 
fine trees, than ever I enjoyed in the gayest scenes of the world. 
In these sweet silent walks I am really happy. Riches and honour are 
with me, yea durable riches and righteousness. To the blessings of 
time, I can here add the riches of expectation and comfort, the 
riches of 'tame glory and happiness. This makes me fond of this fine 
retreat. In contentment, peace, and comfort of mind, I now live; and 
by hearkening to the commandments, my peace is a river."

Here Mrs TENCH had done, and I was amazed beyond expression. This 
charming libertine was quite changed. It was formerly her wont, when 
I have sat an evening with her at CURLL'S, to make a jest of the 
Christian scheme, to laugh at the Devil and his flames; her life was 
all pleasure, and her soul all whim, but when I saw her last, she 
was serious, and seemed to enjoy as happy a serenity and composure 
of mind, as ever mortal was blessed with. Even her eyes had acquired 
a more sober light, and in the place of a wild and luscious air, a 
beautiful modesty appeared.

And now to what shall I ascribe this astonishing alteration? Shall I 
say with our Methodists and other visionaries, that it must be owing 
to immediate impulse, and proceeded from inward impression of the 
Spirit? No, this will not do. It was owing clearly to the word, not 
in-spoken, but taught by Christ in his gospel. When her friend TENCH 
opened the New Testament to her, her good understanding inclined her 
to hearken. She began to consider, she pondered, and had a regard to 
the gospel, now laid before her, by that sensible and excellent 
young clergyman. She became a believer. And as the Apostle says, We 
can do all things through Christ who strengthens us;<221> that is, 
says Dr. Hunt, in one of his fine sermons, through the directions of 
Christ, and through the arguments and motives of the Christian 
doctrine. Well said, Hunt. It must be our own choice, to be sure, to 
be good and virtuous. So far as men are passive, and are acted upon, 
they are not agents. Without power to do good or evil, men cannot be 
moral or accountable beings, and be brought into judgment, or 
receive according to their works.

Dr. Lardner, in his excellent Sermon on the Power and Efficacy of 
Christ's Doctrine, has a fine observation; would any say, that the 
necessity of immediate and particular influences from Christ 
himself, is implied in this context, where he says, "that he is a 
vine, and his disciples branches, and that their bearing fruit 
depends as much upon influences from him, as the life and vigour of 
branches do upon the sap derived from the root of the tree? It would 
be easy to answer, that the argument in the text is a similitude, 
not literal truth. Neither is Christ literally a vine, nor are his 
disciples, strictly speaking, branches. Men have a reasonable, 
intellectual nature, above animals and vegetables. They are not 
governed by irresistible, and necessary, or mechanical powers. But 
it is sound doctrine, and right principles, particularly the, words 
of Christ, which are the words of God, that are their life, and may, 
and will, if attended to, powerfully enable them to promote good 
works, and to excel and persevere therein."

But it is time to return to my own story. While I lodged at CURLL'S 
two Irish gentlemen came to see me, JEMMY KING an attorney, and that 
famous Master in Chancery, who debauched NELLY HAYDEN the beauty, 
and kept her several years. I knew these men were as great rakes as 
ever lived, and had no notion of religion; that they were devoted to 
pleasure, and chased away every sober thought and apprehension by 
company, and by empty, vicious, and unmanly pleasures. The voice of 
the monitor was lost, in the confused noise and tumult of the 
passions, but I thought they had honour at the bottom, according to 
the common notion of it. I never imagined they were sharpers, nor 
knew, that being ruined in Ireland, they came over to live by a 
gaming table. The Doctor especially, I thought, was above ever 
becoming that kind of man, as he had a large estate, and the best 
education; always kept good company; and to appearance, was as fine 
a gentleman as ever was seen in the world. With these two I dined, 
and after dinner, they brought me, as it were, out of curiosity, to 
a gaming table, they had by accident discovered, where there was a 
bank kept by men of the greatest honour, who played quite fair, and 
by hazarding a few guineas, I might perhaps, as they did, come off 
with some hundreds.

On entering the room, I saw about twenty well-dressed men sitting 
round a table, on which lay a vast heap of gold. We all began to 
play, and for two or three hours, I did win some hundreds of pounds; 
the Doctor and the other cheat, his friend, seemed to lose a large 
sum; but before morning they won all back from me, with much more: 
and I not only lost what I had then, but the thousands I had gained 
by my several wives; and excepting a few pounds, all I was worth in 
the world. I had sold my wives' estates, and lodged the money in my 
banker's hands. The villains round this table got it all, and my two 
Irishmen were not to be seen. They disappeared, and left me madly 
playing away my all. I heard no more of them, till I was told 
several years after, that they were in the Isle of Man, among other 
outlawed, abandoned, wicked men, where they drank night and day, 
according to the custom of the place, and lived in defiance of God 
and man. There these two advocates of impiety dwelt for some time, 
and died as they had lived; enemies to all good principles, and 
friends to a general corruption.

As to the well-dressed company round the table, they went off one by 
one, and left me alone to the bitter thought, which led me to 
reflect on what I was some hours before, by what I then found myself 
to be. I was almost distracted. What had I to do with play? I wanted 
nothing. And now by villains, with a set of dice that would deceive 
the Devil, I am undone. By sharpers and false dice I have sat to be 
ruined. The reflection numbed my senses for some time: and then I 
started, became wild, and raved.

This transaction made me very thoughtful, and I sat within for 
several days, thinking which way to turn. CURLL saw I was perplexed, 
and on his asking me if I had met with any misfortune, I told him 
the whole case; that I had but one hundred pounds left, and 
requested he would advise me what I had best do. To do justice to 
everyone, CURLL seemed deeply concerned, and after some silence, as 
we sat over a bottle at a coffee-house, he bid me take notice of an 
old gentleman, who was not far from us. "That is DUNK the miser, who 
lives in a wood about twenty miles off. He has one daughter, the 
finest creature in the universe, and who is to succeed to his great 
estate, whether he will or not, it being so settled at his marriage; 
but he confines her so much in the country, and uses her so cruelly 
every way, that I believe she would run away with any honest young 
fellow, who could find means to address her. Know then," continued 
CURLL, "that I serve Mr DUNK with paper, pens, ink, wax, pamphlets, 
and everything he wants in my way. Once a quarter of a year, I 
generally go to his country-house with such things, as he is glad to 
see me sometimes; or if I cannot go myself, I send them by some 
other hand. Next week I am to forward some things to him, and if you 
will take them, I will write a line by you to Miss his daughter, 
recommend you to her for a husband, as one she may depend on for 
honour and truth. She knows I am her friend, and who can tell, but 
she may go off with you. She will have a thousand a year, when the 
wretch her father dies, if he should leave his personal estate 
another way."

This thought pleased me much, and at the appointed time, away I went 
to Mr DUNK's country-house with a wallet full of things, and 
delivered CURLL'S letter to Miss. As soon as she had read it, I 
began my address, and in the best manner I could, made her an offer 
of my service, to deliver her from the tyrant her father. I gave her 
an account of a little farm I had on the borders of Cumberland, a 
purchase I had made, on account of the charms of the ground, and a 
small pretty lodge which stood in the middle of it, by a clump of 
old trees, near a murmuring stream; that if she pleased, I would 
take her to that sweet, silent spot, and enable her to live in 
peace, with contentment and tranquillity of mind; though far away 
from the splendours and honours of the world, and considering, that 
a Christian is not to conform to the world, or to the pomps and 
vanities of it; its grand customs and usages; its dress and entries; 
its stage representations and masquerades, as they minister to vice, 
and tend to debauch the manners; but are to look upon ourselves as 
beings of another world, and to form our minds with these spiritual 
principles; it follows then, I think, that a pleasing country 
situation for a happy pair must be grateful enough. There peace and 
love and modesty may be best preserved; the truth and gravity of our 
religion be strictly maintained, and every lawful and innocent 
enjoyment be for ever the delights of life. Away from the idle modes 
of the world, perpetual love and unmixed joys may be our portion, 
through the whole of our existence here; and the inward principles 
of the heart be ever laudable and pure. So will our happiness as 
mortals be stable, subject to no mixture or change; and when called 
away from this lower hemisphere, have nothing to fear, as we used 
this world, as though we used it not; as we knew no gratifications 
and liberties but what our 
religion allows us, as our enjoyments will be but the necessary 
convenience and accommodation, for passing from this world to the 
realms of eternal happiness. Follow me then, Miss DUNK; I will 
convey you to a scene of still life and felicity, great and lasting 
as the heart of woman can wish for.

The charming AGNES seemed not a little surprised at what I had said, 
and after looking at me very earnestly for a minute or two, told me, 
she would give me an answer to Mr CURLL'S letter in less than half 
an hour, which was all she could say at present, and with it I 
returned to give him an account of the reception I had. "It will 
do," said he after he had read the letter I brought him from Miss 
DUNK, but you must be my young man for a week or two more, and take 
some more things to the same place. He then showed me the letter, 
and I read the following lines:-

"SIR, 

"I am extremely obliged to you for your concern about my 
happiness and liberty, and will own to you, that in my dismal 
situation, I would take the friend you recommend, for a guide 
through the wilderness, if I could think his heart was as 
sound as his head. If his intentions were as upright as his 
words are fluent and good, I need not be long in pondering on 
the scheme he proposed. But can we believe him true, as 
Lucinda says in the play?

The sunny hill, the flowery vale, 
The garden and the grove, 
Have echoed to his ardent tale, 
And vows of endless love. 

The conquest gained, he left his prize. 
He left her to complain, 
To talk of joy with weeping eyes, 
And measure time by pain."

To this CURLL replied in a circumstantial manner, and vouched very 
largely for me. I delivered his letter the next morning, when I went 
with some acts of parliament to old DUNK and I found the beauty, his 
daughter, in a rosy bower; Simplex munditiis, neat and clean as 
possible in the most genteel undress; and her person so vastly fine, 
her face so vastly charming; that I could not but repeat the lines 
of Otway

Man when created first wandered up and down, 
Forlorn and silent as his vassal brutes; 
But when a heaven-born maid, like you appeared, 
Strange pleasures filled his soul, unloosed his tongue, 
And his first talk was love.

I said much upon the occasion, we became well acquainted that day, 
as her father had got a disorder that obliged him to keep his bed, 
and by the time I had visited her a month longer, under various 
pretences of business invented by the ingenious CURLL, AGNES agreed 
to go off with me, and commit herself entirely to my care and 
protection. But before I relate this transaction, I think it proper 
to give my readers the picture of this lady; and then an apology for 
her flying away with me, with whom she was but a month acquainted.



CHAPTER XXIII.

AGNES in her person was neither tall nor thin, but almost both, 
young and lovely, graceful and commanding; she inspired a respect, 
and compelled the beholder to admire, to love and reverence her. Her 
voice was melodious; her words quite charming; and every look and 
motion to her advantage. Taste was the characteristic of her 
understanding, her sentiments were refined, and a sensibility 
appeared in every feature of her face. She could talk on various 
subjects, and comprehended them, which is what few speakers do; but 
with the finest discernment, she was timid, and so diffident of her 
opinion, that she often concealed the finest thoughts under a 
seeming simplicity of soul. This was visible to a hearer, and the 
decency of ignorance added a new beauty to her character. In short, 
possessed of excellence, she appeared unconscious of it, and never 
discovered the least pride or precipitancy in her conversation. Her 
manner was perfectly polite, and mixed with a gaiety that charmed, 
because it was as free from restraint as from boldness.

In sum, exclusive of her fine understanding, in her dress, and in 
her behaviour, she was so extremely pleasing, so vastly agreeable 
and delightful, that she ever brought to my remembrance, when I 
beheld her, the Corinna described in the beautiful lines of 
Tibullus:--
Illam quicquid agit, quoquo vestigia flectit, 
Componit furtim subsequiturque decor; 
Seu solvit crines, fusis decet esse capillis; 
Seu compsit comptis est veneranda comis. 
Urit seu tyria voluit procedere pulla; 
Urit seu nivea candida veste venit.
Talis in aeeterno felix Vertumnus Olympo 
Mille habet ornatus, mille decenter habet.

When love would set the gods on fire, he flies 
To light his torches at her sparkling eyes. 
Whate'er Corinna does, where'er she goes, 
The graces all her motions still compose. 
How her hair charms us, when it loosely falls, 
Combed back and tied, our veneration calls! 
If she comes out in scarlet, then she turns 
Us all to ashes,—though in white she burns. 
Vertumnus so a thousand dresses wears, 
So in a thousand, ever grace appears. 
[Tibullus, To Sulpicia. Poem 1.-Ed.]

Such was the beautiful AGNES, who went off with me, and in so doing 
acted well and wisely, I affirm, on her taking me only for an honest 
man; for there is no more obedience due from a daughter to her 
father, when he becomes an unrelenting oppressor, than there is from 
a subject to an English king, when the monarch acts contrary to the 
constitution. Passive obedience is as much nonsense in a private 
family, as in the government of the prince. The parent, like the 
king, must be a nursing father, a rational humane sovereign, and so 
long all service and obedience are due. But if, like the prince, he 
becomes .a tyrant, deprives his daughter of her natural rights and 
liberties; will not allow her the blessings of life, but keep her in 
chains and misery; self-preservation, and her just claim to the 
comforts of existence and a rational freedom, give her a right to 
change her situation, and better her condition. If she can have 
bread, serenity, and freedom, peace and little, with an honest man, 
she is just to herself in going off with such a deliverer. Reason 
and revelation will acquit her.

Thus justly thought Miss DUNK, and therefore with me she fled at 
midnight. We met within half a mile of her father's house, by the 
side of an ancient wood, and a running stream, which had a pleasing 
effect, as it happened to be a bright moonshine. With her foot in my 
hand, I lifted her into her saddle, and as our horses were 
excellent, we rode many miles in a few hours. By eight in the 
morning, we were out of the reach of old DUNK, and at the sign of 
the Pilgrim, a lone house in Esur-vale, in Hertfordshire, we 
breakfasted very joyfully. The charming AGNES seemed well pleased 
with the expedition, and said a thousand things that rendered the 
journey delightful. Twelve days we travelled in a fullness of 
delights, happy beyond description, and the thirteenth arrived at a 
village not far from my little habitation. Here we designed to be 
married two days after, when we had rested, as there was a church 
and a parson in the town, and then ride on to Foley Farm in 
Cumberland, as my small spot was called, and there sit down in peace 
and happiness.

But the second day, instead of rising to the nuptial ceremony, to 
crown my life with unutterable bliss, and make me beyond all mankind 
happy, the lovely AGNES fell ill of a fever. A sense of weight and 
oppression discovered the inflammation within, and was attended with 
sharp and pungent pains. The blood could not pass off as it ought in 
the course of circulation, and the whole mass was in a violent 
fluctuation and motion. In a word, she died in a few days, and as 
she had requested, if it came to that, I laid her out, and put her 
into the coffin myself. I kept her seven days, according to the 
custom of the old Romans, and then in the dress of sorrow, followed 
her to the grave. Thus was my plan of happiness broken to pieces. I 
had given a roundness to a system of felicity, and in the place of 
it saw death and horror, and disappointment before me.

What to do next I could not tell. One question was, should I return 
to Orton Lodge, to my two young heiresses? No, they wanted two years 
of being at age. Then, shall I stay at Foley Farm where I was, and 
turn hermit? No: I had no inclination yet to become a father of the 
deserts. Will you return to London then, and see if fortune has 
anything more in reserve for you? This I liked best, and after six 
months deliberation left my farm in the care of an old woman, and 
set out in the beginning of January.

It was as fine a winter's morning as I had seen, which encouraged me 
to venture among the Fells of Westmoreland; but at noon the weather 
changed, and an evening very terrible came on. A little after three, 
it began to blow, rain, and snow very hard, and it was not long 
before it was very dark. We lost the way quite, and for three hours 
wandered about in as dismal a night as ever poor travellers had. The 
storm rattled, the tempest howled; we could not see our horses' 
heads, and were almost dead with cold. We had nothing to expect but 
death, as we knew not which way to turn to any house, and it was 
impossible to remain alive till the day appeared. It was a dismal 
scene. But my time was not yet come, and when we had no reason to 
expect deliverance, the beasts of a sudden stopped, and Soto found 
we were at the gate of a walled yard. There he immediately made all 
the noise he could, and it was not long before a servant with a 
lantern came. He related our case within, and had orders to admit 
us. He brought me into a common parlour, where there was a good 
fire, and I got dry things. The man brought me half a pint of hot 
Alicante [wine], and in about half an hour, I was alive and well 
again. On enquiring where I was, the footman told me, it was Doctor 
STANVIL'S house; that his master and lady were above in the dining-
room, with some company, and he had directions to light me up, when 
I had changed my clothes, and was recovered. Upon this I told him I 
was ready, and followed him.

On the servant's opening a door, I entered a handsome apartment, 
well lighted with wax, and which had a glorious fire blazing in it. 
The doctor received me with great politeness, and said many civil 
things upon fortune's conducting me to his house. The conversation 
naturally fell upon the horrors of the night, as it still continued 
to rain, hail, and blow, beyond what any of the company had ever 
heard; and one of the ladies said, she believed the winter was 
always far more boisterous and cold among the Fells of Westmoreland, 
than in any other part of England, for which she gave several good 
reasons. The solemn mountains; the beautiful valleys, the falling 
streams, constitute to form this one of the most charming countries 
in the world in summer-time; but in winter, it is surely the most 
dreadful spot on earth.

The voice of the lady who talked in this manner, I thought I was 
well acquainted with, but by the position of the candles, and the 
angle of a screen in which she sat, I could not very well see her 
face. Amazement however began to seize me, and as an elegant supper 
was soon after brought in, I had an opportunity of seeing that Miss 
DUNK whom I had buried, was now before my eyes, in the character of 
Dr. STANVIL's wife; or, at least, it was one so like her, it was not 
possible for me to distinguish the figures: there was the same 
bright victorious eyes, and chestnut hair; the complexion like a 
blush, and a mouth where all the little loves for ever dwelt; there 
was the fugitive dimple, the enchanting laugh, the rosy fingers, the 
fine height, and the mien more striking than Calypso's. O heavens! 
said I to myself, on sitting down to supper, what is this I see! But 
as she did not seem to be at all affected, or showed the least sign 
of her having ever seen me before that time, I remained silent, and 
only continued to look with admiration at her, unmindful of the many 
excellent things before me. In a minute or two, however, I recovered 
myself. I ate my supper, and joined in the festivity of the night. 
We had music, and several songs. We were easy, free, and happy as 
well-bred people could be.

At midnight we parted, and finding an easy-chair by the side of my 
bed, I threw myself into it, and began to reflect on what I had 
seen; FINN standing before me with his arms folded, and looking very 
seriously at me. This lasted for about a quarter of an hour, and 
then the honest fellow spoke in the following manner. "I beg leave, 
Sir, to imagine you are perplexing yourself about the lady of this 
house, whom I suppose you take for Miss DUNK, we brought from the 
other side of England, half a year ago, and buried in the next 
churchyard to Blenkern. This, if I may be so free, is likewise my 
opinion. I would take my oath of it in a court of justice, if there 
was occasion for that. However she got out of the grave, and by 
whatever casualty she came to be Mrs STANVIL, and mistress of this 
fine house; yet I could swear to her being the lady who travelled 
with us from the west to Cumberland. But then, it seems very 
wonderful and strange, that she should forget you, Sir, so soon, or 
be able to act a part so amazing, as to seem not to have ever seen 
you before this night. This has astonished me, as I stood behind 
your chair at supper, looking full at her; and I observed she looked 
at me once or twice. What to say to all this, I know not; but I will 
make all the enquiry I can among the servants, as to the time and 
manner of her coming here, and let you know to-morrow, what I have 
been able to collect in relation to her. In the meantime, be advised 
by me, Sir, though I am but a poor fellow, and think no more of the 
matter to the loss of your night's rest. We have had a wonderful 
deliverance from death by getting into this house, I am sure, and we 
ought to lie down with thankfulness and joy, without fretting 
ourselves awake for a woman, or any trifling incident that could 
befall. Besides, she is now another man's property, however it came 
to pass, and it would be inconsistent with your character to think 
any more of her. This may be too free, but I hope, Sir, you will 
excuse it in a servant who has your interest and welfare at heart." 
Here the sage O' FINN had done. He withdrew, and I dozed into sleep.

Betimes the next morning, O'FINN was with me, and on my asking what 
news, he said, he had heard something from all the servants, and 
more particularly had got the following account from the doctor's 
own man: that Dr. STANVIL had a small lodge within three miles of 
the house we were in, and retired there sometimes to be more alone, 
than he could be in the residence we were at; that this lodge was a 
mere repository of curiosities, in the middle of a garden full of 
all the herbs and plants that grew in every country of the world, 
and in one chamber of this house was a great number of skeletons, 
which the doctor had made himself; for it was his wont to procure 
bodies from the surrounding church-yards, by men he kept in pay for 
the purpose, and cut them up himself at this lodge: that some of 
these dead were brought to him in hampers, and some in their coffins 
on light railed cars, as the case required: that near six months 
ago, the last time the doctor was at this lodge, there was brought 
to him by his men the body of a young woman in her coffin, in order 
to a dissection as usual, and the bones being wired; but as it lay 
on the back, on the great table he cuts up on, and the point of his 
knife at the pit of the stomach, to open the breast, he perceived a 
kind of motion in the subject, heard a sigh soon after, and looking 
up to the head saw the eyes open and shut again; that upon this, he 
laid down his knife, which had but just scratched the body, at the 
beginning of the linea alba,<223> as my informer called it, and 
helped himself to put it into a warm bed: that he took all possible 
pains, by administering everything he could think useful, to restore 
life, and was so fortunate as to set one of the finest women in the 
world on her feet again. As she had no raiment but the shroud which 
had been on her in the coffin, he got everything belonging to dress 
that a woman of distinction could have occasion for, and in a few 
days' time, she sparkled before her preserver in the brightness of 
an Eastern princess. He was quite charmed with the beauties of her 
person, and could not enough admire her uncommon understanding; he 
therefore offered to marry her, to settle largely on her, and as she 
was a single woman, she could not in gratitude refuse the request of 
so generous a benefactor. My informer further related, that they 
have both lived in the greatest happiness ever since; and the 
doctor, who is one of the best of men, is continually studying how 
to add to her felicities, that he offered to take her up to London 
to pass the winters there, but this she refused, and desired she 
might remain where she was in the country, as it was really most 
agreeable to her, and as he preferred it to the town.

This account made the thing quite plain to me. And to judge 
impartially, considering the whole case, I could neither blame the 
lovely AGNES for marrying the doctor, nor condemn her for pretending 
to be a stranger to me. She was fairly dead and buried, and all 
connexion between us was at an end of course, as there had been no 
marriage, nor contract of marriage. And as to reviving the affair, 
and renewing the tenderness which had existed, it could answer no 
other end than producing unhappiness, as she was then Mrs STANVIL, 
in a decent and happy situation. And further, in respect of her 
marrying the doctor, so soon after her separation from me, it was 
certainly the wisest thing she could do, as she had been so entirely 
at his disposal, was without a stitch to cover her, and I in all 
probability, after burying her, being gone up to London, or in some 
place, where she could never hear of me more; I might likewise have 
been married, if anything advantageous had offered after laying her 
in the church-yard. And besides, she neither knew the place she fell 
sick in, nor the country the doctor removed her to, as soon as he 
could get her clothes to put on. So that, naked and friendless as 
she was, without any money, and ignorant of what became of me, 
without a possibility of informing herself, I could not but acquit 
her. I even admired her conduct, and resolved so far to imitate her, 
in regard to the general happiness, that nothing should appear in my 
behaviour, which could incline anyone to think I had ever seen her 
before the night the tempest drove me to her house. I was vexed, I 
own, to lose her; but that could be no reason for making a senseless 
uproar, that could do nothing but mischief.

As composed then as I could be, I went down to breakfast, on a 
servant's letting me know they waited for me, and found the same 
company, who had so lately parted to slumber, all quite alive and 
cheerful, easy and happy as mortals could be. At the request of Dr. 
STANVIL, who was extremely civil, I stayed with them two months, and 
passed the time in a delightful conversation, intermixed with music, 
cards, and feasting. With sadness I left them all, but especially on 
account of parting for ever with the late Miss DUNK. It was indeed 
for the pleasure of looking at her, that I stayed so long as I did 
at Dr. STANVIL'S; and when it came to an eternal separation, I felt 
on the morning of my departure, an inward distress it is impossible 
to give an idea of to another. It had some resemblance, I imagine, 
of what the visionaries call a dereliction, when they sink from 
ecstasy to the black void of horror, by the strength of fancy, and 
the unaccountable operation of the animal spirits.

Here, before I proceed, I think I ought to remove some objections 
that may be made against my relation of Mrs STANVIL's coming to life 
again, and her being brought from the couch of lasting night to a 
bridal bed. It is not easy to believe, that after I seemed certain 
she was dead, and kept her the proper number of days before 
interment; saw her lie the cold wan subject for a considerable time, 
and then let down into the grave; yet from thence she should come 
forth, and now be the desire of a husband's eyes. This is a hard 
account sure. But nevertheless, it is a fact. As to my being 
mistaken, no less a man than Dr. Cheyne thought Colonel Townsend 
dead; See his Nervous Cases. And that several have lived for many 
years, after they had been laid in the tomb, is a thing too certain, 
and well-known, to be denied. In Bayle's Dictionary, there is the 
history of a lady of quality, belonging to the court of Catharine de 
Medicis, who was brought from the church vault, where she had been 
forty-eight hours, and afterwards became the mother of several 
children, on her marriage with the Marquis D'Auvergne. The learned 
Dr. Connor, in his History of Poland, gives us a very wonderful 
relation of a gentleman's reviving in that country, after he had 
been seemingly dead for near a fortnight; and adds a very curious 
dissertation on the nature of such recoveries. The case of Dun 
Scotus, who was found out of his coffin, on the steps going down to 
the vault he was deposited in, and leaning on his elbow, is full to 
my purpose. And I can affirm from my own knowledge, that a gentleman 
of my acquaintance, a worthy excellent man, was buried alive, and 
found not only much bruised and torn, on opening his coffin, but 
turned on one side. This many still living can attest as well as I. 
The reason of opening the grave again, was his dying of a high fever 
in the absence of his lady, who was in a distant county from him; 
and on her return, three days after he was buried, would have a 
sight of him, as she had been extremely fond of him. His face was 
sadly broke, and his hands hurt in striving to force up the lid of 
the coffin. The lady was so affected with the dismal sight, that she 
never held up her head after, and died in a few weeks. I could 
likewise add another extraordinary case of a man who was hanged, and 
to all appearance was quite dead, yet three days after his execution 
recovered as they were going to cut him up. How these things happen, 
is not easy to explain or account for; but they do happen sometimes. 
And this case of Mrs STANVIL, may be depended on as a fact.

Opinion's foot is never, never found 
Where knowledge dwells, 'tis interdicted ground; 
At wisdom's gate opinions must resign 
Their charge, those limits their employ confine. 
Thus trading barks, skilled in the watery road, 
To distant climes convey their precious load. 
Then turn their prow, light bounding o'er the main, 
And with new traffic store their keels again. 
Thus far is clear. But yet untold remains, 
What the good genius to the crowd ordains, 
Just on the verge of life.





He bids them hold 
A spirit with erected courage bold. 
Never, he calls, on fortune's faith rely, 
Nor grasp her dubious gift as property. 
Let not her smile transport, her frown dismay, 
Nor praise, nor blame, nor wonder at her sway, 
Which reason never guides: 'tis fortune still, 
Capricious chance, and arbitrary will. 
Bad bankers, vain of treasure not their own, 
With foolish rapture hug the trusted loan. 
Impatient, when the powerful bond demands 
Its unremembered covenant from their hands. 
Unlike to such, without a sigh restore 
What fortune lends: anon she'll lavish more. 
Repenting of her bounty, snatch away, 
Yea, seize your patrimonial fund for prey. 
Embrace her proffered boon, but instant rise, 
Spring upward, and secure a lasting prize, 
The gift which wisdom to her sons divides; 
Knowledge, whose beam the doubting judgment guides, 
Scatters the sensual fog, and clear to view 
Distinguishes false interest from the true. 
Flee, flee to this, with unabating pace, 
Nor parley for a moment at the place, 
Where pleasure and her harlots tempt, nor rest, 
But at false wisdom's inn, a transient guest: 
For short refection, at her table sit, 
And take what science may your palate hit: 
Then wing your journey forward, till you reach 
True wisdom, and imbibe the truth she'll teach. 
Such is the advice the friendly genius gives, 
He perishes who scorns, who follows lives. 

SCOTT'S CEBES. <224>

With this advice of the genius in my head, which by chance I had 
read the morning I took my leave of Dr. Stanvil, I set out, as I had 
resolved, for York, and designed to go from thence to London; hoping 
to meet with something good, and purposing, if it was possible, to 
be no longer the rover, but turn to something useful, and fix. I had 
lost almost all at the gaming-table, as related, and had not thirty 
pounds of my last hundred remaining; this, with a few sheep, cows 
and horses at Orton Lodge, and a very small stock at my little farm, 
on the borders of Cumberland, was all I had left. It made me very 
serious, and brought some dismal apprehensions in view: but I did 
not despair. As my heart was honest, I still trusted in the 
Providence of God and his administration of things in this world. As 
the infinite power and wisdom of the Creator was evident, from a 
survey of this magnificent and glorious scene; as his care and 
Providence over each particular, in the administration of the great 
scheme was conspicuous; can man, the favourite of heaven, have 
reason to lift up his voice to complain, if he calls off his 
affections from folly, and by natural and supernatural force, by 
reason and revelation, overbears the prejudices of flesh and blood; 
if he ponders the hopes and fears of religion, and gives a just 
allowance to a future interest? "Hearken to the commandments," saith 
the Lord, "and your peace shall be as a river."

On then I trotted, brave as the man of wood, we read of in an 
excellent French writer,<225> and hoped at the end of every mile to 
meet with something fortunate; but nothing extraordinary occurred 
till the second evening, when I arrived at a little lone public-
house, on the side of a great heath, by the entrance of a wood. For 
an hour before I came to this resting-place, I had rid in a tempest 
of wind, rain, lightning, and thunder, so very violent, that it 
brought to my remembrance Hesiod's description of a storm.

Then Jove omnipotent displayed the god, 
And all Olympus trembled as he trod: 
He grasps ten thousand thunders in his hand, 
Bares his red arm, and wields the forky brand; 
Then aims the bolts, and bids his lightenings play, 
They flash, and rend through heaven their flaming way: 
Redoubling blow on blow, in wrath he moves, 
The singed earth groans, and burns with all her groves 
A night of clouds blots out the golden day, 
Full in their eyes the writhing lightnings play: 
Nor slept the wind; the wind new horror forms, 
Clouds dash on clouds before th'outrageous storms; 
While tearing up the sands, in drifts they rise, 
And half the deserts mount th'encumber'd skies: 
At once the tempest bellows, lightnings fly 
The thunders roar, and clouds involve the sky.<226>



CHAPTER XXIV.

It was a dreadful evening upon a heath, and so much as a bush was 
not to be met with for shelter: but at last we came to the thatched 
habitation of a publican, and I thought it a very comfortable place. 
We had bread and bacon, and good ale for supper, and in our 
circumstances, it seemed a delicious meal.

This man informed me, that about a mile from his habitation, in the 
middle of the wood, there dwelt an old physician, one Dr. 
FITZGIBBONS, an Irish gentleman, who had one very pretty daughter, a 
sensible woman, to whom he was able to give a good fortune, if a man 
to both their liking appeared; as yet come in their way, my landlord 
advised me to try the adventure, and he would furnish me with an 
excuse for going to the doctor's house. This set me a-thinking. "Dr. 
FITZGIBBONS, an Irish gentleman," said I, "I know the man. I saved 
his son's life in Ireland, when he was upon the brink of 
destruction, and the old gentleman was not only then as thankful as 
it was possible for a man to be, in return for the good I had done 
him, at the hazard of my own life, but assured me, a thousand times 
over, that if ever it was in his power to return my kindness, he 
would be my friend to the utmost of his ability. He must ever 
remember, with the greatest gratitude, the benefit I had so 
generously conferred on him and his." All this came full into my 
mind, and I determined to visit the old gentleman in the morning.

Next day, as I had resolved, I went to pay my respects to Dr. 
FITZGIBBONS, who remembered me perfectly well, was most heartily 
glad to see me, and received me in the most affectionate manner. He 
immediately began to repeat his obligations to me, for the 
deliverance I had given his son,<227> and that if it was in his 
power to be of service to me in England, he would leave nothing 
undone that was possible for him to do, to befriend me. He told me, 
that darling son of his, whose life I had saved, was an eminent 
physician at the court of Russia, where he lived in the greatest 
opulence and reputation, and as he owed his existence as such to me, 
his father could never he grateful enough in return. "Can I any way 
serve you, Sir? Have you been fortunate or unfortunate, since your 
living in England? Are you married or unmarried? I have a daughter 
by a second wife, and if you are not yet engaged, will give her to 
you, with a good fortune, and in two years' time, if you will study 
physic here, under my direction, will enable you to begin to 
practice, and get money as I have done in this country. I have so 
true a sense of that generous act you did to save my son, that I 
will with pleasure do anything in my power that can contribute to 
your happiness."

To this I replied, by thanking the doctor for his friendly offers, 
and letting him know, that since my coming to England several years 
ago, which was occasioned by a difference between my father and me, 
I had met with several turns of fortune, good and bad, and was at 
present but in a very middling way, having only a little spot among 
the mountains of Richmondshire, with a cottage and garden on it, and 
three or four beasts, which I found by accident without an owner, as 
I travelled through that uninhabited land; and a small farm of fifty 
acres with some stock, on the borders of Cumberland, which I got by 
a deceased wife. This, with about fifty guineas in my purse, was my 
all at present; and I was going up to London, to try if I could meet 
with anything fortunate in that place; but that, since he was 
pleased to make me such generous offers, I would stop, study physic 
as he proposed, and accept the great honour he did me in offering me 
his daughter for a wife. I told him likewise very fairly and 
honestly, that I had been rich by three or four marriages since my 
being in this country; but that I was unfortunately taken in at a 
gaming-table, by the means of two Irish gentlemen he knew very well, 
and there lost all; which vexed me the more, as I really do not love 
play; that as to my father, I had little to expect from him, though 
he had a great estate, as our difference was about religion; which 
kind of disputes have always the most cruel tendency and the wife he 
had, a low cunning woman, did all she could to maintain the 
variance, and keep up his anger to me, that her nephew might do the 
better on my ruin. That I had not written to him since my being in 
England; nor had I met with anyone who could give me any account of 
the family.

"And what," said Dr. FITZGIB13ONS, "is this fine religious dispute, 
which has made your father fall out with a son he was once so fond 
of?" "It was about Trinity in Unity, Sir: a thing I have often heard 
your son argue against by lessons he had from you, as he informed 
me. My father is as orthodox as Gregory Nazienzen, among the ancient 
fathers, or Trapp and Potter, Webster and Waterland, among the 
modern doctors; and when he found out that I was become an 
Unitarian, and renounced his religion of three Gods, the horrible 
creed of Athanasius, and all the despicable explications of his 
admired divines, on that subject; that I insisted, that 
notwithstanding all the subtle inventions of learned men, through 
the whole Christian world, yet God Almighty hath not appointed 
himself to be worshipped by precept or example in any one instance 
in his holy word, under the character of Father, Son, and Holy 
Ghost; that the worship of three persons and one God is expressly 
contrary to the solemn determination of Christ and his Apostles; and 
in numbers of instances in the New Testament it is declared, that 
the one God and Father of all is the-only supreme object, to whom 
all religious worship should be directed: that for these reasons, I 
renounced the received doctrine of a coequal trinity, and believed 
our great and learned divines, who laboured to prevent people from 
seeing the truth as it is in Jesus, would be in some tribulation at 
Christ's tribunal; where they are to appear stripped of all worldly 
honours, dignities, and preferments, poor, naked, wretched mortals, 
and to answer for their supplement to the gospel, in an invented 
heresy of three Gods. When my father heard these things, and saw the 
religious case of his son, his passion was very great. He forbid me 
his table, and ordered me to shift for myself. He renounced me, as I 
had done the triune God."

The doctor wondered not a little at the account I had given him, as 
my father was reckoned a man of great abilities, and taking me by 
the hand, said, I had acted most gloriously; that what lost me my 
father's affection, was the very thing that ought to have induced 
him to erect a statue to my honour in his garden—that since I was 
pleased to accept of his offer, his friendship I might depend on—
that if I would, I should begin the next day the study of physic 
under his direction, and at the end of two years, he would give me 
his daughter, who was not yet quite twenty.

Just as he had said this, Miss FITZGIBBONS entered the room, and her 
father introduced me to her. The sight of her astonished me, though 
I had before seen so many fine women, I could not help looking with 
wonder at her. She appeared one of those finished creatures, whom we 
cannot enough admire, and upon acquaintance with her, became much 
more glorious.

What a vast variety of beauty do we see in the infinity of nature. 
Among the sex, we may find a thousand and a thousand perfect images 
and characters; all equally striking, and yet as different as the 
pictures of the greatest masters in Italy. What amazing charms and 
perfections have I beheld in women as I have journeyed through life. 
When I have parted from one; well I said, I shall never meet another 
like this inimitable maid; and yet after all, JULIA appeared 
divinely fair, and happy in every excellence that can adorn the 
female mind. Without that exact regularity of beauty, and elegant 
softness of propriety, which rendered Miss DUNK, whom I have 
described in these Memoirs, a very divinity, JULIA charmed with a 
graceful negligence, and enchanted with a face that glowed with 
youthful wonders, beauties that art could not adorn but always 
diminished. The choice of dress was no part of JULIA'S care, but by 
the neglect of it she became irresistible. In her countenance there 
ever appeared a bewitching mixture of sensibility and gaiety, and in 
her soul, by converse was discovered that generosity and tenderness 
were the first principles of her mind. To truth and virtue she was 
inwardly devoted, and at the bottom of her heart, though hard to 
discover it, her main business [was] to serve God, and fit herself 
for eternity. In sum, she was one of the finest originals that ever 
appeared among womankind, peculiar in perfections which cannot be 
described; and so inexpressibly charming in an attractive sweetness, 
a natural gaiety, and a striking negligence, a fine understanding, 
and the most humane heart; that I found it impossible to know her 
without being in love with her: her power to please was extensive 
indeed. In her, one had the loveliest idea of woman.

To this fine creature I was married at the end of two years from my 
first acquaintance with her; that is, after I had studied physic so 
long, under the care and instruction of her excellent father, who 
died a few weeks after the wedding, which was in the beginning of 
the year 1734, and the 29th of my age. Dying, he left me a handsome 
fortune, his library, and house; and I imagined I should have lived 
many happy years with his admirable daughter, who obliged me by 
every endearing means, to be excessively fond of her. I began to 
practise upon the old gentleman's death, and had learned so much in 
the two years I had studied under him, from his lecturing and my own 
hard reading, that I was able to get some money among the opulent 
round me; not by art and collusion, the case of too many doctors in 
town and country, but by practising upon consistent principles. The 
method of my reading, by Dr. FITZGIBBONS' directions, was as 
follows; and I set it down here for the benefit of such gentlemen, 
as choose to study in the private manner I did.



A METHOD OF STUDYING PHYSIC IN A PRIVATE MANNER 
by which means a gentleman, with the purchase of a Diploma, may turn 
out Doctor, as well as if he went to Padua, to hear Morganni.

The first books I got upon my table, were the Lexicons of Castellus 
and Quincy; one for the explication of ancient terms; and the other 
of modern. These, as Dictionaries, lay at hand for use, when wanted.

I then opened the last edition of Herman Conringius's Introductio in 
Universam Artem Medicam, singulasque ejus partis; I say the last 
edition of 1726, because that has an excellent preface by Hoffman. 
This book, which comes down to the beginning of the seventeenth 
century, I read with great care; especially Gonthier Christopher 
Schelhammer's notes, and additions, which have enriched the work 
very much. By the way, they were both very great men, and bright 
ornaments to their profession. They wrote an amazing number of books 
on medicine. Conringius died December, 1681, aged 75; and 
Schelhammer, in January, 1716, in the 67th year of his age.

The next introductory book to the art, was Lindenius Renovatus de 
Script is Medicis, quibus praemittitur Manuductio ad Medicinam. This 
book was first called Libro duo de Scripturis, &c. and written by 
John Antonides Vander Linden, a famous professor at Leyden, who 
published it in 1637, in a small octavo. It was again printed in the 
same form, in 1651 and 1662, at Amsterdam; but the most valuable 
edition is that printed at Nuremburg in 1686, edited by George 
Abraham Merklinus, who made very many and excellent additions to 
this fourth edition, and called it Lindenius Renovatus, as he had 
augmented it to a thick quarto. Vander Linden died in March, 1664, 
aged 55; and Merklinus in April, 1702, in the 58th year of his age. 
They have both written many books on physic, but there have been 
such improvements made by the diligence and success of modern 
physicians, that it would be only loss of time to read over all 
their works, or all the authors of the seventeenth century.

The next books I opened, were the learned Daniel Le Clerc's History 
of Physic, which commences with the world, and ends at the time of 
Galen; and the great Dr. Friend's History, in two vols. octavo, 
which is a continuation of Le Clerc, down to Linacre, the founder of 
the College of Physicians, in the reign of Henry VIII. These books 
showed me the origin and revolutions of physic, and the ancient 
writers and their works on this subject. Daniel Le Clerc died in 
June, 1728, aged 76, and some months.

When I had read these things<228>, I turned next to botany, and read 
Raii Methodus Plantarum Emendata, 1703. Raii Synopsis Methodica 
Stirpium, third edition; and Tournefort's Institutiones Rei 
Herbaria. These books, with a few observations of my own, as I 
walked in the gardens, in the fields, and on the plains, furnished 
me with sufficient knowledge of this kind for the present. The vast 
folios on this subject are not for beginners.

Chemistry was the next thing my director bid me look into, and to 
this purpose I perused Boerhaave's Elementa Chemiae, and Hoffman's 
Observationes Physico-Chemia. These afford as much chemistry as a 
young physician need set out with; but as books alone give but an 
imperfect conception, I performed most of the common operations in 
Beecher's portable furnace.

The Materia Medica in the next place had my attention, that is, 
those animal, vegetable, and fossil substances, which are used to 
prevent, cure, or palliate diseases. And in order to know the names 
of all the drugs, their history, the adulterations they are subject 
to, their virtues, their dose, their manner of using them, and the 
cautions which they require, to get a sufficient knowledge of this 
kind, I looked into Geoffrey's Materia Medica, and made a collection 
of the Materia at the same time, that I might conceive and remember 
what I read.

Pharmacy, or the art of preparing and compounding medicines, was the 
next thing I endeavoured to be a master of. And that I might know 
how to exalt their virtues, to obviate their ill qualities, and to 
make them less nauseous, I read to this purpose, Quincy's 
Pharmaceutical Lectures and Dispensatory, and took care to be well 
versed in all the Pharmacopaeias, those of London, Edinburgh, Paris, 
Boerhaave, Bate, and Fuller. And I read very carefully Gaubin's 
Methodus Praescribendi. This gave me the materials, and taught me 
the form of prescribing.

Anatomy I studied next, that is, the art of dividing the several 
parts of a body, so as to know their size, figure, situation, 
connexions, and make. I began with Drake and Keil, and then read 
over Winslow. I had likewise open before me at the same time, at my 
entrance upon this study, a good set of plates, the tables of 
Eustachius and Cooper, and turned them carefully over as I read. The 
doctor then showed me how to dissect, but chiefly by the direction 
of a book entitled Culter Anatomicus: ou Methode Courte, Facile, et 
Claire de Dissequer les Corps Humaines. I was soon able to perform 
myself. It was the third edition of the above book, by Lyserus, in 
1679; which has many curious anatomical observations added to it by 
Gaspar Bartholin, the son of the celebrated Thomas Batholin, 
professor at Copenhagen. Michel Lysère was the disciple of the great 
Thomas Bartholin, who died in December, 1680, in his 64th year. 
Michel died early in life, in 1656, a very young man, "regretté à 
cause de son merite." I had also Nichol's Compendium, and Hunter's 
Compendium. By these means, and by reading the authors who have 
written upon some one part only; such as Peyerus de Glandulis 
Intestinus. Experimenta circa Pancras. De Graaf de Organis 
Generationis. Gasp. Bartholin de Diaphragm. Malpigius de Pulmonibus, 
de Venibus, de Liene, et de Cornuum Vegetatione. Lower de Corde, de 
Ventriculo, et de Cerebri Anat. Willis de Respiratione. Glisson de 
Hepatae. Casserius de Vocis Auditusque Organis. Walsalou de Aure. 
Havers on the Bones. Munro on the Bones. Douglas on the Muscles. 
Morgagni Adversaria. Ruyshii Opera. Nuck's Adenographia. Wharton's 
Adenographia. Ridley's Anatomy of the Brain. Santorini 
Observationes. Boneti Sepulchrum Anatomicum. Blasii Anatomia 
Animalium. Tyson's Anatomy of the Oran-Outang. By these means, I cut 
up the body of a young woman, I had from a neighbouring churchyard, 
and acquired knowledge enough of anatomy.

N. B. If all the pieces written upon some one part of the body, are 
not to be had single, the reader inclined to the delightful study of 
physic, will find them in the Bibliotheca Anatomica, 2 vols. folio.

Here, before I proceed, I will mention a very curious case, which 
occurred in my dissecting the body I have spoken of. It was as 
remarkable an example of a preternatural structure as ever appeared. 
In cutting her up, there was found two vaginas, and a right and left 
uterus. Each uterus had its corresponding vagina, and the uteri and 
the vaginae lay parallel to each other; there was only one ovarium; 
but two perfect hymens. The labia stretched so as to take in the 
anus, terminating beyond it; and as they were in large ridges, and 
well armed, the whole had a formidable appearance. If it should be 
asked, Could a perfect superfoetation take place in such a person? 
Most certainly there might be one conception upon the back of 
another at different times; therefore, I should not choose to marry 
a woman with two vaginas, if it was possible to know it before 
wedlock.

But to proceed. The next things I read, were the institutes of 
medicine, that is, such books as treat of the economy and 
contrivance of nature in adapting the parts to their several uses. 
The books purely physiological, are, Keil's Tentamina. Sanctorii 
Aphorismi. Bellini de Pulsibus et Urina. Borellus de Motu Animalium. 
Harvey de Motu Cordis, and de Generatione Animalium, both admirable 
pieces. Friend's Emmenologia. Simpson's System of the Womb. And 
Pitcairne's Tracts. These are the best things relating to 
physiology, which may be called the first part of the Institutions 
of Physic.

The second part of the Institutes is the Art of preserving such a 
system as the body, in an order fit for the exercise of its 
functions as long as possible. The third part is pathology, which 
teaches the different manners in which diseases happen; and the 
various causes of these disorders, with their attendants and 
consequences. The fourth part is the doctrine of signs, by which a 
judgment is formed of the sound or bad state of the animal. And the 
fifth is Therapeutica, that is, the means and method of restoring 
sanity to a distempered body. Treatises on all these matters, are 
what we call institutions of physic, and in relation to the four 
last mentioned, the best books are, Hoffman's Systema Medicinae 
Rationalis, and Boerhaave's Institutions, with his lectures upon 
them. These books I read with great attention, and found them 
sufficient.

Being instituted in this manner, I turned next to the practical 
writers, and read the history of diseases and their cure from 
observations of nature. This is called pathologia particularis, and 
is the great business of a physician. All that has been said is only 
preparatory to this study. Here then I first very carefully read the 
authors who have written a system of all diseases; and then, such 
writers as have considered particular cases. The best system writers 
are Boerhaave's Aphorisms and Comment. Hoffman's Pathologia 
Particularis; being the last part of his Systema Medicinae. Jumher's 
Conspectus Medicinae. Allen's Synopsis. Shaw's Practice of Physic; 
and Lomnii Opusculum Aureum.

The writers on a few and particular distempers are Sydenhami Opera. 
Moreton's Puretologia. Bellini de Morbis Capites et Pectoris. 
Ramazzini de Morbis Artificium. Wepsemus de Apoplexia. Floyer on 
Asthma. Astruc de Lue Venerea. Turner's Synopsis, and of the Skin. 
Musgrave de Arthritide. Highmore de Passione Hysterica et 
Hypocondria. Glisson de Rachitide. Clericus de Lumbrica Lato. 
Daventer Ars Obstetricandi. Mauriceau des Femmes Grosses. Harris de 
Morbis Infantium. Turner's Letter to a Young Physician. All these 
books I read very carefully, and to your reading add the best 
observations you can anywhere get, or make yourself. I wrote down in 
the shortest manner, abstracts of the most curious and useful 
things, especially the representations of nature; and refreshed my 
memory by often looking into my note-book. Everything taken from 
nature is valuable. Hypothesis is entertaining rather than useful.

And when I was reading the history of diseases in the authors I have 
just mentioned, I looked into the ancient Greek and Latin medical 
writers; for all their merit lies in this kind of history. Their 
pharmacy and anatomy is good for nothing. They scarce knew anything 
of the human bodies, but from the dissections of other animals, took 
their descriptions. The great Vesalius in the beginning of the 
sixteenth century, was the first that taught physicians to study 
nature in dissecting human bodies; which was then considered by the 
church as a kind of sacrilege<228>. As to chemistry, they had no 
notion of it. It was not heard of till some hundred years after the 
latest of them. In botany they had made little progress, in short, 
as they knew little of botany, and nothing of chemistry; as their 
systems of natural philosophy and anatomy were false and unnatural, 
and it is upon anatomy and natural philosophy, that physiology or 
the use of the parts is founded, we can expect nothing from the 
ancients upon these heads, but mere imaginations, or notions 
unsupported by observation or matter of fact. It is their history of 
diseases that supports their character. Hippocrates, in particular, 
excels all others on this head; but this great man was not perfect 
even in this. Knowledge in nature is the daughter of time and 
experience. Many notions of the animal economy were then absurd, and 
if Hippocrates was too wise to act always up to his theory, yet he 
could not be entirely free from its influence.

The names of the ancient original Greek medical writers are 
Hippocrates, Dioscorides, Aritaeus, Galen, and Alexander. The Latin 
writers of physic are, Celsus, Scribonius Largus, Caelius 
Aurelianus, Marcellus Empericus, Theodorus Priscianus, and Sextus 
Placitus. We have besides several collectors, as Oribasius, Aetius, 
Paulus AEginata, &c. Nicander, the medical poet; and the fragments 
of Soranus, Rufus Ephesius, Zonorates, Vindicianus, Diocles 
Carystius, Cassius, and a few others; but all these may be looked 
into afterwards. The original authors are sufficient in the 
noviciate.

As to the Latin medical writers, Celsus, and Caelius Aurelianus 
only, are worth reading. Celsus lived in the latter end of the reign 
of Augustus, and is admirable for the purity of his Latin, and the 
elegance of his sense. You must have him night and morning in your 
hands, till you are a master of the terms and expressions peculiar 
to physic, which occur in him. The style of Clius is very bad, and 
his cavils tedious; but his description of diseases is full and 
accurate. In this respect he is a very valuable writer. He lived in 
the second century, as did Galen likewise.

As to Hippocrates, who was contemporary with Socrates, he was born 
the first year of the 80th Olympiad, 460 before Christ. Rene 
Chartier's edition printed at Paris, 1639, is the most pompous: but 
Vander Linden's, printed at Leyden in 1668, two vols. 8vo, is the 
best. When I read Hippocrates, I also looked into Prosper Alpini's 
good book de Presagienda Vita et Morte AEgrotantium, in which he has 
with great care collected and methodized all the scattered 
observations of Hippocrates, relating to the dangerous or salutary 
appearances in diseases. At the same time, I likewise read this 
great man's Medicina Methodica. Alpinus, born in Nov. 1553, died 
professor of botany at Padua, Feb. 1617, AEt. 64. The best 
commentators on Hippocrates, whose names you will find in 
Conringius's Introduction, are also worthy of reference.

The best edition of Dioscorides's Materia Medica, is that of 
Frankfurt, 1598, folio. The best edition of Aritaeus, who lived 
before Julius Caesar's time, as Dioscorides did, A. D. [sic] 46, is 
Boerhaave's, 1731, folio. The best editions of Galen's works, are 
those of Basle, 1538, in 5 vols. and of Venice, 1625, in 7 volumes, 
folio. Alexander of Tralles flourished in the 6th century, under 
Justinian the Great, and left the following works. Therapeutica, 
Lib. xii. De Singularum Corporis Partium Vitiis, AEgritudinibus, et 
Injuriis, Lib. v. Epist. de Lumbricis. Tractatus de Puerorum Morbis. 
Liber de Febribus. The best Greek copy is that of Stephens, Paris, 
1548, folio. In Greek and Latin, Basil, 1658. But in neither of 
these editions is to be found the Epistle de Lumbricis. You must 
look for that in the 12th volume of Fabricius's Bibliotheca Graeca.

In the last place, besides all the authors I have mentioned, I 
likewise looked into the original observation writers, and 
miscellaneous books relating to physic. They afford excellent 
knowledge, where the authors are faithful and judicious. Such are 
the Observationes Medicae of Nicolaus Tulpius, a curious book; and 
the dedication of it to his son Peter, a student in Physic, good 
advice. The second edition of 1652 is the best, being a fourth part 
larger than the first which came out in 1641. The Observationes et 
Curationes Medicinales of Petrus Forestus, Lib. xxii. The 
Observationes Medicae of Joannes Theodorus Schenkius, and the 
various Journals and Transactions of learned Societies, which are 
repositories in which the physician finds much rare and valuable 
knowledge. And as a physician ought to have a little acquaintance 
with the modern practice of surgery, I concluded with Heister's, 
Turner's, and Sharp's Surgery.



CHAPTER XXV. 

By this method of studying physic in the middle of a wood, and 
employing my time and pains in reading the ancients, and considering 
their plain and natural account of diseases, I became a Doctor, as 
well as if I had been a regular collegiate. But it is time to think 
of my various story. Having married the illustrious JULIA, as 
related in a preceding page, and by the death of her father soon 
after the wedding, acquired a handsome settlement, a considerable 
sum of money, and a valuable collection of books, I thought myself 
so happily situated in the midst of flourishing mercies, and so well 
secured from adversity, that it was hardly possible for the flame of 
destruction to reach me. But when I had not the least reason to 
imagine calamity was near me, and fondly imagined prosperity was my 
own, infelicity came stalking on unseen: and from a fullness of 
peace, plunged us at once into an abyss of woe. It was our wont, 
when the evenings were fine, to take boat at the bottom of a meadow, 
at the end of our garden, and in the middle of a deep river, pass an 
hour or two in fishing; but at last, by some accident or other, a 
slip of the foot, or the boat's being got a little too far from the 
bank-side, JULIA fell in and was drowned. This happened in the tenth 
month of our marriage. The loss of this charming angel in such a 
manner, sat powerfully on my spirits for some time; and the 
remembrance of her perfections, and the delights I enjoyed while she 
lived, made me wish I had never seen her. To be so vastly happy as I 
was, and be deprived of her in a moment, in so shocking a way, was 
an affliction I was hardly able to bear. It struck me to the heart. 
I sat with my eyes shut ten days.

But losses and pains I considered were the portion of mortals in 
this trying state, and from thence we ought to learn to give up our 
own wills; and to get rid of all eager wishes, and violent 
affection, that we may take up our rest wholly in that which 
pleaseth God. Carrying our submission to him so far, as to bless his 
correcting hand, and kiss that rod that cures our passionate 
eagerness, perverseness, and folly.

We ought likewise to learn from such things, to look upon the sad 
accidents of life, as not worthy to be compared with what Christ 
underwent for our sakes, who, though he was a Son, yet he learned 
obedience by the things that he suffered; and with Christian 
resignation live in a quiet expectance of a future happy state, 
after our patience has had its perfect work: Considering that these 
light and momentary afflictions, are not worthy to be compared with 
the glory that Christ hath purchased for us; and if we are faithful 
to death, hath promised to bestow upon us.

In all these things resigning to the wisdom of God, and not merely 
to his will and authority, believing his disposal to be wisest and 
best; and that his declarations and promises are true, though we 
cannot in some cases discern the reason of such an end, and such 
means being connected, nor can imagine how some promises can be made 
good. Patience, I said, my soul! Patience, and what thou knowest not 
now, thou shalt know in a little time. Thus I reasoned, as I sat 
with my eyes shut, and Juvenal's observation recurred to my 
recollection:

Omnibus in terris quae sunt a Gadibus usque 
Auroram et Gangem, pauci dignoscere possunt 
Vera bona, atque illis multum diversa remota 
Erroris nebula: quid enim ratione timemus 
Aut cupimus? Quid tam dextro pede concipis, ut te 
Conatus non paeniteat, votique peracti?<229>


Having thus given vent to reflection, I called to SOTO O'FINN, my 
man, to bring the horses out immediately, and I would go somewhere 
or other to see new scenes, and if I could, get another wife; as I 
was born with the disease of repletion, and had made a resolution 
not to fornicate, it was incumbent on me to have a sister and 
companion, with whom I might lawfully carry on the succession. As a 
friend to society, and passively obedient to the laws of my higher 
country, a wife for ever, I declared; for, if on losing one, we can 
be still so fortunate as to get another, who is pretty without 
pride; witty without affectation; to virtue only and her friends a 
friend:

Whose sense is great, and great her skill, 
For reason always guides her will; 
Civil to all to all she's just, 
And faithful to her friend and trust: 
Whose character, in short, is such, 
That none can love or praise too much.

If such a charmer should again appear, and ten thousand such there 
ever are among the sex, silly and base though the majority may be; 
what man could say he had had enough of wedlock, because he had 
buried seven such wives? I am sure I could not. And if, like the men 
who were but striplings at fourscore, in the beginning of this 
world, I was to live for ages, and by accidents lost such partners 
as I have described; I would with rapture take hundreds of them to 
my breast, one after another, and piously propagate the kind. The 
most despicable of all creatures is a w——. An abomination to heaven: 
and if God was a mere fanciful fear; yet such a wretch the 
prostitute is, that neither honour nor honesty can ever be expected 
from her. But, in defiance to divine and human laws, she lives a foe 
to mankind; to ruin the fortune, disease the body, and for ever damn 
the soul of the miserable man, who is dunce enough to become a 
Limberham to the execrable wretch. The misfortunes I have known 
happen to gentlemen of my acquaintance, by street-w——, chamber-w——, 
and kept w——, would make a volume as large as this I am writing, and 
leave another world quite out of the history. I have seen gentlemen 
of the best fortunes and education, become worn-out beggars in the 
streets of London, without anything hardly to cover them, by the 
means of those execrable harlots; some have become bullies to 
brothels; and many I have beheld going to the gallows, by 
maintaining the falsest and least engaging of women; but take a 
modest sensible woman to your heart, who has the fear of the great 
God before her eyes, and a regard to the laws of her country, share 
your fortune generously with her, that she may have her innocent 
amusements and dress, be for ever good-humoured, be true to her bed, 
and every felicity you may taste that it is possible to enjoy in 
this lower hemisphere. Let a wife be our choice, as we are 
rationals.

With these notions in my head, I mounted my horse; and determined, 
in the first place, to pay a visit to my two beauties at Orton 
Lodge, who were by this time at age, and see what opinions they had 
acquired, and if they had any commands for me. But when I arrived at 
my romantic spot, I found the ladies were gone, all places shut up, 
and no soul there; the key of the house-door was left for me, and a 
note fastened to it, to inform me how the affair was.

"Sir, 

"Not having had the favour of hearing from you for almost 
three years, and despairing of that honour and happiness any 
more, we have left your fine solitude, to look after our 
fortunes, as we are of age; and on enquiry have found, that 
old Cock, our cruel guardian, is dead and gone. We are under 
infinite obligations to you, have an extreme sense of your 
goodness, and hope, if you are yet in the land of the living, 
that we shall soon be so happy as to get some account of you, 
to the end we may return the weighty balance due from, 

Sir, 

Your most obliged, 

and ever humble servants."

From the date of this letter it appeared, that they were not a month 
gone before my arrival; but to what place they said not, and it was 
in vain for me to enquire. I found everything in good order, and all 
the goods safe; the garden full of fruits and vegetables, and plenty 
of various eatables in the house, pickled, potted, and preserved. As 
it was in the month of June, the solitude looked vastly charming in 
its vales and forest, its rocks and waters; and for a month I strove 
to amuse myself there, in fishing, shooting, and improving the 
ground; but it was so dull, so sad a scene, when I missed the bright 
companions I had with me in former days, who used to wander with me 
in the valleys, up the hills, by the streams, and make the whole a 
paradise all the day long, that I could not bear it longer than four 
weeks; and rode from thence to Dr. STANVIL'S seat, to ask him how he 
did, and look once more at that fine curiosity, Miss DUNK that was, 
but at the time I am speaking of, his wife. However, before I left 
my lodge, I made a discovery one day, as I was exploring the wild 
country, round my little house, that was entertaining enough, and to 
this day, in remembrance, seems to me so agreeable, that I imagine a 
relation of this matter may be grateful to my Readers. It contains 
the story of a lady, who cannot be enough admired, can never be 
sufficiently praised.



THE HISTORY OF THE BEAUTIFUL LEONORA.

As I rambled one summer's morning, with my gun and my dog, over the 
vast mountains which surrounded me at Orton Lodge, I came as the sun 
was rising to a valley about four miles from my house, which I had 
not seen before, as the way to it, over the fells, was a dangerous 
road. It was green and flowery, had clumps of oaks in several spots, 
and from the hovering top of a precipice at the end of the glen, a 
river falls engulfed in rifted rocks. It is a fine rural scene.

Here I sat down to rest myself, and was admiring the natural 
beauties of the place, when I saw three females turn into the vale, 
and walk towards the waterfall. One of them, who appeared to be the 
mistress, had an extravagance of beauty in her face, and a form such 
as I had not often seen. The others were pretty women, dressed like 
Quakers, and very clean. They came very near the water where I was, 
but did not see me, as I was behind two rocks which almost joined: 
and after they had looked a while at the headlong river, they went 
back, and entering a narrow way between two hills disappeared. I was 
greatly surprised at what I had seen, not imagining I had such a 
neighbour in Richmondshire, and resolved to know who this beauty 
was. The wonders of her face, her figure, and her mien, were 
striking to the last degree.

Arising then as soon as they were out of sight, I walked on to the 
turning I saw them enter; and in half an hour's time came to a 
plain, through which several brooks wandered, and on the margin of 
one of them, was a grove and a mansion. It was a sweet habitation, 
at the entrance of the little wood; and before the door, on banks of 
flowers, sat the illustrious owner of this retreat, and her two 
maids. In such a place, in such a manner, so unexpectedly to find so 
charming a woman, seemed to me as pleasing an incident as could be 
met with in travelling over the world.

At my coming near this lady she appeared to be astonished, and to 
wonder much at seeing such an inhabitant in that part of the world: 
but on pulling off my hat, and telling her I came to visit her as 
her neighbour; to pay my humble respects to her, and beg the honour 
of her acquaintance; she asked me, from what vale or mountain I 
came, and how long I had been a resident in that wild part of the 
world ? This produced a compend of some part of my story, and when I 
had done, she desired, me to walk in. Coffee and hot rolls was soon 
brought, and we breakfasted cheerfully together. I took my leave 
soon after, having made her a present of some black cocks and a hare 
I had shot that morning; and hoped, if it was possible to find an 
easy way to my lodge, which I did not yet know, that I should some 
time or other be honoured with her presence at my little house; 
which was worth her seeing, as it was situated in the most 
delightful part of this romantic silent place, and had many 
curiosities near it; that in the meantime, if it was agreeable, I 
would wait upon her again, before I left Richmondshire, which would 
be soon: for I only came to see how things were, and was obliged to 
hasten another way. This beauty replied, that it would give her 
pleasure to see me when I had a few hours to spare. From this 
invitation I went three times more within a short-space, we became 
well acquainted, and after dinner one day, she gave me the following 
relation.

"My name was LEONORA SARSFIELD before I married an Irishman, one 
BURKE, whom I met at Avignon in France. He is one of the handsomest 
men of the age, though his hopes were all his fortune; but he has 
proved himself a villain as great as ever disgraced mankind. His 
breeding and his eloquence, added to his fine figure, induced me to 
fancy him an angel of a man, and to imagine I had well bestowed a 
hundred thousand pounds, to make him great, and as happy as the day 
is long. For three months he played the god, and I fondly thought 
there was not such another happy woman as myself in all the world, 
but I was mistaken. BURKE found out by some means or other, that I 
had concealed five thousand pounds of my fortune from his knowledge; 
and that I was in my heart so good a Protestant, that it was 
impossible to bring me over to Popery, or ever get me to be an 
idolater at the mass, before the tiny god of dough: that I could 
never be brought to look upon the invented superstitions, and 
horrible corruptions of the church of Rome, as the true religion; 
nor be ever persuaded to assist at the Latin service in that 
communion, as it must be an abomination to Christ and to God, if the 
gospel may be depended upon as the rule of faith. When BURKE 
perceived these things, he threw off the disguise, and appeared a 
monster instead of a man, a bigot of the first order, as he was a 
furious papist, which I did not know, when we married; and as he was 
by nature as cruel, as he was avaricious by principle, he began to 
use me in the vilest manner, and by words and deeds, did all he 
could to make my life a burden to me. He was for ever abusing me in 
the vilest language; cursing me for a heretic for ever damned; and 
by blows compelling me to inform him where my money was; he has left 
me covered with my own blood very often, and when he found I still 
held out, and would not discover to him what remained of my fortune, 
nor violate my religion, which I valued much more than my money; by 
renouncing the customs and practice of the Reformed Church, and 
joining in the sinful worship of the Mass; he came to me one night 
with a small oak sapling, and beat me in such a manner as left me 
almost dead. He then went out of the house, told me he would return 
by twelve, and make me comply, or he would break every bone in my 
body. This happened at a country seat of mine in this shire; all the 
servants being obliged to lie every night in an out-house, that he 
might have the more power over me. His excessive avarice was but one 
cause of this inhuman behaviour: it was the zeal of this raging 
bigot for his ever-cursed popery, that made him act the unrelenting 
inquisitor.

"I asked you, Sir, before I began my story, if you were a Catholic, 
and as you assured me you were the very reverse, I may indulge 
myself a little in expressing my resentments against that religion 
of Satan, which the Popish doctors drew out of the bottomless pit. 
It is a religion formed in hell by devils, and from them brought by 
those arch-politicians, the mass-priests, to make the world their 
slaves, or rack the human race to death, by torments that would 
perhaps melt even devils. O bloody and infernal scheme of worship! 
Surely there is some chosen curse, some hidden thunder in the stores 
of heaven, red with just wrath to blast the men, who owe their 
greatness to their apostasy from the religion of Christ Jesus: and 
to the woes and pains they lay on mankind. By the religion of modern 
Rome, you see in me a wife almost tortured to extinction by a holy 
Roman Catholic husband: nor am I the only married Protestant woman, 
who has felt the stripes and bruises of a merciless popish 
companion. Thousands to be sure have suffered as well as I upon the 
same account, though none in so miserable a manner. Even fathers 
have lost all bowels for their children, and become the most violent 
persecutors, when the blessed religion of popery has been in 
dispute. Children, for its sake, have destroyed their parents, and 
the world has been turned into a field of blood, to feed and support 
those dreadful slaughterers, the mass-priests; and gratify the blind 
and impious religious fancies of their well-taught religionists, 
commonly called Catholics. What I have suffered gives me a true 
sense of popery. It has made me consider its errors and iniquities 
with double attention. I tremble at the thoughts of its prevailing 
in this land. How direful is popery, whether we consider it in a 
religious view, or regard it as a political contrivance, to gratify 
the avarice and ambition of the clergy, it appears the just object 
of our contempt, as well as of our abhorrence. It not only makes its 
priests the slaughterers of mankind; witness the inquisition, the 
Morisco's, Thorn<230>, England, Ireland, France, the Low Countries, 
Hungary, and other theatres of barbarity, the most shocking and 
inhuman; but it causes even husbands to become mere devils to wives 
who are angels of women in mind and body, and can only be charged 
with their being protestants. Could that religion come down from 
heaven, which claims a right not only to persecute single persons, 
but to devote whole nations to destruction by the blackest 
treachery, and most inhuman massacres; and which teaches such 
absurdities as transubstantiation, masses, purgatory, penances, 
indulgences, and attrition: absurdities that dissipate the poor 
Romans of those guilty fears, which natural conscience might 
otherwise keep alive in men. Such things, without mentioning the 
adoration of the cross and other images, and the increasing 
multitude of imaginary mediators, entirely destroy the credibility 
of any system with which they are connected. God cannot be the 
author of a scheme which weakens and corrupts the law of nature.

"But as to my tragical relation," continued Leonora, "being thus 
left by BURKE in this sad situation, bleeding, and miserable with 
pains, but still in dread of worse usage on his return, I crawled 
down stairs, to a small door in a back place, which opened to a 
private way out of the house. This was known only to myself, as it 
was a passage my father had made, in case of thieves, or any 
villains, from a little unfrequented cellar, by a narrow ascending 
arch, to a thicket in the corner of a shrubby field, at a small 
distance from the house. To a labyrinth made in this small grove I 
made what haste I could, and had not been long there, before I 
perceived through the trees my inhuman husband; and as he came near 
me, heard him say, "She shall tell me where my money is, for all she 
has is mine; and worship our Lady and the host, or I will burn her 
flesh off her bones, and make her feel as many torments here, as the 
heretics are tortured with in everlasting pain." The sight of the 
monster made me tremble to so violent a degree, that I was scarcely 
able to proceed to the cottage of a poor woman, my sure friend, 
about two miles from the place I was hid in; but I did my best to 
creep through cross ways, and after many difficulties, and suffering 
much by going over ditches, I got to my resting-place. The old 
woman, my nurse, screeched at the sight of me, as I was sadly torn, 
and all over gore. Such a spectacle as I presented has been seldom 
seen. But by peace and proper things, I got well again in two 
months, and removed to this lone house, which my father had built in 
this spot for his occasional retirement. Here I have been for two 
years past, and am as happy as I desire to be: nay vastly so, as I 
am now free and delivered from a monster, whose avarice and cruelty 
made me a spectacle to angels and men: because, Sir, I would not 
reduce myself to the state of a beggar, to satisfy his insatiable 
love of money: nor worship his dead woman, and bit of bread; his 
rabble of saints, images, relics, and that sovereign cheat, the 
Pope; because I would not give up all I had, and become an idolater, 
as far more despicable and sinful than the ancient Pagans; as the 
Romish ritual and devotions, are more stupid and abominable than the 
Heathen religion; for disobedience in these respects, pains and 
penalties without ceasing were my appointment, and I was for some 
months as miserable as the damned.

"Such, Sir, was my fatal marriage, which I thought would be a stock 
of such felicities, that time only by many years could reduce to an 
evanescent state, and deprive me of. As Venus was at the bridal with 
her whole retinue; the ardent amorous boy, the sister-graces in 
their loose attire; Aglavia, Thalia, and Euphrosine, bright, 
blooming, and gay; and was attended by Youth, that wayward thing 
without her; was conducted by Mercury, the god of eloquence, and by 
Pitho, the goddess of persuasion; as all seemed pleasurable and 
enchanting, my young imagination formed golden scenes, and painted a 
happiness quite glorious and secure. But how precarious and 
perishing is what we mortals call felicity! Love and his mother 
disappeared very soon, as I have related; and to them succeeded 
impetuous passion, intense, raging, and terrible, with all the 
furies in the train. The masked hero I had married was a Phalaris, a 
miser, a papist; a wretch who had no taste for love, no conception 
of virtue, no sense of charms; but to gold and popery would 
sacrifice everything that is fair and laudable. Le Diable a 
quatre<231> he shined in as a player, and was the Devil himself in 
flesh and blood. 'Where is the rest of your gold, you b——?' with 
uplifted arm, was the cry thundered in my ears. 'You shall be a 
Catholic, d—— you, or I will pinch off the flesh from your bones.'"

Here the beautiful LEONORA had done, and I wondered very greatly at 
her relation, nor was her action in speaking it, and the spirit with 
which she talked, less surprising. With admiration I beheld her, and 
was not a little pleased, that I had found in my neighbourhood so 
extraordinary a person, and so very fine an original. This lady had 
some reason to abhor the word Catholic, and might well be angry with 
popery, though she carried her resentment a little too far; but had 
the reader seen her attitude, her energies, and the faces she made, 
when she mentioned the corruptions of popery, or the word husband, 
sure I am, it would be thought much more striking than Garrick in 
Richard, or Shuter in his exhibition of Old Philpot. I was greatly 
delighted with her, and as she was very agreeable in everything, I 
generally went every second day to visit her, during the short time 
I continued in Richmondshire.



CHAPTER XXVI.
Bear me, ye friendly powers, to gentler scenes, 
To shady bowers, and never-fading greens; 
To flowery meads, the vales, and mazy woods, 
Some sweet soft seat, adorn'd with springs and floods: 
Where with the muses, I may spend my days, 
And steal myself from life by slow decays. 
With age unknown to pain or sorrow blest, 
To the dark grave retiring as to rest; 
While gently with one sigh this mortal frame, 
Dissolving turns to ashes whence it came; 
And my freed soul departs without a groan, 
In transport wings her flight to worlds unknown.<232>

July 2, 1734, I journeyed from Orton Lodge, to Bassora, to pay my 
respects to Dr. STANVIL and his charming consort, and was received 
by them both with the greatest goodness and civility; but as before, 
this lady did not seem to have had any former acquaintance, one 
might well think from the part she acted, that she had never seen 
me, till the accident I have related brought me to her husband's 
house. I did not however even hint anything to the contrary, but 
turning to the Doctor a little after my arrival, began to ask him 
some questions.

As he had an Essay on Fevers in his hand, when I entered the room, I 
requested to know how he accounted for the effects of Cantharides, 
in raising and strengthening a low trembling pulse, and driving the 
natural heat and efflatus of the blood outward, in giving relief in 
delirious ravings, stupors, and loss of reason, in reducing 
continual fevers to distinct remissions, and in cleansing and 
opening the obstructed glands and lymphatics, so as to bring on the 
critical sweats, let loose the saliva and glandular secretions, and 
bring down the thick soluble urine? How does blistering, so happily 
brought in by the physical bully of this age, Dr. Radcliffe, so 
wonderfully cool and dilute the blood? It seems to me somewhat 
strange.

"It is easily accounted for," replied Dr. STANVIL. "The Spanish fly, 
an extremely hot and perfectly caustic insect, is stocked with a 
subtle, active, and extremely pungent salt, which enters the blood 
upon the application of the blister, and passes with it through the 
several glandular strainers and secretory ducts. This stimulating 
force of the fly's salt, occasions the pain felt in making the water 
with a blister, which may be taken off by a thin emulsion made with 
the pulp of roasted apples in milk and water, and causes the 
liberal, foul, and stinking sweats, while the Epispastic is on.

"This being evident, it is plain from thence, that the penetrating 
salts of the fly, that is, the volatile pungent parts of the 
cantharides, act in the blood by dissolving, attenuating, and 
rarefying the viscid cohesions of the lymph and serum; by 
stimulating the nervous coats of the vessels, throw off their 
stagnating viscidities, and by cleansing the glands, and forcing out 
the coagulated serum, restore the circulation and freedom of lymph 
from the arteries to the veins; opening, scouring and cleansing at 
the same time, the expurgatory glands.

In short, as common cathartics purge the guts, and cleanse and throw 
off their clammy, stagnating, and obstructing contents, by rarefying 
and dissolving the viscid cohesions of the fluids, and by 
stimulating the solids; so do the active salts of the fly penetrate 
the whole animal machine, become a glandular lymphatic purge, and 
perform the same thing in all the small straining conveying pipes, 
that common purgatives effect in the intestines: and as by this 
means, all the sluices and outlets of the glandular secretions are 
opened, the cantharides must be cooling, diluting, and refrigerating 
in their effects to the greatest degree, though so very hot, 
caustic, and pungent in themselves. So wonderfully has the great 
Creator provided for his creature, man; in giving him not only a 
variety of the most pleasing food, but so fine a medicine, among a 
thousand others, as the Spanish fly, to save him from the destroying 
fever, and restore him to health again. It is not by a discharge of 
serum, as too many doctors imagine that a blister relieves, for five 
times the quantity may be brought off by bleeding, vomiting, or 
purging; but the benefit is entirely owing to that heating, 
attenuating, and pungent salt of this fly, and this fly only, which 
the divine power and goodness has made a lymphatic purgative, or 
glandular cathartic for the relief of man, in this fatal and 
tormenting malady. Vast is our obligation to God for all his 
providential blessings. Great are the wonders that he doth for the 
children of men."

Here the Doctor dropped off his chair, just as he had pronounced the 
word men, and in a moment became a lifeless sordid body. His death 
was occasioned by the blowing up of his stomach, as I found upon 
opening his body, at the request of his lady. When the blood which 
is confined within the vessels of the human body, is agitated with a 
due motion, it maintains life; but if there be a stagnation of it in 
an artery, it makes an aneurism; in a vein, a varix; under the skin, 
a bruise; in the nose, it may excite an haemorrhage; in the vessels 
of the brain, an apoplexy; in the lungs, an haemoptoe; in the cavity 
of the thorax, an empyema; and when it perfectly stagnates there, 
immediate death.

An animal, observe me, reader, must live so long as this fluid 
circulates through the conical pipes in his body, from the lesser 
base in the centre, the heart, to the greater in the extreme parts; 
and from the capillary evanescent arteries, by the nascent returning 
veins to the heart again; but when this fluid ceases to flow through 
the incurved canals, and the velocities are no longer in the inverse 
duplicate ratio of the inflated pipes, then it dies. The animal has 
done for ever with food and sex; the two great principles which move 
this world, and produce not only so much honest industry, but so 
many wars and fightings, such cruel oppressions, and that variety of 
woes we read of in the tragical history of the world. Even one of 
them does wonders. Cunnus teterrima belli causa<233>. And when 
united, the force is irresistible.

But as I was saying, when this fluid ceases to flow, the man has 
done with lust and hunger. The pope, the warrior, and the maid, are 
still. The machine is at absolute rest, that is, in perfect 
insensibility; and the soul of it is removed to the vestibulum or 
porch of the highest holy place; in a vehicle, says Wollaston, and 
Burnet of the Charterhouse, as needful to our contact with the 
material system, as it must exist with a spiritual body, says the 
Rev. Caleb Fleming, in his Survey of the Search after Souls, because 
of its being present with its Saviour, beholding his glory, who is 
in human form and figure, which requires some similitude in the 
vehicle, in order to the more easy and familiar society and 
enjoyment. Or, as the learned Master of Peterhouse, Dr. Edmund Law, 
and Dr. Sherlock, bishop of London inform us, it remains insensible 
for ages, till the consummation of all things; from the dissolution 
of the body, is stupid, senseless, and dead asleep till the 
resurrection.

Such was the case of my friend, Dr. STANVIL; he dropped down dead at 
once. A rarefaction in his stomach, by the heat and fermentation of 
what he had taken the night before at supper, destroyed him. That 
concave viscus, or bowel, which is seated in the abdomen below the 
diaphragm, I mean the stomach, was inflamed, and as the descending 
trunk of the aorta passes down between it and the spine, that is, 
between the stomach and back part of the ribs, the inflation and 
distention of the bowel compressed and constringed the transverse 
section of the artery aorta, in its descending branch, and by 
lessening it, impeded the descent of the blood from the heart, and 
obliged it to ascend in a greater quantity than usual to the head. 
By this means, the parts of the head were distended and stretched 
with blood, which brought on an apoplexy, and the operation upward 
being violent, the equilibrium was entirely broken, and the vital 
tide could flow no more. This I found on opening the body. I 
likewise observed that, exclusive of the compressure of the 
descending trunk of the artery aorta, the muscular coats of the 
stomach were stretched, inflated, and distended; and of consequence, 
the blood-vessels which enter into the constitution of those 
muscles, were stretched, dilated, and turgid with blood, and 
therefore the blood could not be driven forward in the course of its 
circulation with its natural and due velocity, but must prove an 
obstacle to the descent of the blood from the heart, and oblige 
almost the whole tide to move upwards. This, and the constringing 
the aorta, at its orifice or transverse section, between the costa 
and the bowel called the stomach, is enough, I assure you, Reader, 
to knock up the head of a giant, and put a stop to all the 
operations of nature. Thus fell this gentleman in the thirty-second 
year of his age.

Whether the learned Dr. Edmund Law,<234> and the great Dr. 
Sherlock<235> bishop of London, be right, in asserting, the human 
soul sleeps like a bat or a swallow, in some cavern for a period, 
till the last trumpet awakens Lewis XIV. the hero of Voltaire and 
Henault; to answer for his treachery, falsehood, and cruelty; or, 
whether that excellent divine Mr Fleming has declared the truth, in 
maintaining in his late Survey, that the conscious scheme was the 
doctrine of Christ and his apostles; this however is certain, that 
my friend STANVIL, is either now present with his Saviour, beholding 
his glory, in a vehicle resembling the body of our Lord; as the 
dissenter just mentioned teaches; or if, according to Archdeacon 
Law, the author of Considerations on the State of the World, and my 
Lord of London, in his Sermons, the scriptures take no account of an 
intermediate state in death, and we shall not awake or be made alive 
until the day of judgment; then will my friend have eternal life at 
the resurrection; he was as worthy a man as ever lived; an upright 
Christian deist, whose life was one unmixed scene of virtue and 
charity. He did not believe a tittle of our priestly mysteries, or 
regard that religion which skulks behind the enormous columns of 
consecrated opinions; but, as Christianity was revealed from heaven, 
to bring mankind to the worship of the one supreme God and governor 
of the world, and lead them into the paths of humanity, he rejected 
the superstition of Monks and their disciples, and in regard to the 
voice of reason, and the words of the gospel, adored only the 
supreme Being, manifested his' love of God by keeping the 
commandments, and his love of his neighbour, by doing all the good 
in his power. Such a man was Dr. JOHN STANVIL. If men of fortune 
would form their manners on such a model, virtue by degrees would 
spread through the inferior world, and we should soon be free from 
superstition.

Having mentioned the sleeping and the conscious schemes, I would 
here examine these opinions, and show why I cannot think, a dead 
unconscious silence is to be our case till the consummation of the 
ages; as a happiness so remote would weaken I believe the energy and 
influence of our conceptions and apprehensions, in respect of faith, 
hope, and expectations. To curb, desire, or suffer severely here, 
for the sake of truth and virtue, and then cease to be, perhaps for 
ten thousand years to come, or much longer; (for there is not 
anything in revelation, or an appearance out of it, that can incline 
a rational man to think he is near the day of judgment or general 
resurrection;) this seems to be an obstacle in the progress of the 
pilgrim. And therefore, why I rather think, we step immediately from 
the dark experiences of this first state, to a blissful 
consciousness in the regions of day, and by death are fixed in an 
eternal connexion with the wise, the virtuous, and the holy; this, I 
say, I would in the next place proceed to treat of, by considering 
what the scriptures reveal in relation to death, and what is most 
probable in reason; but that it is necessary to proceed in my story.

When the beautiful Mrs STANVIL saw her husband was really dead, and 
had paid that decent tribute of tears to his memory, which was due 
to a man, who left her in his will all his estates, real and 
personal, to be by her disposed of as she pleased, she sent for me 
to her chamber the next morning, and after a long conversation with 
her, told me, she could now own who she was, and instead of acting 
any longer by the directions of her head, let me know from her 
heart, that she had still the same regard for me, as when we 
travelled away together from her father's house in the West, to the 
North of England; and if I would stay at Bassora where I was, but 
for three months she must be away, she would then return, and her 
fortune and hand I might command. This I readily consented to, and 
when the funeral was over she departed. For the time agreed on, I 
continued in the house, and to a day she was punctual in her return. 
We were married the week after, and I was even happier than I had 
ever been before, which must amount to a felicity inconceivably 
great indeed. Six months we resided at her seat, and then thought it 
best to pay a visit to my father in Ireland. We arrived at Bagatrogh 
Castle in the western extremity of that island, in the spring of the 
year 1735, and were most kindly received.

My father longed to see me, and was very greatly rejoiced at my 
coming; but I found him in a dying way, paralytic all over, and 
scarcely able to speak. To my amazement, he was become as strict a 
Unitarian as myself; and talked with abhorrence of Athanasian 
religion. This was owing, he said, to my manuscript Remarks which I 
left with him on Lord Nottingham's Answer to Whiston's Letter to his 
Lordship; which manuscript of mine he had often read over when I was 
gone, and thereby was thoroughly convinced, on considering my 
reasoning, that Christians are expressly commanded, upon pain of 
God's displeasure, to worship one supreme God, and him only, in the 
name and through the mediation of Jesus Christ. Upon this religious 
practice as a fundamental rule he had at last fixed. He saw it was 
the safe way, and would never depart from it. He told me, the parson 
of his parish, a right orthodox divine, who had been his chum in the 
university, and very intimate with him, was greatly troubled at this 
change in his sentiments, and said many severe things; but he no 
more minded the Athanasians now, than he did the idolatrous papists. 
This gave me great pleasure, and recompensed me for what I had 
suffered on a religious account. I gave thanks to God that truth 
through my means had prevailed.

And now my candid Reader, to take my leave of you at this time, I 
have only to observe, that as this volume is full large, I can only 
say in a short summary, that soon after my arrival at Bagatrogh 
Castle, my father's seat on Mal Bay, on the coast of Galway in 
Ireland, the old gentleman died, and as in a passion, he had 
irrevocably settled the greatest part of his large estate on a near 
relation of mine, and had it not in his power to leave me more than 
a hundred a year, a little ready money, and a small ship, which lay 
before his door in the Bay, he descended to the grave in great 
trouble, with many tears. Like old Isaac over Esau, he wept 
bitterly, and wished in vain, that it was in his power to undo what 
he had done.

As soon as my father was buried, I returned to England with my wife, 
in the little vessel, now my own, which lay in the Bay, and 
immediately after landing, and laying up my ship in a safe place, we 
went to Bassora again, there lived for one year as happy as two 
mortals could be; but in the beginning of the year 1736, she died of 
the smallpox, and to divert my mind, it came into my head to go to 
sea, and make some voyages in my own little ship, which was an 
excellent one for strength and sailing, though but a sloop of 
twenty-five tons. I went captain myself, and had an ingenious young 
gentleman, one JACKMAN, for my mate, who had been in the East Indies 
several times, six good hands, and two cabin-boys. Everything 
necessary, convenient, and fit, books, mathematical instruments, &c. 
we took on board, and weighed anchor the 5th of July, 1736.

We went on shore at the Canary Islands, the Cape Verde Islands, and 
other places. We passed the Sun in 15 degrees North latitude, and 
from that time standing South, crossed the Line; the heats 
intolerable, and the mosquitoes and bugs insufferable. We soon lost 
sight of the Northern star, and had the Crosiers and Magellan clouds 
in view. In three months' time we anchored at St. Catharine's on the 
coast of Brazil. The second of December we saw the Straits la Maine, 
that run betwixt Terra del Fuego and Staten, and is the boundary 
between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans; but instead of venturing 
into them, and hazarding our lives among the impetuous blasts and 
waves which sweep round Cape Horn, as Admiral Anson did on the 7th 
of March 1741, two months too late, by the fault of the ministry, in 
his way to the South Seas; we kept out at sea to the East of Staten 
Island, and ran to the latitude 64, before we stood to the westward. 
The weather was fine, as it was then the height of summer, to wit, 
in December and January. All the occurrences in this course, the 
discovery we made in the latitude above-mentioned of an inhabited 
island, governed by a young Queen, and what appeared and happened 
there, and in our run from thence to Borneo and Asia, round the 
globe; and from China to Europe, on our return home; with the events 
we afterwards met with, and the observations I made in other places, 
the Reader will find in a book called, The Voyages and Travels of 
Dr. Lorimer.

Nine years of my life were spent in travelling and sailing about, 
and at last I returned to rest and reflect, and in rational 
amusements pass the remainder of my time away. I retired to a little 
flowery retreat I had purchased within a few miles of London, that I 
might easily know what was doing in this hemisphere, while I belong 
to it; and in the midst of groves and streams, fields and lawns, 
have lived as happily ever since, as a mortal can do on this planet.

Dr. Cheyne by the way, I observe, calls it a ruined planet, in his 
wild posthumous book;<236> a notion he had from enthusiastic 
Law,<237> his master, but from what I have seen on three continents, 
and in traversing the ocean round the globe, from West to East, and 
from the Southern latitude 64, to 66 North; a planet in reality so 
divinely made and perfect, that one can never sufficiently adore and 
praise an infinitely wise God for such a piece of his handiwork. A 
world so wisely contrived, so accurately made, as to demonstrate the 
Creator's being and attributes, and cause every rational mortal to 
acknowledge that Jehovah is our God, and fear and obey so great and 
tremendous a Being the power and glory of our God.

But as I was saying, after my return, I bought a little spot and 
country-house, where I might rest from my labours, and easily know 
what is doing in this hemisphere: how gloriously our most gracious 
and excellent king endeavours to advance the felicity of his people, 
and promote the honour and dignity of Great Britain: how 
indefatigable the present ministry is in pursuing such measures, as 
demonstrate they have the interest of their country at heart; as 
evince how well they supply the deficiencies of their predecessors 
in office; and how zealously the combined wisdom of the whole 
legislature acts for the preservation of the Britannic constitution, 
and the liberties and properties of the people; that the ends of the 
late war may be answered, and the peace at last give universal 
satisfaction.

To hear such news; and know what France and Spain are doing; and 
what the renowned Anti-Sejanus, who deserves the curse and hatred of 
the whole community as an abetter of arbitrary power, and for 
attempting to raise the prerogative, is writing; I purchased a 
retirement near the capital, a spot surrounded with woods and 
streams, plants and flowers; and over which a silence hovers, that 
gives a relish to still life, and renders it a contrast to the busy, 
bustling, envious crowds of men.

Here I sat down at last, and have done with hopes and fears for 
ever.

"Here grant me, heaven, to end my peaceful days, 
And pass what's left of life in studious ease; 
Here court the muses, whilst the sun on high, 
Flames in the vault of heaven, and fires the sky; 
Soon as Aurora from her golden bowers, 
Exhales the fragrance of the balmy flowers, 
Reclined in silence on a mossy bed, 
Consult the learned volumes of the dead; 
Fallen realms and empires in description view, 
Live o'er past times, and build whole worlds anew; 
Oft from the bursting tombs, in fancy raise 
The sons of Fame, who lived in ancient days; 
Oft listen till the raptured soul takes wings, 
While Plato reasons, or while Homer sings. 
Or when the night's dark wings this globe surround,
And the pale moon begins her solemn round; 
When night has drawn her curtains o'er the plain, 
And silence reassumes her awful reign;
Bid my free soul to starry orbs repair, 
Those radiant orbs that float in ambient air, 
And with a regular confusion stray, 
Oblique, direct, along the aerial way: 
Fountains of day! stupendous orbs of light! 
Which by their distance lessen to the sight: 
And if the glass you use, t'improve your eyes 
Millions beyond the former millions rise. 
For no end were they made? Or, but to blaze 
Through empty space, and useless spend their rays? 
Or ought we not with reason to reply, 
Each lucid point which glows in yonder sky, 
Informs a system in the boundless space, 
And fills with glory its appointed place: 
With beams, unborrowed, brightens other skies, 
And worlds, to thee unknown, with heat and life supplies. 
But chiefly, O my soul, apply to loftier themes, 
The opening heavens, and angels robed with flames: 
Read in the sacred leaves how time began, 
And the dust moved and quickened into man; 
Here through the flowery walks of Eden rove, 
Court the soft breeze, or range the spicy grove; 
There tread on hallowed ground where angels trod, 
And reverend patriarchs talked as friends with God; 
Or hear the voice to slumbering prophets given, 
Or gaze on visions from the throne of heaven.
Thus lonely, thoughtful, may I run the race 
Of transient life, in no unuseful ease: 
Enjoy each hour, nor as it fleets away, 
Think life too short, and yet too long the day; 
Of right observant, while my soul attends 
Each duty, and makes heaven and angels friends: 
Can welcome death with Faith's expecting eye, 
And mind no pangs, since Hope stands smiling by; 
Nor studious how to make a longer stay, 
Views heavenly plains and realms of brighter day; 
Shakes off her load, and wing'ed with ardent love, 
Spurns at the earth, and springs her flight above, 
Soaring through air to realms where angels dwell, 
Pities the shrieking friends, and leaves the lessening bell."




A TRANSLATION OF THE MYTHOLOGICAL PICTURE OF CEBES. 
By the Rev. and famous Jeremy Collier.

AS we were taking a turn in Saturn's temple, we saw a great many 
consecrated presents, remarkable enough for their curiosity: Amongst 
the rest, we took particular notice of a picture hung over the door; 
the piece we perceived was all emblem and mythology; but then the 
representation was so singular and out of custom, that we were 
perfectly at a loss whence it should come, and what was the meaning 
of it. Upon a strict view, we found it was neither a city, nor a 
camp, but a sort of court, with two partitions of the same figure 
within it, though one of them was larger than the other. The first 
court had a crowd of people at the gate, and within we saw a great 
company of women. Just at the entrance of the first gate, there 
stood an old man, who by his gesture and countenance, seemed to be 
busy in giving advice to the crowd as they came in. And being long 
at a stand about the design of the fable, a grave man somewhat in 
years, making up, begins to discourse us in this manner. Gentlemen, 
says he, I understand you are strangers, and therefore 'tis no 
wonder the history of this picture should puzzle you: For there are 
not many of our own countrymen than can explain it. For you are to 
observe, this is none of our town manufacture.<238> But along while 
ago, a certain outlandish man<239> of great sense and learning, and 
who by his discourse and behaviour, seemed to be a disciple of 
Pythagoras and Parmenides; this gentleman, I say, happening to 
travel hither, built this structure, and dedicated both the temple 
and this piece of painting to Saturn. Sir, said I, had you any 
acquaintance with this gentleman. Yes, says he, I had the benefit of 
his conversation, and was one of his admirers a long time. For, to 
my thinking, though he was but young, he talked at a strange 
significant rate.<240>

N. B. The remainder of Collier's facetious version, is omitted for 
want of room.



A TRANSLATION OF THE TABLE OF CEBES.
The thing is a Dialogue between an Old Man and a Traveller.

WHILE we were walking in the temple of Saturn, (in the city of 
Thebes,) and viewing the votive honours of the God, the various 
offerings which had been presented to that deity, we observed at the 
entrance of the Fane, a picture tablet that engaged our attention, 
as it was a thing entirely new, both with regard to the painting and 
the design. For some time, we stood considering the device and 
fable, but still found ourselves unable to guess the meaning. The 
piece did not seem to be either a city or a camp; but was a kind of 
a walled court, that had within it two other enclosures, and one of 
them was larger than the other. The first court opened at a gate, 
before which a vast crowd of people appeared, impatient to enter; 
and within a group of female figures was represented. Stationed at 
the porch without, was seen a venerable form, who looked like some 
great teacher, and seemed to warn the rushing multitude. Long we 
gazed at this work, but were not able to understand the design, till 
an old man came up to us, and spoke in the following manner.

#1. O. It is no wonder strangers, that you cannot comprehend this 
picture: for even our inhabitants are not able to give a solution of 
the allegoric scene. The piece is not an offering of any of our 
citizens, but the work of a foreigner, a man of great learning and 
virtue, and a zealous disciple of the Samian or Elean sages, who 
arrived here many years ago, and by his conversation instructted us 
in the best learning, which is morality. It was he built and 
consecrated this temple to Saturn, and placed here this picture you 
see before you.

T. And did you know, (I said) and converse with this wise man?

O. Yes, (he replied) I was long acquainted with him, and as he was 
but young, and talked with great judgment upon the most important 
subjects, with astonishment I have listened to him, and with 
pleasure heard him explain the moral of this fable.

T. Expound to us then, (I conjure you) the meaning of the picture, 
if business does not call you away; for we long to be instructed in 
the design of the piece.

O. I am at leisure, (the old man answered) and willingly consent to 
your request; but I must inform you first, there is some danger in 
what you ask. If you hearken with attention, and by consideration 
understand the precepts, you will become wise, virtuous, and 
blessed:<241> if otherwise, you will be abandoned, blind, and 
miserable<242> The explanation of the picture resembles the enigma 
of the Sphinx, which she proposed to every passenger that came that 
way. If they could expound the riddle they were safe; but if they 
failed in the attempt, they were destroyed by the monster<243>. 
Folly is as it were a Sphinx to mankind. She asks you, "How is good 
and ill defined?" If you cannot explain the problem, and happen to 
misjudge, you perish by degrees, and become the victim of her 
cruelty. You do not die immediately, as the unhappy did by the 
Theban monster; but by the force and operation of folly, you will 
find yourself dying from day to day, your rational part wounded and 
decayed, every noble power of the soul confounded, and like those 
given up to punishment for life, feel the last of those pangs, which 
guilt prepares for the stupid: but if by thinking, you can 
understand and discern the boundaries of good and ill, then folly 
like the Sphinx must perish, and your life will be blest with 
happiness and serenity.—Hear me then with all your attention.

These things being previously observed by the old man, and we 
entreating him to begin, he lifted up a wand he held, and pointing 
to the picture, said, the first enclosure represents human life, and 
the multitude at the gate, those who are daily entering into the 
world. That aged person you see on an eminence, directing with one 
hand, and holding in the other a roll, which is the code of reason, 
is the genius of mankind; benevolent, he seems to bend, and teach 
the people what they ought to do; shows them as they enter into life 
the path they ought to take; the way which leads to danger, and that 
which bears to safety and happiness.

T. And which is the way, (I said) and how are they to find it?

O. That you shall know hereafter: but at present you must take 
notice of that painted woman seated on a throne very near the gate. 
She is called Delusion, and by every art, with fawn and soft 
infection, presents a bowl of ignorance and error to all that enter 
into life. They take the cup, and in proportion to what they have 
drank of the intoxicating mixture, are led away by the women you, 
see, at a little distance from Imposture, to destruction some, and 
some to safety; less erring and less blind those being who have but 
tasted of delusion's cup.

These women so variously dressed, and so profusely gay, are called 
the Opinions, Desires, and Pleasures. You observe how they embrace 
each mortal as he arrives within the gate, promise the greatest 
blessings, and compel their votaries to wander with them where they 
please.

T. But who (I asked) is that woman placed on a globe, who appears 
not only blind, but seems to be wild and distracted? Incessantly she 
walks about, and flings her favours capriciously. From some she 
snatches their effects and possessions, and bestows them upon 
others.

O. They call her Fortune, (replied the old man). Her attitude marks 
her character. Her gifts are as unstable as her tottering ball; and 
all who depend upon her specious promises, are deceived when most 
they trust her, and find themselves exposed to the greatest 
misfortunes.

T. There is a great crowd I perceive surrounding her, and if too 
commonly she meditates mischief, whenever she smiles, what is the 
meaning of their attendance?

O. These are the inconsiderate, and stand there to catch the toys 
she blindly scatters among them; (wealth, fame, titles, an 
offspring, strength or beauty, the victor's laurel, and arbitrary 
power.) Those who rejoice, and are lavish in their praises of this 
divinity, have received some favours from her, and call her the 
goddess of good fortune. But those whom you see weeping and wringing 
their hands, are such whom she has deprived of every good; they 
curse her as the goddess of ill-fortune.

T. But (replied I) as to riches, glory, nobility, a numerous 
posterity, power, and honour, which you called toys, why are they 
not real advantages?

O. Of these things (our instructor answered) we shall speak 
hereafter more fully. At present it is better to continue the 
explication of the picture.

#2. Cast your eyes next then on that higher enclosure, (proceeded 
the old man) and take notice of the women on the outside thereof. 
You observe how wantonly they are dressed. The first of them is 
Incontinence, loosely zoned, her bosom bare; and the other three 
are, Riot, Covetousness, and Flattery. They watch for the favourites 
of fortune. You see they caress them, and try to bring them to the 
pleasures of their soft retreat; where the bowl sparkles, the song 
resounds, and joys to joys succeed in every jocund hour. But at 
length Distress appears, and the favourite of a day discovers, that 
his happiness was merely imaginary, under a delusion; but the evils 
that attend his pleasures real. When he has wasted all he had 
received from fortune, he is forced to enter himself into the 
service of those mistresses, and by them compelled to dare the 
foulest and most desperate deeds; villain and knave he becomes; 
stabs for a purse; his country sells for gold; and by deceit and 
sacrilege, by perjury, treachery, and theft, endeavours for some 
time to live. But shiftless at length, and unable to acquire support 
by crimes, they are consigned to the dire gripe of Punishment.

T. What is she, I beg you will inform us?

O. Look beyond those women, called the Opinions, (continued the old 
man) and you will see a low gate, opening into a dark and narrow 
cave. You may observe at the entrance of it, three female figures 
very swarthy and foul, covered with rags and filthiness; and near 
them, standing naked by their side, a frightful lean man<244>. Close 
to him is another woman, so meagre and ghastly you perceive, that it 
is not possible for anything to resemble him more.

T. We see them, and request to be informed who they are?

O. The first with a whip in her hand, is Punishment, and next to her 
sits Sadness, with her head reclining on her knees; that woman 
tearing her hair is Trouble; the naked lean man is Sorrow, and the 
image by his side wild Despair. You see they are all going to seize 
the unhappy man of pleasure, and make him feel the greatest pain and 
anguish. For they carry him to the house of Misery, and in the pit 
of Woe he is to pass the remainder of life, unless Repentance comes 
to his relief.

T. And what then follows, (I said) if Repentance interposes?

O. She rescues him from his tormentors, and gives him a new view of 
things. He has from her some account of true learning, but the hint 
so short, that it may lead him likewise to false learning. If he be 
so happy as to understand, and choose right, he is delivered from 
prejudice and error, and passes the rest of his days in tranquillity 
and peace: but if he be mistaken, instead of wisdom, he only gains 
that amusing counterfeit, which turns him from vice to studious 
folly.

T. Great (I replied) are the risks we mortals run. But who is this 
false learning?

#3. O. At the entrance of the second enclosure<245>, you may observe 
a woman neatly dressed, and of a good appearance; decent the port, 
spotless the form. This is the counterfeit, but the vulgar call her 
true learning. Even the happy few, who succeed in the pursuit of 
wisdom, are commonly detained too long by this deceiving fair one. 
Nor is it strange; for, skilled as she is in all the learning, and 
in every art can grace the head, you see what crowds of admirers she 
has; poets, orators, logicians, musicians, arithmeticians, 
geometricians, astrologers, and critics.

T. But who, (I asked my instructor,) are those women, so busy on 
every side, and so earnest in their addresses to this company? They 
look like Incontinence and her companions, and the opinions whom you 
showed us in the first court. Do they also frequent the second 
enclosure?

O. Yes, (replied the old man,) Incontinence is sometimes seen here. 
The opinions do likewise enter; for the early potion these men 
received from Imposture still operates. Ignorance finds a place 
here; and even Extravagance and Folly. They remain under the power 
of these, till having left false learning, they enter upon the path 
that leads to Wisdom. When they arrive at the enlightened ground of 
Truth, they get her sovereign remedy<246>, and are freed from the 
ill effects of Ignorance and Error. This enables them to throw off 
the wild hypothesis, the learned romance, and to employ the precious 
hours of life in thinking to the wisest purposes. Had they stayed 
with false learning, they never could have delivered themselves from 
these evils.

T. Proceed then, I pray you, (said I) and show us the way that leads 
to Happiness and Wisdom.

#4. O. Do you see (proceeded the venerable man,) that rising ground, 
which appears so desert and uninhabited. You may observe upon it a 
little gate, that opens in a narrow and unfrequented path; the 
avenue a rugged rocky way. You perceive a little onward, a steep and 
craggy mountain with precipices on either side, which sink to a 
frightful depth. This is the way to Wisdom.

T. It seems a dreadful way, as painted in this table.

O. Yet higher still observe that rock, towards the mountain's brow, 
and take notice of the two figures which sit upon its edge, and 
appear to be as beautiful and comely as the goddess of health. They 
are sisters; Temperance the one, Patience the other. With friendship 
in their looks, and arms protended<247> over the verge of the cliff, 
you see them lean, to encourage those who pass this way, and rouse 
the spirits of the fainting sons of Wisdom, who has stationed these 
two sisters there. They urge the brave men on; tell them the 
hardships will lessen by degrees, the passage will become more easy 
and agreeable as they advance, and offer them their assistance to 
ascend the summit, and reach the top of the rock. That being gained, 
they show them the easiness and pleasantness of the rest of the way 
to wisdom. The charming road invites one's eyes. How smooth and 
flowery, green and delightful, does it appear!

T. It does indeed.

#5. O. Look next (the excellent old man continued,) at that distant 
blooming wood, and near it you will see a beautiful meadow, on which 
there seems to fall a light as from a purer heaven, a kind of double 
day. In this lightsome field<248>, you may perceive a gate which 
opens into another enclosure, which is the abode of the blessed. 
Here the Virtues dwell with Happiness. In this region of eternal 
beauty, the righteous rest.

T. It does appear a charming place.

O. Observe then near the portal, a beauteous form of a composed 
aspect. She seems mature in life, and her robe is quite plain, 
without affectation or ornaments. Her eyes are piercing; her mien 
sedate. She stands not on a globe, (like Fortune) but upon a cube of 
marble, fixed as the rock she is on before the gate. You see on 
either side of her two lovely nymphs, the very copies of her looks 
and air. This matron in the middle is true learning, Wisdom herself; 
and the two young beauties are Truth and Persuasion. Her standing on 
a square, is an expressive type of certainty in the way to her; 
<249> and denotes the unalterable and permanent nature of the 
blessings she bestows on those who come to her. From her they 
receive courage and serenity; that confidence and contempt of fear, 
which exempts the happy possessors from any disturbance, by the 
accidents and calamities of life.

T. These are valuable gifts. But why without the walls does Wisdom 
stand?

O. To present the purifying bowl to those who approach, and restore 
them to themselves. As a physician by degrees first finds out the 
cause of a violent disorder, and then removes it, in order to 
restore the man to health; so Wisdom, as she knows their malady, 
administers her sovereign medicine, and frees them from all their 
evils. She expels the mischiefs they had received from delusion, 
their ignorance and error, and delivers them from pride, lust, 
anger, avarice, and all the other vices they had contracted in the 
first enclosure. In a word, she restores them to sanity, and then 
sends them in to Happiness and the Virtues.

T. Who are, they? (I said).

#6. O. Do you not see within the gate, (my instructor replied) a 
society of matrons, beautiful and modest, dressed unaffected, and 
without any thing of the gay excess? These are Science and her 
sisters, Fortitude, Justice, and Integrity, Temperance, Modesty, 
Liberality, Continence, Clemency, and Patience. They hail their 
guests, and the company seem to be in raptures.

T. But when the friends to virtue are admitted into this charming 
society, where do they lead then to?

O. See you not (resumed the good old man,) the hill beyond the 
grove; that eminence which is the highest point of all the 
enclosures, and commands a boundless prospect. There, on a glorious 
throne, you may observe a majestic person in her bloom, well 
dressed, but without art or lavish cost, and her temples adorned 
with a beautiful tiara. This is Happiness, the regent of that 
blessed abode, and as the moral heroes approach her, you may 
perceive her, with the Virtues who stand assistant round her, going 
to reward the friends of wisdom with such crowns as are bestowed on 
conquerors.

T. Conquerors! (I said) In what conflicts have these persons been 
victorious?

O. They have, in their way to the realm of Happiness, destroyed the 
most formidable and dangerous monsters, who would have destroyed 
them, if they had not been subdued. These savage beasts at war with 
man are, ignorance and error; grief, vexation, avarice, 
intemperance, and everything that is evil. These are vanquished, and 
have lost all their power. The moral hero triumphs now, though their 
slave before.

T. Great achievements indeed! A glorious conquest. But exclusive of 
the honour of being crowned by Happiness and the Virtues, is there 
any salutary power in the crown that adorns the hero's head?

O. There is, young man. The virtue of it is great. Possessing this, 
he is happy and blessed. He derives his felicity from no external 
object, but from himself alone.

T. O happy victory! And being thus crowned, what does the hero do, 
where next his steps?

O. Conducted by the Virtues, he goes back to survey his first abode, 
and see the crowd he left; how miserably they pass their time; waste 
all their hours in crimes, and in the whirl of passions live. Slaves 
to ambition, pride, incontinence, vanity, and avarice, they appear 
tormented with endless anxiety. They have forgot the instructions 
the good genius gave them, at their entrance into life, and suffer 
thus because they cannot find the way to Wisdom.

T. True. (I said) But I cannot comprehend, why the Virtues should 
bring the heroes back to the place they came from. Why should they 
return to view a well-known scene?

O. The reason (answered my instructor) is, because they had not a 
true idea of what they had seen. Surrounded by a confusion of things 
as they passed on, they could not distinctly perceive what was done. 
The mists of ignorance and error obscured the prospect as they 
journeyed on, and by that means, they were subject to mistakes. They 
could not always distinguish between good and evil. But now that 
they have attained to true learning, with concern they behold the 
mad world the virtues show them again, and being enlightened by 
wisdom, are perfectly happy in themselves. The misery of the 
numberless fools they behold now, strikes them very strongly, and 
gives them a delightful relish for their present happiness.

T. It must be so. And when they have seen these things, where do 
they then go?

O. Wherever they please. Safely they may travel where they will. In 
all times, and in all places they are secure, as their integrity is 
their defence. Everywhere they live esteemed and beloved by all. The 
female monsters I have mentioned, Grief, Trouble, Lust, Avarice, or 
Poverty, have now no power to hurt them; but as if possessed of some 
virtuous drug, they can grasp the viper, and defy destruction.

T. What you say is just. But who are all these persons descending 
the hill?

O. Those that are crowned (the old man said) are the happy few I 
have described. You see what joy is in their faces. And those who 
seem forlorn and desperate, under the command of certain women, are 
such who by their folly have not found the way to true learning; or 
stopping at the rough and narrow ascent you observed, went to look 
for an easier path, and so quite lost the road. The tormentors who 
drive them on are, Trouble, Despair, Ignominy, and Ignorance. 
Wretched you see them return into the first enclosure, to Luxury and 
Incontinence: and yet they do not accuse themselves as the authors 
of their own ruin, which is very strange; but rail at Wisdom, and 
revile her ways; asserting, that the true pleasures of life are only 
to be found in luxury and riot. Like the brutes, they place the 
whole satisfaction of man in the gratification of sensual appetite.

T. But who are those other lovely women, who return down the hill so 
full of gaiety and mirth?

O. They are the opinions, who having conducted the virtuous to the 
region of light, are coming back to invite and carry others thither, 
by showing them the felicity and success of those they brought to 
the mansion of Wisdom.

T. And do the opinions never enter with those they bring into that 
happy place, where the virtues and true learning reside?

O. No. Opinion can never reach to science; they only deliver their 
charge into the hands of wisdom, and then, like ships that give up 
their lading, in order to sail for a new cargo, they return to bring 
other Eleves to reason and felicity.

T. This explanation of the table, (I said) is quite satisfactory. 
But you have not yet informed us, what the good genius bids the 
multitude do, as they appear on the verge of life?

O. He charges them to act with courage, and be magnanimous and brave 
in all events; a thing I recommend to you, young man; and that you 
may have a true idea of this, I will tell you what I mean by a bold 
spirit, in passing through this world.

#7. O. Then lifting up his arm again, and pointing with his wand to 
a figure in the picture; that blind woman standing on a globe, as I 
told you before, is Fortune. The genius forbids us to trust her, or 
imagine her smiles will be lasting happiness. Reason is never 
concerned in what the does. It is Fortune still; without principle 
she acts, is arbitrary and capricious, and inconsiderately and 
rashly for ever proceeds. Regard not then her favours, nor mind her 
frowns. But as she gives and takes away, and often deprives of what 
we had before, we are neither to esteem or despise her; but if we 
should receive from her a gift, take care to employ it immediately 
to some good purpose, and especially in the acquisition of true 
science, the most lasting and precious possession. If we act 
otherwise, in respect of Fortune, we imitate those wretched usurers, 
who rejoice at the money paid in to them, as if they received it for 
their own use; but pay it back with regret, forgetting the 
condition, that it was to be returned to the proprietor on demand. 
Regardless of Fortune then, and all her changes in this mortal life, 
the genius advises to pass bravely on, without hearkening to the 
solicitations of Incontinence and Luxury in the first enclosure, to 
reject their temptations, and go on to false learning. With her he 
would have us make a short stay, to learn what may be of service to 
use in our journey to Wisdom. This is the advice of the genius to 
those who enter into life.

T. Here the good old man had done, and I thanked him for his 
explanation of the picture. Only one thing (I said) there was more, 
which I must request he would tell me the meaning of. What is it we 
can get by our stay with false learning?

O. Things (he answered) that may be of use to us. The languages, and 
other parts of education, which Plato recommends, may hinder us from 
being worse employed, and keep us from illicit gratification. They 
are not absolutely necessary to true happiness; but they contribute 
to make us better. Something good and useful they do afford; though 
virtue, which ought to be the principal business in view, may be 
acquired without them. We may become wise without the assistance of 
the arts, though (as observed before,) they are far from being 
useless: as by a good translation made into our own tongue, we may 
know what an author means, and yet by taking the pains to become 
masters of the original language, might gain more advantages, such 
as entering better into the writer's sense, and discovering some 
beauties which cannot otherwise be found. So the useful things in 
the sciences may be very quickly and easily learned, and though by 
great labour in becoming accurately acquainted with them, we might 
fill our heads with speculations, yet this cannot make us the wiser 
and better men. Without being learned, we may be wise and good.

T. And are the learned then in no better a condition than the people 
in respect of moral excellence? (I said). Are the speculations of 
the scholar, and the arts and fine inventions of the schools, of no 
use in perfecting the moral character? This to me seems a little 
strange.

O. Blind as the crowd is the man of letters, in this particular (my 
instructor replied). All his studies and curious knowledge have no 
relation to his living right. With all the tongues, and all the 
arts, he may be a libertine, a sot, a miser, or a knave, a traitor 
to his country, and have no moral character at all. This we see 
every day.

T. But what is the cause of so strange a thing, I requested to know? 
I observe that these men of letters seem to sit down contented in 
the second enclosure, and do not attempt to go on to the third where 
Wisdom resides; though they see continually before their eyes so 
many passing on from the first court, where they had lived for some 
time in lewdness and excess, to the habitation of true learning.

O. It is their remaining in this second enclosure, that occasions 
their being inferior in moral things to those who have not had a 
learned education. Proud and self-sufficient on account of their 
languages, arts, and sciences, they despise what Wisdom could teach 
them, and will not give themselves the trouble of ascending with 
difficulty to the mansion of true learning. They have no taste for 
the lessons of Wisdom; while the humble mount to her exalted 
dwelling, those scholars, as you see, are satisfied with their 
speculations and vain conceits. Dull and untractable in the 
improvement of their hearts, and regardless of that exact rectitude 
of mind and life, which is only worth a rational's, toiling for (as 
he is an Eleve for eternity), they never think of true wisdom, nor 
mind her offered light. Their curious ingenious notions, are what 
they only have a relish for; the imaginations of those men of 
letters cannot reach that ineffable peace and contentment, that 
satisfaction and pleasure, which flow from a virtuous life and an 
honest heart. This is the case of our learned heads, unless 
repentance interferes to make them humble, and scatters the vain 
visions they had from false opinion.

This (concluded the venerable teacher) is the explication of this 
parable or allegory. May you oft revolve upon these lessons, and 
lend your whole attention to the attainment of true wisdom, that you 
may not embrace her shadow, the speculations and inventions of the 
learned, but, by this instruction, acquire the true principles of 
morality and goodness.(21)
————————

This is not all the Table of Cebes, There follows a disputation in 
the Socratic method, concerning the claim of wealth, and other 
externals, to the title of good things: but it is dry, and no part 
of the picture or mythology. For this reason I stop here.

As to the picture of Cebes, it is to be sure a fine thing, and 
greatly to the honour of the Theban philosopher, who was one of the 
disciples of Socrates; and about twenty at the time of the death of 
his master: Socrates died by the executioner, in the 70 year of his 
age, before our Lord 402. Cebes was about eighty, at the birth of 
Epicurus.

But after all that can be said in praise of this excellent remain of 
antiquity, still the little system of ethics is but a poor 
performance, in respect of any section of the gospel of Christ. 
Cebes says nothing of the Deity: nor does he mention the mischiefs 
of vice, and the benefits of virtue, as a divine constitution.

An Apostle, on the contrary, (to mention only one particular out of 
a thousand from the Christian books,) calls to the human race in the 
following manner: "I beseech you, brethren, by the mercies of 
Almighty God, the Father of the Universe, who hath graciously 
admitted you to the faith, and revealed the terms of acceptance; 
that ye present your bodies now a living sacrifice, holy and 
acceptable to the Deity, which is the reasonable and spiritual 
service required of you in the time of the gospel; <250> and not 
offer the bodies of beasts any more as the Heathen world were wont 
to do.

And, as persons now wholly devoted to the Lord of heaven and earth, 
be not conformed to the fashions and ways of this world; but be ye 
transformed by the renewing of your mind; that ye may prove what is 
the good, the acceptable, and perfect will of God. Abhor that which 
is evil, in all your dealings: cleave to that which is good: let 
love be without dissimulation, and be kindly affectioned one to 
another; not advancing, but in honour preferring one another. Be not 
slothful in business, but fervent in spirit; as serving the Lord 
Jehovah in your several stations. Rejoice in hope of a refreshment 
to come, in the realms of bliss: be patient in tribulation, which 
God mil reward, and continue instant in prayer. In sum, let us 
follow the steps of Christ, and in imitation of his divine humility, 
his devotion, his love, be for ever meek and forbearing, gentle and 
charitable, and live in the spirit of prayer."

What is there in the Table of Cebes like this spiritual and 
religious virtue, this love to God, this zeal for his honour and 
service, and an entire dependence upon him in all conditions of 
life? The virtues of the heroes of antiquity are noble and excellent 
qualities; their courage, and justice, and temperance, and 
gratitude, and love to their country are fine things: but they seem 
to have been calculated for the civil life. Those heroes were 
virtuous without being pious, and appear rather as self-sufficient 
independent beings, than as servants and votaries of God Almighty. 
It is these Christian virtues I have mentioned, that adorn and 
perfect human nature. It is these things that mostly contribute to 
the happiness of the world, and of every man in it.

N. B. Scott, at the end of his Notes on Cebes, has the following 
remark. If this philosopher had represented the effects of virtue 
and vice as a divine constitution, he would have ennobled his 
instruction, and done greater service to the interest of morality. 
But those important interests are effectually provided for by 
revelation. There the precepts of virtue are the laws of God. There 
we find a clear and complete system of his will. There our obedience 
is encouraged by hope in his pardoning mercy and powerful 
assistance, by the life, death, and resurrection of his own son; and 
by promises and threatenings which extend the reward of 
righteousness, and the punishment of wickedness unto a future state 
of existence.



THE TENTH SATIRE OF JUVENAL.

The design of this fine Satire is to show, that endowments and 
blessings of the mind, as wisdom, virtue, justice, and integrity of 
life, are the only things worth praying for.

SURVEY mankind, muster the herd 
From smoothest chin to deepest beard; 
Search every climate, view each nation, 
From lowest to the highest station; 
From Eastern to the Western Indies, 
From frozen Poles to the line that singes; 
Scarce will you find one mortal wight, 
Knows good from ill, or wrong from right.* 
'Cause clouds of lust and passion blind, 
And bribe with interests the mind; 
And while they combat in our heart, 
Our fondness crowns the conquering part. 
What is the thing under the sun, 
That we with reason seek or shun? 
Or justly by our judgment weighed, 
Should make us fond of, or afraid? 
Whate'er is luckily begun, 
Brings sure repentance at long-run. 
The distant object looming great, 
Possessed proves oft an empty cheat; 
And he who wins the wished-for prize, 
A trouble often dearly buys. 
Some for their family importune, 
And beg their ruin for a fortune. 
The courteous gods granting their prayers, 
Have entailed curses on their heirs. 
Of wizards some inquire their doom, 
Greedy to know events to come, 
And by their over-caution run 
On the same fate they strove to shun. 
Some have petitioned to be great, 
And eminent in church and state. 
This in the war's a famous leader, 
T'other at bar a cunning pleader; 
The cause on either side ensure you, 
By dint of noise stun judge and jury. 
And if the business won't bear water, 
Banter and perplex the matter. 
But their obstreperous eloquence 
Has failed even in their own defence. 
And saving others by haranguing, 
Have brought themselves at last to hanging. 
Milo presuming on his strength, 
Caused his own destiny at length.

The greedy care of heaping wealth, 
Damns many a soul and ruins health, 
And in an apoplectic fit, 
Sinks them downright into the pit. 
How many upstarts crept from low 
Condition, vast possessions show? 
Whose estate's audit so immense 
Exceeds all prodigal expense. 
With which compare that spot of earth, 
To which these mushrooms owe their birth: 
Their manners to dad's cottage show, 
As Greenland whales to dolphins do.

In Nero's plotting dismal times, 
Riches were judged sufficient crimes. 
First swear them traitors to the state, 
Then for their pains share their estate. 
Fat forfeitures their toils reward: 
Poor rogues may pass without regard. 
Some are hooked in for sense and wit, 
And some condemned for want of it. 
The over-rich Longinus dies, 
His bright heaps dazzled envious eyes. 
Neither could philosophy, 
Wisdom, desert, or piety, 
Rich Seneca from his pupil save, 
'Tis fit he send him to a grave, 
And then resume the wealth he gave.

The guards the palaces beset, 
For noble game they pitch their net. 
While from alarms and pangs of fear, 
Securely sleeps the cottager. 
If you by night shall happen late, 
To travel with a charge of plate; 
With watchful eyes and panting heart, 
Surprized, each object makes you start. 
While racked with doubts, oppressed with fear, 
Each bush does an armed thief appear. 
A shaken reed will terror strike, 
Mistaken for a brandished pike. 
Before the thief, the empty clown 
Sings unconcerned and travels on<251>.

With warm petitions most men ply 
The gods, their bags may multiply; 
That riches may grow high and rank, 
Outswelling others in the bank. 
But from plain wood and earthen cups, 
No poisoned draught the peasant sups. 
Of the gold goblet take thou care, 
When sparkling wine's spiced by thy heir. 
Then who can blame that brace of wise men, 
That in differing moods despise men. 
Th'old merry lad saunters the streets 
And laughs, and drolls at all he meets. 
For pastime rallies, flouts, and fools 'em, 
Shams, banters, mimics, ridicules 'em. 
The other sage in maudlin wise, 
Their errors mourns with weeping eyes. 
Dull fools with ease can grin and sneer, 
And buffoons flout with saucy jeer. 
What source could constant tears supply, 
To feed the sluices of each eye; 
Or t'others merry humour make, 
His spleen continually to shake? 
Could he in sober honest times<252> 
With sharp conceit tax petty crimes: 
And everywhere amongst the rout, 
Find follies for his wit to flout; 
Which proves that Gotham and gross climes, 
Produce prodigious wits sometimes. 
The joys and fears of the vain crowd, 
And whimpering tears he'd jeer aloud; 
Wisely secure, fortune deride, 
By foppish mortals deified; 
Bid her be hanged, and laugh at fate, 
When threatened at the highest rate; 
Whilst fools for vain and hurtful things, 
Pour out their prayers and offerings, 
Fastening petitions on the knees, 
Of their regardless deities<253>.

For place and power, how many men vie, 
Procuring mortal hate and envy; 
Heralds long-winded titles sound, 
Which the vain owners oft confound. 
Down go their statues in disgrace; 
The party hangs up in the place. 
In rage they break chariot triumphant, 
Because a knave 'fore set his rump on't. 
Poor horses suffer for no fault, 
Unless by bungling workmen wrought. 
The founder's furnace grows red hot, 
Sejanus' statue goes to pot: 
That head lately adored, and reckoned 
In all th'universe the second, 
Melted, new forms and shapes assumes, 
Of p——pots, frying-pans, and spoons<254>. 
The crowd o'erjoyed that Caesar's living, 
Petition for a new thanksgiving; 
How the base rout insult to see 
Sejanus dragged to destiny<255>,

Would you on these conditions, Sir, 
Be favourite and prime minister, 
As was Sejanus? Stand possessed 
Of honours, power, and interest; 
Dispose supreme commands at will, 
Promote, disgrace, preserve, or kill; 
Have foot and horse-guards, the command 
Of armies both by sea and land. 
Had you not better ask in prayer, 
To be some petty country mayor; 
There domineer, and when your pleasure's 
Condemn light weights, break false measures; 
Though meanly clad in safe estate, 
Than choose Sejanus robes and fate? 
Sejanus then, we must conclude, 
Courting his bane, mistook the good. 
Crassus and Pompey's fate of old, 
The truth of this sure maxim told. 
And his who first bowed Rome's stiff neck, 
And made the world obey his beck<256>.

The novice in his accidence, 
Dares pray his wit and eloquence 
May rival Roman Cicero's fame, 
And Greek Demosthenes' high name. 
Yet to both these their swelling vein 
Of wit and fancy proved their bane. 
No pleading dunce's jobbernowl<257> 
Revenge e'er doomed to grace a pole.

The trophies which the vanquished field 
Do to the glorious victors yield, 
Triumphant conquerors can bless, 
With more than human happiness. 
This, Roman, Grecian, and barbarian, 
Spurred to acts hazardous and daring; 
In sweat and blood spending their days, 
For empty fame, and fading bays. 
'Tis the immoderate thirst of fame 
Much more than virtue does inflame. 
Which none for worse or better take, 
But for her dower and trapping's sake. 
The fond ambition of a few, 
Many vast empires overthrew; 
While their achievements with their dust, 
They vainly to their tombstones trust. 
For sepulchres like bodies lie, 
Swallowed in deaths, obscurity.<258>

Behold how small an urn contains 
The mighty Hannibal's remains. 
That hero whose vast swelling mind 
To Afric could not be confined. 
Nature's impediments he past, 
And came to Italy at last. 
There, after towns and battles won, 
He cries, comrades, there's nothing done, 
Unless our conquering powers 
Break down Rome's gates, level her towers, 
Root up her posts, and break her chains, 
And knock out all opposers brains. 
Whilst our troops scour the city thorough, 
And fix our standard in Saburra<259>. 
But what catastrophe of fate, 
Does on this famous leader wait. 
His conduct's baffled, army's broke, 
Carthage puts on the Roman yoke. 
Whilst flight and banishment's his fate, 
His ruined country's scorn and hate. 
Go, madman, act thy frantic part, 
Climb horrid Alps, with pains and art, 
Go, madman, to be with mighty reputation, 
The subject of a declamation.<260>

One world's too mean, a trifling thing, 
For the young Macedonian king; 
He raves like one in banishment, 
In narrow craggy island pent. 
In one poor globe does sweat and squeeze, 
Wedged in and cramped in little-ease. 
But he who human race once scorned, 
And said high Jove King Philip horned, 
While managed oracles declare 
The spark great Ammon's son and heir; 
At Babylon, for all his huffing, 
Finds ample room in narrow coffin. 
Man swells with bombast of inventions, 
When stripped, death shows his true dimensions.

So do we read wild Xerxes rent 
Mount Athos from the continent, 
And in a frolic made a shift, 
To set it in the sea adrift. 
With ships paved o'er the Hellespont, 
And built a floating bridge upon't. 
Drove chariots o'er by this device, 
As coaches ran upon the ice. 
He led so numberless a rout, 
As at one meal drank rivers out. 
This tyrant we in story find, 
Was used to whip and flog the wind; 
Their jailor Eolus in prison, 
Ne'er forced them with so little reason. 
Nor could blue Neptune's godhead save him, 
But he with fetters must enslave him. 
Yet after all these roaring freaks, 
Routed and broke he homeward sneaks; 
And ferries o'er in fishing-boat 
Through shoals of carcases afloat; 
His hopes all vanished, bilked of all 
His gaudy dreams: see pride's just fall.

The frequent subject of our prayers, 
Is length of life and many years. 
But what incessant plagues and ills, 
The gulf of age with mischief fills! 
We can pronounce none happy, none, 
Till the last sand of life be run. 
Marius's long life was th'only reason, 
Of exile and Minturnian prison. 
Kind fate designing to befriend 
Great Pompey, did a fever send, 
That should with favourable doom, 
Prevent his miseries to come. 
But nations for his danger grieved, 
Make public prayers, and he's reprieved. 
Fate then that honoured, head did save, 
And to insulting Caesar gave. 
'Tis the fond mother's constant prayer, 
Her children may be passing fair. 
The boon they beg with sighs and groans, 
Incessantly on marrow-bones. 
Yet bright Lucretia's sullen fate, 
Shows fair ones are not fortunate. 
Virginia's chance may well confute you, 
Good luck don't always wait on beauty.

Let not your wills then once repine, 
Whate'er the gods for you design. 
They better know than human wit, 
That does our exigence befit. 
Their wise all-seeing eyes discern, 
And give what best suits our concern. 
We blindly harmful things implore, 
Which they refusing, love us more.

Shall men ask nothing then? Be wise, 
And listen well to sound advice. 
Pray only that in body sound, 
A firm and constant mind be found. 
A mind no fear of death can daunt, 
Nor exile, prison, pains nor want. 
That justly reckons death to be 
Kind author of our liberty. 
Banishing passion from our breast, 
Resting content with what's possessed. 
That every honest action loves, 
And great Alcides' toil approves, 
Above the lusts, feasts, and beds of down, 
Which did Sardanapalus drown. 
Page 510 This mortals to themselves may give; 
Virtue's the happy rule to live. 
Chance bears no sway where wisdom rules, 
An empty name adored by fools. 
Folly blind Fortune did create, 
A goddess, and to heaven translate.

As I had not room for all the tenth Satire, what is seen here, is 
rather an abridgement than an entire version. The whole sense of the 
author, however, is preserved, though several of his examples and 
illustrations are left out.

Dr. Burnet, bishop of Salisbury, thought this Satire so excellent a 
thing, that in his famous Pastoral Letter he recommends it, and the 
Satires of Persius, to the perusal and practice of the divines in 
his diocese, as the best common places for their sermons; and what 
may be taught with more profit to the audience, than all the new 
speculations of divinity, and controversies concerning faith; which 
are more for the profit of the shepherd, than for the edification of 
the flock. In the Satires, nothing is proposed but the quiet and 
tranquillity of the mind. Virtue is lodged at home, as Dryden 
expresses it, in his fine dedication to the Earl of Dorset; and 
diffused to the improvement and good of human kind. Passion, 
interest, ambition, mystery, fury, and every cruel consequence, are 
banished from the doctrine of these stoics, and only the moral 
virtues inculcated, for the perfection of mankind.

But so unreasonable and infatuated are our shepherds, too many of 
them I mean, that a rational Christian cannot go to church without 
being shocked at the absurd and impious work of their pulpits. In 
town and country, almost every Sunday, those bright theologers are 
for ever on the glories of trinity in unity, and teaching their poor 
people that God Almighty came down from heaven to take flesh upon 
him, and make infinite satisfaction to himself. This is the cream of 
Christianity, in the account of those teachers. The moral virtues 
are nothing, compared to a man or a woman's swallowing the divine 
mystery of an incarnate God Almighty. Over and over have I heard a 
thousand of them on this holy topic, sweating and drivelling at each 
corner of their mouths with eagerness to convert the world to their 
mysteries. The adorable mystery! says one little priest, in my 
neighbourhood in Westminster. The more incomprehensible and absurd 
it appears to human reason, the greater honour you do to heaven in 
believing it, says another wise man in the country. But tell me, ye 
excellent divines, tell me in print if you please, if it would not 
be doing more honour to the law of heaven, to inform the people, 
that the true Christian profession is, to pray to God our Father for 
grace, mercy, and peace, through the Lord Jesus Christ; without ever 
mentioning the Athanasian scheme, or trinity in unity, which you 
know no more of than so many pigs do, because it is a mere 
invention, and not to be found in the Bible. And in the next place, 
to tell your flocks in serious and practical address, that their 
main business is, as the disciples of the holy Jesus, a good life; 
to strive against sin continually, and be virtuous and useful to the 
utmost of our power; to imitate the purity and goodness of their 
great master, the Author of eternal salvation to all them that obey 
him, and by repentance and holiness of heart, in a patient 
continuance in well-doing, make it the labour of their every day, to 
live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world: you must 
become partakers of a divine nature, having escaped the corruption 
that is in the world through lust, and by acquiring the true 
principles of Christian perfection, render yourselves fit for the 
heavenly bliss: This, my dearly beloved brethren, is the great 
design of Christ and his gospel. You must receive Jesus Christ as 
your Saviour and Mediator, you must be exercised unto godliness, and 
have the ways of God in your hearts. By a course of obedience and 
patience, you must follow the captain of our salvation to his glory.

To this purpose, I say, our clergy ought to preach; and if in so 
saying, they think me wrong, I call upon them to tell me so in 
print, by argument; that I may either publicly acknowledge a 
mistaken judgment; or prove, that too many ministers mislead 
Christian people in the article of faith and practice. By the strict 
rules of Christian simplicity and integrity, I shall ever act.

THE END

NOTES

Many of these notes are footnotes in the original. Those added by 
the transcriber are marked (TN). 

1. Botargo: A paste made of mullet roe, more commonly nowadays known 
by its Greek name taramasalata. (TN)
2. To the plain and satisfactory method of seeking for the faith in 
the sacred books, there are many adversaries and many objections 
raised. There are, says a great man, a very numerous body of 
Christians who knew no other guides but the living guides of the 
present church; and acknowledge no other faith, for the faith once 
delivered to the saints, but that which is new delivered to them by 
their present rulers, as such.

To establish this point, the greater part of these lay down the 
infallibility of the present church, and of every man of the past 
ages, through whose mouth, or by whose hands, the present traditions 
of faith have descended to them. And this, indeed, would be a very 
good method, if that single proof of infallibility could be proved. 
But this is a point so gross, and so utterly void of all proof, that 
a great body of the Christian would have broke loose from the power 
of this monster, and declared for the New Testament itself, as the 
only guide or rule of faith; the only deliverer of the faith to us 
of later ages.

When this comes however to be put in practice, too many of the same 
persons who set the scriptures up as the only guide, turn round on a 
sudden, and let us know, that they mean by it, not these sacred 
original writings themselves, but the interpretations, or sense, put 
upon them by our spiritual superiors, to which we are bound to 
submit, and put under an obligation to find that to be the truth 
which is taught by these leaders.

But to this we reply with reason, that though we ought to pay a 
regard of serious attention to these whose business it is to find 
out and dispense the truth, and show the respect of a due 
examination of what they affirm; yet we must not yield the 
submission due only to infallibility. It is our glory not to submit 
to the voice of any man. We must reserve that regard, for God, and 
for Christ, in matters of faith once delivered to the saints.

Others, again, of the reformed, tell us, that the surer way of 
knowing what was delivered above eighteen hundred years age, is to 
take the original faith from the Councils and Fathers, grave and 
good men, who met and wrote for the settling of the faith. And to 
this we answer, that these wise and good men cannot give so good an 
account of the faith contained in the original books as the books 
themselves which contain it.

To give an example to the purpose. If we would know the doctrine of 
the Church of England at the reformation, it is not the writings of 
particular divines, many years after that period, that we must 
consult; or any assembly of them; but the authentic acts and 
declarations, and sermons, made and recorded at the time; for many 
of the doctrines thought essential at the reformation, have been 
since changed by gradual alterations; by explainers using their own 
style and manner of expression, and introducing their own scheme of 
philosophy, and judgment in commenting, into the scheme of doctrine 
to be explained. This produces great variation from what was once 
settled. What was once esteemed fundamental is thereby altered. Let 
this be applied to the first Christian writers, after the Apostles 
were departed, and as their language and philosophy were various, 
and they differed from one another, great variations must creep into 
the doctrines delivered by them. It follows then, that nothing but 
what is recorded in the first original books themselves can be firm 
and stable to us in points of faith. In the original books only we 
can find the faith, without that confusion and darkness, which human 
explications and additions have brought in by way of light.
3. The captivity here spoken of began at Nehuzaradan's taking and 
burning the city and temple of Jerusalem, and sending Zedekiah, the 
last king, in chains, to Nebuchadnezzar, who ordered his children to 
be butchered before his face, his eyes to be put out, and then 
thrown into a dungeon, where he died. This happened before our Lord, 
588 years; after the flood, 1766; of the world, 3416.
4. Shinaar comprehends the plains of Chaldea or Babylonia in Asia; 
and the 'men of Shinaar' were the first colony that Noah sent out 
from Ararat, the mountains of Armenia, where the Ark rested after 
the flood, to settle in the grand plains of Babylonia, twelve-
hundred miles from Ararat. This was in the clays of Peleg, two 
hundred and forty years after the flood, when the eight had 
increased to sixty thousand; which made a remove of part of them 
necessary.
5. The extraordinary longevity of the ante-diluvians is accounted 
utterly incredible by many moderns; but it did not appear so 
unnatural to the early ages of Paganism. Let no one, says Josephus, 
upon comparing the lives of the ancients with our lives, and with 
the few years which we now live, think that what we have said of 
them is false. I have for witness to what I have said, all those who 
have written antiquities, both among the Greeks and Barbarians. For 
even Manetho, who wrote the Egyptian History; and Berosus, who 
collected the Chaldean Monuments; and Mochus and Hostius; and 
besides these, Hieronymus the Egyptian, and those who composed the 
Phoenician history, agree to what I here say. Hesiod also, and 
Hecutæus, and Hallanicus, and Acusilaus; and besides these, Ephorus 
and Nicolaus of Damascus, relate that the ancients lived a thousand 
years.

The ancient Latin authors likewise confirm the sacred history in 
this branch: and Varro, in particular, made an enquiry, What the 
reason was that the ancients lived a thousand years?

[The author had here promised "a continuation of this note in the 
Appendix," but it may be proper to notice, that the first volume of 
this work was printed in 1756, and the second, to which the Appendix 
was to have been added, did not make its appearance till 1766, and 
then without the promised addition. What the Appendix was intended 
to comprise will be found more fully noticed in the introductory 
portion to this volume. The materiel connected with the dispersion 
at Babel, was derived by the author, from Blomberg's Life of Edmund 
Dickinson, M.D. 1739. 8vo. of which subsequent notice will be made. 
ED.]
6. The Temple of Tranquillity, described by Volusenus in his dream: 
Florence Wilson, who wrote in Latin as Florentius Volusenus, was a 
Scottish scholar of the 16th Century. His work De animi 
Tranquillatate ("Of the Tranquil Mind") describes a dream-vision in 
which Democritus shows the dreamer a temple dedicated to the 
principles "Know yourself" and "Know your God." (TN)
7. This and the next two Latin quotation are from Volusenus, De 
animi tranquillitate. (TN)
8. I had once a sweet little country house in the neighbourhood of 
those ladies, and used to be often at their gardens and grottos. 
Mrs. CRAFTON had the finest shells, but her grot was dull and 
regular, and had no appearance of nature in the formation. She was a 
pious, plain, refined lady, but had not a fancy equal to the 
operation required in a shell-house.

The excellent, the polite, the well-bred, the good and unfortunate 
Mrs. O'HARA had a glorious fancy. She was a genius, and had an 
imagination that formed a grotto wild and charming as Calypso's. Her 
fancy did likewise form the garden, in which the grotto stood, near 
the margin of a flood, into a paradise of delights. Many a pleasing, 
solitary hour, have I passed in this charming place; and at last saw 
all in ruins; the garden in disorder, and every fine shell torn from 
the grotto. Such are the changes and chances of this first state; 
changes wisely designed by Providence as warnings not to set up our 
rest here: that we may turn our hearts from this world, and with all 
our might labour for that life which shall never perish.

What ruined Mrs. O'HARA's grotto deprived me of my little green and 
shady retreat. CHARLES O'HARA, this lady's husband, a strange man, 
from whom I rented my pretty farm, and to whom I had paid a fine to 
lower the rent, had mortgaged it, unknown to me, to the famous 
DAMER, and that powerful man swallowed all. All I had there was 
seized for arrears of interest due of Mr. O'HARA, and as I was ever 
liable to distrainment, I took my leave of Fingal.
9. Statira A Persian princess. After Alexander the Great's conquest 
of Persia, she became one of his wives. (TN)
10. Erycina: One of the titles of the Roman Goddess Venus. (TN)
11. The words men of are not in the Greek.
12. To this stammering or uncouth pronunciation of barbarous 
dialects the prophet Ezekiel refers, chap. 36. v. 3. "Ye are made to 
come upon the lip of the tongues:" that is, ye are become a bye-word 
even in the heathen gabble, among the babbling nations where ye are 
in captivity. Holloway, the author of Letter and Spirit, says, the 
word barbarous, used in so many languages, (with only their 
respective different determinations) for persons of strange or 
foreign tongues, is a monument of the great confusion at Babel; this 
word being a corruption of the reduplicate Chaldee word Balbel, by 
changing the l in each place into r. Some say, the word in the other 
languages is derived from the Arabic Barbar, to "murmur like some 
beast." Scaliger defines it, Pronunciatio vitiosa et insuavis, 
literasque male exprimens, blæsorum balborumque more: ["A distorted 
and unpleasant pronunciation, badly expressed in writing, in a 
lisping and stammering fashion"] and which was hitting upon the 
truth as to part of the original manner of the confusion. Indeed 
Blæsus [lisp] and Balbus [stammer], in Latin, are both derived in 
like manner from Bal and Balbel. The Welsh have preserved a noble 
word for this barbarism of confused language in their compounded 
term Baldwridd; which is a plain compound of the Hebrew Bal, and 
Dabar, without any other deflection from the original Hebrew, than 
that of changing the b in the latter member of the word Dabar into 
the Welsh w, a letter of the same organ. Moreover, from their said 
Baldwridd, and Das, we again derive our Balderdash; which therefore 
signifies strictly, a heap of confused or barbarous words, like 
those of the gabble of dialects, originally gendered at Babel. See 
Letter and Spirit, ch. 11. It is very remarkable, that this learned 
gentleman says he had been long of Hutchinson's mind, as to a 
confusion of confessions, and not of tongues; but on weighing the 
matter, is now of another opinion. Ibid. p. 115. Therefore, 
Hutchinson not infallible, but out for once, and as Dr. Sharp well 
observes, this may be an earnest of deserting Hutchinson in other 
points of his new hypothesis. See Dr. Sharp's Two Discourses on the 
Hebrew Tongue and Character against Holloway. His Two Discourses on 
Elohim, and Defence. And his Three Discourses on Cherubim. The 
Hutchinsonians lay the stress of their hypothesis on the Biblical 
Hebrew, being the language of Adam in Paradise; and if this be taken 
from them, they are left in a poor way indeed.
13. Fautor: A follower or supporter. (TN)
14. The great Samuel Bochart, born at Rouen, in 1599, was the 
minister of the reformed church in the town of Caen, in Normandy. 
His principal works are his Phaleg and Canaan; works that show an 
amazing erudition, and ought to be well read by every gentleman; you 
should likewise have his Hierozoïcon, or History of Animals 
mentioned in the Sacred Books. It is a good supplement to his 
Scripture Geography. His sermons and dissertations are also very 
valuable. Bochart died suddenly in the Academy at Caen, on Monday, 
16th May, 1667, in the sixty-eighth year of his age. Brieux wrote 
the following fine epitaph on him:-
"Scilicet hæc cuique est data sors æquissima, talis
Ut sit mors, qualis vita peracta fuit.
Musarum in gremio teneris qui rixit ab annis.
Musarum in gremio debuit ille mori."
"One dies as one lives; so Providence
Of Mortals decides the Fate as she wishes
Bochart spent his childhood among the Muses
And was to meet Death in their arms."
15. As this song is a short imitation of the nineteenth Ode of the 
first book of Horace, it is worth your while, Reader, to see how the 
Rev. P. Francis has done the whole. I will here set down a few 
lines:
"Urit me Glyceræ nitor
Splendentis pario marmore purius:
Urit grata protervitas,
Et vultus nimium lubricus aspici."

Which lines are imitated in the first verse of the above song, and a 
part of the second; and the ingenious Mr. Francis renders them in 
the following manner-
"Again for Glycera I burn,
And all my long forgotten flames return.
As Parian marble pure and bright,
The shining maid my bosom warms;
Her face too dazzling for the sight,
Her sweet coquetting—how it charms!"

The following:
"In me tota ruens Venus
Cyprum deseruit—"

of which the third verse of the song is an imitation, Mr. Francis 
translates thus:
"Whole Venus rushing through my veins,
No longer in her favourite Cyprus reigns."
And the lines
"Hic vivum mihi cespitem,
hic Verbenas, pueri, ponite thuraque
Bimi cum patera meri:
Mactata veniet lænior hostia:"

Which are imitated in the fourth verse of the song, Mr. Francis 
translates as follows,
"Here let the living altar rise,
Adorned with every herb and flower;
Here flame the incense to the skies,
And purest wines libation pour;
Due honours to the Goddess paid,
Soft sinks to willing love the yielding maid."

You see in this the difference between a translation and an 
imitation.
16. The reader will find this apology in the Appendix to this life, 
[see Note 5, ante]. By scripture and argument, without any regard to 
the notions of the fathers, I there endeavour to prove, that God the 
Father, the beginning and cause of all things, is One Being, 
infinite in such a manner, that his infinity is an infinity of 
fullness as well as immensity; and must be not only without limits, 
but also without diversity, defect or interruption: and of 
consequence his Unity so true and real, that it will admit of no 
diversity or distinction of persons:—that as to the Lord Jesus 
Christ, he was the servant chosen of this tremendous God, to redeem 
mankind; but his holy soul so far in perfection above Adam or any of 
his posterity, and possessed so much a greater share of the 
indwelling of the divine life and nature than any other creature, 
that he might, compared to us, with a just figure of speech, be 
called God.
17. The Conniving-House, as the gentlemen of Trinity called it in my 
time, and long after; was a little public house, kept by Jack 
M'Lean, about a quarter of a mile beyond Ringsend, on the top of the 
beach, within a few yards of the sea. Here we used to have the 
finest fish at all times, and in the season, green peas and all the 
most excellent vegetables. The ale here was always extraordinary, 
and everything the best; which, with its delightful situation, 
rendered it a charming place of a summer's evening. Many a happy 
evening have I passed in this pretty thatched house with the famous 
LARREY GROGAN, who played on the bag-pipes extremely well; dear JACK 
LATTIN, matchless on the fiddle, and the most agreeable of 
companions; that ever charming young fellow, JACK WALL, the son of 
counsellor Maurice Wall; the most worthy, the most ingenious, the 
most engaging of men; and many other delightful fellows, who went in 
the days of their youth to the shades of eternity. When I think of 
them and their evening songs "We will go to Johnny M'Lean's to try 
if his ale be good or not, etc." and that years and infirmities 
begin to oppress me—What is life!
18. Minerva of Sanctius: Franciscus Sanctius Brocensis(1523-1600)was 
a Spanish scholar and philologiost. His Minerva sive de causis 
linguæ Latinæ (Salamanca: Renaut, 1587), a Latin grammar in four 
books or sections (study of the parts of speech, the noun, the verb, 
and the figures) which, subjecting the study of language to reason, 
is one of the very first epistemological grammars and made him a 
European celebrity for several generations.
Hickes's Northern Thesaurus: George Hickes (1642-1715), an English 
scholar whose book Linguarum veterum septentrionalium thesaurus 
grammatico-criticus et archæologicus ("A grammatical, critical and 
archaeological treasury of the old northern languages") was a work 
of comparative philology which comprehended Anglo-Saxon, Frankish, 
Gothic and Icelandic, in addition to material on numismatics, 
history and archaeology. (TN)
19. The School-house of the famous Dr. Sheridan, in Capel Street, 
Dublin, where many of the younger branches of the most distinguished 
families in Ireland, at that period, received the first rudiments of 
their education; was formerly King James II.'s Mint-house. The only 
view of it extant, is a vignette in Samuel Whyte's Poems, printed by 
Subscription at Dublin, in 1793. 8vo. p. 44. ED.
20. Scelerate: An atrocious scoundrel. (TN)
21. For according to his mercy, &c.: Titus, 3:5. (TN)
22. The Lord died for our sins, &c.: Romans 4. (TN)
23. I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ, &c.: Romans 1:16. (TN)
24. I will pray the. Father, &c.: John 14:16. (TN)
25. If thou doest well, Cain &c: Genesis 4:7. (TN)
26. For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, &c.: 
2 Corinthians 5:10. (TN)
27. And God saw, that the wickednesses of man was great in the earth 
&c: Genesis 6:5. (TN)
28. The earth also was corrupt before God, &c: Genesis 6:11. (TN)
29. Heart is deceitful above all things, &c: Jeremiah 17:9. (TN)
30. There is none righteous, no not one &c.: Romans 3:10-17.
31. Repent, and be baptized every one of you, &c: Acts 2:38-9 (TN)
32. The God of our fathers raised up Jesus whom he slew &c.: Acts 
5:30-2. (TN)
33. Then they (the Gentiles) were filled with the Holy Ghost &c: 
Acts 4:31 (TN)
34. If any man have not the spirit of Christ &c: Romans 8:9-16. (TN)
35. What man knoweth the spirit of man &c.: 1 Corinthians 2:11-12; 1 
John 2:20-1, 26-27, 1 John 3:24. (TN) 
36. And the Lord smelled a sweet savour, &c.: Genesis, 8:21 (TN)
37. Neither will I again smite, &c: Genesis, 8:21-22 (TN)
38. Ex ea re tum privatim tum publice lignea virilia thyrsis 
alligates per eam solennitatem gestabant: fuit enim Phallus vocatum 
membrum virile." Schædius, de Diis Germanis, edidit Keyslero, 1728, 
8vo. p. 130. ["Accordingly, both in private and in public, they used 
a dedicated wooden penis for this ceremony: Phallus was the name 
given to the virile member."]
39. Heraclides Syracusius libro de vetustis et sancitis moribus 
scribit apud Syracusios in perfectis Thermophoriis, ex sesamo et 
melle fingi pudenda muliebria, quæ per ludos et spectacula 
circumferebantur, et vocabantur Mylli. Athenai Deipnos. l. 14. p. 
647. ["Heraclides of Syracuse writes in his book about the ancient 
and sacred customs of the Syracusans, that in honour of the Goddess 
Demeter Thermophorus they moulded from sesame and honey an image of 
a woman's private parts which was carried around at games and 
spectacles, and was called Mylli."]
40. This is taken notice of by the prophet Jeremiah. "The women also 
with cords about them, sitting in the ways, burn bran for perfume; 
but if any of them, drawn by some that passeth by, lie with her, she 
reproacheth her fellow, that she was not thought as worthy as 
herself, nor her cord broken."—Baruch, ch. 6. v. 43.

Herodotus, who lived almost two centuries after, in explanation of 
this passage of the prophet Baruch, tells us, "Every woman at 
Babylon, was obliged, once in her life, to sit down openly in the 
temple of Venus, in order to prostitute herself to some stranger: 
they enter into the temple, and sit down crowned with garlands, some 
continually going out, and others coming in: The galleries where 
they sit are built in a straight line, and open on every side, that 
all strangers may have a free passage to choose such women as they 
like best. Those women who excel in beauty and shape are soon 
dismissed: but the deformed are sometimes necessitated to wait three 
or four years; before they can satisfy the law. The men declared 
their choice by throwing money into the lap of the woman they most 
admired, which she was by no means to refuse, but instantly retire 
with the man that accosted her, and fulfil the law. Women of rank, 
for none were dispensed with; might sit in covered chariots for the 
purpose, whilst their servants waited at a distance till they had 
done." See Herodotus, translated by Isaac Littlebury, 1700, 8vo. 
vol. 1. p. 125.

Strabo also furnishes an account to the same purpose, lib. 16. p. 
745; and Justin observes the reason for this custom, was ne sola 
impudria videretur, i.e. lest she (Venus) alone should appear 
lascivious.—Lib. 18. cap. 5.

As to the breaking of the woman's cord, Dr. Hyde says, their lower 
garments were tied with small and weak cords made of rushes, "qui ad 
congrediendum erant frangendi."["Which must be broken for the 
encounter"] Purchas confirms this notion; having seen the thing 
practised in his travels in the east. Pilgr. book 1. ch. 12. p. 65. 
But Grotius on Baruch says, the meaning was, the women had cords 
given them, as a token that they were under the vow of prostitution, 
which when they had performed, the cord was properly said to be 
broken; for every vow may be called vinculum, or a cord. As I take 
it, the case was both as Hyde and Grotius relate it. I was in 
company with a physician, who had spent many years of his life in 
the East, and he assured me, he had seen both circumstances 
practised in the kingdom of Cranganor [The modern name is 
Kodungallur in Kerala].

As to the woman's burning incense or bran for a perfume, it was the 
custom before coition, by way of charm and incentive. When a 
Babylonian and his wife had a mind to correspond, they always first 
lit up the fuming pan, imagining it improved the passion. So in the 
Pharmaceutria of Theocritus, p. 33. we see Simætha is using her 
incantation, "nunc furfures sacrificabo,"["Now I will sacrifice 
bran"] ??????? [Pituron, bran] the word made use of in Jeremiah's 
Epistle. And as if all this had not been lust enough in their 
religion, it was farther declared in their ritual, that those were 
best qualified for the sacerdotal function, who were born of mothers 
who conceived them of their own sons.

In respect of human sacrifices, if you would have a full account of 
them, consult the following authors, and you will find that the 
Canaanites were far from being the only Pagans who were guilty of 
this unnatural barbarity. Selden de Diis Syris. Segort. 1. c.6. and 
all the authors he quotes. Grotius on Deut. 18. Isaac Vossius de 
Orig. Idol. l.2. c.5. Dion. Vossius on Maimon. de Idol. c.6. Lud. 
Vives Notes on St. Aug. de Civit. Dei. l.7. c.19. Ouzelius et 
Elmenhorstius Notes on Min. Felix. Spenceri de Legibus Hebraorum. 
l.2. c.13. And Fabricius Bibliographia. c.9.
41. But to him that worketh not, &c: Romans, 4:5. (TN)
42. Bishop Sherlock well observes, that "two covenants were given to 
Abraham, one a temporal covenant, to take place in the land of 
Canaan—the other, a covenant of better hope, to be performed in a 
better country." Discourse on Prophesy, p. 134.
43. Shechinah: "The visible manifestation of the Divine Majesty, 
esp. when resting between the cherubim over the mercy-seat or in the 
temple of Solomon; a glory or refulgent light symbolizing the Divine 
Presence." (OED)
44. Even as a partridge, &c.: Jeremiah 17:11. (TN)
45. There was none righteous, no not one, &c.: Romans, 3:10-18. (TN)
46. If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, &c.: John 15:7 
(TN)
48. No man can come unto me, &c: John 6:48. (TN)
49. Sub pedibus ventos et rauca tonitrua calcat: "He crushes (us) 
under the foot of the wind and the noisy thunder." Claudian, 
Panegyric on the Consulship of Flavius Manlius Theodorus.
50. Syzygy: The points where a celestial body is nearest to, or 
furthest from, another body: For the moon and the sun (as here), 
they are at the full and new moon. (TN)
51. Ab extra: "From outside" (TN)
52. That even spontaneous motion is performed by the divine power, 
is proved in the first part of a most excellent book, entitled, An 
Enquiry into the Nature of the Human Soul, [by John Baxter, the 
third and best edition was printed in two volumes, 8vo, in 1745; a 
third followed in 1750.] I shall only observe here that motion is 
spontaneous, as it is begun and ended by the living being itself, 
without physical necessity: but it is above the power and knowledge 
of the spontaneous being, as it is performed mechanically: the 
motive power is immediately impressed by the Creator, who is the 
only mover, as well as the first mover. How adorable is this 
condescension! the Creator exerts his power in consequence of the 
spontaneity of his living creatures! But is not this low work for 
the supreme Lord of heaven and earth, says the mechanical reasoner? 
No. Lowness of work is not applicable to the Creator of all things. 
He is as much the Creator of the meanest insect, as of the highest 
intelligence. It is his perpetual power, exerted in cohesion, that 
keeps all the parts of matter in the bodies of living creatures 
together. Philosophy cannot be hurt by admitting his power. His 
omnipotence is displayed to our senses in the most despicable weed 
of the field as well as in the bright rolling orbs of heaven. In 
calling such things low work, we forget what infinite power implies, 
and what infinite goodness prompts.
53. Should it be asked, why was such an intricate structure of such 
materials employed, or such a laborious method contrived, by the 
organization of dead matter, if it no way serves to produce motion, 
but rather consumes the force impressed? the answer is, that this 
consuming mechanism is no inconvenience in nature, if we consider 
who renews the motive power. We are forced to the frugal of our 
little power: but this is not applicable to the Deity. The governing 
power of the Deity is creating power. Beings made up of matter and 
spirit require such a supplying power, and in the various work God 
instructs his rational beings, and displays his omnipotence in 
wisdom and action.
54. Eldine-Hole in Derbyshire is a mile south of Mamtorr, and four 
miles east of Buxton. It is a perpendicular gulf or chasm, which I 
tried to fathom more than once, and sound it by my line, and by the 
measure of sound at the rate of sixteen feet one twelfth in one 
second, the measure Dr. Halley allows near the earth for the descent 
of heavy bodies; to be one thousand two hundred and sixty-six feet, 
or four hundred and twenty-two yards down to the water; but how deep 
the water is cannot be known. I suppose it reaches to the abyss. 
This chasm is forty yards long above ground, and ten over at its 
broadest part: but from the day there is a sloping descent of forty 
yards to the mouth of the horrible pit, and this is only four yards 
long and one and a half broad. Two villains who were executed at 
Derby not long ago, confessed at the gallows, that they threw a poor 
traveller into this dreadful gulf, after they had robbed him.
55. Indesinently: Continuously (TN)
56. In the second volume of Familiar Letters between the characters 
in David Simple, the reader will find an excellent story in relation 
to wishing, which the ingenious female writer calls 'a Fragment of a 
Fairy Tale,' in the conclusion of which there is the following 
sensible observation: "The good Fairy came often to visit me, and 
confirmed me in my resolution, never again to be so unreasonable, as 
to desire to have all my wishes completed; for she convinced me, 
that the short-sighted eyes of mortals were not formed to see, 
whether the event of any of their own wishes would produce most 
happiness or misery: and that our greatest felicity, often arises 
from the very disappointment of those desires, the gratification of 
which, at the first view, seems to be necessary to our welfare."— 
Familiar Letters, ut supra , 1747. 8vo. vol. ii. p. 225, 272.
57. Tales of the fairies: by the Countess D'Anois, published in 
English translation 1729 & republished several times. (TN)
58. Ælian's description: "In the hollow of the cliff there was a 
cave very deep fortified at the entrance with a great precipice; 
along it crept ivy, and twined about the young trees, upon which it 
climbed. Saffron also grew about the place in a young thick grove, 
with which also sprung up the hyacinths, and many other flowers of 
various colours, which not only feasted the eye, but the odours 
which they exhaled round about into the air, did afford a banquet 
also to the smell. Likewise there were many laurels, which being 
ever verdant were very delightful to the sight; vines also growing 
thick and full of bunches before the cave, attested the industry of 
Atalanta, springs ever running clear and cool to the touch and taste 
flowed there abundantly". Ælian, Various Histories, Book 13, Chap. 
I. Tr. Thomas Stanley,(1665) (TN)
59. That in Homer, where Calypso lived: "Round about the cave grew a 
luxuriant wood, alder and poplar and sweet-smelling cypress, wherein 
birds long of wing were wont to nest, owls and falcons and sea-crows 
with chattering tongues, who ply their business on the sea. And 
right there about the hollow cave ran trailing a garden vine, in 
pride of its prime, richly laden with clusters. And fountains four 
in a row were flowing with bright water hard by one another, turned 
one this way, one that. And round about soft meadows of violets and 
parsley were blooming." Homer, Odyssey, Book 5, Tr. T. A. Murray. 
(TN)
60. When a plague afflicted the Massilienses, they fed a poor man 
deliciously, and adorned him with sacred vestments; then led him 
through the city, and sacrificed him, by throwing him headlong down 
from a steep rock, after the people had poured their execrations 
upon him, and prayed that all the calamities of their city might 
fall upon him. Such practice shows that Christ being offered for the 
sins of the whole world, was in conformity to the ideas of mankind. 
The Jews had their devoted animal, and the Gentiles had their 
sacrificed poor man, and other ways.
61. The renewing of the Holy Ghost, &c.: Acts 2:38-9. (TN)
62. To walk with a perfect heart &c.: Psalms 101:2-3 (TN)
63. Blessing and honour, &c: Rev. 5:13 (TN)
64. Grand operation: The alchemical transmutation of base metal into 
gold. (TN)
65. Spagyrist: An alchemist. (TN)
66. There is a third way to make gold, to wit, by separation, for 
every metal contains some quantity of gold; but the quantity is so 
small that it bears no proportion to the expense of getting it out: 
this last way the spagyrists never attempt; and as for the two other 
methods, maturation, and transmuting by the grand elixir, the happy 
hour will never come, though so many ingenious men have often 
thought it drawing nigh. To console them for the loss of their 
fortunes they have had some comfortable moments of reflection, that 
they have been within some minutes of success, when crack! all is 
gone and vanished on a sudden, and they have nothing before them but 
cinders and broken crucibles. It is very strange then, that a man of 
Dr. Dickenson's great veracity and skill in chemistry, should affirm 
the thing was actually done in his presence by an adept; and the 
more so, as his friend, the Honourable Robert Boyle, told him the 
thing was an impossibility. Dickenson's words are, "Nec potui sane 
quantacunque mihi fuerit opinio de ista re, quin aliquoties animi 
penderem donec illustris ea demonstratio quam vestra excellentia, 
biennio iam elapso, coram exhibuit, omnem ansam dubitandi mihi 
præcidisset." And again "Placuit dominationi vestra: claro 
experimento ante oculos facto animum meum ad opus accendere atque; 
etiam quæstionem mearum solutiones, quantum licerat, promittere." 
See Epistola ad Theod. Mundanum Philosophum Adeptum, de 
Quintessentia Philosophorum, de Vera Physiologia, Oxon. 1636. This 
is very surprising; and the more so, as the greatest watchings and 
closest application, in searching after the stone, are all in vain, 
unless the stars shed a propitious influence on the labours of the 
spagyrist: the work must be begun and advance in proper planetary 
hours, and depends as much on judicial astrology, as on fire, 
camphor, salt, labour and patience: but judicial astrology is no 
science. It is a mere farce. I must conclude then, that the hands of 
Mundanus the adept, were too quick for the doctor's eyes, and he 
deceived him by legerdemain: that all the books on the subject are 
fraudulent descriptions to deceive the credulous; and what Mundanus 
told Dickenson of Sir George Ripley, canon of Bridlington, in 
Yorkshire, in the reign of Edward the Fourth, and of Raymund Lully, 
was mere invention. He affirmed that Ripley sent the knights of 
Rhodes an hundred thousand pounds to support them in their wars 
against the Turks: and that Lully assisted Edward I. king of 
England, with six millions of gold, towards carrying on the Crusade. 
This piece of secret history he assures us he found in an ancient 
manuscript of indisputable authority, quod inculpatæ fidei registris 
innotescit ("which makes his bad faith obvious"): A manuscript that 
no one ever saw except Mundanus himslf; penes me ("in my opinion") 
indeed, it was to be found only in his own head.

Ripley is in great repute among the adepts to this day, and his 
famous unintelligible and mysterious book is called A Compound of 
Alchemy containing Twelve Gates. He inscribed the manuscript to 
Edward IV. but the editor dedicated it to Q. Elizabeth, affirming 
that it contained the right method of making the philosopher's stone 
and aurum potable ("drinkable gold", an imaginary cure-all sought by 
alchemists). Lully was a very learned man for the latter end of the 
thirteenth century, and wrote several books in Latin; Generates 
Artium Libri; Libri Logicales, Philosophici et Metaphisici; Variarum 
Artium Libri; Libri Spirituales Prædicabiles, and the Vade Mecum 
Lullii; which treats more particularly on the Philosopher's Stone.
67. Life of Edmund Dickenson, M.D. Physician in Ordinary to Charles 
II., and James II. by William Nicolas Blomberg, 1739, 8vo. p. 135. 
From this work, the whole that has here been advanced respecting 
Alchemy, is extracted, pp. 87-139.
Enigmatistinubivagi: Vagabond swindlers. (TN)
68. As to the aurum potabile mentioned by Ripley, which was then and 
long after esteemed a panacea, or universal medicine, it is now a 
question if there can be a tincture of gold; for if it be only a 
division of the lests, or minims of gold, by the spicula of aqua 
regia, [gold recrystallized from a solution in a mixture of nitric 
and hydrochloric acids (TN] and these minims thrown into oil of 
rosemary where they swim, it is no radical tincture of gold, and the 
sole virtue lies in the oil of rosemary. The oil may be evaporated; 
the gold dust remains; and that by melting is reduced to a lump of 
gold again. This I have experimented. But the alchemists say, gold 
may be reduced into a gum of substance like honey, without any 
corrosive, and that gum steeped in spirit of wine acquires a ruby 
colour. An ounce of this is to be mixed with sixteen ounces of 
another liquor, and we have aurum potabile; sovereign in all 
distempers. This seems to me to be a second part of the romance. The 
making of this golden gum is a secret we can no more come at than 
the philosopher's stone. The adepts however assert it, and assure 
us, that Moses could make aurum potabile, as is evident from his 
pulverising the golden calf, and giving it to the children of Israel 
to drink. This great man, who wrote 540 years before Homer: 200 
before Sanchoniatho [Sanchuniathon, an ancient Phoenician writer 
(TN)]; and 350 before the Trojan war, was, as they inform us, an 
adept.

[The story of "pulverising the golden calf," a rabbinical 
impertinence, which Calmet in his Commentaire Literal sur l'Exode, 
ch. xxxii. ver. 20. owns himself ashamed to mention, as well as the 
probability, that Moses was an adept, has met with a full 
investigation in the Life of Edmund Dickenson, noticed ut supra, pp. 
162-171.] ED.
69. AZORA BURCOT died in 1732, six years after I left them, but 
ANTONIA FLETCHER was [1756] living in the same happy situation; and 
by advising the young women to marry some young men of those 
mountains, has made an alteration in the community for the better, 
and increased the number of her people. The settlement is now like 
to continue, and they find many advantages from having men among 
them. The rising generation thereby acquired, now proves a blessing 
to the first colony, whom years have rendered much weaker and 
dependent than when I first saw them. AZORA, a little before she 
died, did intend to get in a recruit of female children for the 
support of the society: but ANTONIA judged it was much better, to 
let the young girls of the community get honest youths for their 
spouses; for, by this means, they can never want young people to 
assist and comfort them, and to increase and perpetuate their happy 
republic. For these reasons, she sent for some young men to several 
neighbouring villages in Richmondshire [An area of north-western 
Yorkshire and eastern Westmoreland (TN)], to make several things 
wanting, and to dig, and work in the gardens, for so much by the 
year certain; and as they were smitten with the clean, civil girls 
of Burcot-Hamlet, several marriages soon ensued, and infants were 
produced before the twelve months had expired. More than half of the 
twenty women that married, had twins the first year, and all of them 
had strong, healthy children. The ten extraordinary girls I 
mentioned, got very good husbands, and as ANTONIA was particularly 
kind to them on their marrying, and gave to all the wedded folks 
great encouragement in profitable gardens and houses, grain and 
cattle, they and their spouses became rather more dutiful and useful 
to their mistress and ruler than otherwise, and in gratitude, and 
for the sake of their children, did their best to please Mrs. 
FLETCHER, and increase the common felicity. In this condition I 
found them on my second arrival at Burcot-Hamlet. They were a 
flourishing village, and a most happy people. My second visit was in 
1739, fourteen years after the first; and I saw them a third time in 
1752. They were then all well, and enjoyed every, comfort of life 
that can proceed from good and useful manners. Mrs. FLETCHER, though 
now in years, has no sign of age in her constitution, and still 
leads a most active and pious life. She is a subaltern providence to 
them, and with the tenderest care, makes it the labour of her every 
day to secure and advance the temporal and eternal interest of the 
people: but their souls is her main care. She performs to them 
divine service twice every day, as good AZORA was wont to do. She 
reads the best sermons to the aged, and constantly catechises the 
young ones. She is a blessed woman.

By the way, reader, I must observe to you, that in travelling over 
that part of Richmondshire, which is called Stanemore, I found 
several small villages, that are not mentioned in Camden, or the 
Britannia Antigua et Nova, or in England's Gazetteer; and though not 
so pretty and happy as Burcot in the northern ends of the fells of 
Westmoreland; yet in tolerable condition, and remarkable on account 
of several things and people; though they live entirely on what 
their spot affords, and have little communication with their 
countrymen beyond the mountains that separate the inhabitants of 
Stanemore from the rest of England. I took notice, in particular, 
that although those poor remote people had not faculties adapted to 
large measures of knowledge, nor have ministers to teach them, or 
churches to pray in; yet they were not alienated from the taste and 
feelings of humanity, nor strangers to the momentous principles of 
true Christianity. They had the Bible, and could read it. They 
instructed their children in virtue and religion, and lived 
themselves as the intelligent subjects of an Almighty Governor; in a 
firm belief that God will distinguish the virtue and the offence of 
mankind hereafter, by suitable tokens of his favour, or displeasure 
All this I saw in several villages of Stanemore mountains. I lived 
for some time among the poor people: and I mention their case here, 
that you may have the less reason to imagine there is anything 
incredible in my account of the extraordinary state of Burcot-
Hamlet.

As to the Stanemore-part of Richmondshire, Camden, and the authors 
of the other Britannia, and the tour-men, &c. never so much as saw 
this country at a distance, I am very sure. The very little they say 
of it, is false and ridiculous. Camden places Bows before Greta-
bridge. He says, in this desolate and solitary, this mountainous and 
vast tract called Stanemore, there is but one inn in the middle of 
it for the entertainment of travellers, whereas, in truth, there is 
no inn at all in what is properly called Stanemore: the inn Camden 
speaks of, is the Bell I mentioned before, where I breakfasted with 
Miss MELMOTH; and lies on the left side of a fine turnpike road from 
Bows to Brugh, in Westmorland, the high-way to Carlisle; but though 
this road is a part of Stanemore, running in a direct line from 
Greta-bridge through Bows to Brugh, eighteen miles of delightful 
ground, both on account of the excellence of the way, and the fine 
views of mountains and vales on either hand, for twelve miles, from 
a beautiful ruin of a Roman castle at the end of the town,* yet this 
is but the southern beginning of Stanemore. That vast tract of 
mountains, glens, and valleys, forest, rock, and water, the most 
wonderful land in the world, for forty miles to the end of the 
country, if it was possible to go straight on, lies on the right 
hand of this road, as you ride to Brugh under Stanemore; or, on your 
left, as you come from Westmorland to Catarracton or Caterrick.

Here, by the way, let me tell you, Reader, lives RALPH HAWKWELL, who 
keeps an excellent house, where you may get choice things, after a 
ride of twenty two miles, if you come from Boroughbridge to go to 
the north; or of fifteen miles, if from Greta-bridge, for the south; 
provided you have the rem; [money (TN)] and if you have not, though 
you were an apostle of a man, RALPH would have very little regard 
for you. Indeed, everywhere in the north, where the best of things 
are to be had, I have always found travelling there as expensive as 
near London. Many I know give a different account, but the reason 
is, either they never were there; or they travel in a pilgrim-like 
manner. You must take care, then, to have money enough, if ever you 
undertake the northern expedition I have frequently gone upon: and 
as it is not safe carrying much cash with you, for there are rogues 
in that part of the world, as well as in this; they rob even on 
Stanemore road; and in riding over the great moor that lies between 
Brugh and Appleby, there is a little ale-house to be seen at a good 
distance, on the right hand, at the entrance of a wood, at the 
bottom of a range of vast fells, where highwaymen sometimes resort; 
I was pursued by two of them, not long ago, and to the excellence of 
my horse, owed the saving of my purse, and perhaps my life: they 
were well mounted, but I kept an hundred yards ahead of them for 
several miles, while, as fast as they could stretch away, they 
chased me till near the town of Brugh. I was all alone, my fellow 
having received a mischief, and being obliged to stay a day behind; 
and the rogues did swear and hoot most horribly, and fired three 
shots at me; but my horse was as good as ever spanked it along, and 
I cut him up, and pricked him over the turf, like the wind away. I 
say, then, as it is not safe travelling with all the money necessary 
for such a long journey, the best way is, when cash runs low, to lie 
by to rest for a week, and put your notes in order, in some town, 
and by one of the dealers, or manufacturers of the place, draw on 
your friend, or goldsmith in London, for what you want, and by the 
return of the post, you will be paid the money where you are. In 
this manner I did, when I was last at Richmond, in the North Riding 
of Yorkshire. Being in want of money, I asked a gentleman with whom 
I chanced to dine, how I could supply myself with £20 by draft on 
one in the capital; and he directed me to his neighbour, who let me 
have what I had occasion for at moderate exchange, as soon as he 
heard from his friend in London. I might have had any money I named 
in this way; and so, in other places of trade.

I hope, reader, you will excuse this little digression, because it 
is meant well; and for the same reason, I imagine you will pardon me 
for advising you, in the next place, should the fates ever bring you 
to Catarractonium, in order to proceed to the northern extremity of 
our country; to go four miles out of your way to see Richmond town, 
before you set out for Greta-bridge, to JOSEPH MARSHALL'S; the best 
house of the two inns there. The delightful, romantic situation of 
Richmond, and the fine curiosities about the town, will afford you 
an agreeable entertainment for a couple of days; and if you like 
going at night to a club of very worthy, sensible men of this town, 
who are very civil to strangers, you may pass the evening in a very 
pleasing way; or if you have a taste for dancing, and prefer the 
conversation of a fine girl to a pipe and more serious discourse, 
there is a small polite assembly of as pretty women as ever 
gladdened the heart of man. My method, while there, was to smoke one 
night with the club; and the next I devoted to the ladies. We made 
up ten couple, and had the hemp-dressers one night, which is, you 
know, if you are a dancing reader, the most difficult, and laborious 
of all the country dances; and nowhere have I seen the ground more 
actively beat, or, in juster measure. Life and truth and charms were 
in perfection in those Richmond girls. I was there in 1729, 1737, 
and again in 1752, and the sensible club, and bright assembly, were 
still in being; but no more than three did I see, of men or women, 
in 37, that were there in 29; and in 52, they were all strangers to 
me. Some were married away; some had removed; and others were 
translated to the shades of eternity. This was to me a moral lesson. 
When I looked round the assembly room the last time I was there, and 
found every glorious girl of my acquaintance was gone, and that 
years had rendered me almost unfit to join with the ladies then 
present, in the dancings of the night, a philosophical sadness came 
powerfully upon my mind, and I could not help sighing in the midst 
of harmony, and a blaze of charms. This life, I saw was a fleeting 
scene indeed.

And now, reader, as to Stanemore-country, if it should ever come 
into your head, to wander over this wild and romantic part of our 
world, at the hazard of your neck, and the danger of being starved, 
your route is, when you have passed the turnpike on Stanemore, in 
your way to Brugh, to turn off to the right, beyond the public-
house, and ascend a fine rising valley you will see between two 
mountains, till you come to the top of the first hills: then 
proceed, if you can, in the course I have described, and wherever it 
is in your power, tend to the north-east, for that is the way out. 
This is one way into the heart of Stanemore in Richmondshire, and 
will bring you, by the way, among the dreadful northern fells of 
Westmorland; a frightful country, and a fatiguing march.

Another way to the Stanemore Alps, is behind JACK RAILTON'S, the 
Quaker's house at Bows. Hire a guide from him, and his man will 
bring you as he did me once through a very surprising way of deep 
bottoms to a public house at Eggleston, on the border of Richmond-
Stanemore. There rest that night, and early the next morning, 
proceed due north, when you can, with another guide, and you will 
come to mountains upon mountains, rapid rivers, and headlong 
torrents, that form amazing and tremendous scenes. Or, as this way 
is neither comfortable, nor very safe, it is a better road to the 
confines, or beginning of Stanemore, to ride from Greta-bridge to 
Bernard Castle, and from Bernard Castle to Eggleston, about sixteen 
miles, as I judge, for it is not measured, and then set out for the 
mountains from Eggleston, as before directed. I have been told there 
is another way into Stanemore, through Bishop-Rick; but as I am a 
stranger to it, I can only say what I have heard, that it is worse 
than the bottoms I went through from the Quaker's house. This is 
enough, reader, to show you how to get into Stanemore, if you have 
the curiosity and heart to visit that very wild and wonderful land.

* By the way, I suspect from Bishop Horsley's account of the Roman 
castle or station, that he never was on the spot, but had his 
relation from the surveyor he sent out to find the length of this 
Roman wall, and take other dimensions and notes for his Britannia 
Remana; I mean Mr. Cay, who published the late map of 
Northumberland, which Bishop Horsley employed him to make. He does 
not describe the fort and situation, and the adjacent country, as if 
he had been there himself: nor can I think he ever rode from this 
castle to Brugh or Burgh under Stanemore, or from Brugh, the Roman 
Veteræ, to Brovocum, now Brougham-Castle, a great and curious Roman 
ruin. The finest things relating to them, he has omitted, and many 
antiquities that are to be found in off-sets by the way: I question, 
likewise, if ever he saw with his own eyes, the eastern and western 
terminations of the Roman wall. If he was at Newcastle, and really 
did ride over Lonsdale marsh to Tunnocelum, a marsh where I had like 
to have lost my life; it is surprising that a man of his 
understanding, and taste for antiquities, should give no better 
account of these places. For my part, I could not see what he saw: 
nor did he see what I saw at the end of the town of Boulness.
70. Accension: Ignition (TN)
71. [The Irish history given here is very inaccurate - (TN)] Such 
knights were honourable creations made by the Irish kings. We have 
an account of them in the Psalter of Tara, before the reigns of 
Conaire the Great, A.M. 3970, ante Christum 34; Cormac Ulfada, A.D. 
230; and the glorious Brian Boru, A.D. 1027: the three greatest 
monarchs that ever Ireland had. Fitzgerald, the first knight of 
Glin, was so made by the immortal Brian Boru, who fell in the bloody 
fight between him and Maolmorda king of Leinster, who had joined 
with the Danes, A.D. 1239. The king of Ireland and the king of 
Leinster slew each other; and with Brian Boru set the glory of 
Ireland. The states from this time began to decay; and Roderic 
O'Connor, who came to the crown, A.D. 1168, was the last king of 
Ireland. Our Henry II., got the kingdom A.D. 1172, by two means; one 
of which was a grant the Pope made of it to him; who was allowed by 
the natives to be supreme Lord of the island in temporals, and the 
nobility had by commission resigned it to him, after the death of 
Brien Boru. The other mean, and what effectually did the work, was 
the king of Leinster's joining with Strangwell, who was at the head 
of the English forces, and had married that king's daughter. An old 
chronicle says she was the most beautiful woman upon earth of her 
time, and very learned: but inferior nevertheless in beauty and 
learning to the six princesses we read of in the Psalter of Tara, 
who were fair beyond all mortals that ever lived, and wonderful in 
the extent of their knowledge; to wit—
The princess Mac Diarmuid.
The princess Mac Reagien.
The princess Mac Faolain.
The princess Mae Kennedy. 
The princess O'Heyn.
The princess O'Flaherty.
These six were Druidesses, says the Psalter of Tara.

By the way, reader, let me tell you, that from this same Psalter of 
Tara, I wrote out one of the finest and most improving love stories 
that ever I read. It is called The Adventure of Terlagh Mac Shain 
and the beautiful Gara O`Mulduin; which happened in the reign of 
Cormac Ulfada, king of Ireland, in the year of salvation 213, that 
Fionn Maccumhail, commonly called Finn Maccul, the mighty champion, 
beat the Picts, and brought off among other prisoners, the beautiful 
Ciarnuit, daughter to the king of the Picts, 'whom Cormac Ulfada 
took for his concubine. This story is likewise more shortly told in 
The Red Book of Mac Eogane, a very valuable old Irish manuscript: 
and from both those books I will give my reader the best part of 
this adventure as soon as I can see a proper place to bring it in.
72. This Cormac Cuillenan wrote the famous Psalter of Cashel, a very 
extraordinary and valuable book, which he composed from ancient 
poems of the bards, who thus wrote their history, and from venerable 
records, as this king and prelate declares in his will. The clause 
is this "My psalter, which preserves the ancient records and 
monuments of my native country, which are transcribed with great 
fidelity, I leave to Ronal Cashel, to be preserved to after-times 
and ages yet to come." There is another remarkable clause in this 
great man's will, to wit, "My soul for mercy I commit to heaven; my 
body leave to dust and rottenness." There is not a word of any saint 
in it; and of consequence, there was no saint-worship then in 
Ireland.

Cormac wrote his will the day before he fought the bloody battle of 
Maghailbe with the king of Leinster, and therein fell. It begins in 
this manner:

"Summoned away by death, which I perceive
Approaches; for by prophetic skill,
I find that short will be my life and reign:
I solemnly appoint that my affairs
Shall thus be settled after I am dead;
And thus I constitute my latest will:
My royal robe embroidered o'er with gold,
And sparkling with the rays of costly jewels;
Well suited to a state of majesty,
I do bequeath &c.—
My coat of mail of bright and polished steel
Will well become the martial king of Ulster,
To whom I give it; and my golden chain
Shall the most pious Muchuda enjoy
As a reward, &c.—
My golden vestment for most sacred use,
And my royal wardrobe I hereby give
To &c.-"

Now from this antique piece verbally translated, I think it is 
evident, that the kings of the four provinces of Ireland were not 
such poor and ignorant chiefs as they are generally imagined to be; 
and of consequence, that one of the four to whom the other three did 
homage, and who was therefore called the king of Ireland, was always 
a potent prince, and could do great matters, when they were all 
united. This consideration, I fancy, and the address let me add of 
Anselm, archbishop of Canterbury, and of Lanfranc, archbishop of the 
same see, "to Mortogh O'Brien king of Ireland, and Terlagh O'Brien 
king of Ireland, Moriardacho Glorioso and Terdeluacho Magnifico. To 
the most magnificent Terlagh O'Brien, king of Ireland, our 
benediction," &c. as you may read them at large in Usher's 
Primordia* ought to give some credit to O'Flaherty's Ogygia, 
Keating's History, and Mac Curtins' Annals; which those writers 
really took from very ancient records, and principally from the very 
valuable manuscripts, called the Psalters of Cashel and Tara.

* These letters were written by the English archhishops to the Irish 
kings, Turlogh and Murtogh, in the years 1098 and 1110.

What the Psalter of Cashel was I have told you, reader; and as to 
the Psalter of Tara, the history of it is this.—

On a tract of land called Tara, that was taken from the province of 
Leinster, and added to the county of Meath, stood the largest of the 
four vast palaces of the kings of Ireland, and at that grand fabric 
there was a triennial meeting of the states of the kingdom, called 
the royal assembly of Tara. There they enacted laws, examined the 
ancient chronicles and records, and purged them from all false and 
spurious relations, settled genealogies, and considered noble 
exploits. All the things that received the assembly's approbation 
were registered, and transcribed into the royal records, and they 
called this journal the Psalter of Tara.
73. Anchises' son: Æneas; see the Æneid, Book VI, for his descent 
into the underworld.
74. Pismires: Ants (TN)
75. Scelerates: Scoundrels (TN)
76. The expression, 'partaker of the divine nature by impressions 
from it,' may, perhaps, be thought by some readers, to approach to 
vision; and to contradict my own opinion before delivered, in 
relation to this subject: let me observe then, that by impression, I 
here mean no more, than bright beams of light cast upon the soul by 
the present Deity; as he sits all power, all knowledge, in the 
heart, and dispenses such rays of wisdom to the pious petitioner, as 
are sufficient to procure a lasting sense of spiritual heavenly 
things. God is not only in heaven. He dwelleth indeed in the heaven 
of heavens after the most glorious manlier, as the High and Lofty 
One, and by some splenndid appearance, manifests a presence to the 
senses of the blessed spirits:* but as he is an infinite Spirit, 
diffused through all things filling as well as containing them, 
seeing and knowing all, even the most secret things; for, His eyes, 
to speak after a popular manner, are ten thousand times brighter 
than the sun, beholding all the ways of men and considering the most 
secret paths; knowing all things ere ever they were created, and 
looking upon all things after they were perfected: it follows, that 
since nothing can exclude the presence of this infinite Spirit; 
then, in Him we live, move, and have our being: He is not far from 
any of us; but although he is above all, yet he is through all, and 
in us all; within us, as well as without us; and therefore, in the 
hearts of the faithful, he must be considered, as an immense, 
intellectual, pure light, ready to enlighten and enliven them, and 
to: shed forth the bright beams of his love upon them. I imagine 
this illustrates the thing. To me it seems reason.

* As to the expression just now used, to wit, that this infinite 
Spirit manifests himself to the senses of his blessed subjects—it 
may be asked how this can be—can the eye behold what is infinite and 
invisible?

The answer is this, that although God's essence be invisible, yet 
there is a glory, the train and attendance of his essence, which 
exhibits a bodily and sensible vision of God. He decketh himself 
with light as with a garment. This is the dwelling' of his essence. 
He dwelleth in light that is unapproachable.

We must distinguish then between the essential and the majestatic 
presence of God. The majestatic presence is the discovery of his 
essential presence in a determinate place by a magnificent luminous 
appearance and this the apostle calls the excellent glory, 
megaloprepous doxes.. This glory appeared on Mount Sinai six days 
together. It rested and dwelt in the sanctuary. It filled the house. 
Moses saw its back parts, that is, a small measure and scantling of 
it, in proportion to the weaknesss of his mortal eyes: but, in the 
other world, when mortals shall have put on immortality, and our 
bodies shall be invested with the new powers of spirituality and 
incorruption, then face to face, we shall be able to see the whole 
lustre of divine Majesty, as familiarly as one man beholdeth the 
face of another**.

There are two ways then, as an excellent man observes, of seeing 
God, to wit, by intelligence, and, in some manner, by sense: but we 
must not imagine that these two make up the beatific vision. There 
is a cause of more importance to beatitude. The sight and 
contemplation of the divine glories is our act; but the act of God 
is the communication of them. This makes the saints perfectly 
blessed. By the communication of the divine glories, we come to be, 
not bare spectators, but partakers of the divine nature.

As we are more obliged, says the writer I have mentioned to the sun, 
who is the cheer and vigour of nature, and the very life of all 
animal and vegetable beings: for his influences than for his sight, 
so are the heavenly inhabitants much more obliged to God for their 
receptions from him as the fountain of life and wisdom, than for the 
sight and contemplation of him as the subject of perfection. This 
illustrates the matter, and we may say, there is a third way of 
seeing God, to wit, in the enjoyment of him; the beamings of his 
favour, and the effusions of his love, passing through the whole 
man, and producing an intimate sensation of him both in body and 
soul, and filling both with an unconceivable and endless 
delectation. This is seeing God as he is.

** As grateful objects of sense make up a great part of human 
delectation; may we not suppose, that this glory of God, 
accommodated to our senses, will produce a more ravishing and 
transcendent delight, than all the objects in nature are capable of 
producing.
77. Conclusum est contra Manicheos: "The Manichæans cannot get over 
this argument." i.e this is conclusively proven.
78. Dr Shaw, in his Travels, shows that the cave near Cape Bonn was 
the grot which Virgil describes in the following manner:
"Defessi Æneada, qua proxima, litora cursu
Contendunt petere, et Lybia vertuntur ad oras.
Est in secessu longo locus: insula portum
Efficit objectu laterum, quibus omnis ab alto
Frangitur inque sinus scindit sese unda reductos.
Hinc atque hinc vastæ rupes, geminique minantur
In cœlum scopuli. Quorum sub vertice late
Æquora tuta silent. Tum sylvis scena coruscis
Desuper, horrentique atrum nemus imminet umbra.
Fronte sub adversa scopulis pendentihus antrum
Intus aquæ dulces, vivoque sedilia saxo;
Nympharurn domos."
D
The weary Trojans ply their shattered oars
To nearest land, and make the Lybian shores.
Within a long recess there lies a bay,
An island shades it from the rolling sea,
And forms a port secure for ships to ride,
Broke by the jutting land on either side:
In double streams the briny waters glide.
Betwixt two rows of rocks, a sylvan scene
Appears above, and groves for ever green.
A grot is formed beneath, with mossy seats
To rest the Nereids, and exclude the heats:
Down through the crannies of the living walls
The crystal streams descend in murmuring falls.
P
The Trojans, wearied with the storms, explore
The nearest land, and reach the Lybian shore.
Far in a deep recess, her jutting sides
An isle projects, to break the rolling tides
And forms a port, where, curling from the sea
The waves steal back, and wind into a bay.
On either side, sublime in air, arise
Two towering rocks, whose summits brave the skies;
Low at their feet the sleeping ocean lies:
Crowned with a gloomy shade of waving woods,
Their awful brows hang nodding o'er the floods.
Opposed to these, a secret grotto stands,
The haunt of Nereids, framed by nature's hands;
Where polished seats appear of living stone,
And limpid rills, that tinkle as they run.
S
There lies a harbour far within the land,
Commodious formed by an opposing isle:
Which breaking as a mound the furious waves,
They run divided, calmer then unite.
On each side rocks, and two with steepy height
Aspiring touch the clouds, safe at whose feet
The waters far and near pacific sleep.
Distant from these a sylvan scene, beyond,
To bound the prospect, woods with horrent shade.
Opening to view, beneath the hanging rocks
A cave; within, a fountain pure; and seats
Formed from the living stone; the cool recess
Of nymphs.

This grot within a mountain over-shaded with trees, and lying open 
to the sea, with a cliff on each side, and not far from Carthage, 
answers so well to the Nympharum domus of Virgil*, that I think we 
need not doubt of its being the cave into which the gallant Æneas 
led the gracious queen: but that it ever was a quarry, and that 
pillars were made by the workmen to support the roof, as Dr. Shaw 
says, does not seem to be the case. The whole grot, which goes in 
thirty-six fathoms under the hill, its arches, and pillars were 
undoubtedly by the hand of nature; like many others I have seen. So 
it appeared to me. I could not see the least sign of a labouring 
hand in this cave.

* The kingdom of Tunis in the west of Barbary in Africa, was once 
the celebrated republic of Carthage. The city of Carthage was about 
four miles from the spot the city of Tunis now stands on. Many ruins 
of it are still remaining. This glorious city, was twenty-three 
miles round, and built near an hundred years before Rome, was taken 
and utterly razed by young Africanus, that is, Scipio Æmilianus, 
before Christ 146 years. It had disputed with Rome for the empire of 
the world, for the space of 118 years. The most beautiful village in 
the world, called Marsa, now stands in the western point of ancient 
Carthage, and from thence it is a fine walk to Dido's Cave under 
Cape Bon.
79. St. Donat's Cave, by the vulgar called Reynard's Church, in 
Glamorganshire, is one hundred and sixty feet in length, the breadth 
forty-three, and the height thirty-four. Every spring tide fills it 
with water, and has smoothed it to perfection. At the upper end of 
it, there is a grand seat, arched into the stone, and near it a 
falling-spring of fresh water drops into a cistern it has made. The 
rushing tides have made good seats in the sides of the rock, and 
from them you have a view of the channel, which is seven leagues. 
Every ship that sails to and from Bristol, is seen, and the 
mountains of Somersetshire bound the prospect that way. The cliff 
over the cave is almost double the height of the grot, and to the 
very edge of the precipice, the cattle come to graze, to avoid the 
insects, who will not approach the sea-breezes. The whole is a 
charming scene.
80. I have already observed that Camden, and every other describer 
of England, had not the least notion of Stanemore, that is, the 
north fells of Westmorland, and the northern mountains of 
Richmondshire: and as to the people who live on the borders of 
Stanemore, I could not find so much as one man in Richmond, Greta-
bridge, Bowes, and Brugh, that had been any length of way up the 
mountains. When I asked RAILTON, the Quaker, a very knowing man, who 
keeps the George at Bowes, what sort of a country Stanemore was? He 
answered, It is, after a few miles riding more wild and mountainy 
than the highlands of Scotland, and impassable: nay, my landlord at 
Eggleston, some miles within Stanemore, knew nothing of the 
mountains upon mountains that are far beyond his house.
81. Sigillum Solomonis: Solomon's seal (Polygonatum multiflorum), a 
plant of the Asparagacæ family. (TN)
82. Though the image of a flea may be magnified to eight feet, by 
removing farther off the white paper screen, on which the picture of 
the object is thrown very beautifully from the object posited in a 
single pocket microscope that is fastened to a tube to the solar 
microscope; yet the image or picture is more distinct and exact, 
when not enlarged to more than three feet, on the opposite side of 
the darkened room. By the way, reader, the solar microscope is the 
most entertaining of all the microscopes, and by it without any 
skill in drawing, you may easily make an exact picture of any animal 
or object you can put into the fastened pocket microscope. The 
object is so intensely illuminated by the sun beams collected by a 
convex lens, that are thrown on it by a looking-glass, that its 
picture is most perfectly and plainly represented on the white 
screen. You may have a mite, or one of the imperceptible animals of 
rotten wood, so truly and greatly magnified, as easily to sketch out 
the exact image of it in all its wonderful parts, with a pencil or 
pin and in this amusing work, and in transferring the objects from 
the solar to the double reflecting microscope, the catoptric 
microscope, and the microscope for opaque objects, how usefully and 
delightfully might a young man of fortune employ many hours that are 
miserably sauntered away, or consumed in senseless and illicit 
delights!
83. Catoptric: Relating to mirrors (TN)
84. Christophe Plantin (ca 1520 - 1589) was a printer of Antwerp. 
His volumes are noted for their accuracy and fine production 
standards. (TN)
85. Many instances can be produced of Charles the First's exerting a 
power contrary to the interest of the protestant religion; and a 
capital one is, this king's express and strict orders, signed with 
his own hand, to Captain John Pennington, to deliver, which he did, 
in obedience thereto, a squadron of the naval forces of England, 
consisting of eight men of war, into the hands and absolute power of 
the French king; and Charles directed, that in case of disobedience 
in the English captains to that order, Pennington was to sink them. 
These naval forces enabled the Gaulish king to break and suppress 
the power of the Rochelle protestants: this was an unjustifiable 
step indeed in Charles' reign: and if to this we add a thousand acts 
of this said sovereign Lord, which were the cause of all the 
disagreements, differences and contentions between his majesty and 
his people, that happened in his reign, and the sources of public 
calamity, it is certainly most amazing, to see the memory of this 
prince treated equally, if not superior to the most celebrated 
martyrs! torrents of tears have I seen pour from the eyes of our 
mourning theologers on the 30th of January. I remember one time, 
when Dr. Warren preached the commemoration sermon at St. Margaret's 
Westminster, that he wept and sobbed so bitterly and calamitously, 
that he could hardly get out the following concluding words of his 
fine discourse, the Roy—Royal Ma—Martyr—the—holy Martyr—the—the—
blessed Martyr.

Nor can I forget [Dr. Delany] the learned author of The Life of 
David. This gentleman preached before the late Duke of Devonshire in 
Christ-Church, on Monday, January 30, 1737, from these words, 'Take 
away the dross from the silver, and there shall come forth a vessel 
for the finer.—Take away the wicked from before the king, and his 
throne shall be established in righteousness' Prov. ch. 25.

In this fine sermon, the Dr. gave us the picture of a Man as like 
Charles I. as Phalaris was to the apostle St. John: he then 
deprecated the murder, which are his own words, and in the most 
piteous manner, with tears informed us, that "God gave us this 
prince in his mercy, and took him away in his indignation: A 
prince," said the doctor, "who was a true lover of his people, 
compassionate of their errors and misfortunes and religiously tender 
of their well-being. He equally understood and practised religion in 
its purity; and he died defending it. King Charles the First of 
blessed memory!" Here the preacher wept, and then proceeded to abuse 
the opposers of this royal contender for absolute prerogatives; as 
absolute as those the eastern or civil law potentates claim; and 
then, to make and apply observations and inferences to the persons 
and characters of the present times, he told the Lord-Lieutenant, 
and the House of Lords, among other admirable things, that "they 
should remember how the lay lords had consented to deprive the 
bishops of their seats in parliament, and rob the spiritual lords of 
their rights and privilges; which drew down a just judgement upon 
themselves; for they, the said lay lords, were soon after voted 
useless: have a care then, lay lords, how you act for the future 
against the spiritual lords. Maintain, for the time to come, a 
strict and inviolable regard to the rights, privileges, and 
properties of the spiritual lords."

This advice, by the way, appeared to me very singular, and I think, 
on the contrary, that it would be well for our church, if our 
bishops were obliged to leave the court, the parliament, and their 
politics, and then spend their lives in labouring in the vineyard of 
Christ, in their several dioceses. What have priests to do with 
baronies and acts of state; men that ought above all other men to be 
content with food and raiment, and to withdraw themselves from the 
world, that by their continued conversation with God, and attention 
only to the sacred prescriptions of the gospel, they might appear 
replenished with that divine power and virtue, which by prayer, and 
all the exercises of piety and penitence, they had implored; and by 
their examples and instructions, brighten and inflame the people 
with the love of God, and improve the good in goodness, and correct 
and reform the wicked. This would be acting like bishops indeed. The 
holiness of our prelates lives, and their fervour in teaching 
mankind the truths of Jesus Christ, would soon advance the cause of 
their master. They would bring the people to conform to the will of 
the Lord, and cause the learned to purify the defilements of genius; 
that pride and vanity, that curiosity and self-love which are 
incompatible with an accomplished purity of heart. But as to 
'Charles the First, of blessed memory,' certain I am, that whatever 
Dean Delany may think of him, this prince did really contend for the 
cardinal maxims of the civil law, and died, not for true religion, 
as this doctor says, but to advance the civil laws above the 
constitution and laws of Britain, and thereby acquire an absolute 
dominion. Quod principi placuit legis habet vigorem["That which 
pleases the ruler has the force of law"]. It appears from matters of 
fact, that his pleasure was to be the law. In him was to reside the 
sole power of imposing taxes on the people. This power, and other 
powers contrary to the fundamental form of this government; this 
king of blessed memory assumed and challenged as rights, under the 
name of his undoubted prerogatives, and grasped the pretence so 
hard, as never to part with it, till he wanted strength to hold it. 
THIS IS THE MARTYR!!! His reign was a provoking violation of 
parliamentary rights, and a cruel oppression of his subjects.

Instead then of the fine laboured reasons offered by Dr. Delany to 
the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, to account for the way of Providence 
in the tragical death of this king, he might have said, That whereas 
this prince had departed from the known laws of the land to an 
arbitrary power, and not only the pressures and sufferings of the 
people, under this method of governing, were innumerable; but the 
fundamental form and original constitution of Britain, on which the 
protestant religion and the liberty of Europe depend; was in danger 
of being subverted, and for ever destroyed, therefore did Providence 
deliver up this king into the hands of wicked men, who had usurped 
the administration of affairs; that the mortification in the 
constitution might be cured by the death of this destroying prince; 
and the violence of his exit remain a monument in terrorem to all 
future kings of England; to have a care how they offer to make any 
alteration or change in the original form of government; for 
violations of the constitution had brought Charles the First to the 
block. This had been a reasonable account of that sad affair. It is 
supported by matters of fact.

N.B. The contentions between his Majesty and the house of commons 
began about the following essential points.

A. The power the king assumed, and challenged as a right, to impose 
taxes, levy monies, and impose duties on merchandises, without a 
previous grant thereof in parliament;

B. That the commons were obliged to observe and obey the king's 
messages, in giving precedency to the matter of supplies, preferable 
to the redress of grievances, and to depend on royal promises, for 
time and opportunity to dispatch other business.

C. That the commons had no right and power of enquiring into the 
demeanour of the king's ministers and nearest servants, and 
impeaching them for misdemeanours.

D. That the king could, in his courts below, take cognizance of, and 
censure the debates of the commons.

E. That the king could, by warrants signed with his own hand, arrest 
and imprison his subjects; and especially the members of parliament, 
for what they said and did in parliament.

These illegal and destructive acts of power King Charles I. claimed 
as his prerogatives, and exercised them as long as he was able, with 
great rigour, and extraordinary circumstances; and how such a 
general oppression, and rendering the two estates of lords and 
commons of no signification, can make the memory of this prince 
blessed; or, how his suffering in the manner he did, in defence of 
such absolute, law-giving power, that was inconsistent with the 
constitution, and with the reasons upon which it is founded, can 
render him a holy and blessed martyr, is past my comprehension. I 
should rather choose to say, that since that monarch would not act 
for the protection, happiness, and safety of his people, but by a 
continued exertion of sovereign power, endeavoured to oppress and 
ruin them, and change the form of government, his arbitrary 
principles brought him to a dismal extremity. This, as before 
observed, is the truth of the case. May his death be a warning to 
future English kings; that they may govern with parliaments, and 
exert their power for the protection, safety, and happiness of the 
people.
86. The great Du Plessis de Mornay was born on the 5th of November, 
154g. He wrote several excellent books, and one that is invaluable, 
On the Eucharist, against the papists, which was published in 1598. 
This book produced the famous conference between Du Plessis Mornay 
and Cardinal Perron, at Fontainebleau in the year 1600. The victory 
at this conference is by the papists ascribed to Perron but the 
protestants, with more justice affirm, that Du Plessis was victor at 
Fontainebleau. Jacques Davy du Perron, bishop of Evreux, published 
at the time, a book on this conference, in which he gives a 
pretended true account of it, and illustrates and defends his cause: 
but to this the great Mornay replied, and made a poor devil of 
Perron. See those pieces, reader, and you will be finely 
entertained; for, Perron, though a papist, was a great man. Du 
Plessis died at his barony La Foret in Poictou, Nov. 13, 1623, aged 
74; having retired to his country seat after Louis XIII. had taken 
from him the government of Saumur.

Cardinal Du Perron, born Nov. 25, 1556, was trained up in the 
reformed religion with great care; but went off to popery, on the 
preferments offered him by Henry III. As, on the contrary, Du 
Plessis Mornay had been educated a papist, but became a protestant, 
to the loss of the greatest preferments.—It was Du Perron that 
converted to popery the famous Henry Sponde, bishop of Pamiers, and 
abridger of the Annals of Baronius, dedicated to Perron; and, in 
conjunction with Cardinal D'Ossat, he made a papist of Henry the 
Fourth of France. It was owing to the management of this Cardinal de 
St. Agnes, in the conclave, and to D'Ossat, that that wicked fellow, 
Paul V.* was created pope, and Cardinal Baronius lost the popedom. 
Bellarmine, however who was likewise one of the fifty-nine cardinals 
in that conclave, might have had it, but he refused it. Those things 
we find in the Lettres de Guy Patin, Vol. I. in Godeau Melanges 
Critiques, apud Antillon, and in the Histoire des Conclaves. 
Cardinal Du Perron, died at Paris, in 1618, aged 63.
(*So Marbais, a doctor of divinity, who knew this pope well, assures 
us, vid. Requeste a l'Empereur, Leyden, 1613 p. 223.)

Leo XI. who reigned but twenty-five days, died in the fifty-third 
year of his age, in 1605; was succeeded by Paul Borghese, alias Paul 
V., who died 28th of Jan. 1621; aged 68; having for his successor 
Ludovisio, called Gregory XV.

D'Ossat was born Aug. 23, 1536. His five volumes of Letters are a 
master piece in politics, and next to Father Paul's History of the 
Council of Trent, are the best books you can look into, reader, for 
an exact and full description of the artifices of the Court of Rome. 
Remarkable was the saying of this Cardinal, when Henry IV. of France 
was stabbed; "If there was the least pretext for such 
assassinations, they ought to be contrived and executed by the 
heretics, whom the king separated from and abandoned, and thereby 
gave them reason to be afraid of him; but they never made the least 
attempt of this kind, neither against him, nor the five kings his 
predecessors, though their majesties made the most cruel butcheries 
of the Huguenots." D'Ossat died at Rome: March 13, 1604, in the 
sixty-seventh year of his age.

Baronius was born Oct. 30, 1538. His Ecclesiastical Annals, in 
twelve volumes, folio, containing the history of the church for 
twelve centuries, ending at the year 1198, have been well called the 
twelve labours of the Roman Hercules. It is a prodigious work. The 
reading, the erudition, the judgment; the order, and method of the 
author are amazing; but an unhappy prejudice for papal rights, and 
Romish pieties, attaches him continually to the Roman cause, without 
the least regard to truth, and makes it plain, that he was not as he 
affirms, assisted from above in this work. The most judicious of the 
Roman Catholic writers say, "Il seroit a souhaiter eut ete exempt 
des preventions que son education et son pais lui avoient 
inspirees."["It would be desirable for him to have been exempt from 
the prejudices which his education and his country had instilled in 
him".] Baronius in writing his Annals ascribes the guidance and 
success of his pen, to the favour of the most holy Mary, the mother 
of God. "To her, from whom I acknowledge the whole to be received, I 
offer these Annals, &c. To her by whom the whole of this gift comes 
to us from God, to the most holy Virgin, the most safe ark in which 
our labours may be kept, and in safe custody protected, we offer 
these Annals, that she may sanctify them with her blessing. For the 
entireness of his net, after his having cast it so often, and the 
continuance of his strength fresh and green in his old age; all was 
from the grace of Abishag, their Shunamite, cherishing his aged 
bones; the most holy and pure virgin favouring the work begun, and 
taking care of, and happily promoting all his affairs." What must a 
true Christian say to this?

Many are the abridgements of the Annals; but the best is that of 
Henry Sponde, the apostate, aforementioned. Baronius died Jan. 30, 
1601, aged 68.

After all, the Centuries of Magdeburg, which were published in 1559 
and 1560, are the most valuable body of ecclesiastical history. 
Baronius, who pretended to answer them by his Annals, is undoubtedly 
the finest writer; but the ministers, Matthias Flaccius, Jean 
Vigand, Matthew le Judin, Basil Faber, Nicholas Gallus, and Andrew 
Corvin, are the learned men to whom we are indebted for the noblest 
collection of historical truths in ecclesiastical affairs, that ever 
appeared in the world. They are honest writers indeed. Every page of 
their work discovers a zeal for truth, and the glory of Christ; 
while Baronius sadly labours for a pontifex maximus,["Supeme 
Pontiff"] and the cheats of Rome. The work of the centuriators 
extends to the thirteenth century, and every century contains 
sixteen chapters: the first is a summary of the things to be 
recited; then the second treats of the place and extent of the 
church; the third, of persecution and peace; the fourth, of 
doctrine; the fifth of heresies; the sixth, of ceremonies and rites; 
the seventh, of polity and government; the eighth, of schism; the 
ninth, of synods; the tenth, of bishops; the eleventh, of heretics; 
the twelfth, of martyrs; the thirteenth, of miracles; the 
fourteenth, of the Jews; the fifteenth, of religions separated from 
the church; and the sixteenth, of broils and political changes. In 
this clear and distinct manner are the things of every age treated.

Bellarmine, born the 4th of October, 1542, was a man of great 
learning in the works of the fathers, councils, canon-law, and 
church history, and wrote several laboured things; but his chief 
performance is his body of Controversy, in four volumes folio; which 
the Catholics think very fine: They show, indeed, great reading; 
but, ignorance of the sense of scripture, and are quite void of 
argument. There is not one article of popery tolerably well defended 
in the four volumes. Every exposition and vindication is senseless 
and ridiculous. He died Sept. 17th, 1621, aged 79.

Isaac Casaubon, who wrote the Exercitations on Baronius; was born 
Feb. 18, 1559, died in 1614, in the 55th year of his age, and was 
interred in Westminster Abbey.

Besides his Exercitations, he published several learned works, and 
animadversions and commentaries on Persius, Polybius, Athenæus, 
Strabo, Suetonius, and Diogenes Lærtius. It was he, having purchased 
the MS. at a great price, first published in Greek, Polyænus's 
Stratagems of the Ancients in War, in the year 1589; but the Latin 
Version added to it, was done by Justus Vulteius: and we have since 
had a more correct edition of Polyænus, by Pancratius, in the year 
1690. The Epistolæ Causauboni are likewise valuable things; but of 
most merit are his Exercitations, and his Persius. His Commentary on 
Persius is admirable, not only for a just explication of his 
incomparable author, but for much fine classical learning which he 
has scattered through it; and for his Exercitations against 
Baronius, the friend of truth must be for ever charmed with them. It 
is to be lamented that we have but sixteen of them. They go no 
farther than to the thirty-fourth year of Jesus Christ, and relate 
principally to Baronius's bad explication of scripture.

Two Jesuits, Boullenger and Jean L'Heureux, wrote against the 
Exercitations; but the defence of Baronius by Endemen Jean, the name 
L'Heureux went by, is very weak, as you will soon see, reader, on 
turning him over. And as to Julius Cæsar Boullenger, the other monk, 
when you have read his Dissertation against Casaubon, and Bishop 
Montague's Animadversions on that dissertation, you will perceive he 
was a poor creature.

It is remarkable, that Isaac Casaubon's two sons Henry and Merle, 
both went off to popery, and died in France, apostate priests in the 
Romish church; though their father had fled from that country for 
the sake of the protestant religion, and was one of the best 
defenders of the reformed faith. He was one of the judges at the 
famous conference between Du Plessis and Perron: and, by the way, I 
think it equally remarkable, that the grandson of the great primate 
Usher, and the only remaining person of the archbishop's family, 
should be the most violent papist I ever saw. I knew the man in 
Dublin, and never heard so outrageous a Catholic as he was. He said, 
to my astonishment, that "his grandfather was a great light, but 
burn'd with his head downwards in this world, till he drop'd into 
hell in the next."

As to the conference between Du Plessis and Perron, about the 
Eucharist and other matters, besides the two pieces I have 
mentioned, to wit, Perron's acconnt of it, and Mornay's answer to 
the account, you will find a good relation of it in the Histoire de 
l'Edit de Nantes, tom. 1. p. 343, et suivante; and see further on 
this article Sully's Memoirs.

The ingenious and excellent Miss Mornay, of Shelford-Park, is 
descended from the great Phillip Mornay Du Plessis, and the last of 
the house of Du Plessis now [1756] living. Her grandfather, Jacques 
de Mornay, was great grandson to Du Plessis Mornay, and came over to 
England on the revocation of the edict of Nantes, in the year 1685, 
when Louis XIV, with the same hand that signed the revocation of the 
edict of Nantes, granted to the reformed by Henry IV., in 1598, in 
the ninth year of his reign; likewise signed an order for eighty 
thousand merciless dragoons and other troops, to march against his 
protestant subjects, and force them by plundering and torturing, to 
turn papists.

I say with the same hand, because the twelfth article of the edict 
signed by this cruel and perfidious prince, in the forty-third year 
of his reign, is as follows: "And furthermore, Those of the said 
pretended reformed religion, till such time as it shall please God 
to illuminate them, may abide in the towns, and places of our 
kingdom, countries and lands of our dominion, and continue their 
traffic, and enjoy their goods, without being molested or hindered, 
on account of the said pretended reformed religion, provided they do 
not assemble to exercise it, &c." This was a monstrous cheat and 
highly perfidious to deceive and ensnare his poor subjects. 
Something might be said for the edict of revocation, if Lewis had 
declared, that to quell the agitations of his conscience, be must 
revoke the edict of Nantes, though he had sworn to the observation 
of it; and that he allowed a certain time to his protestant 
subjects, after which they must either turn catholics, or quit the 
kingdom, with their families and effects, or else they should be 
exposed to such and such treatment. This had been plain and honest 
dealing, though an arbitrary proceeding: but to give it under his 
hand to his subjects, that they "might stay and continue their 
traffic, enjoy their goods without being molested, or hindered on 
account of their religion," and at the same time leave them to the 
mercy of the dragoons; Was not this an heinous act? "Had he been 
guilty of this single one only," says Laval, in the sixth volume of 
his excellent History of the Reformation in France, "it would have 
imprinted such a spot on his reputation, that all the waters of the 
Seine were not sufficient to wash it away."
87. Theodore Agrippa D'Aubigne, the favourite of Henry IV., was born 
in the year 1550, and died 1631, aged 80. He wrote several curious 
things; but his great and principal work is his Universal History, 
containing the transactions from 1550 to 1601, in three folio 
volumes. This is a very extraordinary history, and contains many 
curious relations that are nowhere else to be found. He was obliged 
to leave France on account of this history, and died at Geneva. His 
two satires, called La Confession de Saucy and Les Aventures du 
Baron de Fœneste, are fine things. Du Chat's edition of the latter, 
which is really a very curious thing, is well worth reading. The 
best edition is that printed at Cologne, in 1729, in two small 
volumes 12mo.

[The life of this extraordinary man, was written with much elegance 
and perspicuity, by Mrs. Sarah Scott, and printed in 1772, in one 
volume, 8vo. Ed.]
87. Joseph Scaliger, born Aug. 4, 1544, died in the 65th year of his 
age, at Leyden, Jan. 21, 1609. His father, Julius Cæsar Scaliger, 
died in the 75th year of his age, October 21, 1558.

The father was a papist, the son a protestant; were both great men 
in the republic of letters, and both wrote many books, but the son 
was by far the greatest man.

What I like best of the father's works, are his Poetics, His Account 
of the Latin Tongue, and his Exercitations against Cardan. These are 
fine pieces. His Problems on Aulus Gellius are also excellent.

In the works of Joseph the son, one meets with so various and fine 
an erudition, and so much valuable criticism, that if the reader of 
fortune will take my advice, he will get them all into his closet as 
soon as possible; and at the same time, the four excellent pieces I 
have mentioned of Julius Cæsar Scaliger, the father of Joseph.

The great Louis Cappel, author of the Assertion of the True Faith, 
was a protestant minister at Saumur. He was born October 14, 1583, 
and died at Saumur, the 16th of June, 1658, aged 75. He was likewise 
the author of that excellent book called, Arcanum Punctuationis 
Revelatum; and of another very valuable work, entitled Critica 
Sacra. His son, Jean Cappel, turned papist, and died a despicable 
apostate in the Romish church.

There were two other Cappels, protestant ministers; both Jacques, 
one who died in 1585, the other in 1614, who were both authors of 
several controversial pieces against popery. They were however weak 
writers, when compared with the learned Louis Cappel.
88. In Penpark-hole you are let down by ropes fixed at the top of 
the pit, four fathom perpendicular, and then descend three fathom 
more, in an oblique way, between two rocks, which brings you in a 
perpendicular tunnel, thirty-nine yards down, into which you descend 
by ropes, and land in a spacious chamber, that is seventy-five yards 
in length, forty one in breadth, and nineteen yards high, from the 
margin of a great water, at the north end of it, to the roof. This 
water is twenty-seven yards in length, twelve in breadth, and 
generally sixteen deep. It is sweet, bright, and good drink. It 
rises sometimes several feet, and at other times sinks two feet 
below its usual depth. The torches always burn clear in this 
chamber, nor is the air in the least offensive, though fifty-nine 
yards from the surface of the earth, and separated from the day by 
such deep tunnels, and an oblique descent between them. The great 
tunnel is about three yards wide, and in the south side of it thirty 
yards down, nine yards before you come to the opening of the 
chamber, or cavity below, is a passage thirty-two yards in length, 
three and a half high, and three yards broad. It is the habitation 
of bats, and towards the end of it, a sloping hole goes to some 
other place. This passage, and the tunnels, and the chamber below, 
are all irregular work.

Penpark-hole has long been an object of curiosity, and induced many 
to leave "the roddie lemes of daie," ["The bright lights of day" – a 
quotation from Ælla, by Thomas Chatterton (TN)] to explore its 
terrific and gloomy subterranean caverns. The descent of Captain 
Sturmy in 1669, and of Captain Collins in September 1682, are on 
record; but few later visitors of such scenes, so dismal and dreary 
as are rarely to be paralleled and, of which the most fervid 
imagination can form at best an inefficient and faint idea, have 
published any descriptive account. Mr. George Symes Catcott, who 
more than once gratified his curiosity in attempting further 
discoveries in those 'regions of horror and doleful shades;' on a 
visit to this place on Easter Monday, April 17, though the year is 
not mentioned, describes the chamber noticed in the preceding note 
as about ninety feet long, and fifty-two broad, with a hard rocky 
vaulted roof, about thirty feet above the water; but when the water 
is at the lowest, it is supposed to be at least about ninety feet, 
so that even with the assistance of torches the summit cannot be 
distinctly seen. The roof appears to be of nearly an equal height in 
every part; and very much resembles the ceiling of a Gothic 
cathedral. This place is rendered awful by the great reverberation 
which attends the voice when speaking loud, and still more so by the 
pendant rocks which sometimes break in very large pieces from 
overhead and the sides, riveting forcibly on the mind the most 
horrific tremor and dreadful apprehensions of personal danger. The 
water, agreeably to the preceding description, is stated by Mr. 
Catcott, to be in many places seven or eight fathoms deep, but "in 
August 1762, it was found not more than one fathom." In conclusion 
of the notice of this dreadful chasm, the melancholy circumstance of 
the poor traveller being thrown headlong by the villains who had 
robbed him, into Eldine-hole, near Derby, may recur to the reader, 
when he is told that on the 17th of March, 1775, the Rev. Mr. 
Newnam, fell by accident into this tremendous cavern, and was no 
more seen. Public curiosity was excited, and for some weeks a vast 
concourse of persons were brought together daily, to visit this ill-
boding and gloomy spot. Some few persons summoned sufficient 
fortitude to descend into and explore the yawning gulf, and the 
result of these inquiries were communicated by Mr. Mr. Catcott, to 
an excellent, but long since discontinued work, the Literary 
Magazine, March 1793, pp. 206-9. Ed.
89. Pool's Hole, about a mile west of Buxton Wells in Derbyshire, is 
in the whole length from the entrance to the farthest ascent, but 
two hundred and thirty yards. The account of this in Camden's 
Britannia is very imperfect, and next to nothing: and what the 
authors of the Tour through Great-Britain say of it, even in their 
fifth edition, in the year 1753, only shows to one who has been 
there, and carefully examined it, that neither Daniel Defoe, nor 
those since concerned in improving and correcting the four volumes 
of the Tour, ever were in the inside of Pool's Hole. Their 
description of this, like a thousand other places in those volumes, 
is mere imagination, with some things from Cotton's false account; 
and the fancy not only wrong, but very bad. I would describe it 
here, but that the reader will find me in Derbyshire before I take 
my leave of him, if death does not prevent, and I shall then give a 
full and true history of this high and rough country; its waters, 
curiosities, and antiquities. At present, I shall only observe, to 
abate the wonder of my passing from the bottom of the inside of one 
of the Richmond mountains to the plain on the top of it, that the 
hill in which is Pool's Hole is open within side, in the ascent, so 
far, that five yards more of aperture would bring one to the outside 
of the top: and I believe it is very possible for art to make an 
entrance that way, as nature has done at the bottom.
90. Little did I think when I talked in such a manner to Miss 
HARCOURT against the famous symbol, that I should ever find in the 
book of a most learned man and excellent divine, the same kind of 
arguments seriously produced in favour of the Creed of St. 
Athanasius; yet this strange thing has time brought on, and thereby 
convinced the world, that the greatest learning and the most exalted 
piety, employed in the cause of mystery, can become so extravagant 
and erring as to maintain that a thing incomprehensible to human 
reason can be revealed, and that the more incomprehensible it is to 
human reason, and the more senseless it appears to human 
understanding, the more glorious is the object of faith, and the 
more worthy to be believed by a Christian. This deplorable argument 
for the truth of Christianity I met with in a book lately published 
by an admirable man, Dr. Joseph Smith, provost of Queen's College, 
Oxon. In his third section of A Clear and Comprehensive View of the 
Being, Nature, and Attributes of God, from p. 61. to p. 68, the 
reader may see this plea for darkness, confusion, and implicit 
faith.
91. The texts produced by Miss HARCOURT, the next day, in a sheet of 
paper, she gave me, and in my written explication of them in answer, 
I satisfied her, that the letter of scripture was not full in favour 
of contradiction, and that where it had any appearance of being so, 
reason allowed the purest modesty to use some freedom in 
interpreting, and take the texts in a lower meaning, such a liberty 
as Protestants take with the words 'this is my body,' when they 
reject the doctrine of transubstantiation. By this means I made a 
convert of her. This lady became a strict Christian-Deist.
92. Ordonnance: The composition of a picture. (TN)
93. Elle n'inspire pas une simple veneration, elle imprime une 
terreur respectueuse: "It does not simply inspire veneration, it 
impresses on us a feeling of respectful fear." A quotation from 
Critical Reflections on Poetry and Painting by Jean-Baptiste Dubos, 
1731. (TN)
94. As the first notion of God's glory, in the scripture, is a 
physical notion, and signifies the manifestation of God, by fire, 
light, clouds, brightness, and other meteorous symbols, such as the 
marching pillars of fire and cloud that went before the Isrælites, 
and the shechinah in the Holy of Holies, which the Jews called the 
visible presence; so is there a glory of God in a moral 
signification. There is a shechinah in a physical sense by fire, 
light, and refracted colours: and there is a moral shechinah, or 
glory, when men live in obedience to all the divine laws, and walk 
as children of light. This shows the special presence of God in the 
righteous, as much as the cloud of glory did manifest him in the 
temple. The power and wisdom and goodness of God are displayed in 
the holy lives of men. Like the heavens they declare his glory, and 
are the visible epistle of Christ to the world, written not with 
ink, but with the spirit of the Living God. 'Know ye not that ye are 
the temple of God, and that his Spirit dwelleth in you?' (A 
quotation from 1 Cor. 3:16 – TN)
95. Lepid: Charming and amusing. (TN)
96. Connoisance: The knowledge of a connoisseur. (TN) 
97. Ombre: A card game for three players, resembling solo whist. 
(TN)
98. When the tribes went off from Noah in Peleg's days, in the a era 
of the deluge 240, that is, so many years after the flood, we must 
in reason suppose, that they had from the venerable patriarch, a 
final and farewell relation of the creation, and the state of 
innocency, and the fall; the institution of worship; and the hope of 
acceptance, and the promised seed. We may believe they had, at going 
off, a distinct repetition of all the capital articles of their 
faith. They received a clear review of the facts and revelations 
which Adam and Noah had the knowledge of, and in a compend of every 
doctrine and duty, speculative and practical, especially the 
doctrine of the being of a God, his unity and perfections, had a 
sufficient fund of useful knowledge to set up with, in the new 
world. This is natural behaviour in all good parents, and we may 
conclude, that the pious patriarch acted in this manner, when he 
sent his relations away. But this oral tradition was liable to a 
gradual declension, and sunk at last into a state of evanescence. 
Doctrines deduced from facts long since past, and known by tradition 
only, become precarious. The tradition is rendered obscure and 
dubious. It might remain nearly perfect, while Peleg, Reu, Serug, 
Nahor, and Terah lived, as they had their informations from Noah, 
and were thoroughly advised to make God the object of their supreme 
love and fear, and trust and worship; and to practise all virtue and 
righteousness towards each other, as the great instruments and means 
of a general happiness. With an earnest tenderness, these things 
were recommended to them. But as the people who came after them 
never saw Noah, and their information depended on relators, who had 
it from relators, a dimness prevailed upon the ancient facts, and 
distance and other objects overshadowed them. A deprivation of 
tradition might likewise arise from relators forgetting material 
circumstances, and from a misapprehension of ancient facts. There 
might likewise be many that designedly corrupted these facts, and 
out of a dislike to truth, and a distaste to virtue, did their best 
to weaken the principles of religion. Ingenious bad men there were 
among mankind then as well as in our time, and as there was no 
written system and history to go by, they might give the ancient 
story a turn more favourable to sinners. By this means, 
contradiction and obscurity came on, endless fables were introduced, 
and truth was disguised, corrupted and lost.

In respect however of an infinite mind, the author of the universe, 
it must he confessed that those men could not have lost a right 
notion of him, if they had been faithful to themselves; for the 
works of, nature still remained in all their wondrous beauty, and 
useful order, and furnished daily evidence, that neither chance, nor 
undesigning necessity, could produce, the beautiful and harmonious, 
the regular and convenient, the amiable and good; which their eyes 
beheld whatever way they turned. Not only the heavens, the air, the 
earth, the sea, demonstrated the wisdom and goodness of God; but 
every beast, every fowl, every fish they could take, every plant and 
tree, showed an exact proportion of parts, and discovered design in 
the whole of its constitution. Their own intelligence ought likewise 
to have led them to the great original it was formed by, an 
uncreated mind. There must be a divine understanding, or there never 
could be pure intellection in man. It is impossible to solve the 
phenomena of moral entities, without the being of God. If it were 
possible for atoms, rencont'ring in an infinite void, to produce by 
collision and undirected impulse, the corporeal systems, and the 
various beauteous forms which we see; yet the wild and senseless 
hypothesis could not be applied by atheism itself to the production 
of ideas entirely independent of matter, and all its properties and 
powers. We must have them from an intelligent cause. The human mind 
is so framed, that we may surely infer the cause of the constitution 
was intelligent. So that God did not in any age, leave himself 
without witness, or evidence, of his own being and perfection. We 
have full proof of creating, ruling intelligence. All the works of 
nature proclaim it, and especially the human soul.

But through negligence, and false notions of religion brought in by 
impious men, corrupt customs, and prejudices of education, we find 
that not only virtue was lost, soon after the dispersion, but even 
the notion of God. Idolatry and wickedness prevailed for the 
greatest part of the grand period of tradition, from the dispersion 
to the imparting the knowledge of letters by Moses. This shows the 
folly, vanity, and inconsistency of all tradition, and that for the 
support of virtue, and true religion in the world, a written word is 
necessary. In the early ages of the postdiluvian world, religious 
knowledge was decayed, and we can trace the origin and beginning of 
idolatry very high. Even in Serug's time, who had received a compend 
of religion from Noah, when he became infirm by years, and was no 
longer able to inspect the manners of his colony, and go about to 
take cognizance of their irregularities, we find the innovation had 
begun. We read in the books, that Terah, the father of Abraham was 
an idolater, in the 170th year of his age, which was the year that 
Serug died, and to be sure, that was not the first year of his false 
religion: and it is not to be supposed, that when he went forth, a 
worshipper of false gods, from Ur of the Chaldees, with Abraham, his 
son, and Lot, that the young people were safe from the infection. It 
prevailed before Abraham was warned to withdraw, and of consequence 
he was one of the ungodly, that is an idolater. To me it is plain 
St. Paul says so. They all served other gods. In all probability, 
that was beginning to be the case when Abraham was born, which was 
in the year after the flood 352; and as he was forty years old when 
his father marched him from Ur, we may think he was then a settled 
idolater; and if it had not been that the divine mercy called him by 
revelation to true religion, he and the whole world might have 
remained in their gross innovation, eternal strangers to the 
original truths. The free grace of the universal Father took him and 
his posterity into covenant, and used them as a mean to restore true 
piety and virtue to the world, till such time as he was pleased to 
show his astonishing mercy, and inestimable love in Christ Jesus. 
The Creator and Governor of Gentiles as well as Jews, in his 
infinite wisdom proceeded in this manner, first selecting one nation 
to be a beacon upon a hill, a public voucher of the being and 
providence of God; and in the fullness of time, blessing the human 
race with a gospel and Redeemer. Adored be his goodness then for the 
written word. This only can preserve the doctrine of religion free 
from corruption. The miserable papists may trust to their 
traditions, and wander where no covenant is to be found: but the 
religion of Protestants must be the Gospel of Christ. The written 
doctrine of the apostles let us receive. The unwritten word of Rome 
let us despise. There is no security in tradition. It is 
insufficient for the preservation of truth: and for that reason, God 
gave us the writings of inspired men.
99. Worthy to receive &c.: Revelations 4:11 (TN).
100. Set: To catch birds by using a dog called a setter (or pointer) 
to locate them hiding in undergrowth or long grass, and then 
throwing a net over them. (TN)
101. With regard to the Gods, &c.: Isocrates, Discourses 2. To 
Nicocles. The original is in Greek. I am indebted to Dr. Michael 
O'Kelly for the translation. (TN)
102. We are consimilated to the Deity: We become like unto God. (TN)
103. Hecatomb: The sacrifice of 100 animals. (TN)
104. Zechariah 9:9-10 reads: "Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion; 
shout, O daughter of Jerusalem: behold, thy King cometh unto thee: 
he is just, and having salvation; lowly, and riding upon an ass, and 
upon a colt the foal of an ass." John 12:14-15 reads "And Jesus, 
when he had found a young ass, sat thereon; as it is written, Fear 
not, daughter of Sion: behold, thy King cometh, sitting on an ass's 
colt." Matthew 21:1-5 reads "And when they drew nigh unto Jerusalem, 
and were come to Bethphage, unto the mount of Olives, then sent 
Jesus two disciples, Saying unto them, Go into the village over 
against you, and straightway ye shall find an ass tied, and a colt 
with her: loose them, and bring them unto me. And if any man say 
ought unto you, ye shall say, The Lord hath need of them; and 
straightway he will send them. All this was done, that it might be 
fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying, Tell ye the 
daughter of Sion, Behold, thy King cometh unto thee, meek, and 
sitting upon an ass, and a colt the foal of an ass." (TN)
105. Erasmus, Grotius, Limborch, Baxter, and Dodwell, were great and 
excellent men, and their lives and writings highly merit 
consideration. Of the former it may justly be said, that he in vain 
lived and died in the Romish communion, and sustained many 
reflections from some zealous Protestants; he was not the less ill-
treated both during his life, and after his death, by several Romish 
Catholic writers; for though taking all things together, Erasmus was 
what they called a Roman Catholic; yet his Colloquies show his 
hatred of the monks, and it was plain from his writings and 
behaviour, that he did not see without joy the first steps of 
Luther. Bayle says of Erasmus, that he was one of those witnesses 
for the truth, who were wishing for a reformation in the church, but 
who did not think it was to be procured by erecting another society 
to be supported by leagues, and that should pass immediately a 
verbis ad verbera, from words to blows, for speaking of his 
contemporary Luther, Erasmus says, "had all that he wrote been good, 
his seditious freedom would still have been disagreeable to me. I 
would rather submit to some errors than raise a civil war, and put 
the whole world in an uproar for the sake of truth." Jo. Manlius in 
Locorum Commmunium Collectaneis, printed at Frankfurt on the Maine, 
in 1568, in Svo., has this passage: "Erasmus Roterodamus moriturus 
sæpe ingeminavit hanc vocem, Domine, Domine fac finem, fac finem, 
sed quid voluerit dicere non possum" ["Erasmus of Rotterdam, when he 
was dying, often repeated 'Lord, Lord, make an end, make an end, for 
I cannot say what he will want."] Manlius was with Erasmus in his 
last hour.

Erasmus was born at Rotterdam, October 28, 1466, and died of a 
bloody flux at Basel, aged 70. July 12, 1536.

The following epitaph is on a marble stone in the cathedral at 
Basil, where he was buried.

CHRISTO SERVATORI. S.
DES. ERASMO ROTTERODAMO.
VIRO
OMNIBUS MODIS MAXIMO, CUJUS INCOMPA-
RABILEM IN OMNI DISCIPLINARUM GENERE
ERUDITIONEM PARI CONJUNCTAM PRUDEN-
TIA POSTERI ET ADMIRABUNTUR ET PRÆDI-
CABUNT; BONIFACIUS AMERBACHIUS, HIER.
FROBENIUS, NIC. EPISCOPIUS, HÆREDES ET
NUNCUPATI SUPREMÆ SUÆ VOLUNTATIS
VINDICES, PATRONO OPTIMO NON MEMORIAT
QUASI IMMORTALEM SIBI EDITIS LUCUBRA-
TIONIBUS COMPARAVIT, IIS TANTISPER DUM
ORBIS TERRARUM STABIT SUPERFUTURO
AC ERUDITIS UBIQUE GENTIUM COLLOQUU
TURO, SED CORPORIS MORTALIS QUO
RECONDITUM SIT ERGO HOC
SAXUM POSUERE.
MORTUUS EST IV. E I D. JUL.
JAM SEPTUAGENARIUS, ANN. A CHRISTO NATO
M.D. XXXVI.

Above this epitaph is the device and seal of Erasmus, to wit, 
TERMINUS, the god of bounds, and the words-
CONCEDO NULLI.


The inscription to his memory, at Rotterdam, is this:

DESIDERIO ERASMO
MAGNO SCIENTIARIUM ATQUE LI-
TERATURÆ POLITIORIS VIN-
DICE ET INSTAURATORI
VIRO SUI SÆCULI PRIMARIO
CIVI OMNIUM PRÆSTANTISSIMO
AC NOMINIS IMMORTALITATEM
SCRIPTUS ÆVITERNIS JURE
CONSECUTO.
S. P. Q. ROTTERDAM.
NE QUOD TANTIS APUD SE SUOSQUE
POSTEROS VIRTUTIBUS PRÆMIUM
DEESSET
STATUAM HANC EX ÆRE PUBLICO
ERIGENDAM CURAVERUNT.
BARBARIÆ TALEM SE DEBELLATUR ERASMUS
MAXIMA LAUS BATAVI NOMINIS ORE TULIT
REDDIDIT EN! FATIS ARS OBLUCTATA SINISTRIS,
DE TANTO SPOLIUM NACTA QUOD URNA VIRO EST
INGENII COELESTE JUBAR MAJUSQUE CADUCO
TEMPORE QUI REDDAT SOLUS ERASMUS ERIT.

Froben published an edition in 1540, of all the works of Erasmus at 
Basel, in nine volumes, folio. The first, second, and fourth, 
contain his Philosophical, Rhetorical, and Grammatical Pieces, his 
Colloquies and Praise of Folly: the third, his Epistles, which are 
very fine, and many of them relate to the affairs of the church: the 
fifth, his Books of Piety: the sixth, his version of the New 
Testament, with notes: the seventh, his Paraphrases on the New 
Testament: the eighth, his Translations of some Greek Fathers: the 
ninth, which is the largest, his Apologies. His New Testament, 
Letters, and Colloquies, are the most valuable of his works. The 
preface to his Paraphrase on the Gospel of St. Matthew is an 
admirable thing. An English translation of it, with notes, and a 
good preliminary discourse addressed to Roman Catholics, was printed 
in 1749. Reader, though the edition of 1540, here mentioned is a 
good one, yet that of Le Clerc's printed at Leyden, in 1703, in 
eleven volumes, folio, is infinitely superior, and in better 
estimation.

Hugo Grotius, the son of Jean de Groot was born at Delft in Holland, 
the 10th of April, 1583, and died at Rostock in Mecklenburg, Sept. 
8, 1645, aged 62. [In the former editions of this book, a condensed 
list of the writings of Grotius followed this note, which was 
derived from M. de Burigny's excellent Life of that great man, 
printed in 1752, and translated from the French into English in 
1754. With much asperity if not ill-nature, Amory has accused M. de 
Burigny of being 'a bigotted papist,' and charges him with having 
'in a sad and ridiculous manner strained some lines written by 
Grotius to prove that he died a member of the Church of Rome.' The 
Abbé Raynal, a judicious French writer, observes that "M. de 
Burigny, has introduced nothing but facts well supported, or 
theological discussions delivered, but with the greatest conciseness 
and accuracy," and that, the most valuable part of his work, is the 
just and concise idea which it gives of Grotius's several writings." 
The commendation given by the Abbé Raynal is wholly and absolutely 
just; should the reader, therefore, be desirous of becoming better 
acquainted with the Life and Writings of Grotius, he will find 
himself agreeably entertained by perusing the Life written by M. de 
Burigny, and printed in 1754, in 8vo. The list of the works of 
Grotius occupies pp.363-8, and though it has met with the 
maledictory censure of Amory, will questionless receive its due meed 
of praise from the reader. ED.]

The great and good Richard Baxter was a nonconformist divine, who 
suffered much by the severity of that cruel monster of a man, lord 
chief justice Jefferies, in a prosecution, in Easter Term, 1685, on 
account of some passages in his Paraphrase on the New Testament. He 
was confined in the King's Bench prison from the beginning of the 
year 1685, till Nov. 24, 1686; when, by the mediation of Lord Powis, 
he obtained a pardon from King James, and was released out of 
prison. The passages marked for censure, by Sir Roger L'Estrange; 
were his explications of Matt. ch. v. v. 19. Mark, ch. ix. v. 39; 
xi. 31; xii. 38, 39, 40. Luke, ch. x. v. 2. John, ch. xi. v. 57; and 
Acts, ch. xv. v. 2. Dr. South, is said to have likewise, put into 
his enemies' power, some annotations, from Romans, ch. xiii. The 
charge was, that his paraphrase on these places reflected on the 
prelates of the church of England, and, consequently, that he was 
guilty of sedition; but equity at this day can find no such 
reflection or sedition in the passages so condemned.

Richard Baxter was born November 12, 1615, at Rowton in South 
Bradford. He was an author fifty-two years, and in that time wrote 
one hundred and forty-five distinct treatises, whereof four were 
folios, seventy-three quartos, forty-nine octavos, and nineteen in 
twelves and twenty-fours; besides single sheets, separate sermons, 
and prefaces to other men's writings. He began with Aphorisms of 
Justification, printed in 1649, in his thirty-fourth year; and ended 
with the Certainty of the World of Spirits, in 1691; on the 8th of 
December, in the same year he died at the advanced age of 76 years, 
at his house in Charter-house-Yard. The following books of his 
composing in English, are excellent: The Saint's Everlasting Rest; 
Call to the Unconverted; Dying Thoughts; Certainty of the World of 
Spirits; and his Paraphrase on the New Testament. His Latin pieces 
are De Catechisatione Domestica. Aphorismi de Justificatione et 
Foederibus. Apologio. Libellus Rationum pro Religione Christiana 
contra Gassendum et Habesium. Epistola de Generali Omnium 
Protestantium Unione adversus Papatum. Dissertatio de Baptismo 
Infantium. Directiones de Reformatione Ecclesia. De Religione 
Grotiana adversus Piercium. De Jure Sacramentorum. Gildas Salvianus, 
sive Pastor Reformatus. Catechismus Quackerianus. Clavis 
Catholicorum. De Regimine Ecclesic. De Universali Redemptione contra 
Catvinum et Bezam. De Rep. Sancta. Historia Conciliorum.

But few I am persuaded in those days of dissipation and pleasure, 
will sit down to read all or any of what Baxter. hath written. It 
may however, be conscientiously asked, What must become of us when 
high and low, rich and poor, fly from themselves, and laugh at 
everything serious; run into every extravagance and vanity, and 
wanton life away in dissipation and diversion? For shame, rationals, 
reflect. Consider what ye are. You are beings endued with reason, to 
the end that you may pursue the true happiness of rational nature, 
and by a truth and rectitude of life, unite yourselves to the 
supreme inexhaustible fountain of all intellectual and durable good. 
You are likewise accountable creatures, standing on the brink of 
death, resurrection, and judgment; and when this fleeting scene of 
vanity is over, moral impotence, or natural weakness, as they are 
now called, will not be accepted as a plea for the offender against 
nature and reason, for, let reason be heard, and spend some hours of 
your every day, in reading good books, and in the closet in prayer, 
with a resolution to do your best to live as you pray, and that 
power, which darkens the understanding, enslaves the will, and 
obstructs the operations of conscience, you may easily remove. You 
will despise every gratification against truth, and delight in being 
useful and pious here, that you may secure eternal happiness in some 
future world. Ponder then, rationals, in time. As you are placed 
here in a mutable condition, capable of bliss and misery; to be made 
confirmed blessed spirits above, when the time of probation is over, 
if you have kept the commandments of God; or, to live with Lucifer 
and the apostates for ever in darkness and woe, if you have not 
fought the good fight, and kept the faith; therefore, do all that 
piety and goodness can do in this life. Resolve by the advice of the 
gospel, and let nothing in nature be able to divert the execution, 
but a countermand from the same authority. I speak to the rich and 
gay, who nightly visit the resplendent and delusive scenes of 
vitiated life, among the higher orders; as well as to others who 
frequent the dances given at fairs and sixpenny hops as they are 
termed; where people of both sexes, of low and middling condition, 
assemble together, to their destruction in all respects. Here the 
ruin of many an honest tradesman's daughter commences; and from 
being men of pleasure at these places, idle young fellows come by 
degrees to the gallows. Their morals are here corrupted, their time 
is wasted, and money must be got some way or other, to answer the 
expenses. The women there, are for the most part loose characters, 
and the greatest part of the men, pickpockets and gamblers; nor do 
they keep themselves sober; for the last time I looked into one of 
their dancing rooms, to see how it was with my kind, one night, as I 
was walking home, I saw some of the men fuddled, fighting for the 
women; and several unhappy girls, so drunk, they could not stand. 
The whole was a sad scene.

But you, who are great, honourable, and rational, may be called on, 
I suppose, to stay every wandering or illicit thought, every 
inconsiderate word, and to bring every intended action before the 
supreme bar of righteous and impartial reason. You may, perhaps, 
remember what I beg leave to tell you, that you live under a 
threefold duty to God, to your neighbours, and to yourselves: and of 
consequence, that you must flee all those pleasures, and diversions, 
and alienation of mind, which usually obstruct the love of God, his 
fear, and honour; that you must have no immoderate desires, which 
may tempt you to violate the laws of justice and charity; and in the 
regimen of yourselves, that you must observe a strict moderation and 
temperance, and make your whole life an oblation, and submission to 
the will of God. This advice I humbly offer to those intelligent, 
immortal beings, who waste their precious hours in routs and 
spectacles, and in every species of plays and sports, frolic it all 
the long day.

Philip de Limborch, a remonstrant divine, and professor of Theology, 
was born June 19, 1633.He was a learned and excellent man, and hath 
written the following excellent books: Systeme Complet de la 
Theologie, which was translated into English, and printed in 8vo. 
Collatio Amica de Veritate Religionis Christianæ, cum Erudito Judæo. 
At the end of this, is an account of Uriel Acosta, a Portuguese 
deist, who had been a Jew, and Limborch's Defence of Christianity 
against Acosta's objections. This remarkable life and defence of 
revealed religion were translated into English in the year 1740. But 
the Collatio has not been published in English by any one: at least 
I never saw such a thing: and for this reason, I have begun a 
translation of it, and intend to finish it with many notes on the 
arguments of the two disputants; if death, or sickness, do not 
hinder. L'histoire de ce Terrible Tribunal l'Inquisition; that is 
The History of the Inquisition; was translated into English by 
Samuel Chandler [see below], a dissenting minister; who prefixed, in 
an introduction, a History of Persecution, that cannot be 
sufficiently praised, or enough admired. The History and 
introduction were published in 4to, in 1731, and the introduction 
was afterwards reprinted in 8vo. and again by Atmore, in 1813, 8vo. 
Commentarius in Acta 
Apostiolorum et in Epistolas ad Romanos et Hebræos, printed in 
folio. This is one of the most valuable books in Christian learning; 
strong and beautiful; just and rational. Let it stand next your 
bible in your study, and when you sit down to the Acts of the 
Apostles, and the Epistles to the Romans and Hebrews, let Limborch's 
Commentary be open before you, and you will be improved and charmed.

Let me likewise advise you, reader, to open, at the same time, Dr. 
Sykes on the Hebrews; a glorious performance; and his most excellent 
book on Redemption: these two have been published very lately. By 
the way, Dr. Sykes's Essay upon the Truth of the Christian Religion, 
is one of the best, if not the best, of all the good things that 
have been published for revelation; and his Connexion and Discourse 
on the Miracles, are admirable.

See likewise his Essay on Sacrifices, his True Foundations of 
Natural and Revealed Religion, his Two Defences of Clarke's 
Exposition of the Catechism, his Phlegon, his Two Previous 
Questions, and Defence of the Two Questions of Dr. Middleton against 
Dr. Chapman, Dr. Church, and Mr. Dodwell. These, and all his pieces, 
are delightful, useful learning. They illustrate revelation, and 
give a just and charming account of the Christian religion.

Limborch wrote some other small things, as Letters, Prefaces, and 
Essays. Among the former those addressed by him to Locke are 
excellent; that on Liberty or Power, was too much even for that 
distinguished and profound philosopher. But his most celebrated 
Letter to Locke, in which Limborch gave the history of his 
arguments, used in bringing back an ingenious lady to Christianity, 
who had been converted to Judaism, has not been published. It has 
been seen by several, but is now probably irretrievably lost.

In 1675, Limborch published the valuable works of his master Etienne 
de Courcelles, an Arminian divine. Courcelles, born in 1586, 
succeeded Simon Episcopius, who died April 4, 1643; as pastor to the 
Church of the Remonstrants in Holland, but Courcelles dying May 29, 
1659, was followed by Arnold Poelemberg, who was succeeded on his 
death in 1667, by Limborch; who in 1603, published the Sermons of 
Episcopius, in a large folio, to which he not only prefixed a 
preface, but an admirable Life of Episcopius, which was published 
separately, in 8vo. Arnoldus Poelemberg, the writer of the Life of 
Courcelles, prefixed to his works, in 1675, was a learned and pious 
man. His Dissertatio Epistolaris contra Hoornbeekium, and his Examen 
Thesium Spanhemii, are fine things. His preface to the second volume 
of Episcopius's Theological Works, is excellent; and in a valuable 
book called Epistolæ Præstantium Virorum, you will find many letters 
by Poelemburgh, that are extremely beautiful, in respect of the 
charms of his style, and his judicious manner of treating his 
subjects.

The best thing of Courcelles is his Quaternio Dissertationum 
Theologicarum, in which he treats, as an able, rational divine, of 
the Trinity, Original Sin, the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, and 
Justification. The next in value to this, are his Institutiones 
Religionis Christianæ; Diatribe de Jesu Sanguinis; Vindicice contra 
Amyraldum; and Avis d'un Personage Desinteressé; in which he acted 
the Mediator between the Calvinists and Arminians; but without 
success. It is a vain attempt to unite parties. Every party is a 
church, and infallible in its own conceit. Happy they that are of no 
party, but devoted to Jesus Christ only, and his plain gospel; doing 
their best to be pure and good, even as the Lord Jesus Christ was 
pure and good, and worshiping God the Father Almighty, in the name 
of Jesus, as his disciples, without speculating, inventing, or 
perplexing ourselves with imaginations. This was our Lord's 
direction. When you pray, say, Our Father, whatever ye ask in my 
name, without holiness no man shall see the Lord. Here it is, 
gentlemen of the laity, as the doctors call us, and will have us to 
be an inferior tribe to them. Adhere to these few, plain things, and 
you will be for ever happy, though the church damns you by bell, 
book, and candle-light.

The learned and pious Henry Dodwell, who was some time fellow of 
Trinity-College, Dublin; and Camden Professor of History in Oxford, 
till he was ejected for refusing to take the oaths to King William; 
was born at Dublin, in October 1641. His works are the following: 
Prolegomena ad Tractatum Joannis Stearnii de Constantia in Rebus 
Adversis. Two Letters of Advice on going into Holy Orders, and 
Theological Studies, with a Tract concerning Sanchuniatho. 
Considerations of Present Concernment, how far the Romanists may be 
Trusted by Princes of another Persuasion. An Account of the 
Fundamental Principle of Popery, and an Answer to six queries 
proposed to a Lady by a Romish Priest. Separation of Churches from 
Episcopal Government Schismatical, and a Defence of it. 
Dissertations on St. Cyprian. A Dissertation on a passage of 
Lactantius. A Treatise of the Priesthood of Laics. Additional 
Discourses to the Posthumous works of Dr. Pearson, published by 
Dodwell. Dissertations on Irenæus. A Vindication of the Deprived 
Bishops, Sancroft, Lloyd, Turner, Ken, Frampton, White; to whom 
succeeded Tillotson, Moore, Patrick, Kidder, Fowler, Cumberland; and 
a Defence of the Vindication. Four Camdenian Lectures, called 
Prælectiones Academica. The Annals of Velleius Paterculus, 8vo. An 
Account of the Lesser Geographers. The Lawfulness of Church Music. 
An Account of the Greek and Roman Cycle. A Letter against Toland, 
relative to the Canon of the New Testament. The Annals of Thucydides 
and Zenophon: and an Apology for the Philosophical Works of Cicero. 
A Letter on the Soul to Mr. Layton, and a Letter to Dr. Tillotson on 
Schism. Two Dissertations on the Age of Phalaris and Pythagoras. An 
Admonition to Foreigners concerning Schism. An Epistolary Discourse 
to prove the Soul a Principle naturally Mortal, but Immortalized by 
its Union with the Divine Baptismal Spirit; that the Bishops only 
can give this Immortalizing Spirit; and that Sacerdotal Absolution 
is Necessary for the Remission of Sins. Three Treatises in Defence 
of the Epistolary Discourse.

These are the works of the learned Dodwell. Some are very valuable, 
many of them good for nothing; and all of them written with great 
perplexity; without any beauty of style, or any order. Dodwell's 
learning was very great, but beside the singularity of his notions, 
which he affected, his learning lay like a lump of puzzled silk in 
his head, and he could draw few useful threads. Dodwell in the 
fifty-second year of his age, married a very young girl, the 
daughter of a gentleman, in whose house he boarded in the country; 
having been her preceptor for five years; from a regard to her fine 
understanding, and by her had ten children. Two sons and four 
daughters survived him; one of the sons is the present [1756] rector 
of Shottesbrook, well known by the title of ORTHODOX DODWELL, on 
account of his writings for the fathers against Dr. Middleton; and 
to distinguish him from the author of a bad book, finely written [by 
Tindal], called, Christianity not Founded on Argument.

Dodwell, the elder, died at Shottesbrooke, June 7, 1711; aged 70.

[Note] Samuel Chandler: This gentleman is still living, [1756,] and 
greatly to be honoured, on account of several other excellent 
writings, in defence of true piety, and the gospel of Christ. His 
Vindication of the History of the Old Testament against Dr. Morgan. 
His Discourse of the Nature and Use of Miracles; and his Answer to 
Anthony Collins' Grounds and Reasons of the Christian Religion, his 
Re-examination of the Witnesses of the Resurrection, his Commentary 
on Joel, his two sermons called The Notes of the Church, in the 
second volume of the Salter's Hall Sermons against Popery, his 
Sermon on Superstition, and two funeral sermons; one on the death of 
Dr. Hadfield, 'For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of Clod 
is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.' Romans, ch. vi. v. 
23. The other on the death of Mr. Smyth. 'Who shall change our vile 
body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, 
according to the working whereby he is able to subdue all things to 
himself.' Phil. ch. vi. v. 23. are all fine pieces, well written, 
with a sense and spirit, that renders all Mr. Chandler's 
performances very valuable; and therefore, they highly merit the 
attentive reading of every gentleman. Some other things written by 
this minister I mentioned in my Memoirs of Several Ladies of Great 
Britain, 1755, 8vo. p. 73, to which the reader is referred.

Reader, on The Resurrection of Jesus, first read bishop Sherlock's 
Trial of the Witnesses, and Tipping's Defence of the Trial: then 
take up Mr. Chandler's piece; and when you have seriously read it, 
see what Dr. Pearce, bishop of Rochester, says on this subject in 
the first part of his Four Discourses on the Miracles; add to them 
Grove's Sermons on the Resurrection; and I imagine, these fine 
little pieces will give you satisfaction: if a doubt should still 
remain, open Mr. West's fine book on the Article, and I think you 
will be easy as to this point. Reduce the strength of what they all 
say to a few written arguments, and keep them for use.
106. Let me recommend to you, reader, two large volumes written in 
an epistolary form; the first, is Sentimens de Quelques Theologiens 
d'Hollande sur l'Histoire Critique du Vieux Testament, et de Nouveau 
Testament, par P. R. Simon, and the second Defense des Sentimens 
contre Bolville. These are fine books: my reason for mentioning 
them, is, that the eleventh and twelfth letters in the former, are 
on the Inspiration of the Sacred Writers; and the tenth and eleventh 
letters in the Defence, &c. are a continuation of the subject in a 
very extraordinary manner, i.e. by giving a solid demonstration of 
the truth of our religion, without interesting it in this 
controversy, by clearly proving, that the Christian religion is 
true, though the apostles had not been continually inspired. Le 
Clerc, was the author of these works; and the letters here spoken of 
were translated into English, and printed in 1690, in duodecimo. 
Some account of Le Clerk and his writings, will be found in the 
Memoirs of Several Ladies of Great Britain, pp. 356-358.

The famous Father Richard Simon, who wrote the Critical History of 
the Old Testament, was born at Dieppe, 13th of May 1638, became a 
priest of the Oratory, and was the author of many learned works, 
which a general reader should be no stranger to. His Lettres 
Choisies, his Bibliotheque Critique, and his Nouvelle Bibliotheque 
Choisie, in which there is much curious learning, mixed with a no 
less portion of prejudice, are still worthy of commendation. Simon 
was a great man, and bad as the Histoire Critique, is in respect of 
design, it is a learned work, and of great use to those, who have 
heads fit to use it. Simon died at Dieppe, April 7, 1712. Herman 
Witsius, who defended Simon in his Miscellanea Sacra, by abusing Le 
Clerc, was a Doctor in Divinity and Professor of the faculty at 
Franeker, and beside the Miscellanea Sacra, published some other 
works, entitled, Oeconomia Foederum, &c., Exercitationes Sacræ in 
Orationem Dominicum; and Ægyptiaca. If like me, reader, you have 
nothing else to do but read, I advise you to read them as curious 
things; there is learning, though not much good in them. See M. 
Mark's Funeral Oration on Witsius. Simon's Elogè you will find in 
the Journal Litter. tom 3. p. 225. And if you have a critical head I 
recommend to you Father Simon's Dissertation Critique against Du 
Pin's Nouvelle Bibliotheque des Auteurs Ecclesiastiques: it is an 
arch piece of criticism, though it does not hurt Du Pin's 
Bibliotheque.

The learned and excellent Louis Ellies Du Pin, author of the 
valuable Bibliotheque Ecclesiastique, was born June 17, 1657, and 
died at Paris, June 16, 1719, aged 62. He wrote many other excellent 
works: but the Bibliotheque Nouvelle des Autears Ecclesiastique. 
from Jesus Christ to the year 1710, printed in thirty-five volumes 
in 8vo, was the principal labour of his life. The best edition in 
English of this fine work, is that printed by Grierson, at Dublin in 
folio.

The other works of Du Pin are Dissertation Preliminaire ou 
Prolegomenes sur la Bible, in three volumes, 8vo. De Antiqua 
Ecclesiæ Disciplina, in seven Dissertations. De la Puissance 
Ecclesiastigue et Temporelle. La Doctrine Chretienne et Orthodoxe. 
Notes on the Pentateuch. Les Pseaumes en Latin, et des Notes, in 
8vo. Version Francois des Pseaumes, avec des Notes. A Defence of his 
Notes on the Psalms.

He edited in folio, the Works of Optatus Aser, a Numidian bishop, 
who was living anno 368; to this edition, he prefixed an History of 
the Donatists, and the Sacred Geography of Africa. He also 
superintended the edition of Gerson's works in five volumes folio; 
to which he joined a work of his own, called Gersoniana; containing 
the Life of Gerson, the History of his Times, and the doctrines and 
Lives of Contemporary Authors. Critique sur l'Histoire d'Apollonius 
de Tyanne. Une Lettre sur l'Ancienne Discipline touchant la Messe. 
Un Traite de l'Excommunication. Une Histoire de l'Eglise en Abregè. 
Une Histoire Profane depuis les Temps les Plus Reculez jusqu'a 
Present. Une Analyse de l'Apocalypse, avec des Dissertations sur 
Diferentes Matieres Curieuses. Une Histoire du xvii Siecle. Un 
Traite de l'Amour de Dieu; and Bibliotheque des Historiens Profanes. 
Of this last work, he did not publish more than two volumes, which 
have been translated into English: and so far as he went are so well 
done, that it is to be lamented, that he did not finish his noble 
design. As to his edition of Basnage's Histoire des Juifs, without 
mentioning the name of Basnage, and his making many alterations in 
it contrary to its author's mind, it brought on him a severe 
castigation from Basnage; as I mentioned in my account of the 
writings of that writer, in my Memoirs of Several Ladies of Great-
Britain, p. 350; where I referred the reader to a fine piece, called 
the Histoire des Juifs reclaime.

Note: next to the Bibliotheque des Auteurs Ecclesiastiques, the best 
books of Du Pin are, his Seven Dissertations de Antiqua Disciplina 
Ecclesiæ: in Latin, in one volume, 4to, and his Puissance 
Ecclesiastique et Temporelle; in one volume, 8vo. In these volumes, 
he works the Pope in a fine manner, as to supremacy and 
infallibility.
107. Long since my conversation with Mr. BERRISFORT, I have seen an 
excellent book, written by the learned minister of Maybole, in which 
he labours, through several 4to. pages, from p. 213, to reconcile 
Mark and Matthew, by virtue of a second visit to the monument by 
Mary Magdalene, when the Lord appeared first to her; and a second 
visit to the sepulchre by the other women, when Jesus appeared next 
to those women; and in my opinion; he, has proved it, beyond a 
possibility of rational reply. See Macknight's Harmony. Le Clerc, in 
his Harmony, does likewise evince the thing clearly to conviction.
108. Lections: Ways of reading a passage. (TN)
109. For further Satisfaction on this Article, and to be convinced 
that the books of the New Testament, as we now have them, are the 
word of God, see, reader, Blackwell on The Sacred Classics, and 
Jones's Method of Settling the Canonical Authority of the Testament. 
By the way, if Jacob Ilive, who stood in the pillory, the 30th of 
June, 1756, for writing and publishing a thing called Modest Remarks 
on (Dr. Sherlock) the bishop of London's Sermons in a letter to his 
lordship, had read with attention the books I have mentioned, and 
Dr. Lardner's Credibility of the Gospel-History, he would not, I 
imagine, have composed a pamphlet, that manifests not only an 
impious licentiousness, but an ignorance at once great and 
despicable, in relation to the subjects he pretended to write on.
110. Let us now see, says a great man and upright Christian, what 
use the enemies of Christianity have endeavoured to make of the 
prophecies, as the evangelists apply them; and what answer the truth 
of the case will oblige us to give to them.

They assert that the foundation of the Christian religion is laid by 
the evangelists, on the proof of this point, that the mission and 
character of Jesus were foretold by the prophets; and that the 
validity of this proof depends entirely on the force of those 
particular prophecies which the same evangelists have applied to the 
illustration of it, in their several gospels. Upon this hypothesis, 
the enemy undertakes to show, that the prophecies, so applied by 
them, do not at all relate to Jesus, in their proper and literal 
signification, but only in secondary, typical, and figurative sense: 
but then this way of interpreting them is equivocal, precarious, and 
incapable of yielding any rational satisfaction; and of consequence 
Christianity has no foundation. Such is the use the enemy make of 
the prophecies applied by the evangelists.

In truth, if we admit that Christianity has no other foundation than 
what its enemies assign it, it might not perhaps be difficult for 
them to make good the rest: for upon that supposition, many 
objections are thrown in our way, which it is scarce possible to get 
rid of. But while they fancy themselves to be demolishing 
foundations, they are battering only such parts of the edifice, as 
serve for its ornaments rather than its support: and had the enemy 
gone farther, and shown that some of the prophecies cited by Matthew 
did not relate to Jesus in any sense at all, they would have done no 
more than what some of the primitive fathers, as well as modern 
critics had done before them, without designing or doing the least 
hurt to Christianity.

Jesus declared in general, that Moses and the prophets had testified 
of him: but since the evangelists did not think it necessary to give 
a precise account, or deduction of the several prophecies, which 
were alleged by him in proof of that declaration, it is sufficient 
to take it, just as we find it, without thinking ourselves obliged 
to defend all the particular instances or applications, which were 
offered afterwards in support of it by fallible men. Whiston, in his 
Literal Accomplishment of the Scripture Prophecies, has produced 
forty-five prophecies from the Old Testament, which are cited in the 
New, in proof of the Messiahship of Jesus, and which he declares to 
have been clearly and directly fulfilled, without the least pretence 
of any reply from any author whatsoever. Now if any number of these, 
how small soever, are found to be as clearly accomplished, as he 
takes them to be, they are sufficient to support the authority of 
the gospel, though all the rest were thrown aside.

But to say the truth, the grounds of our faith, in these latter ages 
of the church, do not lie in the particular interpretations of 
prophecies, made by men, who might be mistaken, and who, as 
Jerome*[see note below] says more than once, by trusting to their 
memories, in citing these very prophecies, were frequently mistaken 
in the words, and sometimes in the sense of them. Nor is the 
evidence of prophecy so proper in these days, to convert men to the 
faith of Christ, as to confirm those who have already embraced it: 
serving chiefly, as St. Paul expresses it, not to them, who believed 
not, but to them who believe.

The sum then of this article is, that upon the first promulgation of 
the gospel, while the conversion of the Jews was the principal 
object of our Saviour's ministry, and afterwards of his apostles, 
the argument of prophecy was, of all others, the best adapted to 
persuade, and conquer the prejudices of that nation. But in 
preaching the gospel to the Gentiles, not acquainted with the Jewish 
scriptures, nor tinctured with any 
Jewish prejudices, the testimony of its miracles, and the purity of 
its doctrines, were the most affecting proof of its divine origin. 
Yet when by the evidence of these, people had once received the 
Christian faith, and acquired a competent knowledge of it, they 
would then perceive, that the argument of prophecy, was a part also 
of the evidence, essentially necessary to complete the demonstration 
of its truth.
* ST. JEROME is one of the four great doctors of the Latin church, 
who support the magnificent bronze chair of St. Peter, in this 
saint's church in Rome. The other three doctors are St. Augustine, 
St. Ambrose, and St. Gregory. Great might be the piety of those 
doctors, for anything I can say to the contrary: but this is 
certain, from their writings, that they did not understand 
Christianity.

St. Jerome, born at Stridon, in Dalmatia, in the year 340; was a 
hot, abusive man, and quarrelled even with St. Augustine. In his 
disputes, he is more like a madman than a saint, and ever in the 
wrong. He wrote commtents on all the prophets, Ecclesiastes, St. 
Matthew, and the epistles to the Galatians, Ephesians, Titus, and 
Philemon; but they are sad stuff in respect of some modern 
performances. Compare them with the comments of Dr. Clarke, Locke, 
Dr. Benson, and others of our country, and you will see what a poor 
creature this saint was in respect of our English divines and 
philosophers. He translated the Old Testament into Latin from the 
Hebrew; without understanding the Hebrew well: and he corrected the 
ancient Latin version of the New Testament. This is far from being 
correct, though the church of Rome has decreed it to be infallible, 
and appointed it to be used in the church. The best and most useful 
thing this saint hath written is his Treatise of Illustrious Men; 
which contains a summary of the lives, and the titles of the books, 
written by ecclesiastical authors, to his time. The next in worth to 
this, in my opinion, is his book of letters; in which are several 
fine moral sentiments, and much good advice; though his criticisms 
on the Bible in this work are weak enough. He will have it, that it 
was wisdom, and not a young woman, that David took into bed to him, 
when he was old and cold; which is a mere fancy, that plainly 
contradicts the history of that affair in the Bible. But St. Jerome, 
in his Letters, tells us, he abhorred a woman, as much as Mrs. Astel 
did a man; detesting and blackening matrimony and a wife, to extol 
and exalt that whim of his brain virginity. He owns that he beheld 
with detestation every pregnant woman though rendered so in the holy 
matrimonial bed, and could not bear looking at her, but as he 
reflected that she carried a virgin. He was consequently a fit 
supporter of St. Peter's chair. Of the works of St. Jerome, who died 
in the year 420, aged 80, there is a good edition, in nine volumes, 
in folio, printed at Paris, in 1623; but the later one, edited by 
Martianay, the Benedictine, is much finer and more valuable.

St. Ambrose is the next supporter and saint. This holy prelate, born 
at Treves in the year 340, was a great contender for tritheism and 
the rights of the church, and wrote many worthless pieces for them 
and persecution. He acted an insolent and senseless part, when the 
emperor Theodosius, in the affair of Thessalonica, ordered the 
seditious to be destroyed: and died soon after, in April anno 397, 
'the greatest and most blessed of men,' so say Paulinus and Baronius 
who have both written his life. The best edition of his works is 
that enriched with many notes by the Benedictines, and printed at 
Paris in 1691, in two volumes, folio.

As to St. Gregory of Neocaesarea, and the four other saints of the 
name, to wit, the two Nazianzens, Nysse, and Armenia, I shall have 
occasion to mention them in the next volume of my journal, and 
therefore shall here only observe, in respect of Neocaesarea, 
usually called Thaumaturgus, or the wonder-worker, that he died in 
the year 265, according to Baronius, and the saint of Armenia, or in 
270, according to Fabricius and that the best edition of his works 
is that by Gerard Vossius, printed at Mayence in 1604, 4to. His 
pieces were likewise printed in a collection of things written by 
some minor saints, at Paris, in 1621, in a single volume, in folio.
111. Manchet: A small loaf or roll of the finest wheaten bread. (TN)
112. The arguments I used to make a convert of FLEMING, the reader 
will find in the appendix to this journal, among other interesting 
matters, that are too long to be inserted in the story of my life. I 
shall print them in hopes that they may be of service to some other 
soul. They were introduced the first day I was at FLEMING'S house, 
by his saying to me, after dinner, "Dear sir, will you give me leave 
to ask you, by what strange cause if has happened, that you are thus 
travelling on foot in this unvisited country. It must be an 
extraordinary affair I am sure." "Sir," I replied, "my case is very 
uncommon. I do not believe that anything like it ever was before, 
and, perhaps, such another affair may never happen again." I little 
thought then, that I should afterwards meet with two instances of 
the same kind of thinking and resolution in the female world, to 
wit, Miss Chawcer and Miss Janson; whose histories I have given in 
my Memoirs of Several Ladies of Great Britain, p. 41-64. The 
critics, I remember, had some doubts as to the reality of these two 
cases: but to this I answer, that they may as well doubt the truth 
of my own story; and from thence proceed to deny the reality of my 
existence; because several incidents in my life are strange, and 
such as they have not heard of before. It is not, however, in the 
power of criticism to invalidate what I deliver as facts. I will 
tell you my story: and so began to relate the religious dispute 
between my father and me, and how it was brought to a head by the 
devil possessed by a woman, called a mother-in-law. As the glass 
went round, I let them know, how a man in the twenty-second year of 
his age, forsook all for the true gospel of Christ, and at a time of 
life, when very few think of religion, resolved to confess himself a 
Christian deist, to all whom it concerned, if it brought him to 
want, and from a morsel of bread to the grave. So far I was heard 
without interruption, though I declaimed by the way against the 
dreadful heresy of three gods; but not thinking I was in company 
with Catholics, for then I imagined that such subjects of the king 
of England were only to be found in Ireland, I brought into my 
oration against false religion, the diabolism of popery, and gave it 
several thrusts; as, indeed, I always do, whenever it comes in my 
way; for, good reader, though I love the Catholic men and women, 
because I am a friend to man, and nearly related to many Romanists 
of great fortune; yet, popery I abhor; and look upon it as the 
greatest woe that ever the devil introduced into this lower world, 
to ruin mankind: but when I began to touch this string, and was 
raking Rome papal fore and aft, FLEMING the friar, changed colour 
several times, which I took notice of, and knew not what to ascribe 
it to, unless he was very sick; and at last he told me, by way of 
game, that I was an eloquent young gentleman, and had a flow of 
language; but my mistakes as to the church of Rome were very great, 
and he begged leave, as he was a priest of the holy Roman church, to 
set me right in my notions. This was a great surprise to me. It 
struck me silent for some minutes. At last, however, I told the 
gentlemen, that I asked their pardons for making so free with their 
religion, which I should not presume to have done, but that I 
thought they had been Protestants; that, as to his offer to set me 
right, he did me great honour, and I would with pleasure hear him. I 
would, to be sure, be a convert to the strength of his arguments, if 
unanswerable; or, offer such reasons for remaining a Protestant, as 
must satisfy a rational man. He then went on, and my reply followed.
113. Carry a brown musket: Become a common soldier. (TN)
114. The black cock, is as large as our game cocks, and flies very 
swift and strong. The head and eyes are large, and round the eyes is 
a beautiful circle of red. The beak is strong, and black as the 
body; the legs robust and red. It is very high eating, more so than 
any native-bird in England except the fen-ortolan; but in one 
particular it exceeds the fen birds, for it has two tastes, being 
brown and white meat; under a lay of brown is one of white meat: 
both delicious, the brown is higher than the black moorcock, and the 
white much richer than the pheasant.

The moorcock is likewise very rare, bhut is to be had sometimes in 
London, as the sportsmen meet with it now and then on the hilly 
heaths, not very far from town, particularly on Hindhead-heath, in 
the way to Portsmouth. It is as large as a good Dorking fowl, and 
the colour is a deep iron-grey. Its eyes are large and fine as the 
black cock's; but, instead of the red circle round them, it has 
bright and beautiful scarlet eyebrows.

The cock of the wood, as unknown in London as the black cock, is 
almost as large as a turkey, but flies well. The black is a mixture 
of black, grey, and a reddish brown; the belly grey, and the breast 
a pale brown, with transverse lines of black, and a little white at 
the tips of the feathers. It has a large round head, of the purest 
black, and over its fine hazel eyes, there is a naked space, that 
looks like an eyebrow of bright scarlet. It is delicious eating, but 
far inferior to the black cock.
115. I will be a God unto thee, &c.: Genesis 17:7(TN)
116. If succession be the main thing, and to prevent the extirpation 
of the rest of mankind by junction, why may it not be carried on as 
well without marriage, as in that confined way? I answer, that as 
the author and founder of marriage was the Ancient of Days, God 
himself, and at the creation, he appointed the institution: as 
Christ, who was vested with authority to abrogate any laws, or 
supersede any custom, in which were found any flaw or obliquity, or 
had not an intrinsic goodness and rectitude in them, confirmed the 
ordinance, by reforming the abuses that had crept into it, and 
restoring it to its original boundary: As he gave a sanction to this 
amicable covenant, and statuted that men should maintain the dignity 
of the conjugal state, and by virtue of this primordial and most 
intimate bond of society, convey down the race of mankind, and 
maintain its succession to the final dissolution; it is not 
therefore to be neglected or disregarded. We must not dare to follow 
our fancies; and in unhallowed mixtures, or an illegal method, have 
any posterity. As the great God appointed and blessed this 
institution only, for the continuance of mankind, the race is not to 
be preserved in another way. We must marry in the Lord, to promote 
his glory, as the apostle says, 1 Cor. ch. vii. v. 39. The earth is 
not to be replenished by licentious junction, or the promiscuous use 
of women. Dreadful hereafter must be the case of all who slight an 
institution of God.

I am sensible, the libertine who depreciates and vilifies the 
dignity of the married state, will laugh at this assertion: The fop 
and debauchee will hiss it, and still do their best to render 
wedlock the subject of contempt and ridicule. The Roman clergy will 
likewise decry it, and injuriously treat it as an impediment to 
devotion, a cramp upon the spiritual serving of God, and call it an 
instrument of pollution and defilement, in respect of their heavenly 
celibacy.

But as God thought marriage was suitable to a paradisaical state, 
and the scriptures declare it honourable in all: as this is the way 
appointed by heaven to people the earth; and the institution is 
necessary, in the reason and nature of things, considering the 
circumstances in which mankind is placed; to prevent confusion, and 
promote the general happiness; as the bond of society, and the 
foundation of all human government; sure I am, the rake and the 
mass-priest, must be in a dreadful situation at the sessions of 
righteousness; when the one is charged with libertinism and 
gallantries, with madness and folly, and with all the evils and 
mischief they have done by illicit gratification, contrary to 
reason, and in direct opposition to the institutes of God: and when 
the other the miserable mass-priests, are called to an account, for 
vilifying the honour and dignity of the married state, and for 
striving to seduce mankind into the solitary retirements of 
celibacy, in violation of the laws of God; and more especially of 
the primary law or ordinance of heaven. Wretched priests; your 
institutions are breaches in revealed religion, trespasses upon the 
common rights of nature, and such oppressive yokes as it is not able 
to bear. Your celibacy has not a grain of piety in it. It is policy 
and impiety.

Hear me then, ye libertines and mass-priests: I call upon you of the 
first row, ye rakes of genius, to consider what you are doing, and 
in time turn from your iniquities: Be no longer profligate and 
licentious, blind to your true interest and happiness, but become 
virtuous and honourable lovers, and in regard to the advantages of 
this solemn institution, called wedlock, as well to the general 
state of the world, as to individuals, marry in the Lord; so will 
you avoid that dreadful sentence, Fornicators and adulterers God 
will judge, that is, punish; and in this life, you may make things 
very agreeable, if you please; though it is in the heavenly world 
alone, where there shall be all joy and no sorrow. Let there be true 
beauty and gracefulness in the mind and manners, and these with 
discretion, and other things in your power, will furnish a fund of 
happiness commensurate with your lives. It is possible, I am sure, 
to make marriage productive of as much happiness as falls to our 
share in this lower hemisphere; as the nature of man can reach to in 
his present condition. For, as to joy flowing in with a full, 
constant and equal tide, without interruption and without allay, 
there is no such thing. Human nature doth not admit of this. "The 
sum of the matter is this: To the public the advantages of marriage 
are certain, whether the parties will or no; but to the parties 
engaging, not so: to them it is a fountain that sendeth forth both 
sweet and bitter waters. To those who mind their duty and 
obligations sweet ones; to those who neglect them bitter ones."

In the next place, ye monks, I would persuade you, if I could, to 
labour no longer in striving to cancel the obligations to marriage 
by the pretence of religion. The voice of heaven, and the whispers 
of sound and uncorrupted reason are against it. It is will-worship 
in opposition to revelation. It is such a presumption for a creature 
against the author of our nature, as must draw down uncommon wrath 
upon the head of every mass-priest, who does not repent their 
preaching such wicked doctrine. Indeed I do not know any part of 
popery that can be called Christianity: but this in particular is so 
horrible and diabolical, that I can consider the preachers for 
celibacy in no other light than as so many devils. May you ponder in 
time on this horrible affair.
117. Relation de l'Ambassade, dediée a Don Sebastien, roy de 
Portugal. ["An account of the Diplomatic Mission, dedicated to Don 
Sebastien, King of Portugal"]
118. Maria Schurman, was born at Cologne, on the 5th of Nov. 1607, 
and died at Wieuwert in Friesland, on the 7th of May, 1678, in the 
seventy-first year of her age. Jean le Labeurer, in his Histoire du 
Voyage de la Reyne de Pologne,["History of the travels of the Queen 
of Poland"] printed at Paris in 1648, speaking of her surprising 
endowments, says, "Elle respondit en Italien a Monsieur d'Orange, 
qui l'interrogeoit par ordre de la Regne, and elle argumenta tres 
subtilement en Latin sur quelques poincts de theologie. Elle 
repartit aussi fort ellegamment en mesme langue, au compliment que 
je lui fis pour Madame la Mareschalle. Elle parla grec avec le Sieur 
Corrade premier medicin de la Regne. Enfin elle nous oust encore 
parle d'autres langues si nous les eussions sceues; car outre la 
Grecque, la Latine, la Francoise, l'Italienne, l'Espagnole, 
l'Allemaude, et le Flaman, qui lui est naturel, elle a encore 
beaucoup de connoissance de l'Hebreu, Syriacque et Chaldaique; et il 
ne luy marque qu'un peu d'habitude pour les parler." ["She replied 
in Italian to the Prince of Orange, who questioned her on the 
Queen's orders, and she argued most subtly in Latin on certain 
points of theology. She also replied in the same tongue, very 
elegantly, to the compliments I gave her from the Marshal's Lady. 
She spoke Greek with Mr. Corrade, the foremost doctor of the 
kingdom. She also spoke with us in the other languages she knew; for 
as well as Greek, Latin, French, Italian, Spanish, German, and 
Flemish, (her mother tongue), she also had a great knowledge of 
Hebrew, Syriac and Chaldean, and lacked only a little practice in 
speaking them."] Her writings entitled Opuscula Hebraea, Græca, 
Latina,["Short works in Latin, Greek and Hebrew"] were published by 
Frederic Spanheim, Professor of Divinity, in 1618, in 12mo. There 
are some admirable Latin letters on moral subjects in this book. Her 
epistle de Vitæ Termino ["On the End of Life"] to Berovicius, is a 
fine thing. Her other work is called Eukleria, or Bona Pars,["The 
better part"] in allusion to Mary's choosing the better part. (in 
Luke 10:38-42 TN.) This is hard to be met with. It is one octavo in 
Latin, and though it be not without some vision, yet it is in the 
main a beautiful and solid performance. It is in the manner of Law's 
Christian Perfection, and has several sentiments resembling those of 
Madam Guion, in her Comment on the New Testament, and Madam 
Bourignon, in her numerous works. It was the famous Labadie, the 
fanatic, who brought Mrs. Schurman over to the interior life and 
silent worship, in the forty-third year of her age, and from that 
time to her dying-day, she renounced the world, and never went to 
public worship. The men of learning and worth were no longer seen in 
crowds at her house, engaged with her in the noblest literary 
conversations, for the advancement of truth and the sciences; but in 
a solitude, purchased by herself, she moped away her remaining life 
in quietism, and holy reveries, and parting from reason in religion, 
sunk into passive unions of nothing with nothing, and became the 
prey of cunning and stupid religionists. Her house was always full 
of them. She would see no other company. The holy Labadie expired in 
her arms, aged sixty-four, in the year 1674; Mrs. Schurman being 
then sixty-seven. What a deplorable change was here, and owing to no 
reason in religion. Adhere to reason I enjoin you, for whoever tells 
you, you must give it up in religion, is the son of darkness, and 
the truth is not in him.

Labadie, born Feb. 13, 1610, had been many years a Jesuit, then 
Jansenist, Carme Solitaire, Missionnaire, and Devot, and afterwards 
by the interest of the Marquis de Rivas, a Protestant, was made 
minister of Montauban.

Bayle, Bernard, and Basnages, in the Nouvelles de In Republique des 
Lettres, tell a strange story of this man, while he was minister at 
Montauban: that he had brought over a beautiful young lady, 
Madamoiselle de Calonges, to the interior or spiritual life, and to 
make her perfect in what they call la spiritualité et l'oraison 
mentale, ["Spirituality and oraison mentale (Oraison mentale is a 
spiritual condition in which the soul tries to communicate in a 
state of silent meditative prayer centred on divine contemplation – 
TN)] he told her she must be absolutely alienated from all sensible 
objects in her meditations, and lost in he depths of reflection, 
dans le reveillement interieure. To this purpose he gave her a point 
to meditate on, and desired she would give it her whole application, 
as she sighed after Christian perfection. Miss began, and the 
director left her, under a detachement absolu ["A state of complete 
disconnection from the world"]; but returned in an hour or two to 
her chamber. He found her like contemplation on a monument; her eyes 
fixed, and her whole body, as if it were a petrifaction. Softly the 
holy man approached; strange pleasures filled his soul, as he gazed 
upon his heavenly disciple, and believing her quite perfect, from 
her attitude, in the interior way, he gently put his pious hand upon 
her lovely breast, and began to feel the finest tetons ["breasts"] 
in the world. But as Madamoiselle de Calonges was a woman of sense 
and virtue, she could not resign to this part of interior religion, 
and started up in a passion, giving the director a pounce [a blow of 
the fist – TN], and asking him what he meant by such behaviour?

The minister replied, "sans être deconcerté, et avec un air devot; 
'je vois bien ma fille, que vous êtes encore bien éloignée de la 
perfection. Reconnoissez humblement vôtre foiblesse, et demandez 
pardon a Dieu d'avoir été si peu attentive aux mystères que vous 
deviez mediter. Si vous y aviez apporté tout l'attention necessaire, 
vous ne vous fussiez pas apperçue de ce qu'on faissoit à votre 
gorge. Mais vous etiez si peu detachée des sens, si peu concentrée 
avec la divinité, que vous n'avez pas été un moment a reconnoitre 
que je vous touchois. Je voulois éprouver si votre serveur dans 
l'oraison vous elevoit au dessu de la matière, et vous unissoit au 
souverain etre, la vive source de l'immortalité et de la 
spiritualité, et je vois avec beaucoup de douleur, que vos progrès 
sont très petits: vous n'allez que que terre à terre. Que ce la vous 
donnez de la confusion, ma fille, et vous porte a mieux remplir les 
saints devoirs de la prière mentale.'" ["without being disconcerted, 
and with a devout air, 'I see clearly, my daughter, that you are 
still far removed from perfection. Humbly reconsider your weakness, 
and ask pardon of God for having been so inattentive to the 
religious mysteries on which you should meditate. If you had given 
them the full attention they deserve, you would not have noticed 
what had been done to your breast. But are so little detached from 
the senses, so small was your concentration on spiritual things, 
that you immediately noticed that I touched you. I wanted to test 
whether your devotion to prayer had raised you above material 
things, and united you with the Supreme Being, the living source of 
immortality and spirituality, and I see with great sorrow, that you 
have made very little progress: you are only staying down to earth. 
This is what confuses you, my daughter, and you must perform the 
holy duties of mental prayer more diligently.'"]

This speech, continue the historians, was so far from satisfying the 
beautiful Miss Calonges, as she perceived the dreadful consequence 
of such doctrine, and knew it might be extended to the most impure 
transactions, in order to be thoroughly concentered with the 
divinity, that it enraged her as much as the action of Labadie, and 
she would never after have any more to say to him. "Elle rompit 
entierement avec lui." ["She completely broke with him."] Bayle says 
he will not warrant the truth of this story, and Bernard tell us he 
has some doubt about it; but Henry Basnage in his Histoire des 
Ouvrages des Savans, assures us he had the account of this affair 
from the mouth of Mademoselle de Calonges: he says he heard her 
relate it several times, and that she always spoke of the false and 
hypocritical devotion of Labadie with horror. But, notwithstanding 
all this, I have some doubts as to the veracity of Miss Calonges' 
relation, not that I think such behaviour has never been practised 
by a mystic, for there is a lady now living, who was debauched by a 
mass-priest, while he was instructing her how to be perfect in the 
interior life and abstraction. He first made a convert of her to 
popery, and then to raise her to the tiptop saints, consolidated her 
soul to an impenetrable centre; and taught her to pray in silence in 
the inward sanctuary, without any regard to what was outward; the 
more insensible, the more perfect. This continued for some time, and 
the confessor told her she was in a fair way to the highest degree 
of perfection; a little more absence from the body, and she was 
quite glorious. In short, from touching the tip of her ear, as she 
sat like one inanimate, he proceeded to the most illicit liberties. 
She thought him an angel of a man, and was undone by the uncommon 
sanctity he wore, and the strong desire she had to be a perfect 
mystic.

But as to Labadie, if he was the man Miss Calonges reported him, is 
it to be thought Mrs. Schurman would have made him her nearest 
friend, and first minister in the management of her house and 
religionists, and have travelled with him wherever he went. Beside, 
Mrs. Boutrignon did not make this an objection against joining him 
and Mrs. Schurman. Among the many books written by Labadie, and by 
him published, there are some of them moral, and extremely pious: 
and more than this, Yvon was his principal disciple, and all I think 
allow he was one of the most pious of mortals, though a thorough 
visionary. He founded a society at Wiewert, which was another la 
Trappe. "Espece d'Abbaye de la Trap dans le parti Protestant, très 
eloignée de l'esprit de mondanité, reformez dans leurs moeurs et 
dans leurs dogmes",["A kind of Protestant Trappist abbey, far 
removed from worldly things, reformed in their morals and dogmas"] 
says Bayle in his Nouvelles for November 1685. And the Marriage 
Chrétien of Yvon, published immediately after the death of Labadie, 
is a piece of sanctification too severe I think for mortals. I 
imagine then, that in contempt of those mystics and visionaries, 
there may be some things overtold, and some stories received, that 
would bear mitigation, if all the circumstances relating to them 
were known. It is bad enough that there are mystics and visionaries 
in the world: and therefore, if I could, I had rather discover 
virtue amidst their intellectual immoralities, than have an 
opportunity of displaying imperfections in any of their hearts. As 
to Labadie, supposing the worst, and that as Henry Basnage, says, he 
began to feel the breasts of Miss Calonges, might not the attitude 
of the charming image, and the privacy of the place, be too much for 
the poor man, as they say she was a prodigious fine girl, and tempt 
him to commit an indiscretion he might be very sorry for after? He 
was at that time a huge, strong, healthy he-mystic, and perhaps had 
a bottle of generous in his stomach.

Madame Bourignon, whom I have mentioned, was separated from her 
earthly tabernacle the 20th of October, 1680, St. Vet. anno;[Old 
style year] having lived sixty-four years, nine months and fourteen 
days. She died at Franeker, in West Friesland, and had suffered 
greatly in many persecutions. She had an extraordinary fine 
understanding, and would have been a valuable and useful creature, 
if she had not gone in to vision. There are however many admirable 
things in her works, which she published herself at several times, 
and to that purpose, had a printing house of her own, in the island 
of Nordstrand in Holstein; which island she purchased from Monsieur 
Cort, one of the fathers of the oratory. Her works were afterwards 
printed at Amsterdam, 1686, in nineteen volumes in 8vo. A presiding 
good sense appears every now and then in her writings, which kept 
her from sinking into the profundities, unions, and annihilations, 
of Labadie, whom she despised, though Mrs. Schurman was so fond of 
him. Labadie wanted her to come and live with him and Mrs. Schurman, 
and be one of the perfectionists in their retreat. He pressed her to 
it but she would have no connection with them. She told them their 
plan and economy were weak, and they had not the operation of the 
spirit in what they schemed and did. The two best books in this 
lady's works are, The Light of the World, and Solid Virtue. They 
have been translated into English; but are not now to be found.

Madame Guion, another illustrious visionary, died the 9th of June, 
1717, at Blois, in the seventieth year of her age. Fenelon, 
archbishop of Cambray's troubles were all owing to this lady. She 
debauched his understanding with her splendid visions and notions of 
perfection and quiet, and to his last moment he had the most 
singular veneration for her, and thought her to be what our grand 
visionary, the reverend William Law, calls her in one of his pieces 
against Dr. Trapp, the 'enlightened Guion.' Notwithstanding the 
prelate made a public recantation, through fear, of his maxims of 
the saints, yet he was to his extreme unction, a thorough Guionist; 
that is, by associating and concentering with the divinity, as 
Madame directed, he was all light, all eye, all spirit, all joy, all 
rest, all gladness, all love; pure love. These are their terms. They 
rest in quietness, and are absorbed in silent spiritual pleasure, 
and inexpressible sweetness. Filled with a rapturous stillness, they 
sit the hours away at a royal banquet, and enjoy a divine repose in 
the sweet fellowship of the bridegroom. They even become sometimes 
like angels without bodies, so exceeding light and easy do they feel 
themselves with the body. Wretched delusion. It is all a wild, 
senseless fancy. It wants the beams of eternal and unalterable 
reason, and therefore can never be that useful, glorious piety, 
called Christianity; can never be that heavenly religion which was 
promulgated by Jesus; which consists in offering prayers with our 
lips, praising and giving thanks to the one true God the Father, at 
proper seasons; and in reducing the principles of the gospel to 
practice; by a righteousness of mind, and an active universal 
benevolence.

Madame Guion's works are twenty volumes of Explications and 
Reflections on the Old and New Testament, concerning the Interior 
Life. Five volumes of Spirituel Cantiques and Emblems on Pure Love. 
Two volumes of religious discourses. Four volumes of Letters. Her 
Life in three volumes. Three volumes of Justifications in defence of 
herself against her persecutors. And two volumes entitled Opuscules.

. As to Fenelon, archbishop of Cambray, he was a great and beautiful 
genius, and his Telemaque cannot be enough admired; but that bright 
genius he laid at the foot of mystery: His noble reason he would not 
use in religion, and therefore, in this article, was as poor a 
creature as any of the people. His maxims of the saints declare the 
weak visionary; and his submitting them afterwards to the censure of 
the man of sin, called the sovereign pontiff, renders his 
speculating religious character very despicable. He was a thorough 
visionary; and at the same time a thorough papist. The letter he 
dictated for Lewis the XIVth's confessor, after he had received 
extreme unction, shows that no man ever had more at heart that 
monstrous, and most audacious corruption of the Christian religion, 
called popery. In his expiring moments he conjures that bloody 
tyrant, the king of France, to order him a successor that will, like 
him, do everything to oppose and suppress the Jansenists; the only 
remaining light within the vast black realms of papacy: "Je prendrai 
la liberté de demandez a sa majesté deux graces, qui ne regardent, 
ni ma personne ni aucun de miens. La premiere est que le roi ait la 
bonté de me donner un successeur pieux, et regulier, bon et ferme 
contre le Jansenisme, lequel est prodigieusement accreditit sur 
cette frontière." ["I will take the liberty of asking two favours 
from his majesty, which will not benefit me nor anything of mine. 
The first is that he will appoint a successor to me who is pious and 
orthodox, truly firm against Jansenism, which is widely supported in 
this land."]
118. Completorium: Compline, the last service in the daily routine 
of a monastery. (TN)
119. In the morning very early went out into a solitary place, and 
there prayed: Mark, ch.i. v. 35.
120. Who dismissing his disciples departed into a mountain to pray: 
Mark, ch. vi. v. 46.
121. And he continued all night in prayer to GOD: Luke, ch. vi. v. 
12.
122. We are ordered to glorify and bless this only wise God for 
ever: Romans, ch. xvi. v. 27.
123. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ: 2 Cor. 
ch. i. v. 3.
124. To God and our Father be glory for ever: Phil. eh. iv. v. 20.
125 And to love him truly by keeping the commandments: Mark, ch. 
xii. v. 29, 30, 31.
126. There is no one good, &c.: Mark, ch. x. v. 18.
127. Nullus est bonus nisi unus Deus: "There is nothing good except 
the one God." Sebastian Castalio (also Castellio, Châteillon, 
Châtaillon, Castellión, and Castello) 1515-1563) was a French 
preacher and theologian; and one of the first Reformed Christian 
proponents of religious toleration, freedom of conscience and 
thought. *TN)
128. This is life eternal, &c.: John, ch. xvii. throughout.
129. It is one God who will justify: Romans, ch. iii. v. 30.
130. We know there is none other gods &c.: 1 Cor. ch. viii. v. 4-6.
131. There is one GOD and Father of all, &c.: Eph. ch. iv. v. 6.
132. And we should confess one Mediator, &c.: 2 Tim. ch. ii. v. 5.
133. Severin Bini, or Binius, as he is commonly called, born in 
1543, was a doctor of divinity at Cologne, in the circle of the 
Lower Rhine in Germany, and canon of that archiepiscopal cathedral. 
He published in that city, in the year 1606, an elegant edition of 
all the Councils in four very large volumes, folio, and by this 
work, made the editions or collections of James Merlin, Peter Crabb, 
and Lawrence Surius, of no value, but the second edition published 
by Binius in the year 1618, in nine volumes smaller folio, is far 
preferable to the first, and the Paris edition printed in 1638, in 
ten large volumes, folio, is further enlarged, more correct, and of 
consequence still better than the second edition of 1618. This is 
not however the best edition to buy, if you love to read that 
theological stuff called Councils. The Louvre edition of 1644, in 
thirty-seven volumes, folio, is what you should purchase; or, that 
of 1672, printed at Paris, by the Jesuits Labbé and Cossart, in 
eighteen large volumes in folio. I prefer this last, on account of 
the additions, correctness, and beauty of the impression. Pere 
Hardouin likewise printed a later edition of the Councils, with 
explications and free remarks, an extraordinary and curious work I 
have been told; but I could not even see it in France, as the 
parliament of Paris had ordered the work to be suppressed, on 
account of the remarks. Binius died in 1620, æt.["aged"] 77.

James Merlin, the first editor of the Councils, was a doctor of 
divinity, and chanoine of Notre-dame de Paris. Besides the Councils, 
in two large volumes folio; he published the works of Durand de St. 
Porçain, in 1515; the works of Richard de St. Victor, in 1518; and 
the works of Peter de Blois, in 1519. His Defence of Origen, in 4to. 
a good thing; and Six Homilies on Gabriel's being sent to the Virgin 
Mary, in 8vo; which homilies are not worth half a farthing, are all 
that may be considered his. Merlin, born in 1472, died in 1541, æt. 
69.

Peter Crabb, the second editor of the councils, born in 1470, was a 
Franciscan friar. He published two volumes of the Councils, in 
folio, at Cologne, in 1538; and a third volume in 1550.—He died in 
1553, æt. 83.

Lawrence Surius, the third editor of the Councils, born in 1522; a 
monk of the Chartreux, published his edition of them, in four large 
volumes in folio, in 1560; and a few years after printed his Lives 
of the Saints, in six volumes. He wrote likewise a short History of 
his own Time; and An Apology for the Massacre of St. Bartholomew. He 
was the most outrageous, abusive bigot that ever wrote against the 
Protestants. The great men of his own church despised him, and 
Cardinal Perron, in particular, calls him bête["stupid"] and 
l'ignorant. He died in 1578, æt. 56.

Philip Labbé, the Jesuit, born in 1607; the fifth editor, and next 
after Binius; lived only to publish 11 volumes of the Councils, the 
eleventh came out the year he died; the other seven were done by 
Cossart. Labbé was a man of learning, and besides his collection of 
Councils, wrote several other pieces. The best of them are 
Bibliotheca Bibliothecarum; Concordia Cronologica; Bellarmini 
Philologica; and the Life of Galen. He died in 1667, æt. 60.

Gabriel Cossart, the continuator, who published the other seven 
volumes in 1672, died at Paris, the 18th. of December, 1674, æt. 59.

Richard de St. Victor, whose works were published by Merlin, at 
Paris, in 1518, was a Scotchman, and prior of the abbey of St. 
Victor in Paris. He was the author of Three Critical and Historical 
Dissertations on the Tabernacle; Two on the Temple; Three on the 
Harmony of the Chronology of the Kings of Judea and Israel; 
Commentaries on the Psalms, Canticles, the Epistles of St. Paul, and 
the Revelation; as also of some Treatises in Divinity; and several 
Disquisitions relating to Spiritual Life. There have been four 
editions of these pieces, and the best of them is that printed at 
Rouen in 1650, in two volumes, by Father John de Toulouse, who wrote 
the life of Father Richard, and added it to his edition. The three 
other editions are those of Paris, in 1518; of Venice, in 1592, and 
of Cologne, in 1621. Richard de Victor has been highly commended by 
several celebrated writers, particularly by Henry de Grand, 
Trithemius, Bellarmine, and Sixte de Sienne. There are many curious 
and fine things in his writings, it must be allowed; but in general, 
he is too subtle, too diffuse, and too full of digressions. His 
commentaries, for the most part, are weak, and evince that he did 
not understand St. Paul. He died 10th March 1173, æt. 91; and, for 
the twelfth century, was an extraordinary man.

But who was St. Victor, to whom the abbey of Chanoines Reguliers in 
Paris, and the greater abhaye of Chanoines in Marseilles, are 
dedicated? He was a Frenchman, who fought under the Emperors 
Dioclesian and Maximilian with great applause, in the most 
honourable post; but in the year 302, suffered martyrdom for 
refusing to sacrifice to the idols. He was executed on the spot 
where the abbey of St. Victor in Marseilles now stands, and there 
they have his relics, 'a la reserve du pie,' that is, except his 
foot, which lies in the Abbaye de St. Victor de Paris. William 
Grimaud, abbot of St. Victor de Marseille, on his being made Pope, 
under the title of Urban V. in 1362, took the foot of St. Victor 
from his abbey, when he left it, and made a present of it to John, 
Duke of Berry, one of the sons of John I. King of France, who was 
taken prisoner by Edward the Black Prince, in the battle of 
Poitiers, Sept. 19, 1356; and this duke of Berry gave the 
inestimable foot to the monks of St. Victor in Paris. There it 
remains to this day; and though so small a part of the blessed 
Victor, sheds immense benefits on the pious Catholics who adore it. 
Happy Catholics!

As to Peter de Blois, he was archdeacon of Bath, in the reign of 
Henry the second, and died in London, in the year 1200, æt. 71. His 
works comprise one hundred and eighty-three letters on various 
subjects, twenty sermons, and seventeen tracts of several kinds, 
they were first printed at Mayence in 1500, then by Merlin at Paris, 
in 1519, as before mentioned; and afterwards, John Buse the Jesuit, 
gave an edition of them in 1600; which is far preferable to that 
edited by Merlin. But the most valuable edition is that of Peter de 
Goussainville, printed at Paris, in 1667, in folio; to this edition 
is prefixed the life of Peter de Blois, and very learned remarks on 
his writings, and the subjects he wrote on, are added, by 
Goussainville. De Blois's works contain many excellent things, and 
his life is a curious piece. Some of his notions relating to the 
scriptures are very good, and he writes well against vice. He is a 
good author for the age he lived in. His letters are well worth 
reading, especially such of them as relate to his own time. King 
Henry II. ordered him to make a collection of them for his royal 
use.

Durand de St. Pourçain, bishop of Meaux, in 1326, died the 13th of 
September, 1333, in the 89th year of his age. His works are, Liber 
de Origine jurisdictionum, a learned piece; and Commentaries on the 
Four Books of Sentences. The book called the Sentences, was written 
by the famous Peter Lombard, bishop of Paris, who died in the year 
1164, æt. 82. In the Sentences, one of the propositions argued on is 
this: Christus secundum quod est homo, non est aliquod.["That Christ 
was truly a man."] Some call these Sentences excellent, which is 
what I cannot think them; but in Durand's Commentary on them, there 
are several excellent things.

As to the Jesuit, Jean Busse, who published the third edition of the 
works of Peter de Blois; he was the author of many books not worth 
mentioning, and died at Mayence, 30th of May, 1611, aged 64.

The learned Goussainville, who printed the last edition of De Blois, 
with notes, died in the year 1663, extremely poor and miserable. He 
likewise published the works of Pope Gregory, with many valuable 
remarks and notes. There are four editions of this pope's works; 
that by Tussiniani, bishop of Venice, by order of Pope Sixtus the 
Vth; the Paris edition of 1640; Goussainville's edition; and the 
Benedictine edition; but Goussainville's is, in my opinion, the most 
valuable.

The Sermons in the first and second editions of Peter de Blois' 
works are not his, but by Peter Comestor. De Blois' sermons are only 
to he found in Goussainville's edition of this archdeacon's works. 
Peter Comestor was a regular canon of St. Victor's in Paris, and 
died in the year 1198, æt. 65. Besides the sermons published by 
mistake as the work of De Blois, he wrote a large Scholastic 
History, which comprehends the sacred history from Genesis to the 
end of the Acts. This is reckoned a good thing, and has been 
abridged by one Hunter, an Englishman.

But as to Councils, we have the following account of the eighteen 
general ones in the Vatican library, and are told, that the several 
inscriptions affixed to them were made by pope Sixtus V.; the famous 
Felix Peretti, who was born the 13th of December, 1521, and died the 
27th of August, 1590, in the 69th year of his age.

The first Council, which is that of Nice in 325. St. Sylvester being 
pope, and Constantine the great emperor, Jesus Christ the Son of God 
is declared consubstantial with his Father; the impiety of Arius is 
condemned; and the emperor, in obedience to a decree of the council, 
ordered all the books of the Arians to he burnt.

The second Council, which is that of Constantinople in 381. The holy 
Damascus being pope, and Theodosius the elder emperor, the divinity 
of the Holy Ghost is defended against the impious Macedonius, and 
his false doctrine is anathematized.

The third Council, which is that of Ephesus in 431. St. Celestin 
being pope, and Theodosius the younger emperor; Nestorius, who 
divided Jesus Christ into two persons, is condemned, and the Holy 
Virgin is decreed to be the mother of God.

The fourth Council, which is that of Chalcedonia in 451. St. Leo 
being pope, and Marcian emperor, the unhappy Eutychius is 
anathematized, for maintaining that Jesus Christ had but one nature.

The fifth Council, which is the second of Constantinople in 553. 
Vigilius being pope, and Justinian emperor, the debates relating to 
the doctrine of Theodore, bishop of Mopsueste; Ibas, bishop of 
Edessa, and Theodoret, bishop of Cyr, are suppressed, and the errors 
of Origen are separated from the holy doctrine.

The sixth Council, which is the third of Constantinople in 680. St. 
Agatho being pope, and Constantine Pagonatus emperor, the heretics 
called Monothelites, who admitted but one will in Jesus Christ, are 
condemned.

The seventh Council, which is the second of Nice in 784. Adrian 
being pope, and Constantine, the son of Irene, being emperor, the 
impiety of the image-breakers is condemned, and the worship of the 
holy images is established in the church.

The eighth Council, which is the fourth of Constantinople in 689. 
Adrian II. being pope, and Basil emperor. Ignatius, patriarch of 
Constantinople, is re-established in his see, and Photius, the 
usurper, is with ignominy driven away.

The ninth Council, which is the first of Lateran in 1122.

The tenth Council, which is the second of Lateran in 1169. The 
canons of these two councils are wanting, and they have no 
inscription in the Vatican.

The eleventh Council, which is the third of Lateran in 1179. 
Alexander III. being pope, and Frederick I. emperor; the errors of 
the Vandois are condemned.

The twelfth Council, which is the fourth of Lateran in 1215. 
Innocent III. being pope, and Frederick II. emperor; the false 
opinions of the abbot Joachim arc condemned; the holy war, for the 
recovery of Jerusalem, is resolved, and the Croisades are appointed 
among Christians.

The thirteenth Council, which is the first of Lyons in 1245. Under 
the pontificate of Innocent IV., the emperor Frederick is declared 
an enemy to the church, and deprived of the empire; they deliberate 
on the recovery of the Holy Land; St. Lewis, King of France, is 
declared chief of that expedition. The cardinals are honoured with 
red hats.

The fourteenth Council, which is the second of Lyons in 1274. 
Gregory X., being sovereign pontiff, the Greeks are reunited to the 
Church of Rome; St. Bonaventure does signal service to the Church in 
this council; friar Jerome brings the king of the Tartars to the 
council, and that prince receives, in the most solemn manner, the 
blessed water of baptism.

The fifteenth Council, which is that of Vienne in 1311. Under the 
pontificate of Clement V., the Decretals, called the Clementines 
from the name of this pope, are received and published; the 
procession of the holy sacrament is instituted throughout 
Christendom; and professors of the oriental languages are 
established in the four most famous universities in Europe, for the 
propagation of the Christian faith in the Levant.

The sixteenth Council, which is that of Florence in 1439. The 
Greeks, the Armenians, and the Ethiopians, are reunited to the 
Catholic Church, under the pontificate of Eugene IV.

The seventeenth Council, which is the fifth of Lateran, began in the 
year 1517. They declared war against the Turks, who had seized the 
island of Cyprus, and possessed themselves of Egypt, on the death of 
the sultan: the emperor Maximilian, and Francis I., king of France, 
are appointed generals of this war, under the popes Julius II. and 
Leo X.

The eighteenth Council, which is that of Trent, the last of the 
œcumenical or general councils; held from the year 1545 to the year 
1563. Paul III. Julius II., and Pius V. reigning at Rome, the 
Lutherans and other heretics are condemned, and the ancient 
discipline of the church is re-established in her exact and regular 
practice.

These, reader, are the eighteen famous General Councils; and if you 
will turn to the third volume of a work, called Notes relating to 
Men, and Things, and Books, you will find my observations on them; 
my remarks on the popes, the princes, and the fathers, assembled; 
their unchristian immoralities, and sad acts against the laws of 
Christ, in order to establish for ever, that very senseless, and 
very wicked religion, called Popery; which is, a composition of sin 
and error so base and abominable, that we might expect such a thing 
from the devil; but it is impossible it could come from heavenly-
inspired fathers. In that book you will find many thoughts on the 
religion delivered to the world by those Councils, and by them 
established, though it is in reality a disgrace to Christianity; a 
dishonour to the religion of nature; and a faction against the 
common rights of mankind; which ought to be the just object of 
universal contempt and abhorrence; whether we consider it as a 
system of idolatry, impiety, and cruelty; or, as a political scheme, 
to destroy the liberties, and engross the properties of mankind. Of 
these things, particularly and largely, in the piece referred to.

Here I have only further to observe, that in the large collections 
of the Councils, it is not only the eighteen œcumenical the 
collectors have gathered, but so much of all the councils as they 
could find, their acts, letters, formularies of faith, and canons, 
from the first council at Jerusalem, in the year 49, to the last 
council in the eighteenth century; which was convoked by the 
archbishop of Ambrun against Jean de Soanem, bishop of Senez. These 
amount to above 1600 councils. Note, Reader, the condemnation and 
banishment of old John de Soanem, the most learned and excellent 
prelate in France, of his time, in the eightieth year of his age, by 
Firebrand Tartuff, archbishop of Ambrun, and his council, Sept. 21, 
1727; was on account of the bishop's admirable pastoral instruction 
against the execrable constitution unigenitus, and the antichristian 
formulary of pope Alexander II., and because he recommended the 
reading of Pere Quesnel's very pious and fine Reflections Morales.

Pasquier Quesnel, a famous Jansenist, and father of the oratory, was 
born in 1636, was the author of many books, some of them very good. 
He was severely persecuted for many years, and died at last in 
prison, if I mistake not, a sufferer for religion.
134. ex professo, and data opera: "Explicitly and deliberately" (TN)
135. God had exalted the Lord Jesus Christ, &c.: Acts, ch. v. v. 31. 
136. He ever liveth to make intercession for them: Hebrews, ch. vii. 
v. 25.
137. He is gone to heaven, &c.: Acts ch. ix. v. 24.
138. There is no other mediator betwixt God and men, &c.: 1 Tim. ch. 
ii. v. 5.
139. Had not the spirit of God foretold, &c.: 1 Tim. ch. iv. v. 4.
140. We have no command to supplicate any in heaven, &c.: Matt. ch. 
vi. v. 13.
141. He alone is that angel to whom much incense was given, &c.: 
Rev. ch. viii. v. 3
142. O thou that hearest prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come.: 
Psalm lxv. V. 2.
143. As God is but one, &c.: Quid tam proprium Christi quam 
advocatum apud deum patrem adstare populorum.["What is so 
appropriate as that Christ should stand as advocate for the people 
before God the father."] Ambrose in Psal. 39. Pro quo nullus 
interpellat sed ipse pro omnibus, hic unus verusque mediator 
est.["For no-one but him intercedes for all, he is the one and only 
intermediate"] Aug. Cont. Parmen. lib. ii. c. 8.
144. The Roman doctors say, the saints know the transactions that 
are done here below, by revelation or intuition. To this I answer, 
if it is by revelation, that they know our requests and prayers to 
them, then it must be either from God or from angels; of which there 
is not the least assurance or certainty to be anywhere found: but if 
we could be sure of it, then, in my opinion, we ought to pray to God 
or angels to make known our prayers to saints; which would be 
strange religion. If it be by intuition, as the greatest part of the 
doctors say, and that the saints see the requests in the divine 
essence, as men see things in a corporeal glass: then, (exclusive of 
answering that the scriptures say no such thing) the saints must see 
all things in the divine essence, or only such things as God is 
pleased to permit them to see: if all things, they would be 
omniscient: if only the things permitted to be seen, how is it 
possible for us to know whether God is pleased to permit them to see 
therein our prayers, or to know the requests we make to them, unless 
he had told us so. Let it be revelation or intuition, it is sad 
stuff.
145. Alaternus: Buckthorn (TN)
146. Ha-ha: A kind of sunk fence intended to keep cattle in without 
interrupting the view: consisting of a trench one side of which (the 
side the cattle are) slopes down gently, and the other is vertical 
and usually faced with stone or brick, like a wall. (TN)
147. Stow: Lord Cobham's, now Earl Temple's seat in Buckinghamshire, 
fifty-nine miles from London.
148. All that dwell on the earth shall worship him: Rev. ch. xiii. 
v. 8.
149. The waters which thou sawest, &c.: Rev. ch. xvii. v. 15.
150. I could find no ruling power, except Rome papal, &c. : Rev. ch. 
xviii. v. 24.
151. Reader, it is well worth your while to turn to the first volume 
of that admirable work, the Salters-Hall Sermons against Popery, and 
there see how the Cardinal's notes of his church are considered by 
that learned and excellent man, Dr. Samuel Chandler. His 
consideration of the sixth note more immediately concerns me here, 
and therefore I give you an abstract of it.

The writings of the apostles are allowed even by our adversaries to 
be the oldest records of Christianity, and therefore to this ancient 
and infallible rule we ought to appeal, to determine the controversy 
between us and the papists, that is, to see how far this antiquity 
favours their doctrine and practices, or is in agreement with ours.

l. The Protestants renounce the Pope, and acknowledge one law-giver, 
the Lord Jesus Christ, for these reasons, That the Pope is not 
mentioned in the New Testament; that Christ says, one is your 
master, even Christ; and St. Paul says, there is but one Lord, and 
one Faith: the whole family in heaven and earth is named of the Lord 
Jesus Christ.

2. Protestants do not pay any worship at all to saints and angels, 
but as St. Paul directs, consider Jesus Christ as their sole 
mediator and advocate; for there is but one God, and one mediator 
between God and man, the man Jesus Christ. They say, such veneration 
and prayer to saints and angels is superstition and will-worship, 
and only worship God with all their hearts and souls, with the most 
raised affections, and the highest degrees of love and fear, faith 
and confidence; for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord God, 
and him only shalt thou serve. And the angel in the Revelation said 
to John, who fell down at his feet to worship him, See thou do it 
not, for I am thy fellow-servant.

3. We affirm, that in the sacrament of the Lord's Supper, after 
consecration, there is nothing existent but bread and wine; for St. 
Paul says, 'Whosoever shall eat this bread and drink this cup,' and 
as often as you eat this bread and drink this cup.'

4. We affirm the Eucharist is only a memorial of Christ's death; for 
Christ says, do this in remembrance of me; and St. Paul assures the 
Corinthians from Christ himself; Cor. ch. xi. v. 21, that they were 
to receive the elements with this view only: and in his epistle to 
the Hebrews he tells us, that by one offering Christ hath for ever 
perfected those who are sanctified; and that because there is 
remission of sins under the new covenant, there is no more offering 
for sin; which proves, the Eucharist is not a propitiatory 
sacrifice.

5. We renounce the doctrine of purgatory, and affirm that the future 
state is no state of probation; for at death, the dust shall return 
to the earth as it was, and the spirit shall return to God who gave 
it. And St. Paul declares, that at the judgment-seat of Christ every 
one shall receive the things done in the body, according to that he 
hath done, whether it be good or bad.

6. Protestants affirm, that the worship of God ought to be performed 
in a language which all men understand; and that they have a right 
to search the scriptures. For, if I speak with tongues, says the 
apostle, in such a language as those I speak to cannot understand, 
what shall I profit you? Let all things be done to edifying. And 
Christ bids us search the scriptures. And how could the word of 
Christ dwell richly in us in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing 
one another in psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs, if we had not the 
word of Christ, and the scriptures of truth to read and consult for 
ourselves.

These are the Protestant doctrines, and we see they were taught by 
Christ and by his apostles. We have the sanction of the most 
venerable antiquity on our side, and this note of the true church of 
Christ belongeth to us in the highest perfection.

When the papists then scornfully say, Where was your church before 
Luther and Calvin? The answer is obvious: the doctrine of our church 
was in the writings of the inspired apostles, where the church of 
Rome is never to be found; the same that was taught by Christ 
himself, whom they have forsaken, and whose faith they have 
corrupted. As to our predecessors and professors, they were the 
persecuted disciples of the crucified Jesus, those martyrs and 
confessors, whose blood the church of Rome had cruelly spilt. This 
is the genuine antiquity the Protestants have to boast of. Their 
doctrines are the word of Christ, and their fathers were put to 
death by papists for the testimony of Jesus.

But the papists on the contrary, exclusive of the example of the 
devil, who was a murderer from the beginning, and Antiochus 
Epiphanus, Nero, Domitian, and other monsters of mankind, who went 
before them in the measures of persecution, cruelty, and blood; and 
excepting the idolatrous nations of the earth, and the false 
prophets and deceivers among the Jews, by whose authority, and 
example they may vindicate their own idolatries, they, have no 
genuine antiquity to plead. Many of their doctrines were unknown to, 
or abhorred by the primitive church, and are mere novelties and 
innovations, that were originally introduced by superstition, and 
then maintained by cruelty and blood.
152. Voltaire's words are:— "And notwithstanding all the troubles 
and infamy which the church of Rome has had to encounter, she has 
always preserved a greater decency and gravity in her worship than 
any of the other churches; and has given proofs, that when in a 
state of freedom, and under due regulations, she was formed to give 
lessons to all others." Is not this facing the world, and 
contradicting truth with a bold front? Decency and gravity in the 
church of Rome! The licentious whore. And formed to give lessons! 
Lessons, Voltaire! Is not her wisdom, in every article of it, 
earthly, sensual, devilish; and her zeal, that bitter, fierce, and 
cruel thing, which for ever produces confusion and every evil work? 
With a just abhorrence, and a manly indignation, we must look upon 
this mystery of iniquity, and never let that horror decay, which is 
necessary to guard us against the gross corruptions of the Roman 
church; the idolatry of her worship, the absurdity and impiety of 
her doctrines, the tyranny and cruelty of her principles and 
practices. These are her lessons, Voltaire; and you ought to ask the 
world pardon for daring to recommend a church, whose schemes and 
pieties bid defiance to reason, and are inconsistent with the whole 
tenor of revelation. This is the more incumbent on you, as you say 
you are a philosopher, and let us know in more places than one in 
your writings, that by that word, you mean a man who believes 
nothing at all of any revelation.
153. Reader,—Bouhier, president of the French academy, to whom Le 
Blanc inscribes his fifty-eighth letter, died in 1746. He was a 
scholar. L'Abbé de Olivet, speaks of him in the following manner; 
"Je me suis prêté a ce nouveau travail, et d'autant plus volontiers, 
que M. le President Bouhier a bien voulu le partager avec moi. On 
sera, sans doute, charmé de voir Ciceron entre les mains d'un 
traducteur aussi digne de lui, que Ciceron lui-meme étoit digne 
d'avoir pour traducteur un savant du premier ordre."["I applied 
myself to this new work all the more willingly, because President 
Bouhier has kindly divided it with me. Everyone will undoubtedly be 
happy to see Cicero in the hands of a translator so worthy of it; 
Cicero himself would be flattered to have such a first-rate scholar 
for a translator."] Tusc. Disp. tom. i. p. 13. And again; "Le feu M. 
President Bouhier, le Varron de notre siecle, et l'homme le plus 
capable de bien rendre les vraies beautez d'un original Grec ou 
Latin, avoit tellement retouché ses deux Tusculanes, qu'on aura 
peine á les reconnoitre dans cette nouvelle edition." ["President 
Bouhier, the Varro of our times, and the man who is best able to 
capture the beauties of a Greek or Latin original, has so reshaped 
these two Tusculan Disputations, that you would hardly recognize 
them in this new edition."] Tusc. Disp. tome ii. p. 1.

This is Olivet's account of Bouhier; and I have heard some gentlemen 
who knew him say, that he was a very fine genius; but, they added, a 
popish bigot to the last degree, and therefore, Le Blanc chose him 
as the fittest person of his acquaintance, to write an epistle to, 
that abused the reformation, and the English divines. Great is the 
prejudice of education! When so bright a mind as Bouhier's cannot 
see the deformity of Popery, and the beauty of the reformation; but, 
on the contrary, with pleasure reads the despicable defamation in Le 
Blanc's letter.

N.B. The two Tusculans, so finely translated by Bouhier, are the 
third, de Ægritudine Lenienda: and the fifth, Virtutem ad Beate 
Vivendum seipsa esse Contentam. De la Vertu: Qu'elle suffit pour 
Vivre Heureux. See likewise M. Bouhier's curious and useful remarks 
on the three books, De Natura Deorum; the five Tusculans; Scipio's 
Dream; and on the Catilinaires, or three Orations against Catiline. 
These remarks are the third volume of Olivet's fine edition of 
Cicero.
154. Hic non Dubito, &c.:" No doubt you will exclaim against this, 
and will make it a reproach against us that you highly esteem and 
approve perfect chastity, but do not forbid marriage, because your 
followers—that is, those in the second
grade among you—are allowed to have wives." (TN)
155. Heb. ch. xiii. v. 4.
156. Titus, ch. i. v. 6.
157. Chrysost. Hom. ii. in c. 1. ad tit.
158. Note, reader, in the fourth volume of a work, called Notes 
relating to Men, and Things, and Books, you will find some more of 
my remarks on the Abbé Le Blanc's epistles. You will see, among 
other observations on this monk, a vindication of Archbishop 
Tillotson. The Abbé rails at one of this prelate's fine sermons, 
with great malice and impudence, and has the vanity to think his 
miserable declamation an answer. This wretched and despicable Romish 
apostate has the impudence and impiety to defend the worship of his 
God of dough, and would, if it were in his power, persuade the 
readers of his letters, to adore the tiny cake he prostrates himself 
before. For this the reader will find the mass-priest well chastised 
in the work I have referred to; and see the doctrine of the Lord's 
Supper set in a true light. You will find there a curious history of 
the mass, from the time the popish doctors first drew it out of the 
bottomless pit; and see it made quite evident, that in this 
abominable article of their faith, as well as in every other part of 
their execrable religion, they make void the law of God, and sink 
the human race into the vilest slavery and idolatry. Beware then, 
Christians, of popery. Still bravely dare to protest against her 
infernal schemes and inventions, and draw your religion from the 
book of God, that holy volume of inestimable treasure. It is our 
light in darkness, our comfort under affliction; our direction to 
heaven, and let us die in defence of it, if ever there should be 
occasion, rather than suffer the blood-thirsty papists, the red-
handed idolaters, to snatch it out of our hands. They will give us 
for it the despicable legends of fictitious saints and false 
miracles; a history of diseases cured instantly by relics; accounts 
of speaking images—stories of travelling chapels—wonders done by a 
Madonna; and the devil knows what he has crowded into their wretched 
heads. Down with popery then, the religion of hell, and may that 
happy state be erected, when truth and love shall embrace and reign. 
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.
159. The author of John Buncle, junior, printed in 1776, a second 
volume of which appeared in 1778, endeavours to exculpate himself 
and brethren from this concise but severe satire which the author 
has passed upon his children, by observing that being already 
stamped with the character of a fool, and consequently no character 
to lose, he with more boldness published those letters, as the only 
chance left him, by which he might gain the good opinion of the 
reader, and as a means of wiping off the reproach their dear father 
had entailed upon them. Anecdotes of John Buncle, junior, vol. i. p. 
72.
160. In solutis principiis: Dissolved. (TN)
161. Scotomia: An ailment whose symptoms are failing eyesight and 
dizziness. (TN)
162. Chachexy: Weakness and wasting of the body due to severe 
chronic illness (TN)
163. Protracter: Something which expands or prolongs something. (TN)
164. Sociorums: A phrase used by Swift.(Author's note). Companions 
(TN)
165. Mollia tempora fandi: "Times favourable for speaking." Virgil, 
Æneid, Bk. IV l 293-294. (TN)
166. Sanity: Health (TN)
167. Sal polychrestum, or hepar sulphuris: Liver of sulphur, a 
mixture of various potassium sulphides and sulphates. (TN)
168. Ischuries: Difficult or painful in urination. (TN)
169. Gleet: A whitish purulent discharge, as from the urethra in 
gonorrhoea. (TN)
170. St. Anthony's fire: Erysipelas, a skin inflammation. (TN)
171. King's evil: Scrofula, an infection of the lymph nodes in the 
neck by the tuberculosis bacterium. It was so called because it was 
believed that being touched by a King would cure it. (TN)
172. Sal Glauberi: Sodium sulphate, often used as a laxative. (TN)
173. Gambozia: Gambodge, the resin of the Garcinia plant, used as a 
painter's colour and a powerful laxative. (TN)
174. Scammony: A resin extracted from the root of Convolvulus 
scammonia, used as a laxative. (TN)
175. Hydragogue: In pre-modern medicine, a drug which removed 
"excess moisture" from the body. (TN)
176. Descriptive Poem: see 
https://books.google.ie/books?id=kCBWAAAAYAAJ (TN)
177. Reader, that you may the better understand the conversation I 
had with this learned Carthusian, I must inform you what the Talmud, 
and other writings of the Rabbies are.

The Talmud, a celebrated piece of Jewish literature, full of 
Rabinical domination and enthusiasm. The Rabbins pretend, this book 
contains the o
58+-* trral laws, and other secrets, which God communicated to 
Moses. It consists of two parts, each of which is divided into 
several books. In the first part, which they call Mishna, is the 
text. In the other, is a sort of comment on the text, and this is 
styled the Gemara.

This oral law, or tradition of the Jews, was collected after the 
destruction of the Temple, A. D. 150, by Rabbi Judah, and is by them 
preferred before the scripture. They suppose it was orally delivered 
by Moses to Israel, and unlawful to be written; but when Jerusalem 
was destroyed, they were constrained to write it, lest it should be 
lost; but yet it was so written, as that none but themselves might 
understand it. This Mishna and Gemara complete the two Talmuds: that 
of Jerusalem, A. D. 230; and that of Babylon, five hundred years 
after Christ. Many parts of these Talmuds are translated by several 
learned men, who have endeavoured to render them intelligible: but 
in order to understand them fully, you must read the Jad Chaska, or 
Mishna Torah of Moses Maimonides, who was physician to the king of 
Egypt about six hundred years ago. This Rabbi hath comprised the 
substance of the Mishna and Gemara of the Talmud, in his books, and 
enabled us to understand all the Mishna with ease and pleasure. See 
likewise the Clavis Talmudica, Cock's Excerpta, and the works of the 
excellent Ludovicus de Campeigne du Veil, who had been a Jew, but 
after becoming, a Roman Catholic, went over to the Church of 
England, in which he continued for several years in the character of 
a great divine: but at last turned Baptist, and died a member of 
that Christian church; which lost him all his friends and interest. 
He died the beginning of this century, with the reputation of an 
upright Christian and a most learned man. There is no tolerable 
account given of him in any of the Biographical Dictionaries. What 
they say is short and next to nothing. And the Popish accounts are 
not only short, but false, and sheer calumny. I took much pains some 
years ago, to collect among the Baptists, and from others who knew 
this great man, everything I could get relating to him and his 
works, and formed what I had got into a life of him, which I did 
intend to insert in this place: but by some accident or other, it is 
gone. I cannot find it anywhere.
178. Exte Bethlehem &c.: "I will produce from the heart of Bethlehem 
a Messiah, that he may have dominion over Israel, and whose name is 
spoken for ever." (TN)
179. Fluor albus: A thick whitish discharge from the vagina. (TN)
180. Lienteria: A form of diarrhœa in which food passes through the 
body undigested. (TN)
181. A Postilla, reader, is a barbarous word made up of the words 
post illa, and was brought into use in the twelfth century, when the 
marginal explicators of the Bible left the margins, and under their 
text writ short and literal notes, before which they put the word 
postilla, instead of the words post illa, meaning the particular 
words in the text, from whence, by a letter, they referred to the 
little note below: but in the thirteenth century, the barbarous word 
took so much, that all the commentators following, appropriated the 
name to their most copious commentaries, contrary to the first 
practice in the use of the word, and for three centuries after the 
biblical learning was all postilla, till at length the word 
disappeared, according to the wonted inconstancy and agitation of 
all human things, and gave place to a new and fifth invention, 
called tractatus, or homily. This is the history of a POSTILLA.
182. Iam ne agnoscor, &c.: "If I meet one of them in the street, he 
passes me by as he might pass the tombstone of one long dead; it has 
fallen face upwards, loosened by time, but he wastes no moment 
deciphering it." Lucian, Timon the Misanthrope, Translated by H. W. 
Fowler and F. G. Fowler (TN)
183. Nomen amicitiae si quatenus expedit, &c:
"As long as is expedient, the name of friendship lives
Just as in dicing, Fortune smiles or lowers;
When good luck beckons, then your friend his gleeful service gives
But basely flies when ruin o’er you towers."
Petronius, Satyricon, Ch. 18, Translated by W. C. Firebaugh. (TN)
184. Eandem cum Timone nostro sortem, &c: "My situation is the same 
as Timon's: once supported by many friends while a favouring breeze 
filled my sails, now that the wild seas have been swelled by the 
stormy wind, I am abandoned on a shattered boat in the midst of the 
waters". Ovid, Letters from Pontus, Book II, No. 3 To Maximus l. 23-
28 (TN)
185. Premial: Of the nature of a reward. (TN)
186. Old French: Or rather in bad French, as the writer was no 
Frenchman.
187. Nostre confession de foy &c.: [Author's Note] La Verite et la 
Religion en Visite, Alamagne, 1695. Translation: "Our profession of 
faith follows the first teachings of the evangelists, because we 
have the holy scriptures as our basis; but it has come to us, as to 
all who have detached themselves from the Roman church, from those 
whom the Papists have called the authors of the religion, that is to 
say, Luther, Calvin and other doctors who are the restorers of the 
truthful doctrines which were almost lost under the tyrannical rule 
of the Roman church. During which rule the Holy Scripture became 
unknown to the majority of Christians, reading it was forbidden. But 
by the will of Divine Providence the revolution came when everyone 
tried their utmost to unearth the truth; and as in every revolution 
there are chiefs and prominent people, so it was in the re-
establishment of the truths which had been stifled for such a long 
time. Luther, Calvin, Arminius and Socinus were these illustrious 
men, and for them this religion was named. You can, if you like, say 
that Socinius was not the author of our religion and was not even 
the first, because it had not arrived in Poland until after there 
already been formed an assembly of people who had opinions 
resembling his: I say to you that the only reason that he is a hero 
of our faith, is that he has written the books, although hardly 
anyone has read them, because Socin being a lawyer was extremely 
long-winded and boring; and also that we do not wish to have any 
other book than the New Testament or any other teachers than the 
apostles. It is against our will that we are called Socinians or 
Arians; these are the names given us by the malignity of our enemies 
in order to make us hated. Among ourselves we use the name simply of 
Christians. But because of the disunity of Christianity, people say 
that it is not enough to use this universal name, and it is 
necessary to distinguish us by a particular designation, so we will 
agree to have the name of Unitarian Christians, to distinguish us 
from the Trinitarian Christians. 

"This name of Unitarian Christians strongly distinguishes us from 
those who do not wish to subscribe to the true doctrine of Jesus 
Christ, and who distort it in unjustifiable ways; we giving credence 
to the words of Jesus Christ in the 17th Chapter of the Gospel of 
John, when he said "Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that 
thy Son also may glorify thee: as thou hast given him power over all 
flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou hast 
given him. And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the 
only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent."  The Apostle 
St. Paul gives the same doctrine in the 8th Chapter of the epistle 
to the Corinthians, saying "But to us there is but one God, the 
Father, of whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus 
Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him" It is because of this 
doctrine that we call ourselves Unitarian Christians, be cause we 
believe in only one God, He who was father and God of our lord Jesus 
Christ, Whom Jesus Christ has commanded us to adore, and Whom he 
adored himself, calling Him not only our God, by also his God, as he 
said "I go to my father and your father, my God and your God."[John 
20:17. TN]

"So you can see that we adhere to the Divine truth. We have a 
religious veneration for the Holy Scripture. Despite that we are 
humble servants of the Trinitarians, if they do not hold it against 
us that we do not come to their altars, and have the forbearance to 
allow us our simplicity in Jesus Christ, and do not wish to force us 
to profess doctrines beyond those in Holy Scripture." La Verité et 
la Religion en Visite, Allegmagne, 1695.
188. While I waited at the inn, till the horses had eaten their 
corn, the landlord brought me a paper, dropped, by a lady he knew 
not, some days before at his house. He added, it was a curiosity, 
and worth my serious consideration.

A MORNING AND EVENING PRAYER.

"Almighty and ever-living God, have mercy on me. Forgive me all my 
sin, and make my heart one, to fear thy glorious fearful name, 
Jehovah. Guide me with thy counsel, I beseech thee, and be the 
strength of my life and my portion for ever.

"O Lord Jehovah, defend me from the power and malice, the assaults 
and attempts, of all my adversaries, and keep me in health and 
safety, in peace and innocence. These things I ask in the name of 
Jesus Christ, thy Son, our Lord; and in his words I call upon thee 
as, Our Father, who art in heaven, &c."

This prayer pleased me very much. In the most beautiful manner, as 
well as in a few words, it expresses all we need ask from heaven; 
and if Miss Dudgeon of Richmondshire was the composer of it, as I 
have been assured since, upon enquiry, I here place it to her 
honour, as a monument of her piety and sense; and in hopes the 
illustrious of her sex will use so short and excellent a form of 
devotion in their closets morning and night.

There is an expression in this prayer, which for some time I could 
not well comprehend the meaning of it; that is, Make my heart one: 
but on considering it, I found it supported by the greatest 
authorities.

Among the sayings of Pythagoras, one is, be simply thyself. Reduce 
thy conduct to one single aim, by bringing every passion into 
subjection, and acquiring that general habit of self-denial, which 
comprehends temperance, moderation, patience, government, and is the 
main principle of wisdom. Be simply thyself, and so curb desire, and 
restrain the inclinations, and control the affections, that you may 
be always able to move the passions as reason shall direct. Let not 
every foremost fancy, or every forward appearance, have the least 
mastery over you; but view them on every side by the clear light of 
reason, and be no further influenced by the imaginations of 
pleasure, and apprehensions of evil, than as the obvious relations 
and nature of things allow. Let the result of a perception which 
every rational mind may have of the essential difference between 
good and evil, be the cause or ground of obligation. This will add 
greatly to quiet, and be productive of much real felicity. It will 
render every present condition supportable, brighten every prospect, 
and always incline us more to hope than to fear. This is the 
doctrine of Pythagoras.

I likewise find that David expresses the same thought in the 86th 
Psalm, ver. 11, which is rendered in the Bible translation, "Unite 
my heart to fear thy name;" in the Common-Prayer Book, "O knit my 
heart unto thee, that I may fear thy name:" but the Hebrew is, "Make 
my heart one," to fear thy name; meaning, Let the fear of thee be 
the one ruling disposition of my soul, in opposition to the double-
minded man, which the Hebrew elegantly expresses by a "heart and a 
heart;" one that draws to the riches, pleasures, and honours of this 
world; and another to the practice of all virtue.

As to the other part of the prayer, which has the words —glorious—
fearful—Jehovah; whereas in the 86th Psalm it is only said, "to fear 
thy name;" the author certainly took them from Deuteronomy, ch. 
xxviii. ver. 58. The design of the dreadful threatenings in this 
chapter set before the people, is there thus expressed, "that thou 
mayest fear this glorious and fearful name, Jehovah thy God;" or as 
in our translation, "the Lord thy God."—And therefore I think these 
words are very finely used in this prayer.

"It is amazing to me," says the Rev. Mr. Peters, rector of St. 
Mabyn, "that throughout the Bible, the translators have everywhere 
changed the word Jehovah for the word Lord, when God himself gave 
the word Jehovah as his name to he uttered; and as in this word the 
whole mystery of the Jewish and Christian dispensations seem to have 
been wrapped up.

"Say to the people, Ami Jehovah. I am Jehovah. Ye shall know that I 
Jehovah am your God, which bringeth you out from under the burdens 
of the Egyptians." Exod. ch. vi. ver. 6, 7. Deut. ch. vi. ver. 4. 
"Hear, O Israel, Jehovah our God is one Jehovah."

Then as to this word's comprehending the two dispensations, a good 
writer observes that, though God was known to his true worshippers 
by many other names, as God Almighty, the High God, the Everlasting 
God, &c. yet Jehovah was his one peculiar name; a name which he had 
appointed to himself, in preference to all others, and by which he 
declared by Moses he would be distinguished for the time to come.

And as of all the names of God, this seems to be the most expressive 
of his essence, as it can only be derived from the root which 
signifies to be, and denotes the one eternal self-existent Being, 
from whom all other things derive their being, and on whom they must 
depend;—As the word does likewise signify 'makes to be what was 
promised or foretold,' and by such meaning declares, as often as the 
word is repeated, that Jehovah our God is not only self-existent, 
and the Creator of the world, but Him in whom all divine prophecies 
and predictions centre; it follows, in my opinion, that we should 
utter this awful name in our addresses to God, and not, like the 
Jews, through a superstition omit it, and use another instead of 
it." This passage is to be found in an excellent Preface to the 
octavo edition of his admirable Dissertation on the Book of Job, in 
reply to that part of the Divine Legation of Moses demonstrated, in 
which the author, my Lord of Gloucester, sets himself to prove, that 
this book is a work of imagination, or dramatic composition, no 
older than Ezra the priest, whom he supposes to be the writer of it, 
in the year before Christ 467, or the year 155, in the twentieth 
year of the reign of Artaxerxes, king of Persia, when Daniel's 
seventy weeks begin; that is, the period of 490 years, that were to 
be fulfilled before the passion of our Saviour. And further, 
according to the author of the Legation, that this 'allegorical 
drama or poem,' was written to quiet the minds of the Jewish people 
under the difficulties of their captivity, and to assure them, as 
represented by the person of Job, of those great temporal blessings 
which three prophets had predicted.

Now in the Preface to the book aforementioned, in answer to all this 
and fully and beautifully answered it is, you will find the passage 
relating to the word Jehovah, and more than I have quoted from it.

As to Pythagoras the Samean, mentioned in this note, on account of 
his saying, "Be simply thyself;" he was famous in the 60th Olympiad, 
as Jamblicus informs us; that is, his Elikia, or Reign of Fame, 
began in the first year of this Olympiad, which was the year before 
Christ 540; for 60 x 4 gives 240 — 777 leaves 537 + 3, the plus 
years of the Olympiad; i. e. 2, 3, 4 = 540. And he died in the 4th 
year of the 70th Olympiad, that is, the year before Christ 497: for 
70 X 4 = 280 — 777 remains 497: there are no plus years to be added 
here, as it happened in the 4th or last year of the Olympiad. This 
philosopher was contemporary with, and a near friend to, the 
renowned Phalaris, who was murdered in the year before Christ 556, 
when the Belshazzar of Daniel ascended the throne of Babylon. And as 
Pythagoras lived to the age of 90, according to Diogenes, he must 
have been born in the beginning of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar; the 
year this conqueror took Jerusaicm, and its king Zedekiah, which was 
Olymp. 47. 3, and of consequence before Christ 590: for 47 X 4 = 188 
— 777, remains 580 + 1 = 590. This was 54 years before Thespis 
invented tragedy,*[see note below] and 11 years before the birth of 
Æschylus, the reformer of tragedy. Cyrus was then in the 10th year 
of his age.

It is likewise evident from hence, that Pythagoras must have lived 
through the reigns of Cyrus, Cambyses, and the greatest part of the 
reign of Darius Histaspes, who slew Smerdis the Magi, and is called 
in scripture Ahasuerus, the king of Persia, who married Esther, and 
ordered Haman the Amalekite to be hanged on the gallows he had 
erected for Mordecai the Jew, in the year before Christ 510.

Note, David was before Pythagoras 519 years.

Reader, As to the word Elikia, which I have used to express the 
reign or time of flourishing of Pythagoras, I have an observation or 
two to make in relation to it, which I think worth your attending 
to.

Clemens Alexandrinus says, Stromata, p. 40, 'The years from Moses to 
Solomon's Elikia are 610; to wit

Moses's life
120
From his death to David's accession
450
David's reign
40
Total
610

From this passage it is plain, that the Elikia of Solomon is not 
meant of his nativity, but of the beginning of his reign, when he 
was 33 years of age.

It is then very surprising that Dodwell should insist upon it, that 
Elikia always signifies nativity. It is the more wonderful, as 
Dodwell quotes this passage from Clement; and as it is impossible to 
make out 610, without coming to the 33d of Solomon, as I have 
reckoned it.

Nay, in another place of the Stromata, Clement says, Isaiah, Hosea, 
and Micah lived after the Elikia of Lycurgus; where he can only mean 
the time when that lawgiver flourished; for, from the Destruction of 
Troy to the Akmé of Lycurgus, was 290 years: and from Solomon, in 
whose time Troy was taken, to the time of the prophets, was 360 
years.

Thus does learning accommodate things. Dodwell wanted to fit a 
passage in Antilochus to his own calculation and so 312 years from 
the Elikia of Pythagoras, that is, says Dodwell, from the nativity 
of the philosopher, he meant taking the word in that sense, to the 
death of Epicurus, brings us exactly to the time. Who can forbear 
smiling? A favourite notion is to many learned men a sacred thing. 
Dodwell settles his passage in Antilochus to his mind, by perverting 
the word Elikia.

This, to be sure, in profane things, can do no great harm: but when 
the practice is brought into things sacred, it is a detriment to 
mankind. Some divines, for example, to support a notion as 
unreasonable as it is dear to them, tell us that the word Isos 
signifies strict equality, not like: and that when St. Paul says Isa 
Theo, we must construe it, Jesus Christ was strictly equal to the 
most High God. This is sad construction, when Homer, Euripides, 
Æschylus, make the word Isos to import no more than like. Isanemos, 
swift as the wind; Isatheos phos, like a God; Isanerios, like a 
dream.

And when a divine is positive that os and kathos, as, and even as, 
words occurring in the New Testament, signify a strict equality, and 
not some sort of likeness; this is miserable perversion, and hurts 
the Christian religion very greatly; as they endeavour, by such a 
given sense, to prove that the man Christ Jesus is to be honoured 
with the same divine honours we offer to God the Father Almighty, by 
the command and example of Jesus, who was sent from God, and was a 
worshipper of God; who lived obedient to the laws of God, preached 
those laws, and died for them in the cause of God; who was raised 
from the dead by God, and now sits on God's right hand; intercedes 
with God, and in his Gospel owns his Father to be his and our only 
true God. This is sad accommodation. Though the words never signify 
more than a degree of likeness in the Greek classics, yet our 
headstrong orthodox monks will have them to mean strict equality; 
and Alexander the Great and Alexander the Coppersmith are the same 
Being. Amazing! Gentlemen; here is but One Ball, and out of itself 
you shall see this one ball send forth two other balls, big as it, 
and yet not lose one atom of its weight and grandeur. Hocus pocus, 
Reverendissimi spectatores, the One is Three.

And now, Gentlemen, be pleased to observe the miracle reversed. 
Pilluli pilluli, congregate, Presto presto, unite: observate, 
Signori Dottissimi, the Three are One. Such is the hocus pocus the 
monks have made of their Trinity.

*Note: Olymp. 61. I. Selden's Comment on the Arundel Marble.
189. See Memoirs of Several Ladies of Great Britain, 1755, 8vo.
190. Cleanthes was a native of Assus in Lysia, in Asia Minor, and so 
very poor, when he came to Athens to study, that, for his support, 
he wrought at nights in drawing water for the gardens, and in 
grinding behind the mill. He attended the lectures of Zeno, 
succeeded him in his school, and grew into very high esteem with the 
Athenians. He lived to ninety-nine, but the year he died we know 
not. His master Zeno died 342 years before Christ, and had conversed 
with Socrates and Plato.

The ancient academics were Plato, the disciple of Socrates; 
Speucippus, Zenocrates, Polemo, Crates, and Crantor; and from 
Crates, the fifth academic, sprung the old stoics, to wit, Crates, 
Zeno, Cleanthes, Chrysippus, and Diogenes the Babylonian; not he 
that was surly and proud. Cicero in his works often mentions this 
Babylonian, the stoic. We find in the Roman history, that he was 
living in the year of Rome 599, that is, 155 years before Christ; 
but when he died we know not. These gentlemen of the two old schools 
were to be sure great philosophers, excellent men; but then, to be 
strictly impartial, we must own, that all they knew in relation to 
the will of God, and a kingdom to come, was but poor moral learning, 
in respect to what is written in the New Testament for our 
instruction, if we will lay aside our fancies and systems, and let 
reason explain revelation. The Christian religion is really more for 
the glory of God, and the good of mankind, than reason, without 
inspiration, has been able to teach. Christianity, without the 
additions and supplements of monks, is not only above all just 
exception, but preferable to any other scheme.
191. Luctus: Distress or suffering. (TN)
192. Incide: to dissolve or loosen mucus, etc. (TN) 
193. In acidis posita est omni curatio: "In acid things are all 
cures"(TN)
194. Testacea: shells, or other calcareous substances. (TN)
195. Alexipharmics: Antidotes to poisons. (TN)
196. Indoles: Inherent qualities. (TN)
197. Vesicatories: Substances which raise blisters when applied to 
the skin. (TN)
198. Perspiratory emunctories: Sweat and sebaceous glands.
199. Incendium: A fierce burning fire. (TN)
200. Crassamentum: Coagulated blood. (TN)
201. Colluctation: A conflict or struggle (TN)
202. Despume: To clear off scum or froth. (TN)
203. Subsultus: Twitching. (TN)
204. Rad. Ipecacuanha: Root of the plant Carapichea ipecacuanha, 
used as an emetic and expectorant. (TN)
205. Bole: A kind of absorbent clay used as an antidote to poisons. 
(TN)
206. conserva lujulae: Preserve of wood-sorrel (Oxalis); ex sem. fr. 
cum amygd. in aq. Hordei: of the seeds with almonds in barley 
water.(TN)
207. Radicated: Firmly rooted.(TN)
208. This article relating to the encroachments of the clergy, was 
not found among Miss Spence's papers, but is inserted here as in a 
proper place.
209. Ordinary: The bishop of the diocese. (TN)
210. Discourse of Laws, pp. 1, 66, and New Abridgement of the Law, 
p. 398.
211. New Abridgement of the Law, p. 398.
212. Coction: Purification by heating.(TN)
213. Affirmo sanctissime, &c.: "I declare most devoutly, that there 
is nothing better, nothing safer, nothing more effective, for 
grinding in the guts, that I have ever seen, than antimony simply 
powdered and steeped in good strong white wine. Taken at dawn in the 
smallest quantity, twenty or thirty drops, it causes profuse 
vomiting, and also a very therapeutic sweating. This medicine is 
easily prepared, but very powerful." (TN)
214. Aqua fortis: Nitric acid. Aqua regia: A mixture of nitric and 
hydrochloric acids. (TN)
215. Scoriæ: Slag or dross produced in metal-refining.
216. Caliginosa nocte premit deus: "God hides it in darkest night." 
Horace, Odes Bk. 3. 29. l. 30.
217. These lines from the Antiquities of Buissard, are a real 
inscription on a tomb in Italy, which this antiquary found in his 
travels, and copied it as a curiosity to the world. Homonœa was a 
great beauty at the court of the Emperor Honorius, and married to 
Atimetus, a courtier and favourite, who preferred her to the most 
illustrious of ladies of that time, on account of her extraordinary 
charms, and uncommon perfections; but she did not long enjoy the 
honour and happiness she was married into. Before she was twenty, 
death snatched her away, in the year of the reign of Honorius, A. D. 
401, and the following beautiful epitaph was cut on her monument, 
and remains to this day; I place it here for the entertainment of my 
readers, and likewise La Fontaine's elegant translation of it.

HOMONŒA'S EPITAPH.
Si pensare animas sinerent crudelia fata,
Et posset redimi morte aliena salus
Quantulacunque meæ debentur tempora vitae
Pensarem pro te, cara Homomea, libens.
At nunc quod possum, fugiam lucemque deosque,
Ut te matura per stuga morte sequar.

(Atimetus the husband, is the speaker of these six lines.)

Parce tuam conjux fletu quassare juventam,
Fataque merendo sollicitare mea.
Nil prosunt lacrumas, nec possunt fata moveri.
Viximus; hic omnes exitus unus habet.
Parce, ita non unquam similem experiare dolorem.
Et faveant votis numina cuncta tuis!
Quodque mihi eripuit mors immatura juventæ,
Hoc tibi victuro proroget ulterius.

(Homonœa is supposed to speak these eight lines, to her husband; and 
then relates her case to the traveller, who is passing by.)

Tu qui secura procedis mente parumper
Siste gradum quæso, verbaque pauca lege.
Illa ego quæ claris fueram prælata puellis,
Hoc Homonœa brevi condita sum tumulo,
Cui formam paphia, et charites, tribuere decorem,
Quam Pallus cunctis artibus eruduit
Nondum bis denos ætas compleverat annos,
Injecere manus invida fata mihi.
Nec pro me queror; hoc morte mihi est tristius ipsa,
Mœror Atimeti conjugis ille mihi.
Sit tibi terra levis, mulier dignissima vita
Quæque tuis olim perfruerere bonis.

(These two lines may be the words of the Public, or of whoever 
erected the monument to the memory of Homonœa.)

Now see how finely La Fontaine has done this inscription into verse.

Si l'on pouvoit donner ses jours pour ceux d'un autre
Et que par cet échange on contentat le sort,
Quels que soint les momens qui me restent encore
Mon ame, avec plaisir, racheteroit la votre.
Mais le destin l'ayant autrement arreté,
Je ne sçaurois qui fuir les dieux et la clarté,
Pour vous suivre aux enfers dune mort avancée.
Quittez, O chère epoux, cette triste pensée,
Vous alterez en vain les plus beaux de vos ans:
Cessez de fatiguer par de cris impuissans,
La parque et le destin, deïtez inflexibles.
Mettez fin a des pleurs qui ne le touchent point;
Je ne suis plus: tout tent a ce supreme poinct.
Ainsi nul accident, par des coups si sensibles
Ne vienne a l'avenir traverser vos plaisirs!
Ainsi l'Olimpe entier s'accorde a vos desirs!
Veüille enfin atropos, an tours de vôtre vie
Ajouter l'etenduë a la mienne ravire!
Et toy, passant tranquille, apprens quels sont nos maux,
Daigne icy d'arréter un moment a les lire,
Celle qui preferée aux partis les plus hauts,
Sur le cœur d'Atimete, acquir un doux empire;
Qui tenoit de Venus la beauté de ses traits,
De Pallas son sçavoir, des graces ses attraits,
Gist sous ce peu d'espace en la tombe enserrée,
Vingt soleils n'avoient pas ma carriere eclaires,
Le sort jetta sur mois ses envieuses mains:
C'est Atimete seul qui fait que je m'en plains,
Ma mort m'afflige moins que sa douleur amere.
O femme, que la terre à tes os soit legère?
Femme digne de vivre; et bientôt pusses tu
Recommencer de voir les traits de la lumieres,
Et recouvrer le bien que ton ceur a perdu.

Or thus in prose.

S'il suffisoit aux destins qu'on donat sa vie pour celle d'un autre, 
et qu'il fût possible de racheter ainsi ce que l'on ayme, quelque 
soit le nombre d'annees que les parques m'ont accorde, je le 
donnerois avec plaisir pour vous tirer de tombeau, ma chère Homonée; 
mais cela ne se pouvant, ce que je puis faire est de fuïr le jour et 
la presence de dieux, pour aller bientot vous suivre le long du 
Styx.

O mon chere epoux, cessez de vous affiiger; ne corrompez plus le 
fleurs de vos ans; ne fatiguez plus ma destinée par de plaintes 
continuelles: toutes les larmes sont icy vaines; on ne sauroit 
émouvoir la parque: me voila morte, chacun arrive a ce terme la. 
Cessez done encore un fois: ainsi puissiez-vous ne sentir jamais une 
semblahle douleur! Ainsi tous les dieux soient favorable a vos 
souhaits! Et veüille la parque ajoûter a votre vie ce qu'elle a ravi 
a la mienne.

Et toy qui passes tranquillement, arrete icy je te prie un moment ou 
deux, afin de lire ce peu de mots.

Moy, cette Homonée que preferra Atimete a de filles considerables; 
moy a qui Venus donna la beauté, les graces et les agrémens; que 
Pallas enfin avoit instruite dans tous les arts, me voila icy 
renfermée dans un monument de peu d'espace. Je n'avois pas encore 
vingt ans quand le mort jetta ses mains envieuses sur ma personne. 
Ce n'est pas pour moy que je m'en plains, c'est pour mon mari, de 
qui la douleur m'est plus difficiic supporter que ma propre mort.
Que la terre to soit legere, O épouse digne de retourner a la vie, 
et de recouvrer un jour que to a perdu!

The legend on the monument of Homonœa, translated into English.

Atimetus.

If it was allowed to lay down one's life for another, and possible 
by such means, to save what we loved from the grave, whatever length 
of days was allotted me, I would with pleasure offer up my life, to 
get my Homonœa from the tomb; but as this cannot be done, what is in 
my power I will do, fly from the light of heaven, and follow you to 
the realms of lasting night.

Homonœa.

My dearest Atimetus, cease to torment your unhappy mind, nor let 
grief thus feed on your youth, and make life bitterness itself. I am 
gone in the way appointed for all the mortal race: all must be 
numbered with the dead. And since fate is inexorable, and tears are 
in vain, weep not for me, once more I conjure you. But may you be 
ever happy, may Providence preserve you, and add to your life those 
years which have been taken from mine.

The person who erected the monument to the memory of Homonœa.

Stop, traveller, for a few minutes, and ponder on these lines.

Here lies Homonœa, whom Atimitus preferred to the greatest and most 
illustrious women of his time. She had the form of Venus, the charms 
of the Graces; and an understanding and sensibility, which 
demonstrated that wisdom had given to an angel's form, a mind more 
lovely. Before she was twenty, she was dissolved. And as she had 
practised righteousness, by carrying it well to those about her, and 
to all that were specially related, she parted with them, as she had 
lived with them, in justice and charity, in modesty and submission, 
in thankfulness and peace. Filled with divine thoughts, inured to 
contemplate the perfections of God, and to acknowledge his 
providence in all events, she died with the humblest resignation to 
the divine will, and was only troubled that she left her husband a 
mourner. Excellent Homonœa.

May the earth lie light upon thee, and in the morning of the 
resurrection, may you awake again to life, and rise to that 
immortality and glory, which God, the righteous Judge, will give to 
true worth and dignity; as rewards to a life adorned with all 
virtues and excellencies, the dikaiomata, that is, the righteous 
acts of the Saints.
218. Edmund Curll: He was a real person and figured prominently in 
Pope's Dunciad. See Wikipedia article 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edmund_Curll for details of his 
disgraceful but highly successful career.(TN)
219. Baker-kneed: Knock-kneed; this was often regarded as a sign of 
effeminacy. (TN)
220. The Irish gentleman: Again, a real person. His name was Cotter 
and he was hanged in 1719. (TN)
221. We can do all things through Christ who strengthens us: 
Philippians ch. 4. v. 13. (TN)
222. Simplex munditis: "Simple Elegance." The name of a poem by Ben 
Johnson, which includes the lines:
Give me a look, give me a face
That makes simplicity a grace;
Robes loosely flowing, hair as free:
Such sweet neglect more taketh me
Than all th' adulteries of art;
They strike mine eyes, but not my heart.
(TN)
223. linea alba: The umbilical vein (TN)
224. SCOTT'S CEBES: As the Table of Cebes does best in prose, and 
Jeremy Collier the Nonjuror's translation of this fine mythological 
picture is not good, the reader will find another version of Cebes' 
Table, as an appendix at the end of this volume. I made it at the 
request of a young lady, who did not like Collier's version. The 
fine picture in his English, looks more like a work in the cant 
language of L'Estrange, or Tom Brown, than the ancient and charming 
painting of Cebes the Theban philosopher. It is fitter to make the 
learned men of a beer-house laugh, than to delight and improve 
people of breeding and understanding.
(TN—Cebes was an ancient Greek philosopher. His Table (or Tablet), 
an explanation of an allegorical depiction of human life, was 
translated into English verse by Thomas Scott in 1754.)
225. In Claude's reply to Arnaud, the French papist, we are told it 
was the humour of the Prince of Condée, to have a man of wood on 
horseback, dressed like a field-officer, with a lifted broad sword 
in its hand; which figure was fastened in the great saddle, and the 
horse it was on always kept by the great Condé's side, when he 
travelled or engaged in the bloody field. Fearless the man of wood 
appeared in many a well-fought day; but as they pursued the enemy 
one afternoon through a forest, in riding hard, a bough knocked off 
the wooden warrior's head; yet still he galloped on after flying 
foes, to the amazement of the enemy, who saw a hero pursuing without 
a head. Claude applies this image to popery.
226. Then Jove omnipotent &c.: Hesiod, The Theogony, l. 690 ff., Tr. 
William Broome.(TN)
227. The case was this: As I was returning one summer's evening from 
Tallaght hills, where I had been to see a young lady, mentioned in 
the beginning of my first volume, I saw in a deep glen before me two 
men engaged; a black of an enormous size, who fought with one of 
those large broadswords which they call in Ireland, an Andrew 
Ferraro; and a little thin man with a drawn rapier. The white man I 
perceived was no match for the black, and must have perished very 
soon, as he had received several wounds, if I had not hastened up to 
his relief. I knew him to be my acquaintance, young FITZGIBBONS, my 
neighbour in the same square of the college that I lived in; and 
immediately drawing an excellent Spanish tuck I always wore, took 
the Moor to myself, FITZGIBBONS not being able to stand any longer, 
and a glorious battle ensued. As I was a master at the small sword 
in those days, I had the advantage of the black by my weapon, as the 
broad sword is but a poor defence against a rapier, and gave him 
three wounds for every slight one I received: but at last he cut me 
quite through the left collar-bone, and in return, I was in his vast 
body a moment after. This dropped the robber, who had been a 
trumpeter to a regiment of horse; and FITZGIBBONS and I were 
brought, by some people passing that way, to his father's house at 
Dolphin's Barn, a village about a mile from the spot where this 
affair happened. A surgeon was sent for, and we recovered in a few 
weeks' time; but my collar-bone was much more troublesome to me, 
than the wounds FITZGIBBONS had were to him, though he lost much 
more blood. This was the ground of the obligation the doctor 
mentioned, in his conversation with me.
228. When Vesalius began to dissect human bodies, he was considered 
by the people as an impious cruel man, and before he could practice 
publicly, was obliged to get a decision in his favour from the 
Salamanca divines. "C'est ce qui engage Charles V. de faire une 
consultation aux theologiens de Salamanque, pour savoir si en 
conscience on pouvoit dissequer un corps humain, pour en connoitre 
la structure. [It was this which moved Charles V. to consult with 
the theologians of Salamaca, to know if one could in conscience 
dissect a human cadaver, to learn its structure]" Memoirs de 
Niceron. They would not let him settle in France, but the republic 
of Venice gave him a professor's chair at Padua, where he dissected 
publicly, and taught anatomy seven years. He was but eighteen, when 
he published his famous book, La Fabrigue du Corps Humain, which was 
the admiration of all men of science; and a little after, he made a 
present of the first skeleton the world ever saw, to the university 
of Basle; where it is still to be seen. This great man, Andrew 
Vesal, was born the last of April, 1512; and in the 58th year of his 
age, October 15, 1564, he was shipwrecked on the isle of Zante, and 
in the deserts there was famished to death. His body was found by a 
goldsmith of his acquaintance, who happened to land there not long 
after, and by this man buried. Vesal's works were published by 
Herman Boerhaave, in two volumes, folio, in 1725. Every physician 
ought to have them.
229. Omnibus in terris &c.: Juvenal, Satires, X, l. 1-6
"In all the lands that stretch from Cadiz to the Ganges and the 
Dawn,
There are few who, free of a cloud of errors, can discern true good
From a host of opposites. What indeed do we wish for or fear that is
Rational? How often is what we conceive so far from wrong-headed
That we don’t regret both the effort, and the fulfilment of our 
desire?" Tr. A.S. Kline (TN)
230. The Moriscos were expelled Spain, in the year 1492; the 
inquisition was erected four years after, and the doings at Thorn, 
by which the quantity of blood formerly spilt on the ground by ever-
cursed popery was increased, in the year 1721.
231. Le Diable a quatre: "The Devil to pay", a card game. (TN)
232. Bear me, &c.: from On the Seat of War in Flanders by William 
Broome (1689-1745) (TN)
233. Cunnus teterrima belli Causa: "A cunt is the most shameful 
cause of war" Horace, Satires I. 3. l. 106-7. (TN)
234. Notwithstanding all the fine learning of Dr. Law, I think he is 
mistaken in many of his notions, and especially in his Notes on 
Archbishop King's Origin of Evil; as I intend to show in my Notes 
aforementioned. His Tritheism likewise requires a few 
animadversions; which I shall humbly offer with plainness, fairness, 
and freedom.
235. Dr. Sherlock, bishop of London died at Fulham, after a long and 
lingering illness, Saturday, July 18, 1761, three months after the 
great and excellent bishop Hoadley, who departed this life at 
Chelsea, April 20, 1761. Sherlock and Hoadley never agreed; and 
which of them was right I attempt to show in my Notes on Men and 
Things and Books. Which will be published as soon as possible. Why I 
think Hoadley's Sermons far preferable to Sherlock's, vastly 
beautiful though some things are in the Discourses of the latter; 
and that my Lord of Winchester's Plain Account of the Supper is a 
most rational and fine performance; as gold to earth in respect of 
all that has been written against this book. Why, I say, all 
Hoadley's Tracts are matchless and invulnerable, and that he was 
victor in the Bangorian controversy, the Reader will find in many 
considerations on these subjects in the book called Notes, &c. 
aforementioned.
236. It is a question with some, if this book was not written by the 
Doctor's visionary daughter, or by her and the Rev. Athanasian 
bigot, her brother. But as I knew the Doctor after he was a little 
cracked with imaginary religion, and have heard him talk as in this 
book, I am positive it is his.
237. William Law, the father of our Methodists, and the disciple of 
Jacob Behmen the theosopher, died at King's Cliff near Nottingham, 
April 13, 1761, seven days before bishop Hoadley, against whom he 
was a bitter writer in the Bangorian controversy. I knew this famous 
visionary very well, and shall remark largely on his writings in my 
Notes relating to Men and Things and Books.

Law was the most amazing compound I have ever seen. He was a man of 
sense, a fine writer, and a fine gentleman; and yet the wildest 
enthusiast that ever appeared among men. His temper was charming, 
sweet, and delightful; and his manners quite primitive and 
uncommonly pious: he was all charity and goodness, and so soft and 
gentle in conversation, that I have thought myself in company with 
one of the men of the first church at Jerusalem while with him. He 
had likewise the justest notions of Christian temper and practice, 
and recommended them in so insinuating a manner, that even a rake 
would hear him with pleasure. I have not seen any like him among the 
sons of men in these particulars. It was wrong to put him in the 
Dunciad, and call him one Law, as Pope does. He was really a very 
extraordinary man; and to his honour be it remembered, that he had 
the great concern of human life at heart, took much pains in the 
pulpit, and from the press, witness his two fine books On a Devout 
Life; to make men fear God and keep his commandments. He was a good 
man indeed.

But what strange books did he write! His Appeal to the Deists, His 
Spirit of Prayer and Love, his Earnest and Serious Answer to Trapp; 
his Notes and Illustrations on Behmen; his Replies to Hoadley; and, 
what is stranger still, his abuse of bishop Hoadley, in his Appeal I 
have mentioned.

Here, had I room, I would relate a very curious conversation that 
passed between Dr. Theophilus Bolton, archbishop of Cashel in 
Ireland, a most excellent, most sensible, and most learned man, and 
me, on the third night's sale of archbishop King's library in 
Dublin, in relation to Mr Law. It happened on his Lordship's buying 
Jacob Behmen's Works for a pound, and then asking me who stood by 
him, if I had read them, and could enable him to understand them? 
But this I must place in my Notes aforementioned.
238. The Greek Words which Collier renders town-manufacture, are 
????????? ??????? [politikon anathema]
239. And what he calls outlandish, is ????? [xenos]
240. A strange significant rate: The Greek is, ????????? ????? ??? 
????????. [dielegeto polla kai spoudaia]
241. Wise, virtuous, and blessed: ?????? ???????? ??? ?????????? 
[Esesthe phronimoi kai eudaimones]
242. Abandoned, blind, and miserable: ???????, ??? ?????????????, 
??? ??????, ??? ???????. [aphrones, kai kaikodaimones, kai pikroi, 
kai amatheis]
243. The Sphinx: This monster, who lived near Thebes, was said to be 
the daughter of Typhon and Echidna, and had a head and face like a 
girl, wings like a bird, and in the rest like a dog.  
244. A frightful lean man: This man, Collier calls, an ill-looking 
skeleton of a fellow, with scarce a tatter to his limbs. Cant! The 
Greek is, ??? ???????? ??????, ??? ?????? [tis duseidos leptos, kai 
gumnos]
245. The three enclosures in Cebes, allude to the division of human 
life into the sensual, the studious, and the virtuous.
246. They get her sovereign remedy: Collier translates it,—they 
enter into a course of physic. The Greek is, ??? ????? ??? 
?????????? ?????? ??????[kai piozi pen kathartikon dounmon touton]. 
And what Collier a little before translates, 'She opens a vein, and 
gives them a glass of her constitution' when they have taken the 
stirrup cup, brimmers: the lasses frisk about : salute with a deal 
of welcome, and then lug them off, some to ruin, and some to the 
gallows. All this, and much more night-cellar stuff, the Theban 
philosopher had not an idea of, as any one may see who can turn to 
the Greek. How Collier learned such guard-phrases, and why he used 
them, seemed for some time very strange to me, till I was informed 
by one who knew this divine well, that in the days of his youth, he 
kept very low company, and was known at several night-houses. In 
that period of his life, he translated Cebes.
247. Protended: Stretched out (TN).
248. In this lightsome field: ???????????? ??? ???? ????? 
????????????? [leimonoeides kai photi pollo katalampamnomeno]
249. An expressive type of certainty: ??????????? ?? ????????, 
[kazestekuia to prosopon] constanti vultu or constans vultum. 
250. I beseech you, brethren, &c.: Romans, 12:6. 
251. Before the thief, &c.: The Latin of these two lines is Cantabit 
vacuus coram latrone viator, which Dryden translates thus:

The beggar sings, ev'n when he sees the place
Beset with thieves, and never mends his pace.

Shadwell, who was Poet Laureate in King William's time, does it thus 
:

While the poor man, void of all precious things,
In company of thieves, jogs on and sings.
252. Could he, &c.: Juvenal here means Democritus.
253. Fastening petitions &c.:The Latin of these two lines is — 
Propter quæ fas est genua incerare deorum.
Which Dryden does not translate at all. His lines are —
He laughs at all the vulgar cares and fears:
At their vain triumphs, and their vainer tears:
An equal temper in his mind he found.
When Fortune flatter'd him, and when she frown'd:
'Tis plain from hence that what our vows request.
Are hurtful things, or useless at the best.
254. Dryden's translation of this passage is thus:
Sejanus, almost first of Roman names,
The great Sejanus, crackles in the flames:
Form'd in the forge, the pliant brass is laid
On anvils. And of head and limbs are made,
Pans, cans, and piss-pots, a whole kitchen trade.
The Latin is:
Jam strident ignes, jam follibus atque caminis
Ardet adoratum populo caput, et crepat ingens
Sejanus. Deinde ex facie toto orbe secunda
Fiunt urceoli, pelves, sartago, patellae.
255. Sejanus, the vile minister of Tiberius, was executed by order 
of the Emperor, A. D. 31, and to prevent his suspecting any such 
thing, and providing against the calamity, which the favourite might 
easily have done, as he commanded the Praetorians, and had all power 
given him, his master named him his colleague in the consulship; 
which of all things Sejanus most desired, and thought the highest 
mark of his sovereign's affection. So true it is that we know not 
what we wish for.
256. And made the world obey his beck: Julius Cæsar, who acquired 
the sovereign sway by art and slaughter, and when a tyrant, fell by 
his own desires.
257. Jobbernowl: A fool. (TN)
258. Much more than virtue does inflame, &c.: The Latin of this 
passage, which is truly beautiful, is:

Et laudis titulique Cupido
Hæsuri saxis cinerum custodibus : ad quæ
Discutienda valent sterilis mala robora ficus:
Quandoquidem data sunt ipsis quoque fata sepulchris.
Which Dryden renders in the following manner:
This avarice of praise in times to come,
Those long inscriptions crowded on the tomb,
Should some wild fig-tree take her native bent,
And heave below the gaudy monument,
Would crack the marble titles, and disperse
The characters of all the lying verse.
For sepulchres themselves must crumbling fall
In time's abyss, the common grave of all.
259. Saburra: The greatest street in Rome.
260. Go, madman, &c.: The Latin is:
I demens currepur Alpes.
Ut pueris placeas, et declamatio fias.
Dryden has given it thus:
Go, climb the rugged Alps, ambitious fool,
To please the boys, and be a theme at school.

