THE REAL STORY OF JOHN CARTERET PILKINGTON
Written by Himself
Introduction

John Carteret Pilkington was the youngest son of Lætitia Pilkington 
the poet, memoirist and friend of Jonathan Swift, whose memoirs are 
also on this site. After his father had cast her off, young John was 
so ill-treated that he decided to run away from home. This memoir is 
the story of some of his subsequent adventures. He alternated between 
being taken up by wealthy patrons, and being dropped by them and left 
to shift for himself.  They are well-written with a very ingenuous 
honesty – he professes himself at a loss to understand why his 
company seemed to pall after a while with a patron, and his 
adventures with the inventor of musical instruments, with the 
Jacobite agents, and on the stage are funnier to us than they were to 
him.

Also appended to the book are a number of letters between his mother 
and Lord Kingscourt, of which the account of her meeting with John 
Wesley is the most interesting. It seems he was in private a much 
less austere personality than he showed in public to his followers. 


Bibliographic Note
 
The True Story of John Carteret Pilkington, Written by Himself was 
first published by subscription in 1760. A second edition appeared 
in 1762.  This Ex-Classics edition is taken from a facsimile of the 
first edition. Spelling and capitalisation have been modernised, and 
names abbreviated with dashes have been filled in as far as we have 
been able to find out.


TITLE PAGE.
Of the First Edition

THE REAL STORY
OF
JOHN CARTERET PILKINGTON
Written by HIMSELF.
=================================
All on the sea of life, some calms have seen,
Whatever bursting tempests raged between;
But I have still by adverse winds been tossed,
And always shipwrecked e'er I reached the coast.
==================================

LONDON: Printed in the YEAR MDCCLX.



DEDICATION.
To The Right Honourable Georgina, Caroline, Countess Of Cowper.

MADAM,

AS the following pages contain an account of my life, I know not to whom
I can with more propriety inscribe them, than to Lady Cowper; whose
goodness, I am proud to acknowledge, has been the preserver of it.
Publicly to confess we have received favours from illustrious personages,
is a public innuendo that they know something of us; thus, Madam, we have
an opportunity to show our pride and gratitude at the same time.

I flatter myself, Madam, that no part of a book, thus honoured with the
sanction of your Ladyship's name, will occasion your being a penitent to
your own virtues, or regretting the good offices your humanity has led
you to do for a little family, whose greatest crime has been their
distresses; which, indeed to some minds, appear an accumulation of all
human faults.

Your Ladyship was kind enough, not only to befriend the writer, but to
pity the man; not only to subscribe to him as an author, but to
administer to his necessities: whether the world may praise or condemn
this conduct in your Ladyship, you have at least the consciousness of a
generous intention, and the prayers and praises of an unfeignedly
grateful heart. I have the honour to be,

MADAM,
Your Ladyship's
most obliged,
and most obedient,
humble servant,
JOHN CARTERET PILKINGTON.

St. James's-Park,
August 12, 1758.



PREFACE.
By the Author

CONSIDERING the number of grave, learned and divine authors, that become
so cheap a purchase at every stall, it might be a matter of wonder how a
book, of this size and price, could have made its way into the republic
of letters; or how a young man, with so small a share of merit, and so
much smaller degree of interest, could have obtained such a number of
noble adventurers to deposit half a guinea, for a work they had never
seen, and of which, from the title, they could have but little
conception; after  having, as themselves repeatedly assured me, been
considerable losers by subscribing to books, which never were even
written, much less intended for publication. If any, or perhaps the
greatest part of my benefactors, imagined that might be the case with me,
how amiable, how generous, how condescending was it in them, to
contribute to the support of a family, merely on a probability that the
son of Mrs. Pilkington might have some merit? This single circumstance
may clear the present age of imputations that have been thrown on some
former ones, that they "suffered these great geniuses to want, whose
writings are now the highest delights of retirement." My success has
occasioned a learned gentleman of my acquaintance, who is very
misanthropic in his disposition, to declare, that "if anything could
reconcile him to entertain a tolerable opinion of mankind, it would be
the notice and favour I have found amongst them."

The number of books daily published for instruction, by persons qualified
through great parts and study to bestow it, are, I hope, sufficient to
answer their upright intentions: 'tis a character I confess myself
unequal to in every respect; having as much occasion for it as most men;
therefore the reader is to expect nothing in the following pages but
entertainment. If I can give that in a rational and inoffensive manner,
so as to kill two winter afternoons, I see no reason any of my
subscribers will have to regret their purchase, as two Italian operas
would cost the same money, for which they have nothing afterwards to
show; whereas, after this has been read, the binding, gilding, and
lettering, will render it a pretty ornament to a library.

As I before mentioned, the infinite goodness of the nobility and gentry,
in contributing to this undertaking, with so great a hazard of having
nothing for their money, I hope my having fulfilled my engagements will
entitle me to this further indulgence; that no subscriber who has any
pity for the circumstances of the author, or who meant his subscription
as the relief of indigence, as well as the encouragement of literature,
will lend this book to any person whatsoever, who is capable to purchase
because that will be gratifying their curiosity at my expense.

I must likewise entreat that no nobleman, gentleman or lady, will form a
judgment of the production of my pen, from whatever accounts may be given
of this Work in the Monthly, Literary, or Critical Reviews. Every person
of taste and elegance must certainly be the best judge of what pleases
him, without taking the insignificant nod of a book-seller, or the
invidious grin of a ragged critic, for the model of their dislike or
approbation. I think this matter cannot be better closed than with a
quotation from Swift.

Till blockheads blame, and judges praise,
The poet cannot claim the bays;
On me when dunces are satiric,
I take it for a panegyric;
Hated by fools, and fools to hate,
Be that my motto, and my fate.

Writers who have had too much modesty, or perhaps too little money, to
pay a large sum for printing their own productions, have had recourse to
the learned for what they termed a subscription, or a deposit of so much
money, as might encourage an author to proceed, without being run into a
prison on the one hand, or becoming the dupe of a bookseller on the
other; dreadful alternative!—Mr. Pope very, happily succeeded, and some
others of less note, whose works are yet worth preserving.

A set of people (who watch every occasion to impose on the credulity of
mankind, and who are called schemers, but more properly sharpers)
observed this; and likewise, that an author seldom published more than a
title page, and a subscription receipt: they immediately set their
imaginations at work, to compile different titles for books never penned,
and to extract subscriptions from all the known encouragers of
literature.

Poor merit was unapprised of this villainous artifice, to sap the
foundations of her public credit; so that when she personally appeared,
with a modesty inseparable from herself, she was rejected with indignity.

Perhaps the author's modesty will be called in question, for the
inference he is about to draw; but as this Preface is intended for the
good of those who really mean to write, and publish what they propose, he
will stand the shock of censure.

His proposal was honoured with most of the names now on the list: he sent
it to a nobleman, distinguished as a judge and patron of the muses: the
nobleman immediately sent out a subscription; but recollecting how often
he had been cheated, sent his footman after the person who received it,
the length of a street, and obliged him to return the money, saying
withal, he would enquire further about it.

The author, mortified at being compelled to refund, sent the following
question to his Lordship directly.

Will he whose power a L——n inspired,
With every excellence on earth admired,
Cease with his bounty to refresh the earth;
Because her bosom gave a villain birth?
Or shall the patron of the muses train,
By honest industry be sued in vain,
Because some wretch to perfidy inclined,
Dared to deceive the friend of human kind?
His Lordship subscribed.



A LIST OF THE SUBSCRIBERS.

A

HER Grace the Duchess of Ancaster, 2 Books
The Right Hon. the Earl of Arran
The Right Hon. the Countess of Albemarle
Sir Richard Atkyns, Baronet
Mrs. Archer
Miss Archer
The Right Hon. James Agar, Esq.
Mr. Arthur Anthony Askew, Esq. M. D.
Michael Adolphus, Esq.
Mrs. Ashby

B

The Right Hon. the Countess of Brandon
The Right Hon. the Earl of Bath
The Right Hon. the Marquis of Blandford, 2 Books
The Right Hon. the Earl of Blessington, 2 Books
The Right Hon. Lord Berkley of Stratton, 2 Books
The Right Hon. Lord Blakeney, Books
The Right Hon. Lord Viscount Bateman
The Hon. General John Boscawen
The Hon. Lieutenant General Bland
The Hon. Captain Boyle
Lieutenant Charles Besson
The Right Hon. William Bristow, Esq.
Sir Walter Blacket, Baronet
Ballard Beckford, Esq.
Mr. John Brooks
Edward Beauwater, Esq.
Mr. Baldwin, Bookseller
Mrs. Bowes
Henry Bridgeman, Esq.
The Lady of the Right Han. Admiral Boscawen
Lady Bayley
John Brown, of the Neal, Esq.

C

The Right Rev. Doctor Herring, late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, 12
Books
His Grace the Duke of Cleveland
The Right Hon. the Earl of Cardigan
The Right Hon. the Earl of Clanricarde
The Right Hon. the Earl of Cork
The Right Hon. the Countess of Carlisle
The Right Hon. the Countess of Cowper
The Right Hon. Lady Ann Connolly
The Right Hon. Lord Charles Cavendish
The Right Hon. Lord Viscount Conyngham
The Right Hon. Lord Cadogan
The Hon. Lieut. General Conway
The Hon. General Cholmondley
The Right Hon. Lord Cahir
Sir Henry Cavendish, Baronet
Thomas Connolly, Esq.
The Hon. Miss Chudleigh
The Right Hon. Lord Viscount Charlemont
The Right Hon. Lady Lucy Clinton
The Right Hon. Lady Mary Coke
The Right Hon. Lady Jane Cook
Sir Thomas Chapman, Baronet
Thomas Cholmondley, Esq., 2 Books
John Coppinger, Esq.
Fish Coppinger, Esq.
Mr. The. Cibber
William Cartwright, Esq.
Sir Nathaniel Curzon, Bart.
Hon. Lady Dowager Curzon

D

His Grace the Duke of Dorset
His Grace the Duke of Devonshire, 2 Books
The Right Hon. Lord Duncannon
The Right Hon. Lord Dungarvan
The Right Hon. Sir Conyers D'Arcy.
The Hon. Miss De Courcy
Sir Francis Dashwood, Baronet
Sir Jacob Downing, Baronet
William Drake, Esq.
Arthur Dawson Esq.
Mr. Dodley, Bookseller, Pall-mall
Mr. Alderman Dunn, of Dublin
Mrs. Dalrymple
Peter Dalmie, Esq.
James Dawkins, Esq.
The Right Hon. The Countess of Denbigh.

E
Sir John Evelyn, Bart.
Sir Henry Echlin, Bart.
The Right Hon. Welbore Ellis, Esq.

F

The Right Hon. William Finch, Esq.
The Hon. Henry Finch, Esq.
Right Hon. Lord Farnham
The Right Hon. Henry Fox Esq.
The Right Hon. George Fox Lane, Esq.
Mr. George Faulkner, Bookseller, Dublin
Mrs. Fuller
The Hon. Lady Frederick
Mrs. Franks

G

The Right Hon. the Earl of Godolphin
The Right Hon. the Marchioness of Granby
The Right Hon. the Earl of Guildford
The Right Hon. Lady Elizabeth Germain
The Hon. James Grenville, Esq.
Sir Richard Grosvenor, Baronet
The Hon. General Guise
The Hon. Baptist Levison Gower, Esq.
Major-General Grey
Mr. Gunson
Mr. David Garrick.

H

The Right Hon. the Earl of Hertford
The Right Hon. the Earl of Holdernesse
The Right Hon. the Earl of Hillsborough
The Right Hon. the Earl of Halifax
The Hon. Lady Hervey
The Right Hon. Lady Howe
The Hon. Robert Herbert, Esq.
John Hall, Esq.
Mr. Nathaniel Hone, Enamel Portrait Painter, 3 Books
Sir Joseph Hankey, Knt. and Alderman, 2 Books
The Right Hon. the Earl of Huntingdon
Mrs. Huit
The Hon. General Howard

I

The Right Rev. Dr. Stone, Lord Primate of all Ireland
The Right Hon. Robert Jocelyn, late Lord Chancellor of Ireland
Sir William Irby, Baronet
The Hon. Colonel Jeffreys, 2 Books
St. John Jeffreys, Esq.
The Right Hon. the Countess of Ilchester
Stephen Theodore Janssen. Esq. Alderman of London
Hugh Valence Jones, Esq.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Jersey
The Right Hon. the Countess Jersey
The Hon. Lady Mary Jennings
Soame Jennings, Esq.
Mr. Michael Jackson

K

The Right Hon. Lord King
The Right Hon. Lady King
The Hon. Henry King, Esq.
The Hon. Peter King, Esq.
Anthony Keck, Esq.
Lieutenant Kendall

I

His Excellency Field Marshal General Lord Viscount Ligonier, Commander in
Chief of all his Majesty's Forces, 20 Books
His Grace the Duke of Leeds
Her Grace the Duchess of Leeds
Her Grace the Duchess Dowager of Leeds
The Right .Hon. the Countess of Leicester
The Right Hon. the Countess of Lincoln
The Right Hon. Sir George Lee
The Right Hon. Henry Bilson Legge, Esq.
The Right Hon. Lord Ludlow
The Right Hon. Lady Ludlow
Miss Lewis
Miss Legge
The Right Hon. Lord Lyttleton
Colonel Ligonier
The Right. Hon. Lord Luxborough

M

His Grace the late Duke of Marlborough, 10 Books
The Right Hon. Lord Chief Justice Mansfield, 2 Books
Her Grace the Duchess of Manchester
The Hon. Sir Edward Montagu, Knt. of the Bath, 10 Books
The Hon. Sir John Mordaunt, Knt. of the Bath
His Grace the Duke of Montrose
The Right Host. Lady M'Morres
Mrs. Montagu
Mrs. Maynell
The Right Hon. the Earl of Middlesex
Sir Richard Manningham, Bart. M. D., 2 Books
William Moorhead, Esq.
Arthur Murphy, Esq. 2 Books,
Mr. James M'Ardel
Sir Ralph Milbank, Bart.,
The Right Honourable Lord Mayo, Leonard Morse, Esq
The Rev. Mr. Mason
Edward Messenger, Gent.

N

Her Grace the Duchess of Newcastle
The Right Hon. the Earl of Northumberland
The Right Hon. the Countess of Northumberland
The Right Hon. Lord North
Thomas Newburgh, Esq.
Mrs. Martha Newburgh
The Right Hon. Lord Newnham

O

The Right Hon. the Earl of Oxford
The Right Hon. the Countess of Oxford
John Offley, Esq.
The Right Hon. The Earl of Orford, 2 Books
The Right Hon. Lord Olyphant

P

The Right Hon. the Earl of Plymouth
The Right Hon. the Earl of Pembroke
The Right Hon. the Countess of Pembroke
The Right Hon. Lady Caroline Peachy
The Right Hon. John Ponsonby, Esq.
Thomas Pelham, Esq.
Sir Lionel Pilkington, Baronet
Sir John Phillips, Baronet
George Pitt, Esq.
Mrs. P. Pitt
The Right Hon. Lord Viscount Powerscourt
The Lady of Roger Palmer, Esq., 2 Books
Edmund Pawlett, Esq.

Q

His Grace the Duke of Queensbury

R

Her Grace the Duchess of Roxborough
The. Right Hon Lord Viscount Romacey
The Right Hon. Richard Rigby, Esq.
The Hon. Admiral Rodney
John Robartes, Esq.
Mr. John Rich
S

The Right Hon. the Earl of Shaftesbury
The Right Hon. the late Countess Shaftesbury
The Right Hon. the Countess of Stratford
The Right Hon. Lord George Sackville
The Right Hon. Sir William Stanhope, Knt. of the Bath
The Hon. John Spencer, Esq.
Andrew Stone, Esq.
The Rev. Doctor Sharpe
John Shelly, Esq.
Peter Shaw, Esq. M. D. Physician to his Majesty
Sir George Saville, Baronet
Hon. Colonel Shutes

T

The Right Hon. the Earl of Thanet, 2 Books
The Hon. Thomas Townshend, Esq.
Alexander Thistlethwayte, Esq. F.R.S.
Lady Tynte
Mrs. Thistlethwayte
Miss Thistlethwayte
—— Thornhill, Esq.
Forster Tuffnell, Esq.
Robert Taylor, Esq. M. D.
Edward Turnour, Esq.
The Right Hon. Lord Villers

W

The Right Rev. the Lord Bishop of Winchester
The Right Hon. the Earl of Waldegrave, 2 Books
The Hon. Lady Warren
William Woodley, Esq.
William Whitehead, Esq. Poet-Laureate
George Waring, Esq. 2 Books
The Hon. Lewis Monson Watson Esq.
The Lady of General Webb, 2 Books
Richard Waring, Esq. M.D.



CHAPTER I.
My Ancestry and Birth—My Mother's departure

IT may possibly be apprehended, by such persons as are inclined to peruse
the following pages, that a writer, of my age, can scarce have seen
variety enough to form an entertaining volume: had it pleased providence
to have blessed my earlier days, with quiet and felicity, 'tis probable I
should now have as little to set forth as any other young man who had
lived the same number of years.

But though nothing I can advance, in relation to my adventures, deviates
much from the common road of things, or those occurrences which daily
happen, I have too sincere a respect for the illustrious patrons of my
labour, to presume to impose fictions on their superior understanding:—
Therefore however this undertaking may fall short in wit, elegance, of
superiority of fine, I am determined it shall be adorned with native
truth; which is allowed to surpass the flourishes of rhetoric, and
carries with it, like the Works of Nature, something that Art vainly
strives to imitate.

I am the youngest son now alive, which the Reverend Mr. Matthew
Pilkington had by his first wife, Mrs. Lætitia Pilkington, the daughter
of John Vanlewen, M. D. and niece to Sir John Meade, Baronet.

The writings of my mother, added to the candour and indulgence of her
readers, has procured her a place in the temple of fame; and my father's
poetical productions, though not received with so much applause, are yet
allowed to be pretty enough.

From a poetical father and mother, what inheritance could a second
brother hope, but a pen? An implement which, however dangerous, I am
compelled to use. As far as I have been capable to gather of my paternal
genealogy, my great grand-father was the younger son of a gentleman of
fortune in Yorkshire; who went over to Ireland, at time, when King
Charles the First had occasion to try the purses and loyalty of his
British subjects; and had for his services there, a handsome estate given
him in the county of Meath, which remains in that family to this day.

My grandfather Pilkington, being the youngest of twenty-one children, end
having a great mechanical genius, applied himself to the business of
watch-making; by which, and much honest industry, he became capable in
his lifetime of giving my father a liberal education; and at his death
bequeathed him a handsome estate.

My elder brother, being the first pledge of reciprocal love, was taken in
his infancy into the care of my father's parents; where, though he was
not brought up with delicacy, as to person or diet, the old man took care
to enrich his mind with the best tuition money could procure; the
benefits of which, with a grateful remembrance of that worthy parent, he
now enjoys.

A boy whom Dean Swift was to have stood godfather to, having died without
public baptism; the Dean, though no admirer of such business, was pleased
to promise to honour my christening with his presence, which promise he
did not fulfil.—I have been told that Lord C——t, now Earl of G——e, was
really one of my god-fathers, and that his Lordship substituted Dean
Delany, from whence I have derived the happiness of being called by his
name. But I apprehend that I have either been imposed on in that
relation, or that his Lordship has utterly forgot it; as I never could,
by any solicitations, prevail with him to subscribe to my writings.
[Note: Dean Delany, on reading this passage at Col. Nuburgh's in
manuscript, recollected it; and I have, since the death of my mother,
very happily experienced the advantages of his Lordship's choice, in a
representative on that occasion, as the Dean has more than fulfilled all
the promises he made at my baptism, by unlimited instances of his favour
and liberality to me.]

The method I took of introducing myself to that Nobleman, was I confess a
little too familiar for one of my humble condition, and juvenile years;—
but as I am determined herein to submit to the judgment of my superiors
as well as to self-conviction, I shall transcribe the lines, which I took
the freedom to address to his Lordship, some time after my arrival in
London.

To the Right Hon. the Earl of Granville

I HEAR, my Lord, from common fame,
You promised Three Things in my name,
The story most demands my credit,
Because Delany often said it,
And men of most profound sagacity,
Will answer for the Dean's veracity;
But be that matter as it may,
I'm called John Carteret at this day,
This name, my Lord, elates my pride,
More than all gifts I boast beside;
And should illustrious Granville smile
'Twould every recent ill beguile,
Saving: from famine death's grim agent,
My Lord,
Your Lordship's
Most Obedient,
J.C.P.

Now it may not be improper to observe that when I wrote the above, I was
not under the least apprehension of starving, but said so merely to make
his Lordship .merry at my expense. The consequence will forever caution
me against being humorous: with my superiors, as I am persuaded from the
instances of that Nobleman's munificence, still fresh in the memory of
many, that no .other stance could have withheld his Lordship's bounty
from me.—But, certain it was that I was christened;. and the acting
sponsors were Dr. Clayton, now Lord Bishop of Clogher, Dr. Delany, Mrs.
Barber, and, Mrs. Grierson: as none were present but poetical people,
they determined to make a fairy christening of it, and each to endow me
with the gifts they most eminently possessed.. The Dean representing the
Viceroy, gave power and eloquence; Mrs. Grierson, learning; Mrs. Barber,
poesy; and for my part, said the Bishop, "I'll endow him with good
fortune, 'tis the only gift I can boast," as his Lordship modestly
expressed himself.

My mother informed me, that when I was about three years old, my
godfather the Bishop requested my father, as his Lordship had no
children, to resign me entirely to him; who would undoubtedly have made
me as happy as a fine education and affluent condition could do; but my
father, to my misfortune, rejected this generous offer, to which amongst
other causes I may impute my present situation.

The first thing which impressed itself on my infant memory, was the
separation of my father and mother; a circumstance, in which my future
fortune was much more deeply interested, than I had then abilities to
conceive, not being more than six or seven years old.

As I had till this fatal juncture been bred with the utmost delicacy and
tenderness, my poor mother, having made it her chief and highest study,
to mingle instruction with delight, and by the most engaging methods, to
mould our tender minds for fine impressions, insomuch that we loved her
as a companion, and respected her as a parent; the sense I felt of our
separation, even at that age, is scarcely imaginable. What cause my
father had to suspect her virtue, or whether he had any or not, is best
known to heaven and his own conscience and far is it from my present
purpose to say anything which may draw a reflection on his name, or
disturb, a moment of his tranquillity; since I had much rather the world
would attribute my misfortunes to my own misconduct, than want of
humanity in him, whom as the author of my, being, I esteem with the most
dutiful reverence.

The morning after my mother's departure from his house, he called his
children before him, and in a most tender and pathetic manner, acquainted
us, of what he termed her misfortune; assuring us, that he would
nevertheless perform the strictest duty of a father to us, while our
behaviour merited his being such; but withal he remonstrated to us, on
the necessity we were under, to be particularly circumspect in our
conduct, as well to him as the rest of the world, in order to make the
matter entirely be forgotten.

We gave a settled attention to his words, but could not remain our tears
on so melancholy an occasion, especially as he informed us we were never
more to see her.

Sometime after her departure, she earnestly solicited my father, for one
last interview with her dear little ones; as she affectionately styled
us; but that favour, if I may call it such, was for the present denied to
her; upon which occasion she added four lines to her poem called Sorrow,
which, though am not fond of quotations, I ask pardon for reciting.

And since no more I boast a mother's name,
Nor in my children, can a portion claim,
The tender babes to thy protection take,
Nor punish for their hapless mother's sake.

Vide 1st vol. Mrs. Pilkington's Memoirs.

After this, either my father's heart relented, or he was by entreaties
prevailed on to let us visit her; the mutual joy that took place in our
souls at this indulgence, can only be conceived by the fondest of
children, and the most endearing of parents.

We continued the whole day with her, during which she would frequently
gather us in her arms, and folding us in the most passionate grief,
invoke the Almighty to be father and mother to us; and indeed so far her
prayers have been received, as the dangers from whence his holy hand
alone has delivered even me, have been infinite: nor let the young and
gay, into whose hands these writings fall, be offended at these serious
reflections; they will sometimes perhaps find me too volatile, but where
the praise is due, there let it be ascribed.

When night approached, being the defined moment of departure, my mother
would fain have detained me (her peculiar favourite) having intended, as
I since learned from her, to have brought me to London; but the servant
who attended us would by no means suffer it, so that however severe we
esteemed our fate, we were obliged to submit to it, and left my poor
mother in a flood of tears.

For some time after she left the kingdom, my father continued moderately
kind to us, and probably might still have been so, but that going on a
visit into the country, he met with Miss Sands, who is at present his
wife. This lady, without sense, beauty, fortune, or one amiable
accomplishment, found means so powerfully to engage his affections, that
he entirely neglected everything but the pursuit of her. Nay, for so much
enamoured was he with her very name, that it was carved on every tree in
his garden, and written with a diamond on every window in his house; and
very seldom had we a sight of him. I can't help thinking that one motive
of his attachment to this lady, was her being so diametrically a contrast
to the unfortunate object of his resentment; for if my mother was witty
and polite, she was hoggish and livid; if my mother was neat and cleanly,
the other was dirty and slovenly; if my mother was liberal and generous,
she was mean and mercenary; of which I could give demonstrable proofs,
but that it would break in upon the chain of my story; and will do as
well in its proper place.

I hope I shall be pardoned for saying, that I believe my father now
sincerely wished at any rate to get his encumbrances off his hands; and
as the present engrosser of his affections wanted none of her sex's
artifices, I am pretty certain that much of his coolness and distance to
us, proceeded from the councils and the insinuations of that Hyena.—My
father, I am told, has lately got a child by her, God forbid it should
partake of her disposition, or be used with so little tenderness, as
those which he has already gotten, and left the world to provide for (but
to my story.)

I was, while my grandfather lived, first kept at the writing school,
where I made but small progress; from whence, I was removed to the study
of Latin, under the tuition of the. Reverend Mr. Baldrick. I had not
attained to the classics before the good old man died, and with him my
farther advancement in literature for that time; as I was shortly after
judiciously removed to my father's kitchen, lest too much learning should
have made me mad; in which place it seems I was under the benign
influence of the footman, and maid servant, to finish my studies; being
kept a perpetual prisoner there, and otherwise treated, in a manner I
shall never repeat, and which I heartily wish to forget.

For my own part, I had at that time reflections much above my years,
having read every book which chance or providence threw in my way, and
digested them, in a manner not customary with children: I had naturally
great sprightliness and vivacity, an easy obliging disposition, a good
voice, and a tolerable person; with these endowments, it was no matter of
wonder, if I looked on my present situation with horror, being utterly
abstracted from what my mind most thirsted after, books, company and
improvement; an ambition to be amongst my superiors, seemed inherent to
me, and I might truly have said with. Horace.—Spernere vulgus.

I now grew solicitous to know what family and relations I had living;
judging I might have a greater probability of being welcome to some of
them, than desirable to my father.

An old coachman of my grand uncle, Brigadier Meade, came one evening to
visit my father's servants, and was as communicative on this head, as I
could possibly have wished; he told me the affinity I had with all the
Meade family, and several of the nobility and gentry, not material here
to name but what most engaged my attention in the course of his
narrative, was the account he gave me of my grand-uncle Doctor George
Vanlewen of Cork; who he said had no legitimate children, and was one of
the best-natured gentlemen existing; but his peculiar oddity makes
strangers frequently mistake him for morose and ill-natured, which
indeed, as much as his good-nature will permit him, he endeavours to
affect. He gave us some entertaining accounts of my uncle's disposition,
that may here serve as an illustration to the future character I shall
have occasion to give of him.

A very spruce dancing-master, and excellent swordsman, happened
accidentally to be at a gentleman's house, where the Doctor was sent for
to attend the lady in labour. The Doctor, who is homely in his person,
and plain in his apparel, when he entered a room where the gentleman of
the house and this person were, cried, "Zounds, Sir, what d'ye want with
these butterflies about you at such a time as this? Turn him out of
doors." The dancing-master, just arrived from Paris, imagined this
rencounter a little malapropos; and he neither knowing my uncle, nor the
occasion of his coming, told the gentleman of the house he understood no
such treatment, and would demand satisfaction from that sorry fellow,
whoever he was. My uncle, who had but passed into another room, overheard
him; and came out with a very serene countenance, to acquaint him, that
if he would wait but fifteen minutes, he would make any concession so
great a personage thought proper to require; returning immediately into
the room, he dispatched his business in half the time, and after having
brought the lady a son, came to fulfil his engagement. The whole thing
was so sudden and whimsical, that the gentleman of the house had not
presence of mind to interpose his good offices; or, perhaps, the
situation his wife was in might have engrossed all his attention: However
it was, the disputants went out together. The dancing master told my
uncle, he desired to meet him on the Mall the next morning at five
o'clock;—no, no, says the Doctor; I shan't then be out of bed, but, if
you please, I'll wait on you now. The antagonist finding him true blood,
offered many weighty reasons for postponing the combat, particularly his
being obliged to teach some ladies to dance. By G——d, says the Doctor,
I'll teach you to dance, and sing too, before we part, as sorry a fellow
as I appear. Upon this he drew his sword, and defied his enemy to do the
same; the second pass he wounded the dancing-master in the sword arm,
which possibly saved his guts; he dropped his weapon and asked for mercy,
which the doctor generously showed him; and drawing his sword very
carefully from the wound, he immediately pulled out a case of surgical
instruments, dressed his arm, and sent him home in a chair, recommending
it strenuously to him, not to be so hasty in his conclusions for the 
future. After these proofs of his skill in surgery and the sword, he paid
a visit to the lying-in lady, and found her as well as he could wish; but
pray Doctor, said the gentleman of the house, why did you leave us so
abruptly? Only to skewer a woodcock, replied the Doctor, very gravely,
which was all the information that could be obtained from him; it excited
the gentleman's curiosity to send to the dancing-master's lodgings, where
he was found very ill in bed; the Doctor, however, carefully attended
him, supplied him with all necessaries, and was so firm a friend to him
from that time, that his recommendations were the means of making the
dancing-master's fortune.

He went one morning. into a coffee-house in Cork, and it being cold,
stood with his back to the fire; a young officer came in, extremely fine
in his dress, and says to my uncle, stand farther off fellow;—yes, please
your honour, replied the Doctor, and moved considerably back;—farther yet
fellow, says the other; the Doctor kept retreating till he got to a
window; he opened it, and taking the young spark suddenly in his arms,
called to the company to know if he should throw the impertinent coxcomb
into the street;—the gentlemen knowing my uncle, and having heard what
passed, owned he deserved no better, but on account of his youth,
besought mercy for him.

My dear child, said the Doctor, never affront a man who is every way your
superior, because his inclination does not lead him to be so great a
jack-daw as yourself. After reciting these, and many instances of my
uncle's temper, he departed, leaving me fully resolved to embrace the
first favourable occasion to fly there for refuge.



CHAPTER II.
I Run away to my Uncle in Cork

My father was not only indifferent about my education or clothing, but a
little too severe; since, if anything disturbed his temper abroad, I was
sure of a flogging when he came home; and a rainy day was fatal to me;
being ever the fore-runner of chastisement, whether with or without a
cause. This might probably be done to humble my spirit, and fit me for
the hardships of a world I was entering into; and indeed it has had the
desired effect, for though I have fallen under various calamities since,
none have been half so dreadful to me as those I sustained at home; nay,
I am sure I must have died of a broken heart ere now, had I not so early
been inured to afflictions. To seek occasion to quit such treatment was
not difficult; and though I had never been in the country of Ireland, I
conceived a notion of travelling to Cork, being very sure, if once found
the road, I should pursue it till I obtained my wishes.

A gentleman came one afternoon to enquire for my father, for whom I
happened to open the street door; he gave me a shilling, which was, I
believe, the first I could ever call mine; with this sum I resolved,
before daybreak the next morning, to set out on my intended expedition,
and so little of this great world did I know, that I thought it quite
sufficient.

According to this plan I executed my scheme with all possible silence,
secrecy and success; but happened fortunately enough to take a wrong
road, that is, one that made my journey about thirty miles about.

Before I had one single reflection on my condition, agitated by the
pleasing hope of a better fate, I had measured twenty miles, fatigue and
hunger then very closely assailed me. I discovered at some distance
behind me, a lusty healthy-looking farmer on horse-back; probably he
perceived in my features and appearance, something above the vulgar, that
induced him to ask me where I was going to, I told him to Cork,—To Cork
child, says the man with astonishment—this is not the road, besides, 'tis
a journey you will never be equal to at this season, (it being near
Christmas) I told him I mattered no hardships, in contempt of which I
would prosecute my journey, though at the expense of my life.—You are
then, I suppose, well stocked with cash, said he, to refresh yourself by
the way. Yes, returned I, I have thirteen pence, which I think quite
enough: the honest fellow laughed heartily at my innocence, and as I
walked beside his horse, now took me up before him upon it.—His curiosity
to find out who I was, made him ask many questions: these I evaded very
carefully, left he should take a fancy to send me home. I told him my
father was a shoe-maker, who was gone to Cork, and that having no friends
in Dublin, I was going to him. Though he did not seem entirely to credit
this relation, he had good manners enough to desist any further
interrogations, till we arrived at his house, an homely, but a clean and
comfortable habitation, where the whole family came to meet us at the
door, and were overjoyed that the farmer had brought a guest with him. As
soon as they had furnished me with dry apparel, for it rained very hard,
they placed me near a large turf fire, then bathed my feet (which is
customary in Ireland) and after spread a table, abounding with milk,
butter, eggs, and all the rural delicacies that are the sweet rewards of
a virtuous industry.—When I reflect on the serene felicity met with in
minds never taught to aspire, I pity, from my soul, many of the rich and
great whom I have since fallen amongst: health, competence and
contentment they are generally strangers to: luxury destroys the first,
extravagance the second, and ambition the last.

That hospitality is the distinguishing characteristic of the people of
Ireland, has never yet been disputed; and the little instances of it
inserted here, may amount to a further demonstration.

After being liberally refreshed by my kind host, he waited on me to a bed
with one of his sons, where I slept, "wrapped up in measureless content,"
till daybreak. I was then called to know if I chose to rest myself a day
or two, or pursue my journey; when I made choice of the latter. The board
was again spread, and might justly be termed a Cornu Copiae, accompanied
with the most tender and sincere expressions of a hearty welcome.

The farmer then saddled his horse, and after an affectionate embrace from
every one of the family, took me before him, and convoyed me about seven
miles, and slipping a shilling into my hand, prayed to God to preserve
me, and send me more friends.

Encouraged by such unexpected liberality and kindness from perfect
strangers, I pushed on in great spirits; about noon I stopped at a little
house on the road to procure some food, as I had money to pay for it. The
best the cottage afforded was immediately produced, and to my great
surprise, the people, though seemingly in the most abject distress,
refused to accept the smallest gratification for what they gave me; but
on the contrary, loaded my pockets with provision, and attended me to the
door with ten thousand blessings.

In the afternoon I was overtaken by a footman, who had a led horse, and
who made me a tender of riding: I readily accepted the invitation, and
upon his requesting to know my name, and the purport of my journey,
ingenuously told the truth. He knew my family very well, and told me he
was a servant to Squire A——, who lived a few miles off; and that, though
it was out of my road, if I would venture along with him, he would
promise me good entertainment, and take care to put me ten miles forward
in the morning, if he could render me no other service, which yet he said
he hoped to do, as his master and mistress were patterns of good-nature,
and consequently would be pleased to help a young gentleman in my
circumstances.

About an hour after dark brought us to the Squire's house; the footman
brought me into a large hall without a fire, and, gave me into the care
of Peter Ludlow the coachman, whole name I gratefully remember, and of
whose uncommon kindness I never can say enough.—The footman with whom I
came, presently returned from the house, loaded with eatables of
different kinds, such as cold beef, ham and fowl; but fatigue had taken
away my appetite, which Peter observing with some regret, entreated me to
go to his house, and he would endeavour to get something more proper for
my refreshment. The footman, who esteemed me his guest, expressed his
unwillingness to part with me, till Peter reminded him of his having no
fire, and but indifferent bedding, which might occasion my death: at this
the poor fellow with a sigh agreed should go with Peter.

It was a bitter frosty night, and travelling, to which I had never been
inured, with my sitting down at the Squire's, without a fire, made my
limbs stiff, and my frame quite chilly. My host, in order to render his
cottage more agreeable on sight, than in idea, told me his house was a
beggar's but at one side the road,—that he had no food but potatoes, no
drink but water, no fire,—nor any bed but straw. Now Sir, said he, if
this fare will suit you, come on with me; if not, turn back to the
Squire's.—I told him I had observed something so pleasing in his manner
of receiving me, that under all those disadvantages I chose to accompany
him.—Soon after he knocked at his own door, and indeed his endeavour to
prepossess me with an indifferent opinion of his house had the defined
effect, in making me imagine it a paradise.—There was a large sprightly
turf fire, a clean, neat, handsome wife and daughter, who (when they
heard who I was) were as much overjoyed to receive me, as I could
possibly be at falling into such hands; they brought every article that
was necessary for my refreshment, and then put down a couple of fowls,
bacon and greens for supper. After treating me with a tenderness and
regard, which I had never experienced since the loss of my mother, they
put me into their own bed, where delicacy and softness would have
inclined a person to sleep, much less tired than I was.

Peter, who was obliged to attend his master early in the morning, left
strict orders that I should be well accommodated in his absence; and by
no means be permitted to depart, if I should express an inclination for
it,—indeed I was ill qualified so to do, either in purse or person, being
scarcely refreshed by my night's sleep, and possessed but of two
shillings.

My amiable and friendly hostess waked me early in the morning, to drink
some milk hot from the cow, and at ten called me up to breakfast on tea;
so that I question, had I been the Squire's guest, if my entertainment
had surpassed this. The lower sort of people in Ireland hold the name of
a gentleman in high veneration, and would be more subservient to a man of
family, without a shilling, than an upstart, possessed of ever so much.—
They are great genealogists, and can trace a man three or four
generations back; then tell you the different branches and
intermarriages, at which they are so extremely expert, that it is next to
an impossibility to impose on them.

The lower people here in England differ from them extremely in this, as
well as in most other points; there being no greater object of derision 
amongst them, than a person by any means assuming the character of a
gentleman, without a competency to support it in every degree; so that in
London, a cobbler's son in a lace coat, will have more deference paid to
him than the offspring of a nobleman, whose necessities are once made
known; which makes this proverb so frequent amongst them: "don't tell me
what I was, but what I am," with many others to the same purpose. I
cannot help saying with regret, that an outside has an effect on persons
of greater consequence, to whom it is so familiar:—this to me is
extremely surprising, because if merit consisted in velvet, lace or
embroidery, Monmouth-street, would be a good place to find it. (But to
proceed.)

By the time breakfast was over Peter returned, and informed me, that on
his having mentioned me to his master and mistress, they had expressed a
desire to see me; but, said he, it would be advisable to stay till
tomorrow, and in the meanwhile, let my wife make your linen and stockings
clean, that you may appear decently before them.

The next morning pretty soon, being quite spruce, Peter and myself set
out for the Squire's, whose lady, it seems, my grandfather, Doctor
Vanlewen, had attended as physician; this had raised some favourable
sentiments of me before I made my appearance; and, if I may judge from
the reception I found, the sight of me rather increased than diminished
them.

The Squire and his lady met me coming in, and the lady in a very affable
manner, declared she was proud to have one of the worthy doctor's family
in her house, to whom she owed (under God) her life. They made me stay
and dine with them, and afterwards told me, if I chose to reside there a
month or two, I was welcome; and they would, in the meantime, write to my
uncle in Cork, (to whom they understood I was going) to see if he would
receive me. These proposals I respectfully thanked them for, but did not
choose to comply with them. The reason was that I had rather stay with my
friend Peter, if I was to abide at all, as I could there be less upon the
reserve, and seemed to be perfectly deified at his house: at my departure
in the evening the lady gave me half a guinea, the gentleman a crown, and
what seemed more surprising, every servant in the house followed me, and
each gave me something according to their degrees; which, notwithstanding
all I could say in opposition to it, they compelled me to accept of.

I now thought myself as rich as Croesus, having never before been the
master of such a sum; so that I returned with Peter in great spirits.—
Peter, who was, without a compliment, one of the best men I had ever
known, was sincerely rejoiced to find that his representations of me were
attended with so happy an issue: I told him I could not but look upon him
as my benefactor upon the whole; but this he would by no means. suffer to
be told, and rather seemed to chide his fate, as not being capable to act
in my favour, suitable to the greatness of his sentiments.

In short he detained me a fortnight, during which no circumstance was
omitted that could be thought conducive to my health, contentment or
recreation; and when Peter found, that no solicitations could prevail on
me to continue longer with him, he desired his wife to make me a new
shirt, bought a pair of shoes and stockings at his own expense, and under
pretence of sewing my money in my fob, lest I should be robbed, conveyed
a small piece of gold into it, as I afterwards discovered; yet when my
little baggage was packed in a canvas wallet, made by Peter, and
everything in readiness for my departure, it was three days before I
could get away: Peter accompanied me about fifteen miles, leaving his
wife and daughter in tears, for our separation, and set me down at the
Royal Oak, ten miles from the city of Kilkenny, from whence there is a
fine turnpike road to Cork. Peter returned home with reluctance, after
enjoining me by the most solemn promises to write to him when I arrived
at my journey's end; and if my uncle should not receive me kindly, he
would come himself and bring me back to his house, where I should be
welcome while ever he had strength to earn a support for me.

I need not animadvert on the benevolence of soul Peter must have
possessed; as it must be obvious to every reader, that what he did for
me, was without the hope of any recompense, but such as he might obtain
from the hand of heaven; and though there passages may seem almost too
trivial to engross the reader's attention, yet I am satisfied there are
many who will be pleased to find such a character in such a sphere of
life; and that a man without the helps of education, may from pure nature
practice every Christian virtue in its most amiable perfection. The
modesty and delicacy with which poor Peter conferred his favours, may be
a just admonition to the rich, and the proud, who when they are prevailed
on to help their fellow creatures, do it in so cruelly contemptuous a
manner, as makes the receipt of it more painful, than the wretchedness it
is bestowed to relieve.—But to go on:—A gentleman in a coach and six
picked me up at the "Royal Oak," and in about two hours set me down in
the ancient city of Kilkenny, rendered venerable by the beautiful ruins
of the Duke of Ormond's palace, and several edifices and monuments of
great antiquity, that gave me infinite pleasure to survey, though I
confess I am not able to describe them.

The next day being Sunday, I rested from my labour; and as I had no
acquaintances here, employed myself in contemplating the devastations
made by time, war, and its revolutions on the perfection of sculpture and
architecture, in several old abbeys and monasteries I visited here: this
gave rise to a train of reflections, while the gloom of the weather and
stillness of the day inspired an aweful, yet pleasing melancholy; a
condition of mind I am much addicted to, and which none can truly value
who has not at some time tasted the sweets of it.

That Milton was peculiarly charmed with its effects, may be seen in many
passages of his writings, as well as his pathetically elegant Il
Penseroso.

Come pensive nun, devout and pure,
Sober, silent, and demure,
All in a robe of darkest grain,
Flowing with majestic train,
Come, but keep thy wonted state,
Musing step, and awful gait,
And looks commercing with the skies,
Thy rapt soul sitting in thy eyes:
There held in holy passion still,
Forget thy self to marble—till
With a sad leaden downward cast,
You fix them on the earth as fast.

Here's painting of the most masterly hand, every attitude described,
immediately salutes the view, so that one can never read this, without
beholding in his imagination a cloistered virgin. I don't know if I have
done the author justice in the quotation, as I do not possess his
writings, nor any other, book whatsoever—for which I hope some allowance
will be made by the literati. The sentiments that occurred to me in this
place, I have since endeavoured to express, and present them to those who
will take the trouble to read them, by the title of

Scattered Reflections, inscribed to the Right Honourable the Earl of
Shaftesbury.
THOSE aweful isles where sculptured marbles tell,
What storied chiefs within their precinct dwell;
Oft by a pensive contemplation drawn;
My footsteps visit at the evenings dawn,
Where sleeps perchance now senseless, of my moan,
One who in life had made my care his own;
Had raised my soul from this dejected state,
And softened all the rigour of my fate.

Short is the date of our existence here,
As the light rainbow in the lucid sphere;
Though sacred science all her stores expand,
Though wealth, and honour, flow from fortune's hand;
Though all the virtues in progression rise,
That form the learned, benevolent and wise;
Though great in title, though renowned in birth,
Our last retreat's to the oblivious earth.

Where's now the pomp, the Majesty that shone
A former century around the throne;
The shifted scene produces to our view,
Lords, statesmen, courtiers, and domestics new;
The florid Tongue, the Machiavellian head,
And soldier's arm, are mingled with the dead;
Gone to the dark recesses of the grave,
The potent monarch, and the abject slave.

When sordid reptiles 'midst these relics place,
The chisel's shame, and Poetry's disgrace,
Ascribe that language<*see note> to a grovelling mind,
To picture sun-bright excellence, designed,
My soul detests the mercenary tale,
And thus the lying statue, I assail:
'Twas thine, oh! man, in one important hour,
To live the steward of eternal power;
Comfort, and joy, and blessings to dispense,
And bid a sea of sorrows wait you hence.
Behold your foes in luxury and pride,
Lavish that dross, to anguish you denied;
Thy life reproach, thy every action blame,
Forget thy merits, and detest thy name.
<*Note: Poetry>

'Tis his sublime felicity to find,
Whose fortunes suit the greatness of his mind,
Whose friendly heart with conscious rapture glows,
When sued for succour—succour it bestows;
Who stoops like heaven, to hear the plaintive prayer,
And makes affliction his peculiar care;
Amidst the toils with greatness that consist,
Who finds an hour to pity and assist;
Abstracts his ear from a tumultuous train,
To hear unmerited distress complain;
Whose every grace and virtue to define,
Illustrious Shaftesbury I'd picture thine.
This when thy soul from worldly business flown,
Shall blend with beings, spotless as its own;
When arts regret, and sciences deplore,
Their patron, judge, and lover is no more;
On fame's record, shall keep thy name alive,
Whilst virtue, truth, or equity survive.



CHAPTER III.
Life with My Uncle in Cork

I shall not tire the reader with a further detail of my journey, nor
would I have said so much, but that the reflections frequently cast on
the people of Ireland made me wish for an occasion to show them to my
English reader in their native simplicity. I don't know whether this
expedition of mine has been tedious to the reader, but I know it was very
much so to me; I have at length obtained the end of it, and you are to
suppose me at the summit of my wishes, in the city of Cork: but, as Lord
Chesterfield observes, in a letter to Colonel Newburgh, "most prospects
are seen advantageously at a distance, and, lose much of their beauty on
a nearer view."—I had wound my imagination up to expect a tender and
affectionate reception the moment I discovered myself to my uncle; it was
first, however, necessary to find out where he lived, and how the family
were then situated.  Cobblers and barbers are not only well versed in
such matters, but likewise prompt to bestow information on such as
require it; therefore having passed into the principal street of the
town, I had recourse to a facetious-looking old fellow, whom I saw
industriously vamping old shoes for a second market:—to say the truth, my
shoes were the worse for the wear, and as I had most part of my money
about me, I imagined it discreet to furnish myself here, before I waited
on the Doctor. The cobbler seeing my feet, immediately guessed my
commands, and handing me a large assortment of his commodity, told me—
they were pretty goods, and would do me service.—I sat down to try a pair
on me, and in the meantime asked him if he knew one Doctor Vanlewen?—What
old George, said he,—that I do, and have done any time this thirty years,
and his father old Guisebert too: oh! that old Guisebert was an odd fish:
when George was a boy, he was after all the wenches in town. Some of the
neighbours told the old Doctor, their daughters were not safe, while his
son was prowling about.—Egad, said the old man, coop up your hens, I let
my game cocks loose. He would probably have continued the discourse till
night, if I had not asked where the doctor now dwelt;—why, where the
devil do you come from to ask me that, sure every child in Cork knows old
George lives in Hanover-Street, over the way.—Pray what family has he?—
Family enough, I warrant you: there's his wife, Peggy Crofts, and Betty
Donavon; and their brother Barny M'Gomery; whom the doctor has bred to
his own trade of midwifery.—Ah! it's a pity the dear gentleman has no
children or relations of his own; for between you and I, he took the wife
without a fortune, and has supported her two sisters and brother this
many years, who are little better than they should be.—Having found how
the ground lay, and being weary and dirty, I asked the cobbler if he
knew, where I could sleep that night? He told me I might go to his house,
as I seemed to be a sprightly lad, and he would accommodate me cheaper
and better than any person whatsoever. In the interim I paid him for the
shoes; and he obligingly shut up his bulk to conduct me to his house:
after passing through one of the gates of the city, and a variety of
blind alleys, lanes and passages, we arrived just by candle-light at the
spacious confines of a smoky thatched cabin; in which there seemed to be
all imaginable harmony, as the swine, the wife, the pigs and the
children, lived very sociably together, and seemed to vie with each other
in point of nastiness. When the light of a bulrush had discovered this
delightful scene to me, I for the first time wished myself back in my
father's kitchen. However, I made a virtue of necessity, and seemed quite
satisfied with all I beheld; soon after a supper of salt fish and
potatoes was produced, of which I made a hearty meal.—When I told the
cobbler who I was, where I came from, and what I proposed, he seemed
perfectly enraptured, and begged I would send him to the doctor,. as he
would take care to incense him, (Note: Ignorantly spoken for convince.)
because he was certain George would regard his recommendation:—But come,
come wife, said he, this is no place for the doctor's nephew, go look out
a clean good bed for him, let it cost what it will, I'll warrant old
George will pay it. Ay, ay, boy, your bread is baked, you'll never want
meal or malt, while your head's hot. I was much pleased with the simple
sincerity of the poor man, and had no diffidence of finding his promises
fulfilled. The cobbler's wife procured me a decent lodging, and set about
washing a shirt for me immediately, which she had tolerably done up
against morning; the cobbler himself brought it to my bedside, with clean
shoes and stockings, so that I looked pretty smart.—You had better now,
said he, write to your uncle, and I'll tell you what to say, and will
carry it myself:—he brought me pen, ink and paper, and dictated, as near
as I can remember, as follows:


Honoured Uncle,

BEING told of your great honour and kindness, I have walked all the way
from Dublin to you, hoping your kindness will provide for your own flesh
and blood, as my father has proved ungrateful: I am at present with the
cobbler, your old friend, who will tell you where I am; which is all from
your loving .nephew and kinsman to command till death,

JOHN CARTERET PILKINGTON.

Having finished this elegant epistle, I dispatched my envoy with it, and
waited impatiently at the cobbler's house till he returned, which
happened in about an hour's time: he entered with a strange contraction
of countenance, that seemed, "The title page of a tragic volume." I asked
him what news? Why, I'll tell you. I went to the house and knocked at the
street door; the footman opened it; I asked if I could see the doctor? he
told me he was at breakfast: upon this the doctor himself opened the
parlour door, and said, well my old friend, what do you want? He made me
come in and sit down (for George always does if the room was full of
company) but he was by himself, as God would have it:—so I told him there
was a pretty young youth, the very moral (Note: for model) of himself, at
my house, who had sent his honour that letter. He read it over and over,
and then said, so you tell me honest friend, this pretty young youth is
the moral of myself; you mean, I suppose, he is like me in the face. Yes,
please your honour, said I, as like as if he was spit out of your mouth,
though I lied too, for he's damned ugly, but no matter for that you
know.—Well friend, said the doctor, this very dutiful nephew of mine
writes me word, that he has walked all the way from Dublin to know what I
would do for him: you may tell him to walk all the way back again, and
inform his friends there that I will do nothing; and if the impostor
continues in this town, I'll send him to Bridewell.—But won't your
honour, said I, give him a trifle to carry him? Not a penny, said he; and
so giving me the letter back, he pushed me out of doors:—therefore I
advise you, while your shoes is good, and you have a trifle of money, to
leave this place; for George is as positive as the devil, when he says a
thing.—Judge, reader, of my surprise and confusion, to find all my
promising hopes and long expeactions of comfort, dashed in a moment:
Philosophy had not then armed me against the vicissitudes of fortune, I
burst into tears, and gave a loose to the agonies of my mind. The poor
people were moved at my condition, and told me I might stay a day or two
with them, and perhaps the doctor's heart would relent. I embraced the
offer.—This was of a Saturday. I continued with them really dejected in
spirit the remainder of the day, and 'till about nine o'clock on Sunday
night; at which hour, a watchman knocked at the door, and enquired if it
was here the doctor's nephew lodged? The poor people imagining he came to
take me away, told him I had been there, but was gone off to Dublin: the
words were scarcely delivered, when the doctor and a gentlewoman entered.
The moment the lady saw me, she cried with emotion; that's he, doctor,
I'll take my oath to his curly head, and the likeness he has to his
father. At this the doctor winked, and coming up to me with a stern
countenance, cried; Who are you Sir, that dare to say I'm your uncle? I
was about to reply, when the lady said, don't you know me Jack? don't you
know your cousin Crofts?—Yes, madam, I remember your name perfectly well—
This is indeed your nephew, doctor, said she, and no impostor; with that
she took my hand and presented me to him. He embraced me very
affectionately, holding me some time in his arms, while the tears
streamed from his eyes, and he cried, this is all I wished for. He held
me fast by the hand, and turning to the cobbler, thanked him for the
regard he had shown to his little run-away, presenting him, at the same
time, a couple of guineas, as a gratuity for his kindness. My uncle's
coach waited for us at the end of the lane, into which he conducted me,
and brought me safe to his fireside.

An entire new scene now opened to me, and from a state of the most abject
distress, I saw myself in the midst of genteel friends, who seemed
sincerely to regard me. I was received by the doctor's lady with all
imaginable tenderness, to whom my uncle introduced me in these words:
"Here, Kate, I have brought you the prettiest little vagrant I ever saw;—
take him, and look on him henceforth as my son." She affectionately
embraced me; assuring the doctor, he could not have assigned her a more
pleasing office, since love and gratitude taught her to esteem everyone
who belonged to him.

A supper was now brought in, where plenty and elegance spoke the
hospitality of the man, and the good economy of the woman:—but I was so
smitten with a sense of my happy revolution of fortune, that though I had
an excellent appetite at the cobbler's, I could not eat a morsel: the
doctor observing it, and guessing the cause, ordered some wine whey to be
made for me, and sent me to bed. The first visit he paid in the morning
was to me, and he was pleased to find me very well, as he afterwards told
me, that he apprehended such a surprise might have occasioned a fever.—He
acquainted me at breakfast, that when I had sent the letter he concluded
I was an impostor, especially as the messenger assured him of my exact 
resemblance to him, and egad I know I'm the ugliest of the whole family;
nor should I have thought further about it, but that the women importuned
me; and Mrs. Crofts assured me, she would know your face in any part of
Europe. He then demanded every particular of my former life, and my
father's behaviour; at the relation of which he was so incensed, that he
swore by G——d he would go directly to Dublin, and horse-whip the rascally
priest, that dared to use one of George Vanlewen's family in that manner:
nay, I seriously believe he would have done it, had not female entreaties
prevented him. He was pleased to find I had some share of education,
which, said he, as you don't seem to be a dunce, may be improved here;
and I'll send you to the university, and make you a brighter, and, I
hope, an honester man than your father. A tailor and sempstress were
employed to equip me for a decent appearance; in short, I had everything
provided, that could answer my convenience or flatter my vanity (for,
oh!, reader, with shame do I own, that. I had a strong dash of the
coxcomb in my nature) my uncle engaged masters to teach me music, the
languages, and the sword; in the acquisition of which sciences, I did not
manifest so much of the blockhead as the fine gentleman: for while I was
seemingly applying close to study, my thoughts were ranging the world. I
had such volatility and inattention, that I cannot help admiring, how I
ever even learned to read. At my hours of leisure from business, my uncle
took me amongst all his friends, where his virtues occasioned many
civilities being shown to me, which I modestly imputed to my own merits,
as many unthinking people do: nay I took as cordial and sincere, all the
complimentary professions of friendship paid to me on his account. I
perceived that my uncle was a boon companion wherever he went, and never
started from his bottle till pretty late at night. It generally happened;
that at his return he found the ladies at cards, perhaps, with some of
the neighbours, who were to sup: he used, at his entrance, to salute them
in a friendly manner, and then taking me on his knee, by the fireside,
behind them, every now and then he lolled out his tongue at the company,
and whisper' d softly to me—Bitches! Bitches!—As I had no conception of
this being the effect of drink; I was quite at a loss what to think of
it; nor could I get from him, for he held me fast, saying, now nephew,
you are undoubtedly my flesh and blood, and I am determined to tell you
the whole affair:—then he'd look at the company and put his tongue again
out, in an ironical contemptuous manner, which the homeliness of his
face, and the gravity of his wig, rendered so whimsically absurd, that I
could not forbear laughing at: this pleased the old gentleman infinitely,
as he imagined I laughed at the company.—Well, said he, but nephew, I
will now tell you the affair.—What this affair might have been, heaven
only knows, but I never could learn a word more about it, though the same
scene was acted almost every night.

I took an opportunity one morning to ask my aunt the occasion of this
droll behaviour, as I knew she could not but observe it, though good
manners induced her to take no notice of it. She told me it was his whim,
whenever he had drank a glass too freely, but withal, that he meant
nothing by it, and gave no offence; and that he was far from having
either peevishness or ill-nature in him. She told me that he used to
tease my mother in the same manner, when she was there; and my uncle,
Captain Vanlewen, used to steal off to bed the moment the doctor came in.
In these vagaries, sometimes, says the, he takes it into his head to
sing; words or time of anything he has not—except "Ballo my Boy lie down
and sleep;" that he chants so loud, that you may hear him half a mile,
and repeats till he has deafened the company, and put himself to sleep;—
and yet in the midst of his humour, if he is sent for to attend a labour,
he becomes in one instant as sober as an infant, as clear-headed as any
man living, and as capable of business. When your grandfather, said she,
the doctor's brother, had got an accidental wound, that occasioned his
death, my husband, when he heard he was given over, took horse and rode
night and day till he came to his house, in Molesworth-street, Dublin:
your uncle, to fortify his mind against so affecting a sight, as a
departing brother, took a hearty glass of Madeira in the morning, before
breakfast. When he entered the dining-room, he found a consultation of
all the grave eminent gentlemen of the faculty: he came in with his whip
and hunting cap, and without noticing one of the physicians, began to eat
some of a cold rice pudding that lay on a sideboard: then turning about
with a large piece in one hand, a knife in the other, and his mouth full,
Well, gentlemen, said he, I find you have killed my brother, and I'm much
obliged to you for it. The doctors assured him that they had most
assiduously attended their patient, and prescribed everything, they could
possibly think would promote his recovery. You did, says the doctor,
turning again to the rice pudding, it's apparent to me you know nothing
of the affair: with that he put his tongue out at one side (as your
mother told me, who saw it) well, upon my word, you're a parcel of pretty
little gentlemen: here is all the great physicians in Dublin to kill one
poor man, and old George must come all the way from Cork to cure him. The
gentlemen suffered the doctor, they had not the least doubt of his
superior abilities, or of the success that might be consequent to it;
that they for their parts, could do nothing farther, and would be glad to
improve by the recipe of so skilful a gentleman. They then related what
methods they had proceeded upon, and what medicines they had used; at all
which the doctor shrugged up his shoulders, put out his tongue, took a
pinch of snuff, and then turned to your mother, who was ready to sink
with shame, saying, are not these a parcel of pretty little gentlemen?
It's apparent to me they know nothing of the affair. Mr. Nicholls, the
surgeon-general, who had a great love for your grandfather, besought the
doctor earnestly to prescribe something before it was too late. He
assured him he did not come there to make them as wise as himself, and,
therefore, when he had made a hearty breakfast, he departed, sans
ceremonie, having only just crept into his brother's room, and felt his
pulse, but without ordering anything for his relief, which was the very
motive of his journey to Dublin (such and so whimsical is his
disposition.) I could not suppress the curiosity I had to know, why my
uncle, who was, from every circumstance I had heard or seen, a humane
benevolent man, should, at such an exigence, demean himself in that
manner. I therefore took an occasion one morning at breakfast, when there
were none present but ourselves, to introduce that topic. He could not
even hear of it without tears, but told me the condition he found his
brother in, gave him no room to hope that any prescription could serve
him; and that as the Dublin physicians might possibly have a contemptible
opinion of him, he was resolved, by finding those faults, to keep up his
dignity in their esteem; and not to risk his reputation, by attempting
impossibilities. After saying this, he conjured me never to mention my
grandfather to him again, which I took care to observe.

I had by this time made a tolerable progress in my studies particularly
in music, having a good voice and an easy manner; but though this
advantage rendered my company desirable almost everywhere, yet it was
attended with many bad consequences; such as sitting up at night, which
disqualified me in some measure for school in the morning, though I never
drank. The musical gentlemen (I don't mean fiddlers) of the city, had
formed themselves into a society, and were all of them to perform at a
concert, once a week; the money arising from which, was to be applied to
the building of an hospital. Some of them entreated my uncle would permit
me to sing a song or two of a concert night, when I was not otherwise
engaged; to this he readily consented, both as it was to promote a good
end and that no hirelings were admitted into the band. A passion for
applause is predominant in most minds, particularly those of young
persons; and when the object from whence we can expect it is truly great,
nothing can be more praiseworthy. To this single passion, is owing the
rise and progress of arms and arts: had we no emulation to excel, we
should never exert the nobler faculties of the soul, that lead us on in
the pursuits of fame and glory. I am far from concluding, that every
great and good action takes its rise from a thirst of applause. No, I'm
persuaded, a Legge, a Pitt, and a Boyle [*see note], are only actuated in
the service of their country, by that sincere pleasure, that must warm a
patriot bosom from a consciousness of having acted as it ought, equally
contemning censure and commendation.
[Note: The Right Hon. Henry Bilson Legge, Esq.; The Right Hon. William
Pitt, Esq.; The Right Hon. the Earl of Shannon.]

Now my Lord, or my Lady, Sir or Madam, or whoever you are that I have the
honour to converse with, you'll find that I have made this pompous
digression, only to apologize for my honestly confessing, that I was
infinitely delighted when the audience clapped their hands at the end of
a song:—for whether I pleased them or no by my singing, yet they heartily
pleased me by giving me room to imagine I had done it. At the end of each
song I went into a side box, where I had a thousand compliments and
invitations, to the no small pleasure of my uncle and the ladies, who
generally accompanied me there.

One evening, in the midst of the concert, my uncle was called on to
attend a lady, so that we went home without him: about eleven o'clock at
night he knocked a thundering sasarara at the door; I flew to open it,
and, to my unspeakable surprise, saw him with his sword drawn, and
bloody, in his hand, his wig with one tie over his face, and his whole
frame in the utmost agitation. He entered the parlour in this pickle,
when my aunt, though well used to his temper, fainted back in her chair.
While we were using means to recover her, he strutted about the room like
Ancient Pistol, crying; villains! scoundrels! to attack me at my own
door; but. I have pinked one of them; I promise you he'll never attack
old George again; no, no, he's quiet, if a lunge through the guts could
make him so.

By this time my aunt recovered, and cried, surely, doctor, you have
killed nobody: no, my dear, said he, but I have certainly killed
somebody; ecce signum, look at his blood, the dog. For heaven's sake,
dear doctor, tell us how or what it was? Why, Kate, you know I'm as
peaceable as the devil, though as cross as the devil, when put upon. Just
turning Hanover-street, three fellows set upon me, one of them collared
me, while the, two others stood behind; so I just run him through the
body, that's all child; and he lies, now where I left him. The footman
was immediately ordered to get a lanthorn, and we all, except my uncle,
precipitately ran to behold this tragic event; but neither man, living or
dead, was to be found, which was some consolation to my aunt. While the
doctor enjoyed his triumph, and extolled himself as a prodigy of skill
and courage, we were all in the utmost panic, lest he should have killed
some of his innocent neighbours. Under these anxieties we retired to bed,
hoping that morning would afford us a more particular knowledge of the
affair.

When we were seated at breakfast, one Hignet Keeling, a tavern keeper,
came in, and told us he was in great trouble about his mastiff dog, who
had, followed the doctor from his house last night, and came home, with a
wound of a sword quite through his neck. It seems the dog had a great
love for my uncle, and: as the tavern was pretty remote from his house,
used to come by way of a safeguard with him; and of a dark night
frequently jumped up to his breast, to let him know Pompey was with him:
but my uncle being, I suppose, wrapped up in wine, contemplation, and the
idea of robbers, proved a shrewd Caesar to poor Pompey; since it appeared
from all circumstances, that the three robbers were neither more nor less
than one unfortunate mastiff. Though my uncle was sufficiently mortified
at the laugh this occasioned against him, yet he immediately went and
dressed the wounded Pompey, who became his patient till he had made an
entire cure; but Pompey never could be prevailed on to escort the doctor
home after that.

I now began to enjoy that serenity of mind, that results from
circumstances entirely at ease; my studies were a pleasure, rather than
labour to me, and everything seemed to concur to make me extremely happy;
but, alas! my felicity was too great to be permanent, as will appear from
what follows: I have before observed, that my uncle supported his wife's
two sisters, and brought her brother up to his business: though the
obligations they all were under to him, made them treat me with the
utmost civility; yet they could not avoid secretly repining at the share
I had in his affection, who indeed seemed to attract all his regard;
insomuch, that he took but little notice of my cousin, from the time I
came. He was a proud sullen young man, who never spoke as much as he
thought: though my entertaining faculties afforded them some. amusement,
yet they were such as made me too much the object of popular regard. My
uncle's sole design, in educating me, was to make me one of the faculty,
and they justly foresaw, that if I settled in Cork, I should be more
probable to succeed him in his practice, than a man who had no talents to
endear him to society. These considerations were too important and
interesting, not first to create a jealousy of me, and afterwards an
absolute hatred; that in the end obtained their wishes of procuring a
separation between my uncle and myself.

Amongst the many invitations that were offered me, I had one from some
officers in the barrack, and acquainted my uncle with it overnight,
requesting his permission to go the next morning, and he accordingly gave
it to me. As I had a long walk, I rose betimes, to be there by breakfast:
there were a very polite set of gentlemen to be there at dinner, and they
pressed me to spend the day with them. I told them I should think .myself
happy in their company, but was apprehensive my uncle might be disobliged
at my staying: one of them promised to send a footman to make an excuse
to him, which quite contented me. We had an elegant dinner, and after
coffee was over, a ball, where there was a number of the first rate
beauties. My little heart was so elated with music, gaiety and
cheerfulness, that I never observed how the hours rolled on; so that it
was past two in the morning before I remembered I was to go home: in
short, it was too late, and I had a bed with one of my friends. Though I
judged my uncle would not be altogether pleased at my staying, yet, as I
was in some of the genteelest company in town, I hoped to find remission
of the first fault; and the more readily to obtain it, I brought Captain
F——r and Captain A——y to apologize for me, and take the reproach of my
offence on themselves. My uncle was abroad, but my aunt received them and
myself with a coolness and formality, that expressed rather her contempt
of me than care for my welfare. The gentlemen excused my misdemeanour in
the best terms friendship and truth could dilate; assuring her, my being
out was entirely their faults. She told them she was sorry they had the
trouble of coming; but that as for me, she was not in the least
disobliged at my conduct, who was really too fine a gentleman to be under
her direction, or my uncle's either: that the Doctor was determined to
send me back to my father, whose family had already been too expensive to
him. My father's family, madam, said I, with surprise? Yes, Sir, your
mother cost me fifty pounds at Mallow, a sum that her son shall never
have from us, The gentlemen finding her begin to grow indelicate, took
their leave, and promised to call some other time.

When my uncle came in he took no manner of notice of me, further than by
bidding me get ready to go to Dublin, as he was determined to have no
more plague with any of my family. I could make no reply to this
injunction, my heart was so full of sorrow; but immediately left the
room, and retired to my bed chamber, to contemplate my unhappy condition.
As nothing appeared half so dreadful to me as a thought of returning to
my father, assured that my treatment would there be infinitely more
rigorous than in a galley, the more I studied what to do, the more I was
perplexed; till at length I recollected, that my school master, Doctor
Bayley, was very fond of me, and that, perhaps, by opening my bosom to
him, he might become a mediator with my uncle for our reconciliation.
Inspired with this hope, I went to him, which gave my good-natured aunt
and her sisters a happy occasion to observe the pride and haughtiness of
my spirit, that I was ready to burst with it, even while I stayed in the
room; and that, instead of falling on my knees to implore forgiveness, I
flew like a tiger out of the house, without rhyme or reason; so that if I
was encouraged, would I would in another year turn them out of doors:
this discourse I learned after from my uncle's footman.

My poor uncle, whose real good nature was not accompanied by an equal
share of penetration, saw things in the manner they were represented to
him, without giving the eye of his understanding room to meditate on the
real causes of them: he instantly swallowed this palpable bait, and
became now earnestly incensed against my pride and ingratitude. The
ladies then seemed to plead for me, kindly confessing I was a pretty
youth, and had great abilities for my years; but withal, that they had
never told the doctor half the state I took upon me, or the contemptuous
airs I gave myself to them and their servants. These they illustrated by
many instances, but, notwithstanding, they would by no means advise the
doctor to part with me, as I was the only exposed branch of his family,
and might, with proper care and correction, become an honour and comfort
to him: all these arguments had their desired effect, of putting my uncle
into a great rage, in which he swore a solemn oath, I should never sleep
under his roof. In the meantime, I had reached doctor Bayley's, to whom I
ingenuously unfolded the anguish of my heart, and the unfeigned regret I
felt, at having given the shadow of an offence to my most generous
preserver and benefactor. After he had very warmly remonstrated on the
fault I had committed, and the ill consequences of keeping too good
company, which he said was almost equal to keeping too bad, he entered on
his office of advocate, and went directly to my uncle, leaving me to
drink tea with his wife and family.

I sincerely believe the good man said and did all that Christianity and
benevolence could inspire, to mollify the rigour of the sentence my uncle
had pronounced of never receiving me again into his family: but, alas! it
was vain and fruitless, as he told me at his return, my uncle valued
himself upon being positive and unchangeable in his decrees; and the
gentlewomen had so completely fermented that temper, experience had
taught them to manage, that the doctor and he had very high words before
they parted, and it has occasioned a mutual coolness from that day to
this, if they are still living.

Mr. Bayley had too just an idea of my father, from various accounts, as
well as the plain simple ones he had from myself, not sincerely to lament
my adversity: he assured me, that if he was not cramped by a small
fortune and large family from giving a scope to his good intentions in my
favour, he would support me like his son, till I was fit for the
university, which he said I should have been in another year; where, he
was kind enough to add, he made no doubt my genius would be sufficient to
advance my fortune. But in the present case, added he, I am at a loss
what to do with you; however, you are welcome to remain with us, either
till your uncle comes into better temper, or you return to your father.



CHAPTER IV.
Expelled from my Uncle's House, I Return to Dublin and meet with a
Musical Projector

The next morning a footman brought me a small trunk, containing my
clothes, linen, and books; with a note from my aunt's sister, enclosing a
guinea, which she told me she gave me herself, as the doctor would not
bestow a shilling; and likewise, that there was a sloop to sail for
Dublin that afternoon, and the would advise me to embark in it, where I
might have my passage for half a crown; and that if I determined to take
her counsel, she would furnish me with proper sea-store.

I consulted Mr. Bayley, who advised me, by all means, to embrace the
offer, as it might probably be made to try my temper. I accordingly sent
back word that I acquiesced with the proposal. My aunt and cousin, in
order to make sure work of it, came themselves, and brought a basket very
well filled with neats' tongues, wine, rum, tea, sugar and bread. They
accompanied me to the water side, shedding tears all the way for my
leaving them so suddenly; but well I ween they were the tears of joy.
They advised me as soon as I landed, to write a submissive letter to my
uncle, which they would strenuously back with their entreaties for my
coming home again, and that they made no doubt of having me with them in
less than a month. My foolish heart believed all this, and my eyes
overflowed with real tears for my departure, though I made no doubt of my
returning according to their suggestions.

As soon as I came on board the sloop, which was the first I had ever been
in, I delivered my trunk and provisions to the Captain; these he promised
to take good care of, and likewise to accommodate me with his own bed.
There was nothing I asked him about, but he gave me a satisfactory
promise for; how they were fulfilled, will shortly appear. There was near
fifty passengers beside myself on board, men, women and children; to
every one of whom, I dare say, the Captain had made the same liberal
professions of care and attendance he had done to me; but it seems he
intended we should all fare alike, the vessel being fully loaded, and the
cabin not capable of containing above three persons with any tolerable
satisfaction. As soon as night came on, and we got out to sea, a
universal sickness prevailed, from which I was not exempted. I then
entreated our commander to show me where I was to sleep: he at first
laughed at me, but after frequent solicitations, he complimented me with
this elegant sea phrase, "Dam your eyes, stow where you can." I attempted
to go to the cabin, but that was filled with the most loathsome and
melancholy objects; which may be better conceived by those who know what
sea sickness is, than described: in short, I was glad to get into a small
boat that was fastened on the deck, where I endured cold and disorder
till morning. What would I then have given for a dish of tea: but, alas!
my very honest Captain took such care of my stores, as never to let me
see the smallest particle of them; so that, during a passage of seven
days, had it not been for the hospitality of some other of my fellow
sufferers, who were more careful of their stores than I was, I must have
been starved with hunger as well as cold: At the end of that time, on a
Sunday afternoon, we came safe into Dublin harbour; and after paying my
half crown, and a shilling for a boat, I was landed with my small cargo
at Ringsend.

I immediately looked out for a house where there was a large fire, and
after having exhaled the friendly heat, I refreshed myself with a change
of linen and apparel, which I never more stood in need of: I then called
for some warm punch, and before I had drank two glasses, a tall middle-
aged gentleman entered, with a bag wig and a sword on. He began a
conversation with me, by asking if I came from abroad: I told him I had
come from Cork by sea, and related the particulars of my passage. When I
told him who I was, he seemed to know me and my family exceedingly well,
with which I was not a little pleased. In the course of some general
chat, I mentioned my singing at the concert in Cork; upon this he eagerly
said, why, can you sing? I told him I believed I could: he begged I would
just hum a tune to give him an idea of my voice and manner; when I did,
he cried, bravo! bravo! by G——d, I'll make your fortune: I thought this
an odd adventure, and besought him to explain himself, which he did in
this manner.

You must know, Sir, that I am a gentleman who has run through, a
plentiful estate in schemes for the public good; and though some of them,
through the inattention of the great, have miscarried, yet I have at
length hit upon one which will return me tenfold the four thousand a year
I have parted with; and that your own judgment will determine, when I
explain it to you. In the more gay and happy hours of my life, I studied
music as an amusement, and am, perhaps, the best maker of harmony in the
known world; of this I will give you an immediate demonstration: saying
so, he pulled from his sleeve sixteen large pins, and from his pocket a
small hammer; with this he drove the pins into a deal table, all ranged
one above the other, and some almost in as far as the heads: he then took
from his side pocket two pieces of brass wire, and demanded what tune I
would have: I told him the Black Joke: then lay your ear to the table,
says he, hear and admire: I did so, and, to my infinite amazement, he
played it with all its variations, so as to sound somewhat like a
dulcimer.

Encouraged by the applauses I gave to this uncommon instrument, he took a
parcel of drinking glasses, and tuned them, by putting different
quantities of water in each: upon these he played a number of the newer
tunes in the most elegant taste, giving me delight and satisfaction. He
then proceeded to inform me, that these were but sketches and outlines of
his grand art and discovery; for, said he, I have at home glasses as
large as bells, of my own invention, that give a sound as loud as an
organ, but more delicate and pleasing to the ear: now, Sir, as we are
both gentlemen, and both possessed of excellence in the science of music,
if we unite them together, we must make a fortune; for after we have
exhibited in Dublin this winter, for which purpose I have already taken
the Taylors' hall, we may go to Bristol, Bath, Scotland, and, to crown
all, to London; and in order, at once, to show you how much I prize
merit, and how ready I am to encourage it, I will engage to give you a
hundred pounds the first year, besides your board and lodging, and
afterwards increase it, if you choose to continue with me.

Such a proposal to a person in my situation, could not fail of a ready
acceptance: I blessed the happy moment I left my uncle, and began to
think providence had ordered it for my advantage. I considered myself
already a man of an hundred a year, without the pains of studying physic;
and that for only amusing myself by singing, which I thought no manner of
trouble. I told the gentleman my opinion, who allowed I was extremely
judicious, and added, that if I pleased I might go to his lodgings
tonight, and that we would to-morrow have articles drawn, and set about
the study of such songs as were best adapted to his Angelic Organ, as he
styled it. He then told me in an easy familiar way, that he had brought
out no change with him; but that if I had any, and would lend it to him,
he would pay the reckoning, and treat me with a coach, I gave him every
penny I possessed, and set out with him to his apartments; which I made
no doubt were equal to the appearance he made.

As we went along, he told me that the last house he lodged in he paid
three guineas a week; but that his music, and the concourse of the
virtuosi who came to see him, prevented other lodgers from staying in the
house; and therefore, as he would rather discommode himself than others,
he had taken rooms at his tailor's; that it was in an obscure place, but
then it was cheap, retired, and commodious for his business.

Soon after we were set down at a mean-looking house in Bride-street, and
the Captain, for so he had been formerly called, was suffered to go
upstairs in the dark.. He left me at the outside of the room till he
struck a light, which revealed to my eyes the most littered dirty hole I
had ever yet seen: the furniture consisted of an old tawdry bed, one
rush-bottom chair, a frame with a number of large glasses ranged on it,
and the case of a violoncello. I believe the Captain observed dismay in
my looks, and in order to comfort me, said, that he had made the people
take all superfluous things out of the room, and: that that he never
suffered a servant to clean: it, lest their damned mops and brushes would
break his glasses

He then set down and played Handel's water music, and several other
pieces, on the glasses, that indeed made some amends for the wretched
appearance of everything about him: After this he called his landlord to
provide a bed for me; this, after numberless obstacles, was done in a
miserable garret, where nothing but the long want of rest could have
lulled me to repose.

When I came down in the morning, I found the Captain labouring hard with
a broken pair of bellows, to blow about a handful of embers, on which a
tin coffee-pot, without a handle, was placed for a tea-kettle; after
great industry it boiled, and he took from the case of the violoncello
before mentioned a broken delft basin, with same coarse brown sugar, a
paper with some nasty bohea tea, a coarse loaf, and a crock of stinking
butter: all these appearances of the most abject poverty, after the
scenes of plenty and delight I had just left, considerably abated the
transports my hundred a year had given me; and though I had no conception
of the character of a projector, yet I could not help thinking the man
mad; to talk of a hundred pounds, who did not seem worth three-pence. I
very modestly told him, I should be obliged to him for a shilling of the
change I lent him, to get a better breakfast, as I could not possibly
dispense with such homely fare?

Why there it is child, said he, that is the very rock I split on: good
God! to what end do we eat? To sustain nature. Suppose this breakfast
consisted of everything nice in its kind, what difference will it make in
my constitution to-morrow, nay, an hour hence? Or when I go abroad in the
habit of a gentleman, who is to know whether I breakfasted on Hyson tea,
or water gruel? Indulging the appetite is a mere brutal custom, beneath
the dignity of a prudent man, or a philosopher; and a young man like you,
who has all his faculties in the highest perfection, should be quite
indifferent about these matters. I will let you have a shilling with all
my heart, but I would advise you to do as I do, and you'll find the
comforts of it at the year's end.

His argument was enforced with such reason and gravity, that I so far
adapted his sentiments as to take share, for the present, of what God
sent; and the more so, as though he seemed so ready to let me have the
shilling, yet I never observed he made the least motion to put his hand
in his pocket. After this splendid repast we fell to practising different
songs, and the Captain perceived with great rapture, that my voice
accompanied the glasses very well.

It may not be improper, before I proceed further, to give my readers the
real story, character, and disposition of this person, as far as I have
been able to collect from my own knowledge of him, or the accounts of
different gentlemen of his acquaintance, particularly Mr. Newburgh, of
Ballyhaise, in, the county of Cavan, who has celebrated this second
Quixote in several humorous poems, particularly one called the Pockjead,
wherein he explains all his numerous, unsuccessful and impracticable
projects; the one of which may give a sample of the rest. This was no
less than a scheme for immortality upon earth, and his manner of
obtaining it was this: that when any gentleman or lady came to be about
three-score, the blood then grew cold and stagnate; this occasioned
disorders, which terminated in death. The Captain, in order to remove
these obstacles, proposed, that persons at that age, should have a vein
opened in each arm, and at the same time a vein opened in the arm of a
strong healthy cook maid, or kitchen wench; and let an inflex tube, be
placed in the orifice made in her arm, and the arm of the old person;
that then as the old decayed blood flowed out at one of the patient's
arms, he would receive the young healthy vigorous fluid into the other,
which must totally abolish the effects of age, and cause an utter
renovation of the animal spirits.

Whether the operation has ever been tried, or whether it might or might
not be successful, those better acquainted with the human system than
myself are left to judge and determine.

Mr. P——h, at the age of twenty-five, found himself in the possession of
an unencumbered estate of four thousand a year, which was so far from
answering his genius for spending, that in the end of a small time he had
sold every foot of it; and what is more surprising, he was never known to
give one genteel entertainment, to do one benevolent act, or anything
that could obtain compassion at his fall, or friends to commiserate his
distress; he had plenty without the approbation of a single mortal, and
want without the least pity. How he did lavish so handsome a patrimony,
has been an equal mystery and wonder to his most intimate friends and
acquaintance; as they do him the justice to declare, they were never the
witnesses of the least extravagance in his equipage, house-keeping, or
his other expenses; nor can he to this day be brought to give any account
of the steps he took so suddenly, to divest himself of all the comforts
of life: for my own part, there appeared so much meanness and low
breeding in all his words and actions, that if I had not had it from
better authority than his own relation, I could never have believed he
had received the education of a gentleman, or kept company with any above
the degree of a journeyman mechanic.—For during my unhappy pilgrimage in
his abode of famine, he made no ceremony of going to a cook's shop,
opposite to his lodgings, for four pennyworth of meat, and disputing
learnedly with the cook woman for another bit of fat; from this, and some
other instances of the like nature, I have drawn one maxim; That where a
gentleman can descend to be a blackguard, he is always of the worst kind;
in short, all sense of shame leaves him with his title and fortune, and
things that a reduced servant would blush to do, he transacts with all
imaginable ease and serenity.

Colonel Newburgh, whom I have before named, and with whom I had the
pleasure to commence an acquaintance, through my connection with the
Captain, told me, that he was endeavouring to give Baron Dawson, a
gentleman of true wit and humour, an idea of P——'s instrument, by telling
him he run two sticks along the glasses, and by that means played
distinct tunes; but, says the Colonel, except you were to see and hear
it, you can have but little conception of its excellence: oh! but I have,
said the Baron, 'tis like a blackguard boy, trailing a stick along iron
rails.

If the readers, from the foregoing pages, are the least acquainted with
me, they will judge how tedious and disagreeable a life of this kind must
have been. The firm step I took to the advancement of a better, was
writing as pathetic a letter to my uncle as possible, entreating him
forgiveness and permission to return; to which I never received an
answer, or indeed to many others, written to the same purpose: in the
mean time, the Captain and myself laboured hard at our music. The songs I
was to sing at my first appearance were fixed upon, and everything got in
readiness for the important event; when I hoped my patience and long
suffering would meet some reward, for by this time two months had sneaked
away: at length the hour arrived. The Taylors' Hall was finely
illuminated, the newspapers filled with encomiums on the angelic organ,
every public corner was towered with large bills, and tickets dispersed
amongst the nobility. About three hours before the concert was to begin,
the Captain went to range and tune his glasses, when unfortunately
stepping out for some water, a large unmannerly sow entered, and, oh!
guess the rest!—threw down the whole machine, and covered the ground with
glittering fragments; destroying not only the hopes of the public, but
ours of a present and future subsistence. When the Captain returned, and
found his lofty castles in the air reduced to an heap of rubbish, he
looked just like Mark Anthony, when he beholds the body of Julius Caesar
on the earth, and says:

Mighty Caesar, dost thou lie so low?

He, however, supported the catastrophe with a dignity and heroism
peculiar to great minds; and without staying for the company, desired the
door-keepers would inform the world of this melancholy event, retiring
himself once more to, his gloomy abode. As soon as we came home, made, I
think, the only prudent speech that ever flowed from my lips; namely,
that I found in his present condition I could not be an assistant to him
and that I, therefore, thought it a pity to put him to an additional
expense in house-keeping; that I was in hopes my uncle would receive me,
if I returned to Cork; and, therefore, besought him, if possible, to let
me have at least a part of the money I formerly lent him, to pay my
passage there in a sloop. He said the first part of my speech spoke me a
youth of good parts, which made him lament his not being able to comply
with the latter, because child, said he, I am not master of a single
penny.



CHAPTER V.
I Return to Cork and am Taken up by Mr. O'Neill

I recollected that I had some superfluous apparel, which I the next
morning disposed of to a broker for half value, and took my voyage in the
same vessel, to the place from whence I came. Though I had now brought no
provisions with me, made but a shabby appearance, and had considerably
less money than when I entered his sloop before, yet the Captain's
behaviour was totally different: he gave me his own cabin, made tea for
me morning and afternoon, treated me with punch every night and, in
short, by his kindness, endeavoured to obliterate the remembrance of his
former usage of me, which he told me, had I been his son, he could not
have avoided, when he had such a number of passengers: but the true
reason of all this civility was, his knowing my uncle, and knowing, that
if I related the manner of his first behaviour, he would not go
unpunished. When I came on shore, he would accept no gratuity for my
passage, but brought me to his house, and made so much of me, that I
concluded he was one of the honestest fellows I had ever seen.

From the intimacy I had, through the interest of my uncle, with all the
persons of consequence in this city, I. imagined myself surrounded with
friends, with any of whom might have had. a twelvemonth's board and
lodging, if the worst came to the worst this I had also strong reason to
judge from the ardent desire they all expressed for my company, and. the
unwillingness they all showed to part with me,—as well as the most lavish
professions of friendship made me at a time when I needed not their
service. The Captain recommended me to a cheap little lodging, where I
sat down for the present to study the plan of my future operations, which
I did not doubt would be attended with all the success I could wish. The
first visit I made, was to a Roman Catholic widow, whom my uncle called
cousin; a lady who had a good fortune, and who seemed, by the hospitality
of her table, to live to the top of it. Here at least I promised myself a
hearty welcome, and elegant entertainment: indeed, considering how
extremely cheap all kinds of provision are in Cork, what one moderate man
can eat or drink in a family; becomes so small an expense that any good-
natured person might afford it, without incommoding themselves.

On my first entrance, the whole family seemed agreeably surprised at the
interview, and congratulated me on, my return to my uncle, whom they said
they all knew would never be happy without me. They were just going to
dinner, and begged the favour of my company, an invitation very
acceptable at that time; but as soon as I had let them know I had
undertaken this journey without my uncle's knowledge, and that I was not
yet certain of a reception, I perceived a visible alteration in every
countenance, particularly two Jesuits, who were the widow's domestic
chaplains: the one of whom began a very elaborate discourse upon the ill
consequences of children flying in the face of their parents; which was
as impious as flying in the face of God; that the curse of disobedience
attended not only the offender; but a curse was likewise entailed on all
who afforded them harbour or refuge. I am not saying, said he, Master
Pilkington's case is such, though I cannot but conclude, he has committed
some extraordinary crime, to turn so good a man as the doctor against
him, and while he continues unreconciled to him, he is doubtless
unreconciled to heaven; and under those circumstances a blessing will not
attend those who harbour or entertain him. This was the strangest and the
newest doctrine I had ever heard; in answer to which, I related the whole
story of my offence; but the pious zealot insisted, that my endeavouring
to defend my innocence, was a proof of incorrigible guilt, and that he
had now a worse opinion of me, than before: this Jesuitical manner of
arguing put me entirely out of countenance, and made me look on myself in
a very despicable light.

The lady of the house told me, that she should see the doctor the next
day; and that both herself and those worthy gentlemen would use their
endeavours to obtain my forgiveness, with which assurance I left them. As
I returned to my lodging, I met a young gentleman I had formerly known in
the university of Dublin, who was extremely glad to see me: he told me,
that he had disobliged his friends, and had betaken himself to the stage
for a livelihood; that he had acted in Dublin with great applause, and
was now come to spend the summer with the Cork company. After telling him
how I was situated, he asked me if I had a lodging? Upon my answer, in
the affirmative, he told me, that he would be obliged to me for a part of
it, and that, in return, I might see a play as often as I chose. I was
pleased to meet with a genteel companion in my adversity, and to have so
high an entertainment as a play, which I then looked on as the greatest
enjoyment in life. I have no money, said my friend, but I have good
credit, of which you will immediately have a proof; saying this, he led
me to a tavern, where most of the comedians resorted. I found the
conversation of these men made up of buffoonery, effrontery, and
quotations from plays; for all which I was so much at a loss, that I
appeared a mere novice amongst them. At length one of them was requested
by the rest of the company to sing a song; which, after numberless
entreaties and apologies for a cold and hoarseness, he was prevailed on
to do; but indeed his performance needed more excuses than he had offered
for it, being intolerably bad. After having received the thanks and
compliment of the company, for his masterly execution and judgment, my
friend desired I would favour the gentlemen with a specimen of my
singing, which I readily did, and was repaid by a thundering clap of
approbation. The master of the theatre, who was present, told me, that if
I would join the company, I should have all suitable encouragement; to
which my acquaintance earnestly pressed me, by way of showing the old
rogue, my uncle, how little I valued him.

Whatever reluctance my pride felt at entertaining a thought of appearing
in the despicable light of a strolling player; yet when I reflected on my
necessitous condition, I could not but be almost tempted to embrace the
offer; nay, I was determined to have done it, if I found my uncle persist
in his resolution: and therefore told the manager, that I would consider
of his proposal, and give him an answer in a few days. After having
supped and drank very hearty, my friend and I retired to our lodgings, he
first having answered the reckoning.

As I determined in the interim, not to neglect the main chance, I went to
the widow's the next afternoon; but had no admittance farther than a back
parlour, where one of the priests came to acquaint me that my uncle had
been there; and as soon as he was informed of my being in town, flew in a
great rage, not only solemnly protesting he would never be reconciled to
me by any entreaties, but likewise, that he would break off all
friendship and connection with any of his acquaintance who received me.
You know, Sir, said he, what a regard and intimacy has long subsisted
between the doctor's family and this. You likewise know, that you are
utterly a stranger to us, and were only acceptable as his relation. You
cannot possibly suppose, that a family breach will at this time of day be
made upon your account. When you consider all this, you cannot be
displeased, or think it unreasonable in the widow, to desire the favour
you will not come here again. She wishes you very well, and you have the
prayers of the family for your better fortune, but that is the most you
can expect. I told him, I could not blame the widow, or my uncle, and
only hoped they would retain the same charitable opinion of me, if I made
use of means for my own support, without being a burden to anyone. He
assured me, they always would, and earnestly recommended to me to pursue
such measures as I thought most conducive to it; concluding with your
most humble servant, Sir. When I returned to my lodgings, I found my
friend preparing to go to the play; I went with him behind the scenes,
and either as good or ill-fortune would have it, the doctor and his
family were in the pit, and saw me. When the play was over, the company
went to their usual rendezvous, where my friend brought me to supper. I
told the manager I was now ready to embrace his offer, since I found I
had no longer the hopes of being a gentleman. A gentleman! Sir, said he;
why, what do you take me for? there is not a man in the company, who is
not a gentleman by birth and education. If we were not men of learning
and parts, we should be badly qualified to represent the human passions;
but you are too young to make proper distinctions, therefore should be
forgiven for a sarcasm otherwise inexcusable.

This lesson had a proper effect on me, and persuaded me, that players
were gentlemen, especially as by their dress and expenses they assumed
the character as much as could be; so that I was quite reconciled to be a
gentleman player; upon which I received the congratulations of the
company, and was to have sung between the acts the Monday following.

The next morning after breakfast somebody rapped very hard at our door;
my companion, who was apprehensive of a bailiff, betook himself to a
closet to hide. When I opened the door, I discovered the manager and some
other of the principal actors: they asked for my friend, who knowing
their voices, ventured to make his appearance. So, says the manager, I
have brought an old house over my head, through your acquaintance here;
the mayor of the town has shut up the playhouse, and we may now go thrash
in a barn for our maintenance. How so, said my companion? Why, Sir, it
seems this young man is doctor Vanlewen's nephew, and the doctor having
seen him at the house last night, and judging we were going to entertain
him, has made interest to deprive us of bread, until I was obliged to
give very great security, that master Pilkington should never appear on
our stage: I am very sorry for it, as I know it would have been mutually
serviceable; but such is the case, and there is no help for it.

My companion and myself were thunderstruck with this relation, which
utterly disconcerted all the plans we had laid for the enjoyment of life;
but to give me what comfort my condition would admit of, my friend
assured me, that if I did not adjust matters with my Uncle, he would
share the last shilling with me, and therefore entreated I would keep up
my spirits.

How inconsistent this part of my uncle's behaviour was with the rest of
his character, may seem extraordinary to a reader, who does not consider,
that with all his good qualities, he was haughty, positive, and
inflexible. He would, perhaps, have as willingly beheld me going to make
a hempen exit, as entering on the stage; and indeed I do not now wonder
at it, as it certainly would have made him look very contemptible in the
eyes of a people, to whom he had himself so warmly recommended me;
besides that, the dissolute lives and idle dispositions of those men,
their absurd composition of pride and meanness, their impertinence and
presumption in all companies where they have the least countenance shown
them, renders them but too justly the objects of universal derision;
neither did I ever know a single one of them, except the person above
named, who was not lavish, ostentatious, ignorant, and ungrateful; whose
vanity did not exempt him from all feeling of obligations, through an
opinion, that whatever favour could possibly be shown him, was a stipend
justly paid to his distinguished merit.

The generous offer of assistance, made me by my friend, by no means
afforded me a quiet mind; to drag a dependent existence from the labours
of a distressed gentleman, did not tally with my sentiments of life; I
therefore went every day. amongst my former acquaintances, in the
behaviour of whom I found all the coolness and reserve that could
possibly discourage me from visiting one place a second time; and
discovered, that the true characteristic of the people of this country,
is to make extravagant professions of regard to all those who want no
favours, and to treat with the utmost indifference all those who do; for
this they are indeed remarkable through the known world.
[Note: By "This country" I mean the province of Munster: if the critics
should say here that I contradict myself in the characteristics of the
people of Ireland, I answer, there is no general rule without an
exception; 'tis the genius of the province alluded to, to act as I have
described, and I copy nature.]

My apparel, which was but tolerable at my arrival here; daily grew more
weather-beaten; so that at length I was ashamed to walk out except at
night. I began now to experience the pinching effects of want, in the
midst of which my spirit kept me from complaining even to my bedfellow. I
have frequently been a whole day without food of any kind, and wandered
in the lonely fields, to hide it. One evening about dusk I passed by the
place where the concert was held, and concluding from a number of chairs
and coaches about the house that there must be a great audience, I begged
leave of the stage door keeper, who knew me, to let me go behind the
scenes, which favour I obtained. The first act of the music was then
playing, and I observed that the boxes were fuller than usual. When the
act was over the gentlemen came out to take a glass of wine, and as soon
as they saw me, unanimously solicited I would sing a song in the next
act. I excused myself on account of my dress. Oh! said one of them, your
singing will make amends for that defect: in short, I found it impossible
to refuse them, and accordingly I began the second as with a song. I had
the pleasure to be highly applauded, and encored; I sung it a second
time, and after saluting the company, made my exit.. As soon as I retired
behind the scenes, a gentleman came and .acquainted me, that Charles
O'Neill Esq. and some ladies, who were with him, desired the favour of my
company to supper at the Cork arms tavern: I said I did not know the
gentleman: yes, Sir, said he, but he knows you, and your family, and your
going will be to your advantage. He has heard, said he, of your affair
with your uncle, and therefore you need not be uneasy about your
appearance. I promised to wait on Mr. O'Neill, and in the meantime flew
to inform my friend of my adventure. He was sincerely rejoiced at it; and
as he had no clean shirt but that on his back, even stripped it off, and
lent it to me. By the time I had put myself in order, the hour arrived
for my repairing to the tavern: I was shown up stairs directly, where the
cloth was laid, and I found the gentleman with two ladies: he immediately
arose and saluted me, introducing me full to Lady Freke, and then to Miss
Broderick; both of whom were his wife's sisters.

After an elegant supper was over, Mr. O'Neill entered into a very serious
discourse with me, about my uncle's displeasure, and the causes of it: I
told him candidly the whole story, gave my uncle an admirable character,
and imputed the blame of it to my unguarded conduct. He confessed my
sincerity gave him as much satisfaction as my singing had done, and that
he thought it a pity the Doctor could not be mollified; that, Sir, said
he, by all accounts he never will: but child, don't despair, for
providence may raise you some other friend. After having drank a glass or
two of wine, he hummed a tune himself, and then requested a song from
Lady Freke, who excused herself, by saying, she would prevail on Master
Pilkington to do it for her, and she would, in return, play him a tune on
the harpsichord, whenever he did her the honour to pay her a visit. This
polite manner of treating a person in my desolate state, appeared the
highest pitch of good breeding and delicacy. There is no merit in being
complaisant to those who are upon an equality with us in fortune and
station; none but truly refined spirits are capable of making the
distinction, or of bestowing their favours with that becoming dignity,
that leaves the most grateful impression on a sensible mind. This
perfection of soul eminently adorns the admirable lady to whom I have
inscribed this work; every mark of whose friendship is accompanied by a
mark of her good sense, condescension, and unlimited benevolence.

I readily complied with Lady Freke's request, and sung for her ladyship
and Miss Broderick; withal declaring; that I found so much pleasure in
the hope of pleasing, that I should never be tired of singing, till they
were weary of indulging my vanity, by attending to it. Mr. O'Neill
remarked, that I was the first obliging good singer he had ever met with;
for pox on them, said he, one has so much trouble to persuade them to
open their mouths, that when they do it, it is not worth a farthing.

After entertaining them with all the songs I could recollect, and
receiving all the compliments usual amongst the musical connoisseurs,
they desired I would come and breakfast with them next morning. Mr. asked
me where I lodged, and with whom: this gave an opportunity to introduce
the obligations, I lay under to my friend, and to picture him in the most
amiable light, in hopes to procure him some recompense for his readiness
upon all occasions to serve me. Mr. O'Neill was pleased to find the
ardent expressions of gratitude I made use of on this subject; and while
I endeavoured to promote the welfare of another, promoted my own, by
confirming in this instance, the good opinion which had been conceived of
me in other respects: we parted, I believe, thoroughly pleased with each
other; at least in appearance and consequence it seemed so.

The reader will judge in what raptures I returned to communicate my good
tidings; I found my friend amongst the comedians, whom now looked on in
their proper light, and could not be prevailed on even to sit down
amongst them. My companion, who was impatient to know the event of my
supping with these great folks, presently took his hat and accompanied me
home: I related every circumstance to him, which he heard with equal
rapture, attention, and astonishment. You must know, said he, that
Charles O'Neill is a man of five thousand a year; he is a person of
extreme good sense, penetration and judgment; though I only conceived he
had sent for you to sing a song or two, and have given you a few guineas,
yet I was very uneasy, lest you should have said or done anything amiss.
By the manner you have been received, and his inviting you to his
lodgings, I conclude, he intends to make you a companion, which, if you
make proper use of, will be the establishment of your fortune: I believe,
my dear Jack, continued he, 'tis needless to remind you of my condition;
no, I am persuaded you'll think of me, when you are encircled with
splendour and happiness, which I plainly foresee will be shortly your
lot. I told him I never made protestations, it was so like the Munster
men, but he would find his expectations more than answered, in my
friendship, if his prophecy was fulfilled.

I waited on Mr. O'Neill the next morning, at the hour appointed, and
found the ladies with him at breakfast: after tea was over, he asked me
how I should like to go to the North? I answered, I would be pleased to
accompany him anywhere. Well then, said he, you shall go with me, if you
please, to Shane's Castle, and though your uncle should never come into
terms with you, I have a fortune sufficient to make you happy; but I hope
you will not take offence at one request I shall make to you, and that
is, as you are too young to borrow money, and yet have occasions for the
use of it, that you will permit me to supply you for the present with
such things as you stand most in need of. My tailor is to be here
presently, and you may choose whatever dress is best suited to your
fancy; in the meantime, as I have but a short stay to make in town, these
ladies have themselves undertaken to make a few shirts for you. So much
goodness left me rather stupefied, than capable to speak what I thought
of it: all I could say, with tears in my eyes, was, that I submitted
everything to his judgment. After this Mr. O'Neill went out, and left me
with the ladies, who, in his absence, congratulated me on my good
fortune, in knowing their bother, who they said was so much taken with
me, that I might date my future happiness from the hour I met with him.

Meantime the tailor came, with an unlimited order to equip me, but, to
his entire disappointment, I bespoke no more than a suit of fustian, in
which dress I perceived Mr. O'Neill generally went. After having been
taken measure of, I again returned to my friend, who told me, that his
benefit play was to be the Thursday sennight following; that he hoped I
would be present at it, as he was to perform his favourite character that
night. I took a bill and some tickets from him, which I brought with me
when I went to dinner, as I should have observed, that I received a
general invitation in the morning.

Mr. O'Neill asked what clothes I had ordered? I answered, that having no
emulation but that of resembling him, I had desired the tailor to make a
suit in the manner of his: this pleased him extremely, and he assured me,
that modesty laid more claim to his friendship, than even the title I had
to it from my conversation and condition; promising, that as soon as we
went to Dublin, I should have an elegant wardrobe, and every
encouragement that could most conduce to my felicity.

After dinner, I took occasion to introduce one of my friend's play-bills,
and again to enumerate his good qualities; relating, without disguise,
all our past conversation on the happy omens of my better fate; not
omitting the character he had given me of Mr. O'Neill: this succeeded to
my wish. Mr. O'Neill sent for the gentleman, and after taking about ten
pounds-worth of his tickets, and paying for them, now, Sir, said he, as
neither myself, or any of my family, can possibly have the pleasure to
see this play, being obliged before the time mentioned, to be out of
town; whether will it oblige you most to give these papers away, or put
them into the fire? But again, said he, I need not ask, because, from
what Master Pilkington has told me of your theatrical abilities, you will
undoubtedly have a full house, exclusive of this trifling number;
therefore Sir, said he, to the flames they go: so saying, he put them in
the midst of the grate, where they were consumed in an instant. My
friend, at his departure, returned Mr. O'Neill many thanks. He very
politely told him, that if there was any obligations subsisting, it must
be between himself and Mr. Pilkington. The gentleman was too much
confused and overjoyed to say much on the subject, therefore he silently
retired with a low bow.

Had Mr. O'Neill put me in possession of his whole fortune, it could not
have given me more rapture, than this instance of his humanity inspired.
Debts of honour are a most painful burden to a heart abstracted from the
sordid self-devoted principles that actuate the generality of mortals.
Favours conferred without a view of recompense, demand of themselves the
fullest return. Good God! How often, in the transient span of my life,
have I prayed for an opportunity like this, of demonstrating what an
unlimited ascendancy gratitude has over my bosom. How often wished, that
instead of soliciting one favour for myself, I could bestow fifty on
others; but, alas! I was born to be still a poor dependent, in which
light, all that even the muse inspires with truth, is looked on as
venial; and though I endeavour that way to express the sense I have of
the goodness of my benefactors, yet I am apprised that my poverty makes
many just commendations of virtue and merit, falling from my pen, but too
liable to be thought flattery; even by such as are conscious in
themselves, that much more might be said on the subject by a man of
fortune, without the least suspicion of it.

If my reader finds this work interspersed with some panegyrics, they must
do me the justice to own, they are addressed to such as are
unexceptionably distinguished for the qualities I have assigned to them:
that my pen, whether good or bad, has never been the prostitute of party,
or the press: that I never wrote a single syllable in verse, that was not
literally true in prose; and which, from the sincerity of my heart, I did
not believe: but stay, it's time enough to talk of that when we come to
recite the verses; I had better now go on where I left off.



CHAPTER VI.
With Mr. O'Neill at Ballyannan

Our continuation in Cork, which was but a few days, afforded nothing but
repeated marks of Mr. O'Neill's friendship and regard to me, in equipping
me with all the absolute necessaries for our intended journey; such as
boots, whip, hunting cap, and riding coat; together with some very fine
linen. He paid my lodging for the whole time I had been in it; and the
next morning, about eight o'clock, we set out in a Phaeton chaise, drawn
by six dun horses, and a numerous retinue of servants in silver laced
liveries, for Ballyannan, near Middleton, the seat of Mrs. Broderick,
mother-in-law to Mr. O'Neill.

As we passed through the town I espied my old cobbler, formerly
mentioned, in the spot, and about the same employment, I had first
discovered him: this brought a long train of reflections to my mind, and
made me for some time grave and silent. When we got into the clear air,
upon a fine turnpike road, Mr. O'Neill requested to know the subject of
my contemplations. I related to him the narration of my journey from
Dublin, my adventure with the cobbler, my reception with my uncle, and
everything I thought would entertain him, at which he expressed much
satisfaction. You must know, said he, the moment you came upon the stage,
I discovered something of je ne sais quoi about you, that convinced me
you were above your appearance. I enquired of the gentleman whom I sent
to you, who you were: he told me your story in a few words; upon which I
turned to Lady Freke, and offered to hold a wager I would bring you to
Shane's Castle; having conceived pity for your distresses, and regard for
your accomplishments. I have; said he, three children of my own, but they
are as yet too young to make company of; the eldest being only six years
old. The insincerity of the world makes me avoid intimate connections
with any, since I was deprived, by death, of a faithful, most endearing,
and sensible wife; who had variety of charms in her person, conversation,
and skill in music; being superior in that respect to any I have ever
heard. You will find that Lady Freke and Miss Broderick play exquisitely
well on the harpsichord, but they were by no means equal to her. When we
arrive at Shane's Castle, continued he, I have a library of books, the
best calculated to improve the understanding of a young student. I should
think myself rather an enemy than a friend, if I retained you merely for
any gratification of myself, or my acquaintances. I know it is now the
time for you to enrich your mind with those qualities, that will render
you fit for any employment, your friends or your talents may procure you.
It is only with this view I have received you, and be assured, that while
you persevere in virtue, humility, and obligingness, I will make it a
principal point of my study to promote your present content and future
enjoyment.

By the time he had made an end of this discourse, which manifestly spoke
the excellence of his disposition, and awakened in my soul the most
inexpressible veneration and transport, we arrived, just before dinner,
at Ballyannan; a place where everything seemed to conspire to make
solitude truly delightful. It is situated on an arm of the sea, which
waters its verdant bank, shaded with lofty limes, elms, and oak; whose
shrubs are everywhere intermingled with honeysuckle and other odoriferous
flowers, extensive pleasure and fruit gardens, fine summer houses,
turrets crowned with ivy, and all the irregular beauties that charm the
fancy and delight the sense. It was about the end of July we came to this
terrestrial paradise, when the blooming season added all her sweets to
render it worthy of that name and the inhabitants were so richly endowed
with ease, elegance, hospitality, learning, wisdom, and skill in the
polished arts which soften life, that I could scarce believe this terrene
spot had been productive of such homefelt bliss, as was here enjoyed from
rosy morn to dewy eve, without the least interruption: I might truly have
said with poor Othello.

If I were now to die, 'twere now to be most happy,
For here my soul hath her content so absolute,
That not another pleasure like to this
Remains in unknown Fate.
SHAKESPEARE.

As soon as we entered the gate, we were received by the gentlewoman of
the house; Lady Freke and Miss Broderick, her two amiable daughters, who
obligingly introduced me to Mrs. Broderick; a lady in whose countenance
appeared the tender mother, and sensible friend. There were no ceremonies
made use of in our reception, but those cordial embraces and unfeigned
expressions that eloquently speak a kind welcome. The moment we got into
the house, Lady Freke and Miss brought me to a drawing room, where there
were a fine chamber organ, a harpsichord, and several musical
instruments. You know, said my lady, I promised to play for Master
Pilkington, which she accordingly did in the most masterly manner; while
her fingers flew like lightning over the chords, displaying all the
ecstatic sweets of divine harmony, with the peculiar embellishments of an
admirable taste, and a fine ear.

When her Ladyship resigned the chair, Miss assumed it, bringing from the
aweful organ most angelic sounds, fit to enwrap the soul in heavenly
contemplation: in short, I had here an epicurean feast of music, that
might elevate the heart of a monarch. [Note: Lest the lovely lady of my
esteemed friend, Colonel Newburgh, should be jealous of these just
commendations of the two ladies' skill on the harpsichord, I acknowledge,
that next to Lady Freke, she is the best female performer I ever had the
happiness to hear.

Mr. O'Neill, in the meantime, went to take care that justice was done to
his cattle, an office which he never neglected, or would entrust to the
most careful servants he had, without being himself a witness that his
orders were duly executed.

When he returned to us, Miss Broderick accompanied me in the organ with
two or three songs, and an anthem, at which also Mrs. Broderick was
present; who being unaffectedly religious, was particularly pleased with
this part of our entertainment, which she said she should frequently
trouble me for, during our stay at Ballyannan.

From this delicate repast of the mind we were called to the necessary one
of the body, to dine: 'tis needless to recount the number of dishes, or
economy of the table; all who had the happiness to know Mrs. Broderick,
will judge there was genteel plenty, without ridiculous superfluity and
ostentation; which, in the opinion of the judicious, serves rather to
disgust the appetite; and emaciate the constitution, than anything else.

When dinner was over, Mr. O'Neill entreated I would entertain the ladies
with the account of my adventures I had favoured him with on the road.
Happy in any occasion of showing a willingness to do all I could to
please. him, I began it, and though a twice told tale is seldom pleasing,
I observed he particularly attended to every occurrence, as if he had
never heard it; and whether it was owing to the unstudied manner of my
rehearsing it, or the infinite good manners of the company, I had as much
audience as if Caesar had been relating some famous passage of his
history, or Cicero haranguing the Roman senate.

When I had made an end, Mr. O'Neill complimented me on the simplicity of
my style, and the veracity to which I so minutely adhered: for, said he,
you have not differed in a single point from what you told me in the
morning; which evidences the truth of your relation to me, more
sufficient than if a train of witnesses had attested every fact.

Mrs. Broderick, who made no comment at any pause, but seemed desirous I
should proceed till she had learned the whole of my life, even as I have
heretofore written it, desired I would take a walk with her in the garden
in the afternoon. As soon as we were there alone, she addressed me in
this manner:

You see, my poor child, how infinitely good the Almighty has been to you;
permitting his providence to guard you in the midst of dangers and
distresses; rescuing you out of the hands of an obdurate father; giving
you an opportunity of cultivating your natural understanding, by an
education he would never have bestowed on you, of recompensing your want
of real fortune by endowments that, properly applied, will, probably,
procure you one. These are miraculous proofs, that the father of all
things has interested himself in your behalf, and inspired Mr. O'Neill
with that pity and esteem which I hope your conduct will merit; I don't
say I hope it from any doubts I entertain of your upright inclinations,
but from a knowledge I have of the perversity of human nature, and the
long train of snares and allurements found in a bad world to destroy the
soul and body. I would, therefore, my dear child, recommend it to you
with a mother's ardour, first to seek the kingdom of God, and all things
will be added to it. Let no prosperity that may hereafter attend you,
make you forget the hour of adversity, in which the Almighty stretched
forth his arm to save you. When you behold the poor and wretched,
consider with yourself, that their case might now be yours; but for the
peculiar blessings conferred upon you, treat your superiors with respect,
your equals with civility, and your inferiors with mildness and humanity.
I thought it my duty, continued she, to make these remonstrances to you,
and to ask you a few material questions, which the course of your story
gave me no insight into, and those are relating to your conception of the
deity, and whether your father has taken any pains to make you a good
Christian; these I expect you will answer me with the utmost truth and
sincerity.

Such precepts, delivered with a meekness, affability and candour,
entirely suited to the purpose, and becoming the person by whom they were
dictated, could not but affect me in the deepest manner. I told the lady,
that though my ideas of the deity were but imperfect, being such as I
retained from the instruction of my mother, who was too early separated
from me to have left these strong impressions that might otherwise have
been made, I was yet persuaded, that every comfort I enjoyed here, or
might hope hereafter, must proceed from the same hand who created me;
that I religiously adhered to the doctrines of Christianity, as taught by
the established church, of which I gave as full an account as I was
capable of doing, and endeavoured to apologize for my father's neglecting
me in this point.

Though my discourse on this sublime topic was far from being what I could
have wished it, yet I could perceive a seraphic smile of Christian
benevolence diffuse itself over her countenance, expressive of her
satisfaction to find I was not altogether a Pagan; and the little I did
advance, I believe, gave her a general good opinion of my morals.

When we returned into the house, we found Mr. O'Neill and the ladies, in
company with his three lovely children, and Mademoiselle, the French
governante. I could not help admiring the exact proportion and symmetry
of these emblems of their father; the manly gracefulness of the two boys,
and the feminine sweetness of the little girl. They too had lost a
mother, but they had a father, whose tenderness was dealt in a double
portion to them; alas! I had both, and yet neither; being miles and seas
divided from the one; and assured the account of my departure from life,
would be most acceptable news to the other. Filled with this thought,
together with the discourse I had just been attending to, a silent tear
irresistibly fell from my eyes, which Mr. O'Neill taking notice of,
earnestly pressed me to explain the causes of it to him: as it would be
ungrateful to conceal the recesses of my soul from such a benefactor, I
confessed I was thinking of my poor mother, the memory of whose
tenderness and affection to me, this scene presented to my imagination in
full view; and that I was lamenting the uncertainty I was under about her
fate, whether she still existed, or was now no more. Mr. O'Neill
comforted me with a promise, that as soon as we arrived in Dublin he
would himself make the strictest enquiry into that matter; and that if he
discovered my mother was in being, he would put it in my power to show
the duty and regard I had for her. This was too delicate a point to dwell
long upon, and the conversation was waived, by Mrs. Broderick's calling
Mr. O'Neill into another apartment till supper time. The mean while I
employed in amusing the children with little stories, which so much
endeared me to them, that they reluctantly permitted my departure from
amongst them on any terms.

I was now about fourteen; and though that is a time of life when lads are
most disagreeable to the society of men, and grave persons in general,
yet I had nothing of the school-boy in my behaviour, I affected the man
as much as possible in every serious respect, particularly attending to
the conversation of such as might improve my own, and always preserving
silence where I was not equal to the subject: by this means I
considerably refined my intellects, and became sufferable in the
community. Though I was infinitely delighted with the address and
delivery of every person about me, yet I found a peculiar charm in the
conversation of Miss Broderick; a young lady whose age might have been
twenty, and whose extreme good sense was unequalled by her every other
accomplishment, except her good-nature and politeness. She was not what
the world calls a beauty, the smallpox having enviously stolen from her
face some charms which might allure the eye; but not in such a manner
that there did not still remain an ineffable sweetness and grandeur of
look blended with condescension, modesty and penetration.

The frequent opportunities I had of being alone with this young lady,
from our mutual kindness music and poetry, gave me more and more
occasions to admire her. The companionate regard with which she attended
to the many affecting passages of my former life, that oft-times made a
part of our discourse; and the ardent desire she seemed to have for my
future welfare, together with her still outstripping my wishes in
anything she imagined might oblige me, created that kind of esteem, which
time or absence can never remove; and surely, at this distance of years,
the world and she will forgive me, if I confess, that love, most sincere
love, was the consequence of so much kindness on my part. How it was on
the lady's, she only knows, nor dare I presume to flatter myself she
entertained a thought of that kind.

A day or two after we were settled here, another daughter of Mrs.
Broderick's paid her a visit. This lady was the widow of Colonel
Jeffreys, of Blarney Castle, in this county; who had two sons with her,
the eldest of whom was about twelve years old, and had a great share of
knowledge for his years. With this young gentleman I contracted a strict
friendship, and run into all the boyish frolics that could be thought of.
The children in general were so fond of my company, that it frequently
debarred me of conversation much more desirable; however, there was no
getting rid of them without offence, when Miss Broderick made one of our
party, which frequently happened; in plundering the cherry orchard,
gathering wood- strawberries, or collecting beautiful shells on the
strand; in awakening the silent echo with a song, or beguiling the
tedious hours with a fairy or Peruvian tale (at which she was truly
eminent) I knew not how the smiling moments wasted; all was joy,
transport and unspeakable delight.

In order to give my readers an idea of this family, and the harmony that
universally reigned in it, I will, as well as I can recollect, tell them
the manner in which every day was passed, that we were not visiting
abroad. At nine o'clock in the morning there was a table spread, in a
large room that commanded a delightful prospect of the sea, with tea,
coffee and chocolate. Mr. O'Neill drank balm tea always, which I first,
through good manners, brought myself to, and afterwards really preferred
to any other, from its high balsamic flavour, and medicinal qualities. It
raises the spirits to the greatest pitch, sweetens the blood, and
invigorates the nerves; in short, if it came from Canton, and was twenty
shillings a pound, I am persuaded it would be universally in vogue.

Any of the family, who did not choose to be at this general breakfast,
might have whatever best pleased them in their own apartment; but as they
were no invalids amongst us, it rarely happened we were not all present.
From this till twelve we dispersed in parties, to walk, to read, sing,
play or dress, without the least formality or restraint; at that hour the
bell tolled for prayers, which were read by Mrs. Broderick's chaplain,
and at which the whole family, servants and all, commonly appeared.

At three dinner was on the table, to which we were summoned by a bell for
half an hour; where the relation of our different amusements, the
planning of succeeding ones, wit and repartee, blended with strict
politeness and good manners, commonly formed the table conversation.

The first party of pleasure we embarked in, was an expedition to
Ballycotton, an exploit that was near costing me my life. This place is a
fine harbour for shipping, and a large extensive bay, covered by
excessive mountains on every side; but it is so little used, that I could
perceive no town or village near it; nor had a numerous company of us any
place to be entertained, but in a cottage thatched with straw. However,
we brought all kinds of provision, wine and conveniences with us, and
likewise Mrs. Broderick's cook to dress some fish, which was here in its
highest purity.

While the company and servants were employed in breaking down fences, to
make a road for carriages to this identical cabin, myself, who was
mounted on a very sorry palfrey, endeavoured to find a shorter way; and
having observed a path down a monstrous promontory, whose side was
covered with sharp, craggy and dangerous rocks, just wide enough for one
person to go down on foot to the strand, I, with my usual discretion, let
my Rosinante saunter along this dreadful passage, which I believe the
immortal Don Quixote himself would have endeavoured to shun, except he
was certain to find Dulcinea at the bottom. Mr. O'Neill, when he had
completed the road, at which he himself worked, turned round to look for
me, but I was nowhere above ground to be seen: at length he cast his eye
down the mountain, and behold I appeared to him like one on horseback,
surveyed from some lofty steeple, as they after told me, scarce
discernible. Mr. O'Neill, who never indeed thought to hear me speak
again, threw himself on his breast upon the earth, saying, Lord have
mercy on him, I can behold no more. By this time I saw myself suspended
between earth and air, heard the wide billows bursting on the rocks, and
saw nothing but the over-whelming ocean before me. I began to be
frightened, and with a presence of mind unaccountable indeed, got first
on the horse's neck, and then got over his head; which was no sooner
done, and my hand happily disengaged from the bridle, than the horse made
a faux pas, and fell precipitately down a thousand and a thousand
fathoms, by which he was instantly dashed to pieces, small enough for the
ravens and gulls that screeched the omens of his downfall.—Hearkye
critics, if this style displeases you, or is inconsistent with your
pragmatical rules, know, ragamuffins, that I will write as I think
proper; 'tis the sensible and elegant I address myself to; nor do I
regard the formal pedantic maxims you lay down, to confine everyone in
the same circle of dullness you move yourselves: incorrigible men!

Contrary to the expectation of everyone who beheld me, I came safe and
sound to the bottom; to the agreeable surprise of my friends, who all
came to wish me joy, and join with me in thanks to the Almighty for so
miraculous a deliverance.

It may be asked, why Mr. O'Neill, who is known to possess some of the
finest cattle in Europe, should mount me on so sorry a nag? The truth is,
I am the worst rider, perhaps, who ever crossed a horse, and consequently
would not venture myself on the back of one, whose value exceeded forty
shillings.

Give me leave, indulgent reader, to digress one moment from the past to
the present time, lest I should forget a circumstance that certainly will
produce admiration. There are in this opulent city a set of men, who hang
out the sign of the three blue balls at their door, and who are the
readiest persons in the world at an emergency. They indeed take a little
gratuity for their trouble, but that is so inconsiderable, that few
persons of spirit would not more willingly pay it, than be indebted to
their acquaintances; at least I would, and I candidly own I have
frequently had recourse to them, when I have been most at a loss which
way to turn: one of them in particular, my servant frequently told me,
was certainly a gentleman by his behaviour; nay, the other day she
peremptorily insisted, that the was sure he would subscribe to my book,
if I was to ask him: I laughed heartily at the absurdity of the
proposition, and gave it as my opinion, that a pawn-broker would as soon
give me ten of his teeth, as ten and sixpence for a subscription. The
girl did not discontinue her importunities to get rid of them, and, for
once, to make an extraordinary experiment, I wrote the following lines:
To Mr. G——

TO the highest and best, in each different station,
For subscription, we scribblers address application
By the dull, or the envious, it can't be denied,
That you at the head of your science preside;
Besides, 'tis from frequent experience confessed,
That of all the fraternity, G——'s the best.
To write is my trade, to take movables thine,
As I help you in yours, give assistance in mine;
Then to ages remote, I'll the wonder transmit,
That a pawn-broker lent ten and sixpence on wit.


P. S. The bearer, my maid, persuades me, that you will subscribe to the
enclosed proposal; for my own part, I confess, want faith to believe it:
your answer is to determine, which of us has the most sagacity.

J. C. P.

The manner of the above will show, how little I expected a compliance
with my request, though I absolutely never stood more in need of half a
guinea. My maid told me, that the instant Mr. G—— read it, he put his
hand in his pocket, and paid her that sum; saying, he was pleased in an
opportunity to serve the son of the great Mrs. Pilkington, and many other
civil things, too much in praise of myself to be properly repeated here.

I'll leave my readers to comment on so marvellous a passage in my
history, and return to Ballycotton; from whence I have rambled all the
way to London, in less than half an hour, because I would make a kind of
analogy between one miracle and another.

After having recovered from my surprise, we came along a beautiful level
strand, to the house of entertainment before mentioned, where we had
indeed a most splendid repast. After which the conversation turning on.
accidents, resulting from pleasure and gaiety, Miss Broderick entertained
us with the following story, which she assured us was a fact, and which I
have since heard confirmed by several persons of equal veracity.

Mr. and Mrs. Coddington, of Oldbridge town, near Drogheda, who had a
liberal fortune and beautiful estate, situated on the Boyne water, just
at the place where King William's army crossed it, were patterns of
hospitality, virtue, and conjugal affection. Their house was the
continual resort of both the indigent and the gay; the first found
relief, and the latter pleasure and entertainment, they were therefore
venerated by all beneath them, and beloved as well by their equals as
their superiors.

Heaven blessed them with one son who seemed from his infancy born to
inherit their mutual good qualities, as well as their fortune: as this
young gentleman advanced towards manhood, he advanced in all the politer
arts that finish that character; but as this cannot be completely done by
mere precept or speculation, it was necessary he should take the tour of
Europe, in order to know men as well as books.

So excessively fond were this happy couple of this their beloved and only
offspring, that they imagined it not safe for him to go abroad without
their accompanying him; so that if any accident happened at sea, as their
whole comfort was centred in his life, they might all perish together.

After having made all the preparations requisite for such an undertaking,
the whole family set out for Paris, at which place they arrived safe and
in full health and spirits. After they had been there some time, they had
an invitation to a splendid ball; upon which occasion the young
gentleman, very lovely in .his person, was so elegantly dressed, that he
attracted the eyes of the whole company. A young lady, whom he approved
more than any other present, he selected out to dance with him; but she
at first modestly declined it, and upon his further entreaties;
absolutely refused him. While young. Mr. Coddington walked to the other
end of the room, his mother, whom the young lady did not know, and a
gentlewoman whom she was acquainted with, came to her, and asked, why
she, being the brightest female in the place, could refuse her hand to so
handsome a young gentleman? She answered, that she had her own reasons,
gave a deep sigh, and endeavoured to avoid more conversation. This
awakened all the curiosity of an affectionate mother, who concluded, that
the young lady was in love with her son; she therefore eagerly pressed
her to explain that sigh, and likewise her previous behaviour.

Madam, replied the lady, I think, in my life, I never beheld so many
unstudied charms, as appear in that amiable foreigner; nor did I ever
behold a youth my heart would sooner incline me to give my hand to, if it
were consistent with the will of our parents. After telling you this so
candidly, you will judge my refusing to dance with him proceeded from no
dislike, either to his country, person or breeding; but, alas! Madam, I
see with grief and horror, that, before this day twelve months, that
amiable blossom of youth and comeliness will die an untimely death.

Judge what an alarm this prognostication was to the attentive parent who,
though she had a great share of good sense, could not be unalarmed at the
dreadful presage. However, she passed it off with a becoming decency, and
did not interrupt the pleasures of the company or the night, which ended
in great harmony.

When the old gentleman and lady retired to their apartment, she
acquainted him with what had passed, in a very serious and pathetic
manner. After having gravely attended to her, he burst out a-laughing,
and told her he minded no such fancies, and entreated she would think no
more of it: she told him, he knew her too well to suppose her
superstitious, but at the same time they could not be too careful in
watching against accidents, where they had such a warning given them;
therefore, my dear, said she, as you never refused any favour requested
by me, I hope you will now oblige me, by returning with our son to
Ireland, where there is scarce a danger but we may be guarded against.
The good man, already weary of travelling, was pleased with the motion,
gave his consent, and without letting the young gentleman know their
motive, embarked in a few weeks for Ireland; where after a short passage,
they landed safe, and again took possession of their own fireside.

They continued in their usual tranquillity eleven months, at which time
Mr. Coddington began to banter his wife in private, about her Joan de
Pucelles prophecy, as he termed it; nay, the young man was well and safe,
till the night before the predicted time was to expire; which night, she
ordered the servants to lock every door in the house, and bring her the
keys: she then went and saw every bit of fire and candle in the house
extinguished; after doing this she retired to repose, and fastened her
bedchamber door. Young Mr. Coddington was a keen sportsman, and had made
an appointment to go a hunting the succeeding morning, of which his
mother had no knowledge: when he arose and found all doors fast, he
demanded of the servant the meaning of it? They informed him it was done
by his mother's command: oh! very well, said he, then I'll get out at the
window, which he accordingly did. As soon as he came to the water side,
he found the dogs and horses were gone across the river, therefore
determining not to lose game for a little obstacle, he put himself from
the shore in a small cot or canoe. This was carried down by the strong
current for half a mile, when it overset, and the youth was unfortunately
drowned, in presence of his friends and servants, who, for want of a
boat, could afford him no assistance: so that the first object which
struck the afflicted mother's eye, when she arose in the morning to look
out of the window, and thought her fears were over, was the corpse of her
son carried on a board by some of the servants. The lamenting father, on
hearing the news, instantly became a lunatic, and died raving mad in a
few weeks after. The poor mother, unable to survive the loss of all that
was dear to her, broke her heart with grief; so that a whole family, who
might have promised themselves years of comfort, were extinguished by one
fatal event in less than three months.

When the lady had finished this tragic narration, with infinitely greater
perspicuity than I have repeated it, we returned home. Some days after we
went to the races of Carrigtwohill, accompanied by Lady Freke, Miss
Broderick, Lord Buttevant, and some others: as I sat in a high phaeton
with Mr. O'Neill, I commanded a fine prospect of the ground, and had
another advantage I did not then think of, of being seen per tout le
monde. Before the races began we went into a tent, where, as the ladies
were the majority of the company, they insisted on treating us with the
best entertainment the place afforded. Mr. O'Neill, who is a known lover
of horse-racing, was not content to continue in one spot, but having
fixed Miss Broderick and myself in the most advantageous situation, he
mounted his horse and rode up and down the field. During his absence a
gentleman on horse-back came up, and saluted me by name, assuring me,
that he was extremely glad to see me well; that he and his two sisters
were come to see the races, and he entreated the favour of my company to
the little island, where his house was. I could not but be amazed at this
flow of compliments, from one of those lukewarm friends, who had lately
looked so coolly on my adversity. This gentleman's name was H——y; he was
one of those, who, whilst I continued with my uncle, was ready to devour
me with caresses and protestations; and who, upon my reverse of fortune,
was as careful to avoid me as a pestilence. Though he was a man of some
fortune, and a student in the temple, yet I knew he was not equal to the
company I then was in, or the acquaintances I had now made; therefore I
looked as indifferently on him and his invitation at this time, as I
should in my distresses have been proud to accept it: but yet my vanity
and resentment were equally gratified, by his seeing me so happily
circumstanced, and the more so, as Mr. O'Neill, Lord Buttevant; and
several of the first rank in that part of the world, soon after came up
and joined us. I told Mr. O'Neill of the invitation I had from Mr. H——y 
and, as he was still present, asked if Mr. O'Neill would permit me to go.
This Mr. H——y backed, by desiring the favour of Mr. O'Neill to let me go
for that night with him and his sisters, and he would himself see me safe
to Ballyannan the next day. Mr. O'Neill, who did not know how much I was
averse to accept this offered civility, told Mr. H——y, that though he
deprived himself and his friends of much pleasure by it, he could not
refuse to acquiesce with any desire of mine. Mr. H——y returned him many
thanks, and took me off quite enraptured to his sisters, who were in a
coach waiting for us, and who expressed as much satisfaction at my
presence as possible.

In the afternoon we arrived at the little island, which is very pleasant
and romantically situated, being surrounded by the river, except in one
passage wide enough for a coach. Though Mr. H——y's sisters were tolerably
handsome, and played very well on the harpsichord; and though they
exerted all their skill to please and entertain me, yet when I reflected
on Mr. H——y's former behaviour, I could not bring my spirits into a right
flow. The image of the lady I had parted from was dearer to me, even in
idea, than beholding in reality all the finished beauties of Christendom:
all my conversation was praises of her sense, beauty and merit,
particularly in music, which could not be very pleasing to ladies who
were emulous to excel in those points themselves; but one of them, in
order at once to put me in temper, and to secure my good opinion, pulled
a handsome diamond ring from her finger and placed it on mine, asking me
at the same time, if Miss Broderick had ever done so much for me? Her
brother and sister were present, and as I observed they looked gravely at
her, I was for returning it, but she absolutely insisted on my keeping
it, and wearing it for her sake. I confess it had an instantaneous effect
on my spirits; I then began to sing, dance, and enjoy the company, giving
myself entirely to them. When all our pastimes were over, and I retired
to bed, I could not rest for the thoughts of my ring. I knew it was
valuable and ornamental, and imagined it would do me great honour at my
return; but still I was perplexed, lest the lady should repent of her
liberality, and take it from me in the morning. No miser, who suspected
anyone had watched him to his hidden treasure, ever spent a night with
greater anxiety or less repose. Though I had taken care to lock myself
into my bed-chamber, yet, whenever I dozed, I imagined the lady came to
demand the ring: in short, finding all my efforts to sleep ineffectual, I
arose by daybreak, and wandered about the island till the family were up.
They were much surprised when I acquainted them I had no rest, and more
so to find I looked quite stupid. I was glad to take the hint of feigning
myself unwell, to depart as soon as possible with my prize, for this
reason: no persuasions, though many were made use of, could prevail with
me to stay any longer; therefore, to get rid of my importunities, they
found it necessary to let me obey the impulse of my mind, and they
accordingly ordered a one-horse chaise and footman to conduct me: Mr. H——
y making many excuses for his not waiting on me himself, and I as readily
accepting them, as I did not covet his company. After I had saluted all
the family, and was just going into the carriage, the Lady besought me to
return the ring, as it was a family trinket, and could be of no use to a
young gentleman. I complied with her request, but so covered with shame,
disappointment and resentment, as must have been perceived by my
countenance. I had some miles to travel, and amused myself with the gloom
of my own thoughts; one time blaming myself for being so great a fool to
imagine the lady intended me such a favour; another; cursing my stars for
not leaving the house when I first awoke; that again appeared too
mercenary: upon the whole, I never met anyone circumstance that made me
so completely miserable for two or three days. When I returned to my
friends, they perceived a visible alteration in my countenance, (which
they humorously attributed to my being in love with Miss H——y; whereas I
might justly have said with Mr. Bays, I was the farthest from it of any
man in the world; and all that. I did not, however, subject myself to a
severer ridicule, by telling the occasion of my dejection; but I tell it
to my readers as an instance of my credulous folly, at which they will
frequently find occasion to laugh.



CHAPTER VII.
I return to Dublin in Great Style

And now drew on the melancholy period wherein I was to leave this dear
spot, which contained all that I prized upon earth, in the person of Miss
Broderick. We set out from Ballyannan for the North, after I had obtained
a promise from the lady, that she would honour me with a literary
correspondence as soon as we were settled in any place. As Mr. O'Neill
intended to pay a visit to Sir Charles Moore on our way, Sir John Freke
accompanied us. The first inn we set up at on the road the conversation
turned on the family we had left, and, to my no small surprise, I found
the worthy Baronet traduce almost every one of them, without being
opposed by Mr. O'Neill: this was the first instance I had seen of the
insincerity of the great, I wish to God it had been the last.

Sir Charles Moore had a most elegant house, at which we arrived the next
day, and were indeed splendidly entertained; nor was there anything mean
or contemptible about the place, except the little worthless possessor of
it, who reluctantly forced me to be an eyewitness of one of the greatest
pieces of brutality I ever beheld. There was a poor woman came to ask
charity from him, and besought his honour very earnestly to bestow
something for the support of her family. On pretence of enquiring into
the reality of her distress, he brought her into a garden; now, said he,
here is a couple of guineas, which I'll give you, but not for God's sake, 
no, you must gratify my curiosity in one respect, which is that of
letting me see you quite naked: I'll give you my word and honour, added,
he, I will not touch you. The moment I heard the proposition I would have
retired, but he absolutely insisted on my staying. The poor creature made
all the apologies modesty and decency could suggest, but it was to no
purpose, he would give the money on no terms but those of her compliance.
Two guineas seemed two thousand to a person in her situation, and at last
got the better of her scruples, and she did what he desired, though I
assure my readers I turned my eyes a different way. The moment she had
suffered herself to be so imposed on, instead of giving her the money, he
called all his footmen, and. desired them to turn the whore out of doors.
This he thought a finished piece of wit, and repeated it as such at
supper; but he could find none to join him in the laugh. The company,
except himself, were lovers of women, and his untimely fate since has
proved his passions were for a different sex. I was quite impatient, and
perfectly teased Mr. O'Neill to leave this place, where nothing prevailed
but drinking debauched toasts, and all the vices that poison the mind.

Soon after we set out for Dublin, where Mr. O'Neill's gentleman had taken
for us very grand lodgings, and Mr. O'Neill, according to his promise,
provided me with an appearance suitable to the company he did me the
honour to bring me amongst, which were the first persons in the kingdom.

Shakespeare observes, that

There is a tide in the affairs of men,
Which taken at the flood, leads on to fortune;
But slighted the residue of their lives,
Is bound in shallows and in misery.

I believe my time was now in the flood; and if I had sense enough to make
a proper use of it, I might have arrived at a better fortune, than
tagging of rhymes, or writing adventures, will procure for me: but, alas!
I wanted the principal ingredients of a great man's dependant: I could
not flatter, nor could I speak any matter contrary to my own judgment,
not considering that a poor man never has any such thing: in short, as I
was quite sincere in everything I spoke, I imagined everyone I conversed
with equally so. I looked on myself as a man of fortune and independency,
from Mr. O'Neill's friendship, which I imagined no time could alter;
therefore I made no advantages of the frequent interviews had with the
great and powerful, all my hopes were centred in the one point of
preserving his good opinion.

I should have observed, that before we left Ballyannan, Mr. O'Neill
addressed me one morning after breakfast to this effect: That as the
dispositions of men were as variable as the winds, and that the object
they most delighted in at one time, might be displeasing to them at
another, it was possible, that though he now had so thorough an esteem
for me, he might hereafter be tired of my company; and that, in order to
secure me from any distress, he thought it the best way, while he found
his heart warm in my cause, to make a settlement on me for life, that
would put it out of the power of himself or the world to hurt me. I
think, said he, two hundred pounds a year will do that; and if you
choose, you shall have it not only while you continue with me, but even
if ever we should part you may make yourself happy. Would any but the
most infatuated dunce have rejected this as I did? I told him, that while
I was his companion, I wanted no money and, besides, a salary of that
kind would make me a servant; that I hoped we never would part; but that
if we did, I should be very indifferent whether I lived or died, as I
could not think Mr. O'Neill would ever part with me except I transgressed
in some shape, and that if I was capable of doing that I was unfit to
live. He liked my argument and my spirit, and told me I should not repent
the confidence I placed in his generosity: but to return.

When we had been some time in Dublin, I took an opportunity to remind Mr
O'Neill of his promise, with regard to my mother, whose absence from me
was ever a pang to my heart, and an anxiety for whose welfare was ever
foremost in my thoughts. He told me he would endeavour to find out where
she was and how situated; and if he found that she had occasion for
money, would give me a handsome sum to remit to her. He likewise advised
me to take his equipage and go pay my respects to my father, and to
invite him and my brother to dine with us. I knew my father too well to
imagine this would be any advantage to me, but was notwithstanding
infinitely pleased with an occasion to call on him in a coach and six.

The next morning I dressed myself very fine, and went in great state to
Lazar's-Hill, the footman knocked a loud peal at the door, and my father
opened it himself: as soon as ever he saw me descend from the coach, he
ran upstairs; upon which I walked into a street parlour, and rung the
bell. The servants, it seemed, were out, so that my brother was obliged
to come to me. As I had never wrote a word to him about my condition, to
which he was entirely a stranger, as well as my being in town, it
appeared like magic to him, to see me come in a flaming coach, and the
servants with laced liveries. He stood silent some time, till I said,
What brother don't you know me? Know you, says he, I know Jack Pilkington
very well, but I can hardly think he is so grand a gentleman; but yet I'm
glad to see you with all my heart, and I wish you would unriddle yourself
a little. I told him I was come with Mr. O'Neill's compliments, to desire
my father and himself would do us the favour to come and dine, and
appoint their day. He said, that my father was out of town (though I had
seen him) but for himself, if it would be agreeable, he would come. I
pressed him to use his entreaties with my father to accompany him, but he
gave me a sign that he was listening, and then assured me loudly he was
out of town. I took the hint, and departed extremely satisfied at my
adventure.

At my return Mr. O'Neill was impatient to know the event: I told him all
the particulars: he said, that if my father had condescended to come, it
would have been both to his and my advantage; but that as he thought such
an invitation beneath his acceptance, I might order what I pleased to
entertain my brother, but he would not see him. I was confounded at this,
and said, Sir, I thought you knew my father before; am I accountable for
his disposition? No, Sir, said he, nor am I for my own sometimes, I
cannot be pleased at this treatment.

The entrance of a very silly Baronet, who is a relation to Mr. O'Neill
broke our further discourse. He entertained us with all the nonsense of
the town, at which he himself laughed very hearty; and any one disposed
for mirth, would have found him a sufficient subject for laughter. When
he heard me sing, he was quite captivated with it, which did not make me
in the least vain, as I would even then rather have had the serious
attention of one true connoisseur, than all the fulsome compliments of a
coxcomb. This gentleman was with us every morning, and used frequently to
take me out with him: these opportunities he embraced, to endeavour to
persuade me to leave Mr. O'Neill, and go abroad with him. I asked him how
he thought my friend would like to be used so? or whether it was
consistent with his regard for Mr. O'Neill to make such a proposal? Damn
regard, said he, every man is to do what pleases him best; and if you go
with me, I'll make your fortune. I told him, if he gave me his title and
estate, I would not part from Mr. O'Neill, whom I held in greater
estimation than any one upon earth.

Though Mr. O'Neill persevered in his good-manners, or rather increased
his politeness to me, yet I could plainly perceive there did not subsist
the same cordial and easy regard I had formerly experienced, in his words
and actions, since that unlucky invitation; however, I was still
extremely happy: and though Mr. O'Neill was not at home when my brother
came, yet everything was carried on with equal decorum, and nothing
wanting to give him the highest idea of my felicity. After dinner I
related my whole story to my brother; and after displaying all my
eloquence on Mr. O'Neill—'s goodness, generosity and affability, I told
him how much he was displeased at my father's not coming, and likewise
that it was for that reason I could not have the pleasure to introduce my
brother to him. He was justly concerned, but told me he had said so much
to my father upon it, that he had not spoke to him for three days; and
were I, said he, as happy as you, I did not care if he never spoke to me
more, for it is an Herculean labour to humour the caprice and peevishness
of his disposition. He would have been glad to see Mr. O'Neill on his own
account, but could not think of making an acquaintance through your
means. This, my dear Jack is the honest truth, and you, who know him so
well, must pity my condition.

My brother and I parted, after mutual assurances of inviolable affection,
and a promise to correspond with each other. Mr. O'Neill now prepared for
our Northern expedition, and we were accompanied out of town by Arthur
Hill, Esq. brother to the Earl of Hillsborough, who is, perhaps, the most
accomplished gentleman in Europe. There is in his conversation, ease,
accuracy, and true humour; blended with the most refined delicacy, and
all the ornaments of education. A person of the smallest capacity might,
from one twelve-months conversation with Mr. Hill, be made acquainted
with all that is necessary to constitute the character of a great man. I
can never sufficiently thank Mr. O'Neill for introducing me to this great
and good man, and to another whom I shall hereafter mention, whose
friendship I have carried through all the rubbish of my misfortunes,
which I esteem as great an honour as I can possibly boast of.



CHAPTER VIII.
My Stay in Shane's Castle

The roads all through Ireland are extremely good, which makes travelling
there very pleasant; but I observed, that the farther North we went, the
worse our accommodations at the inns were; but this was amply recompensed
by the ingenious conversation of our fellow traveller, who had something
peculiarly good to say upon every subject, and would make even his talk
to the landlord, or the ostler, a scene of humour and entertainment. The
second day we were upon the road, I made choice to go in a one-horse
Dutch chaise with Mr. Hill's steward, to enjoy the fine air and prospect.
We had a footman to lead the chaise, as the horse who carried us was an
old offender, and apt to do mischief when he conveniently could; but Mr.
Hill's steward, just as we came to the top of a very steep mountain,
ordered the footman to fall back, and undertook to manage the chaise
himself. The moment the horse found himself free from restraint, he set
out in a full gallop down the hill, so that nothing could stop him till
he had dragged the carriage after him for a mile and a half; and at last
leaping over a large ditch of water, left the chaise behind him in it,
with one of the shafts above a foot driven into the opposite bank, within
a few inches of where my body fell, almost without life. The servants,
who had all pursued us, by this time came and found me in a most
disastrous plight, up to my waist in water and mud, pale and trembling.

As soon as the two gentlemen came up, they said and did everything to
comfort me; but as there was no inn for some miles, I was put into the
chariot with Mr. Hill, and Mr. O'Neill rode on horseback, till we came to
Hillsborough, and there stopped at Lord Hillsborough's house. The
gentlemen would have persuaded me to go to bed, but as I found that after
taking a glass or two of wine I was as well as ever; I just comforted
myself with a change of clothes, and was fit to travel. I enquired
several times what became of the steward who was with me, and how he had
escaped; but received such ambiguous answers, as gave me reason to
conclude his brains were dashed out.

Certainly no person living had ever two more extraordinary escapes from
sudden death than I, in this, and the Ballycotton affair before-
mentioned; and yet there are two subsequent ones equally wonderful, the
reflecting on which is sometimes the most cordial antidote against
despair.

For surely, as inconsiderable an atom as I am in the work of creation, I
am, nevertheless, under the special protection of an Almighty God, the
sole disposer of all events; and I can't help persuading myself, that
unless he designed me for some better fate than I have hitherto enjoyed,
it would have been more consistent with his mercy and justice to have
then let me find mortality, than to prolong a life of pain, sickness and
adversity. Perhaps the divines may cavil at this manner of arguing, if
they do I cannot possibly help it.

From Hillsborough, we went directly to Mr. Hill's country seat, where we
continued some days; and where painting, sculpture, architecture, books,
music, conversation, with the most hospitable treatment, conspired to
show the greatness of the gentleman whole guest we had the honour to be.

From hence, without meeting anything remarkable, we came to Shane's
Castle, a most dreary old mansion, situated on the banks of Lough Neagh.
[Note: To explain the word Lough to my readers, I believe it signifies a
lake, or large body of standing water, without any communication with the
sea. This Lough is remarkable for its petrifying qualities, and will turn
wood into hard stone, as I have been told, but never saw a proof of it] 
The town or village about it is composed of miserable little cottages,
chiefly inhabited by fishermen, who make a livelihood of the salmon,
which is taken here in great plenty. In the inside of this castle, which
formerly belonged to the famous Shane O'Neill, and which might in those
days have been a strongly fortified place, the rooms are mostly hung with
old fashioned tapestry, and the stairs and floors built of black Irish
oak, which the servants keep clean by rubbing with beeswax and a hard
brush; so that it reflects a gloomy gloss, and is not altogether safe to
walk upon: in short, the whole scene brought Mr. Pope's lines to my
memory.

She went to rivers, and to purling brooks,
Old fashioned halls, dull aunts, and croaking rooks.

Shane's Castle might inspire veneration, like Henry the VIIth's chapel in
Westminster Abbey, but was by no means calculated to inspire delight.
Upon our coming here, we were visited by the Earl of Antrim and Lord
Masserene, with their ladies; and whether the compliment of their
approving me, and my singing, was paid to Mr. O'Neill's judgment, or to 
any real merit they found in it, I know not, but certainly I had great
encomiums.

Mr. O'Neill had been at considerable expense to have a pleasure boat
built to sail upon the Lough; which, though it is all fresh water, is as
rough a sea at sometimes as the Bay of Biscay, being near fifty miles in
circumference, interspersed with many small uninhabited islands. I am to
inform my readers, that, from my infancy, I have been of a timid temper
and delicate constitution, unfitted by form or abilities for any athletic
undertakings; and the dread I had of sea-sickness, from my former
experience of it, made me have no gout for maritime expeditions.
Notwithstanding the boat, as she lay at anchor opposite to Mr. O'Neill's
dressing room window, with her streamers flying, looked very pretty, yet
I saw no necessity for trusting the precarious element of water, more
than I did for mounting one of Mr. O'Neill's running horses. Therefore
when a considerable party was made to go and take a few days recreation
on the Lough, I heartily begged I might not be of the number, and gave my
reasons why I objected to it; but these had so little weight with the
polite Mr. O'Neill, that he absolutely used force to bring me, and
completely to pull of the mask of good manners, so long worn with
constraint. As soon as the small boat brought us on board, he obliged a
contrivance to be made to haul me up to the top of the mast, while four
and twenty patteraroes were discharged: 'tis true, I sustained no damage
by it, but the horror of my danger, and the vexation of being so
contemptuously treated, joined to my being extremely sick the moment the
boat was unmoored, were sufficient to take from any pleasure I could
possibly afterwards enjoy. When we cast anchor before a beautiful island,
and went ashore, where there were tents pitched for us, and we had
several salmon taken, and roasted whole on wooden spits before a large
fire of wood, besides all sorts of cold provisions and wine; to complete
this entertainment, Mr. O'Neill would have had me fang, but I absolutely
refused to do it; telling him, that if he brought me here for a buffoon
and a laughing-stock, he should never have made me his companion. He then
passed a good many ironical sneers on my greatness and dignity, which he
was sorry to have offended. 'Tis true, Sir, said I, I am neither great,
nor dignified by title or estate, but I am the son of a gentleman, whose
distresses have brought him under your protection. Every instance of your
friendship to me is gratefully registered on my heart, but a few
instances of this kind would be sufficient to erase them from it. Whether
Mr O'Neill was really ashamed of what he had done, or only affected to be
so, is hard to say; but I had reason to believe he was, from his very
seriously asking my pardon, and assuring me if I was his son, he would
have done the same, since nothing was so unbecoming in a:young gentleman
as cowardice; and as you know, Jack, I have ever behaved to you like a
father; and ever mean to do so, it is my duty, when I see a weakness in
you, to endeavour to remove it. After I had given ease to my heart by a
few tears, I accepted the treaty of peace, sincerely forgot what had
passed, and voluntarily offered to sing. Upon this occasion Mr. O'Neill
expressed great satisfaction; for, said he, Jack, I find you have a
proper degree of resentment, and a superlative degree of good-nature.

Mr. O'Neill is a gentleman of what the world calls extreme good sense: he
has learning enough to give him an insight into all things requisite for
a man of five thousand pounds a year to know; and prudence enough to
manage both his fortune and knowledge, in such a manner, as never to
suffer either to be called in question or impaired: for instance, when he
is in company, where topics arise, that seem difficult to him, he either
acknowledges his deficiency, and desires information, or else is entirely
silent. Upon the other hand, with regard to his fortune, he pays all his
tradesmen himself; and as he constantly pays ready money for every
article the moment it comes home, he has things considerably cheaper than
most other gentlemen, and has besides an unblemished reputation. I
observed, that, whilst I was at Shane's Cattle, no man ever more
zealously strove to make his company drink too much than Mr. O'Neill, yet
no man living was more careful to avoid doing so himself; for this
reason, he always took care to have variety of bottles and glasses on the
table, and perhaps, while the company were drinking deep of claret, he,
under pretence of drinking champagne, had a bottle of Bristol water. He
frequently endeavoured to fasten an extraordinary glass upon me, but
without the least success; as I not only was averse to all sorts of
liquor, but likewise knew the remarks he had made on others, who had
suffered themselves to be over-persuaded in that respect. From this and
what I have formerly said, I fancy the general character of this
gentleman may be guessed at by the discerning part of my readers. Mr.
O'Neill is rather a sportsman, than a man of talk; rather a just, than a
generous man; and rather a man of sense, than a man of letters. There is
one thing I am highly emulous to do in the course of my descriptions, and
that is, to take my reader by the hand, and introduce him into the
company and intimate conversation of the person I would have him
acquainted with. There are some authors who have wrote volumes, called,
The lives of the poets: The only information we receive from whom, is,
that they were born at such a time, wrote at another, and died at last;
all which common reason lets us know, and as Shakespeare observes,

"There needs no ghost come from the grave to tell us this."

I would, rather hear one hour of a great man's unreserved conversation
with a friend, and be more capable to form an idea of him from thence,
than fifty pages penned in the ordinary of Newgate's style, about his
life, parentage and education. Without a compliment to the memory of my
mother, I think her bringing her readers to dinner with Dean Swift, has
made them more intimate with the cast of that great man's temper, than
other noble efforts that have been made to give him to the world in a
proper light.—As I never disguised any part of my story from Mr. O'Neill,
I was one afternoon giving him a humorous description of Captain
Poekrich, the glass projector, and likewise what hardships I had
undergone with him; Mr. O'Neill knew the man, and told me, that if he was
to come down to Shane's Castle he would get him a large benefit at
Antrim, entertain him at his own house, and withal that he would be glad
if I wrote to him to him that effect. [Note: This unhappy person was
burnt in the late fire, near the Royal-Exchange, Cornhill, Saturday,
Nov., 10, 1759.] Though I had no regard for the Captain, I was fond of
his performances, and as I knew his coming would occasion a public
meeting, and likewise show the Captain the influence I had here. I wrote
him word what Mr. O'Neill mentioned,  but did not receive an answer, as
we the next day set out for Dawson's bridge, in the county of Derry, the
seat of Arthur Dawson, Esq. one of the Barons of the Court of Exchequer,
and brother-in-law to Mr. O'Neill. On our way hither we stayed one night
at a place, called the ferry, where there is a small river, and where
fine large eels are in such plenty, that any quantity of them may be
caught at half an hour's warning: as the place afforded nothing but this
fish and some coarse bread, we had some taken for us; as they were very
delicate in their kind, we made a hearty supper of them, drinking some
whiskey punch to wash it down, the only liquor that could be had.

I found my condition at Dawson's bridge much happier than it had been at
Shane's Castle; not only as both the Baron and his lady received me with
the tenderest regard, but likewise, because they had a son about my age,
whom I found a very agreeable companion in. The Baron's mansion house was
then out of repair, and going to be rebuilt; but his discourse was a
perpetual feast of nectared sweets, through which were conveyed to his
auditors, with modesty, affability and manly grace, the abstract of all
human knowledge. The Baron had known my mother and her family in happier
hours; and was so kind to represent her and them in such an amiable light
to Mr: O'Neill, and to express so much regret for the injuries had been
done her in fortune and fame, that Mr. O'Neill, who only knew her story
from general report, which is seldom partial to the unhappy, began to
look on me in a different light from what he had heretofore done; and to
complete the whole, he assured Mr. O'Neill that my mother was descended
from as noble a family as any in Ireland; but the adherence of her
ancestor, Patrick Sarsfield (Lord Lucan, son to the Earl of Kilmallock)
to King James the second, whose General he was during the wars in
Ireland, and who accompanied him to France, and afterwards lost his life
in Flanders, had impaired the fortune of the family, but not in such a
manner as to deprive those who conformed to the present establishment of
estate and dignity.

The Baron was a gentleman of a grave, reserved and penetrating aspect,
though extremely handsome both in his person and countenance; but he had
such an unbounded flow of real wit and true humour, that he said more
good things in half an hour, and forgot them the next, than half the
comic writers in the world have introduced into their plays; and what
added to the delight such an entertainment must afford, was, that it was
all genuine, unstudied and concise; so that while he set,

Laughter holding both her sides

He appeared himself with the same steadfastness that accompanied him on
the bench as a judge; and so happy was this great man in the talent of
unbending his mind, that he could even make companions of his son and
myself, though both so young and giddy; nay, he would adapt his discourse
exactly to our degree of comprehension, and by that means become master
of our minutest thoughts. He has wandered with us for hours through his
wide domains, leaped over ditches, looked for birds' nests, flown a kite,
and played at marbles: he might in this respect be compared to that great
Roman, who, when called on to serve the senate, was found toying amongst
his children.

I remember one day after dinner, when the company were inclined to be
grave, he looked very earnestly at me, and then addressed himself to Mr.
O'Neill: "I'm sorry, dear brother, that my skill in astrology, has led me
into one secret of the events of time; and that is, that Jack Pilkington
will come before me to be tried for his life, the particular fact I am
not acquainted with, but it will probably be for sheep-stealing; very
well, Sir, said he, to me, when you hold up your hand at the bar, hold
two fingers up and two down, in token of the promise I now make you, in
regard to your family and Mr. O'Neill; though the proof should be ever so
home against you, such as your having sold the skin, made broth of the
head, and candles of the tallow, yet have a good heart, I'll bring you
safely off for this time. Since ever I was a judge, I never saved a
criminal at one assize, that I had not the trouble to condemn the next;
and as you seem of an aspiring temper, 'tis most likely the second effort
of your genius will be made in horse-stealing; very, well, Sir, hold upon
this occasion but one finger up, and I'll save you: but the third time
hold up your whole hand, for I cannot wrong my conscience any further;
hanged you must be, till you are dead; dead; dead! and the Lord have
mercy on your soul.

I returned the Baron many thanks, and told him, the only person I would
wish to rob, would be himself.—Hold there, Sir, said he, I am exempted;
what, rob a judge! if you begin that way I'll take you up on suspicion. I
mean only to take that from you, Sir, which you can spare without even
missing, learning, taste and eloquence. Upon my word, said Mr. O'Neill, I
never heard Jack make such a speech before. I'll tell you, Sir, said the
Baron, he's flattering for a reprieve the third time; but he must use
your interest for that, I have done for him all I can do.

The Baron told us, that when he was a templer in London, he used
sometimes, to dine at an ordinary, whereto a Scotsman frequently came,
who wore very dirty linen. He was one day, after dinner, leaning on his
elbow, and informing a French barber, who sat next him, of what an
illustrious pedigree he was descended: in the meantime, said the Baron, a
great black louse frequently sauntered out of the wrist of his shirt
along his hand and the Scotsman, slyly looking round to see that none
observed him, instead of throwing it away, or destroying it, as I
expected, put it with his finger and thumb very tenderly up again. The
barber, who had observed him, cried, le diable! mon ami, why you not kill
de lousee, who plague you so? D—n your saul, said the Caledonian, he's
the heed of a clon, and if I molest him, they'll come down by ten
thousands for revenge. I thought, said the Baron, it was full time for me
now to make my escape, and took care how dined with a Scotsman ever
after.

Talking of the Scots brought another story on the tapis, but by whom
related I don't remember. The bishop of Cork, a great virtuoso, a learned
and hospitable man, used whenever he saw a stranger at church, in the 
appearance of a gentleman, to invite him home to dinner, There happened a
regiment to be quartered in Cork, several of whom were of that nation. An
English gentleman, who was likewise an officer, but extremely fond of a
jest, asked a North British commander to go to church with him one Sunday
morning, well knowing the Bishop would invite them both; They accordingly
went, and as they came out, the Bishop, who knew the English gentleman,
sent his compliments to him, and if he and his friend were not engaged,
should be glad of their company to dinner. The Englishman pressed the
other to go, though he made several objections; at last he prevailed by
telling him the Bishop was a person of great interest, and might be very
serviceable to him. When arrived within a quarter of a mile of the house,
Gads so! said the Englishman, I forgot to ask you one very material
question, and that is, whether you have your catechism by heart? for it
is his Lordship's custom after dinner to examine the company round. "Deel
rive my saul, quo he, gin I kin a word ont." Well, well, returned his
friend, he always begins with the greatest stranger, and if you can
answer the first question, it will hardly come to your turn again. Upon
examining the prayer-book, he found it was only to tell his Christian
name; but to make sure work of it, he got the second also, and was
conning it in his mind till they arrived at the house; where his Lordship
received them with all imaginable politeness, showing them his study, his
cabinet of curiosities, his gardens, improvements, and, in short,
everything that could manifest his own judgment and give them pleasure.
At length the bell rung for dinner; and after it was over the ladies
retired, and bottles and glasses were placed on the table. The Bishop,
who had a mind to drink the stranger's health, said, Captain, may I crave
your name? The Scotsman instantly stood up, and answered, "William, my
Lord;" and, without giving the Bishop time to say any more, ran on with
"my godfathers and godmothers, in my baptism, where in I was made a
member of Chreest, a cheeld of God, and an inheritor of the kingdom of
Heeaven," &e. The bishop, who had not a grain of fanaticism in him, stood
amazed, and said, Sir, I hope you think I'm too much a gentleman to
catechise any anyone at my own table. The Englishman and the rest of the
company laughed immoderately, which completely put the captain out of
countenance. The other, who, was known to be a wag, honestly owned he had
done it for a joke; but the Scot told him he forgot the motto of the
thistle, when he attempted to play upon him; however, there was no more
said about it, the evening was spent in great harmony, and the two
officers went home together: But the Scotsman was so far from forgiving
his acquaintance, that he challenged him to fight the next day, in spite
of all the concessions a man of honour could make, and terminated his
revenge by running him through the body, of which he died, leaving a
distressed family behind him.

This, said the Baron, is a comi-tragedy, and would have made a good
story, but for the catastrophe. I wish the Scot had adhered to his motto,
and only pricked him, instead of running him through the guts; but the
true meaning of the Scots motto is, Touch me not, lest I infect you.

Some days after this, to the great surprise of the Baron and all the
family, who never suspected I had the least itch for scribbling, I
produced at breakfast the following paraphrase on Mr. Dawson's story,
called

The Cautious Caledonian.

A Scotsman once in conversation
Was in a dreadful consternation
A louse that browsed about his neck,
Travelled abroad in search of peck;
Down his gigantic arm he strayed,
And from his wrist appearance made.
The prudent Scot, though filled with shame,
Still pulled him back from whence he came;
And talked as careless, gay and free,
Of his illustrious pedigree,
As if no sorrow could invade
The brawny Caledonian blade.
A French monsieur, who next him sat,
Presumed to give his friend a pat;
And said, mon bien ami, pray kill
A louse that bears you such ill will.
The wary Scot, cried, silence mon,
He is the chieftain of a clon,
Wha in ten thousands would descend,
Should I destroy their foremost friend.

The undeserved applauses this essay obtained from one of the most
competent judges of poetry in Europe, was, perhaps, the most unfortunate
circumstance could have befallen me, as it has set me rhyming from that
day to this. The compliment Mr. Dawson paid me on it was: It's a wise
son, boy, that knows his own father, nor could I myself swear you were
Matt. Pilkington's; but anyone who saw even this, would declare you the
son of Letty Pilkington, which is, by the by, a much greater honour to
you. It was customary in this family, instead of pushing the bottle about
after dinner, which is indeed too much practiced in Ireland, so that a
man, without keeping himself in a perpetual fever, by drinking to oblige
his friends, is not thought a tolerable companion for them; instead of so
destructive a method of at once killing time, reason, and ourselves, we
found the agreeable scheme of storytelling, in a rainy afternoon, as high
an entertainment as Bacchus in the house, or Ceres and Pomona in the
groves, could possibly have afforded to us.

Though I never was capable of being more than an humble auditor, yet, by
firm observance, and a good memory, I have brought off one, besides what
has already been said, which, though generally known to my noble
Hibernian subscribers, may not be so to my illustrious English ones; so
down it goes, and, as Falstaff says, 'twill fill a page as well as better
matter; that it is authentically true, may be depended on by all.

The late Earl of Ross was, in character and disposition, like the
humorous Earl of Rochester; he had an infinite fund of wit, great
spirits, and a liberal heart; was fond of all the vices which the beau
monde call pleasures, and by those means first impaired his fortune, as
much as he possibly could do; and finally, his health beyond repair. To
recite any part of his wit here is impossible, though I have heard much
of it, but as it either tended to blasphemy, or at best obscenity, its
better where it is. A nobleman could not, in so censorious a place as
Dublin, lead a life of rackets, brawls, and midnight confusion, without
being a general topic for reproach, and having fifty thousand faults
invented to complete the number of those he had: nay, some asserted, that
he dealt avec le diable; established a hell-fire club at the Eagle tavern
on Cork hill; and that one W——, a mighty innocent facetious painter, who
was indeed only the agent of his gallantry, was a party concerned; but
what won't malicious folks say? Be it as it will, his Lordship's
character was torn to pieces everywhere, except at the groom porter,
where he was a man of honour; and at the taverns, where none surpassed
him for generosity. Having led this life till it brought him to death's
door, his neighbour, the Reverend Dean Madden, a man, of exemplary piety
and virtue, having heard his Lordship was given over, thought it his duty
to write him a very pathetic letter, to remind him of his past life; the
particulars of which he mentioned, such as whoring, gaming, drinking,
rioting, turning day into night, blaspheming his maker, and, in short,
all manner of wickedness; and exhorting him in the tenderest manner to
employ the few moments that remained to him, in penitently confessing his
manifold transgressions, and soliciting his pardon from an offended
deity, before whom he was shortly to appear.

It is necessary to acquaint the reader, that the late Earl of Kildare was
one of the most pious noblemen of the age; and in every respect a
contrast in character to Lord Ross.

When Lord Ross, who retained his senses to the last moment, and died
rather for want of breath than want of spirits, read over the dean's
letter (which came to him under cover) he ordered it to be put in another
paper, sealed up, and directed to the Earl of Kildare: he likewise
prevailed on the Dean's servant to carry it, and to say it came from his
master, which he was encouraged to do by a couple of guineas, and his
knowing nothing of its contents. Lord Kildare was an effeminate, puny,
little man, extremely formal and delicate, insomuch, that when he was
married to Lady Mary O'Brien, one of the most shining beauties then in
the world, he would not take his wedding gloves off when he went to bed.
From this single instance may be judged, with what surprise and
indignation he read over the Dean's letter, containing so many
accusations for crimes he knew himself entirely innocent of. He first ran
to his lady, and informed her that Dean Madden was actually mad; to prove
which, he delivered her the epistle he had just received. Her ladyship
was as much confounded and amazed at it as he could possibly be, but
withal, observed the letter was not written in the style of a mad man,
and advised him to go to the Archbishop of Dublin about it. Accordingly,
his Lordship ordered his coach, and went to the episcopal palace, where
he found his Grace at home and immediately accosted him in this manner:
Pray, my Lord, did you ever hear that I was a blasphemer,a whore-monger,
a gamester, a rioter, and everything that's base and infamous? You, my
Lord, said the Bishop, everyone knows you are the pattern of humility,
godliness and virtue. Well, my Lord, what satisfaction can I have of a
learned and reverend Divine, who, under his own hand, lays all this to my
charge. Surely, answered his Grace, no man in his senses, that knew your
Lordship, would presume to do it; and if any clergyman has done it, your
Lordship will have ample satisfaction from the spiritual court. Upon this
Lord Kildare delivered to his Grace the Dean's letter, which he told him
was that morning given to his porter, by the Dean's servant, and which
both the Archbishop and the Earl knew to be Dean Madden's handwriting.
The Archbishop immediately sent for the Dean, who happening to be at
home, instantly obeyed the summons. Before he entered the room, his Grace
advised Lord Kildare to walk into another apartment, while he discoursed
the Doctor about it, which his Lordship accordingly did. When the Dean
entered, his Grace looking very sternly, demanded if he had wrote that
letter? The Dean answered, I did, my Lord. Mr. Dean, I always thought you
a man of sense and prudence, but this unguarded action must lessen you in
the esteem of all good men; to throw out so many causeless invectives
against the mot unblemished nobleman in Europe, and accuse him of crimes
to which he and his ancestors have ever been strangers, must be the
effect either of a distempered brain or a corroded heart: besides, Mr.
Dean, you have by this means laid yourself open to a prosecution in the
ecclesiastical court, which will either oblige you publicly to recant
what you have said, or to give up your possessions in the church. My
Lord, answered the Dean, I never either think, act, or write anything,
for which I am afraid to be called to an account, before any tribunal
upon earth; and if I am to be prosecuted for discharging the duties of my
function, I will suffer patiently the severest penalties in justification
of it. Upon this the Dean retired with some emotion, and left the two
noblemen as much in the dark as ever. Lord Kildare went home and sent for
a proctor of the spiritual court, to whom he committed the Dean's letter,
and ordered a citation to be sent to him as soon as possible. In the
meantime the Archbishop, who knew the Dean had a family to provide for,
and foresaw that ruin must attend his entering into a suit with so
powerful a peer, went to his house, and recommended to him to ask my
Lord's pardon, before the matter became public. Ask his pardon, said the
Dean, why the man is dead. What Lord Kildare? No, Lord Ross. Good God,
said the Bishop, did not you send a letter yesterday to Lord Kildare by
your own servant? No truly, my Lord, the man can witness I sent it to the
unhappy Earl of Ross, who was then given over, and I thought it my duty
so to do. Upon examining the footman the whole mistake was rectified, and
the Dean saw with real regret that Lord Ross died as he lived; nor did he
continue in this life above four hours after he sent off the letter. The
poor footman lost his place by the jest, and was indeed the only sufferer
for my Lord's last piece of humour. But to return.

Some strange gentlemen arriving at Dawson's bridge, there was a hunting
match proposed, to which we all repaired by daybreak the next morning,
and very shortly started a hare: when it was almost run down. Mr.
O'Neill, who had a fowling piece charged with bullets in his hand, and
who perceived by the course the hare took that it would come within shot
of him, asked me if he should let fly at her? I advised him to do it by
all means. He therefore stood cocked and primed, and just as madam puss
came near enough for her approaching fate, I run across the piece at the
instant it went off, and only had a little breach made in my coat at the
hip, and a slight graze of a ball. Mr. O'Neill, who knew the danger I had
exposed myself to much better than I did myself, was very much frighted,
and protested I should, never run any more risks of my life with him, in
pursuit of pleasure. This was the first of the escapes from death I
formerly mentioned, the other is rather more surprising.

At our return to Shane's-Castle I found a very thankful letter from
Captain Poekrich, with a promise that he would immediately set out for
this place. When I showed it to Mr. O'Neill he seemed surprised, and
asked me by what authority I had given such an invitation? I reminded him
of our conversation on that head, and said I should never have taken such
a liberty without it had been an absolute request of Mr. O'Neill. He
protested he remembered nothing of it, and he thought one encumbrance
sufficient. This was an unexpected stab, which I plainly understood, and
warmly replied to, by telling him, his present encumbrance, if he meant
me, was easily got rid of; that my misfortunes had not got the better of
that decent degree of pride which every rational creature ought to have:—
but the truth was this; my voice now began to break into a hoarse
disagreeable tenor, and I being no longer the object of amusement, was
likely to become the object of contempt. All the fine promises formerly
made to me were entirely forgotten, and young as I was, I could not but
feel resentment at this behaviour, and penetrate into its causes.
However, Mr. O'Neill, who had so recently recommended me to all his
acquaintances, and told them his intentions were to provide handsomely
for me, wanted a more plausible pretext for an open breach than had
hitherto preferred itself from the course of my behaviour.

As a mutual coolness from this day took place in us both, we seldom met,
except at mealtimes, and then discoursed of nothing but the weather; and,
in short, began as politely to detest one another, as any well-bred Lord
and Lady in the world do; and that is speaking largely, in an age where
every refined passion of the soul, every beauteous idea of the mind,
every generous sentiment of the heart, are shuffled up in a pack of
cards; where the dupe who loses, or the sharper who wins, is the only
respected creature in society. Tell a fine lady that Shakespeare wrote
like an angel; she answers, how did he play at whist? Nay, the name of
Pope would have been insipid, only that the Rape of the Lock shows how
eminent a master of gaming he was. In short, I take it for granted, that
no subject will now please, but cards, cards, cards; and therefore I
humbly propose to write a paraphrase upon Hoyle, as soon as I have
finished this; which, neatly bound in Turkey, a lady may read at church
instead of her prayer book; and it will prove of more service to her in
the business of the afternoon, namely, cards, than getting a whole sermon
by rote. The next push I intend to make for public favour, is to write
the pedigree of all the running horses that ever existed, and their
peculiar qualities, in heroic verse, which will not make a larger volume
than the profound Blackmore's Prince Arthur. 'Tis with the sincerest
regret I confess, that I am at present unequal to so glorious, useful,
and profitable an undertaking; though I might have had sufficient
knowledge of it, could I have relished the company of grooms and
postilions at Shane's Castle, or indeed given a proper attention to the
Squire himself, whose favourite subjects those things were; but I don't
despair, by drinking a butt or two of porter, and exhaling the aromatic
flavour of a pound or two of tobacco, at some livery stable, to be an
accomplished master of the subject in a year or two: if then I can close
the whole with an elegant essay on cock-fighting, I shall at least be
esteemed the master-piece of the present age, though I fail to transmit
my fame to future ones. If I should not succeed in these laudable
attempts as a writer, my familiarity with those important affairs, will
enable me to get my livelihood as a Sharper; many of whom are admitted
into the best companies, and regaled on Ortolans and Champagne, while the
sons of Apollo are left to drink the Helicon stream, or ditch water if
they please. After modestly asking, "are not these things so?" I'll
return from this digression to finish my adventures at Shane's Castle,
wherein I shall be very concise, being already tired of the subject, and
fearing my readers are so too. My life here began to be very insipid, I
had no company or books; for though Mr. O'Neill had promised access to
his library, which in all probability was in Monde de la Lune, yet I
never even saw a book in the house, and therefore have some cause to
suspect there were none.

One very calm serene morning I got up sooner than any of the family, and
taking a solitary walk by the Lough, that now appeared like a looking-
glass, in which the fair face of the rising day was reflected with
bewitching loveliness, I took the small boat that lay near the shore, and
thought to have paddled myself on board the large one, about a quarter of
a mile off.  The boat was no sooner adrift than I perceived my own want
of skill to pilot her, and began to endeavour to get on shore, but these
efforts were unsuccessful: a small breeze from the land arising, the boat
drove before it, in spite of all my attempts, the wind increased, and the
water beginning to swell, I was obliged to relinquish my oar, and leave
myself to the mercy of the waves, expecting every moment to meet that
fate that so apparently threatened me. I continued in this dreadful
suspense till about ten o'clock, when Mr. O'Neill was going to breakfast,
and made enquiry after me; every place was searched, but poor Jack was
not to be found: On some of the servants going to the pier, whereto the
boat had been fastened, they discovered it was gone: Mr. O'Neill
immediately went to his study, which commanded an extensive prospect of
the water, and with a telescope discovered something just discernible, a
considerable distance from land. He immediately ordered all the fishing
boats out, and promised a handsome reward to the first who found the
boat, though he was not sure I was in it. Accordingly six or seven boats
set sail, but it was past three in the afternoon before they overtook me,
being by that time in the middle of the Lough: they found me lying flat
at the bottom of the vessel, almost dead with fear, wet, cold and hunger.
The sight of returning life to one on the brink of mortality, soon
cheered my spirits, nor could crowns, sceptres, or all the riches of the
East, inspire a greater transport in my breast, than the sight of these
honest fishermen. I embraced them with ecstasy, and besought them, for
heaven's sake, to put me anywhere on shore; if it was fifty miles from
Shane's Castle, I cared not. The fellows tugged loftily at their oars,
and by the time it was near dark brought me safely to the pier, where Mr.
O'Neill and all the family were assembled to meet us. The rapture I was
in at finding myself once more on terra firma, prevented my taking much
notice of the reproaches thrown on me by Mr. O'Neill, for my
indiscretion. I made the best of my way to the kitchen fire, where I had
some comfortable things given me, and immediately went to bed. The next
morning, when I came to breakfast, Mr. O'Neill told me, that this was the
fourth escape I had had from a sudden death within twelve months; and
that, as my family might impute any accident that happened me to his
negligence, he thought it was high time to resign his charge, and send me
home to my father. As this was a stroke I had for some time expected, it
did not much alarm me; nor did I indeed take any methods to evade it,
being heartily tired of an indolent, inactive, and unimproving life; I
therefore told him, that as I always had been ready to obey him in every
respect, he would find me so in this, except that I absolutely would not
return to my father, let my fate be what it would. I thought Jack, said
he, you would have expressed more concern for parting with me? In short,
Sir, said I, it has long been beyond a doubt, that you will feel no
concern for parting with me, otherwise this declaration of your intention
to send me home, would have been more dreadful than yesterday to me.
There is not a man in the world I love, honour, or esteem, half so much
as Mr. O'Neill, and consequently I cannot wish to make him uneasy for the
sake of a dependent subsistence: betides, Sir, as you never saw anything
immoral or indecent in my conduct, I can't but know, that if you had the
smallest esteem for me, this accident would rather excite your pity than
resentment, because it was such as might have befallen a person of more
years and discretion than myself, and that I have suffered severely for
it.

As my arguments did not tend to promote my longer continuance here, but
rather to show that this separation, was more his will than my fault, he
told me, that as he found I was weary of him, the stage-coach would leave
Belfast in a day or two, and I might take my passage in it to Dublin, if
I chose; but, said he, Jack, if you have a mind to stay, you are still
welcome, provided you will be a little more careful of yourself. I told 
him a hint to me was sufficient, and, without prolonging the discourse,
went and packed up all my things, which his valet, a most insinuating
deceitful fellow, took care to give him speedy information of. When I
came to dinner Mr. O'Neill again acquainted me, that what he spoke of my
going away was rather done to sound my inclination, than with any serious
intention that I should quit him; but he could not upon mature
deliberation but express his wonder at my forwardness to do it, when my
own sense must acquaint me how destitute I was of friends, and picture to
me the distresses such a step might involve me into; for believe me Jack,
said he, I will vindicate myself, by assuring everybody, your going, if
you do go, was the result of  your own pride and obstinacy; and that when
I only gently chid you for exposing your life to danger, and my mind to a
whole day's pain and anxiety, you went and prepared for a journey,
instead of endeavouring to palliate your fault, and promising a future
amendment. I told him I could not look on it as a crime, nor through the
fear of any distress descend to be a beggar for a maintenance. Well Jack,
said he, this spirit may be brought down, and you may again wish you had
continued with me at any rate: I shall not further oppose your desire of
going, and hope you may never find cause to repent it; so, said he, I'll
order a footman and, a couple of horses to convey you to Belfast to-
morrow, from whence you may take the stage home; and if it will not be
too great a piece of condescension, pray write to me when you get there,
and let me know what you further propose to do. I told him he did me much
honour in permitting me to be his correspondent, which I was too sensible
of to omit doing.



CHAPTER IX.
I Leave Mr. O'Neill. Life with Students in Dublin. Theatrical Quarrels. I
Resolve to go to Scotland.

Early the succeeding morning a footman came to tell me everything was
ready, and Mr. O'Neill waited breakfast for me.  When I came down I found
him reclined in a pensive manner, with his elbow on the table, and his
hand supporting his head: he continued silent for some time which made me
enquire if he was unwell? He said he had slept none all night, he was so
much concerned for my future happiness. I then gently reminded him how
much it was in his power to promote it, by even doing what himself
generously offered to me at Middleton. Jack, said he, you should have
embraced it then; I told you my temper was changeable, and you now
experience it. I answered, with tears in my eyes, it was but too
apparent. I have, said he, paid for your place in the coach, your
expenses on the road will not be great, and therefore I believe the sum I
shall give you will be sufficient to answer the end: laying this, he
slipped four half guineas into my hand, which I carelessly threw into my
coat pocket, and mounting my horse, was soon out of sight. Resentment for
some time kept up my spirits, but when I beheld myself in a bleak
lonesome country, without a friend near me, or the hope of meeting one
where I was going, and then my not having money sufficient, as I thought,
to pay my travelling expenses, sunk me into the deepest melancholy, which
could only find relief from a flood of tears: they continued plentifully
to flow till I came to Belfast, where Mr. O'Neill's servant left me.
Being called up before daybreak in the morning to take my place, the
dawning light discovered me in company with two clergymen and two ladies,
one of whom appeared a perfect beauty. The sight of the lovely charmer,
and the hope of being her companion for two or three days, dissipated,
for the present, all my gloomy reflections; and my having been so long
conversant with the nobility, and persons of fortune, made me talk so
much in their style, that I believe the company took me for such, at
least the consequence strongly indicated it; for when we stopped to
breakfast, one of the Levites, whom I afterwards learned was Archdeacon
Hutchison, now a prelate, said, that it was customary, where there were
more gentlemen than ladies in a coach, to treat them. To this, indeed,
nothing but the narrowness of my purse could make me have the least
objection, nor did I offer to do it publicly, whatever panics I felt
about it; but the other man, who was a dissenting parson, and as formal
as a full-dressed old maid, or a Methodist weaver in Spitalfields, warmly
opposed it, and said, let every one pay their own quota, I will pay for
no one but myself. This set us all on bantering the old gentleman, and
the amiable and lovely Miss Molly Wier began now to court him. He was
greatly enraged at being made the subject of our ridicule, and neither
liking the company or the expense, took his leave of us the next
afternoon. Miss Wier had a fine voice, and sung very well and very freely
for us. I had now but the ruins of my former voice, but made mine a foil
to her admirable one. The Arch-deacon was fond of poetry, and repeated 
several beautiful pieces to us, which, with other chat, made our journey
very agreeable: but, as we continued to pay for the ladies, my poor sum
was quite exhausted before I came within a few miles of Dublin; and
should certainly have been put to the blush on this occasion, but that,
as our last stage was at the Man of War, an excellent inn about twelve
miles from our journey's end, the ladies insisted on treating us, to an
entertainment more elegant than they had ever received from us, and more
expensive, I am certain, than our mutual cost upon the whole. We here
revealed ourselves to each other, and reciprocal invitations were passed
and received for our future better acquaintance. I was set down in Dublin
with about eighteen-pence in my pocket, most of which I had to pay for a
coach to carry my baggage somewhere, but the destination of it, or
myself, was undetermined till I was in it. My grandmother being then
alive, and lodging within a few doors of my father, I desired to be set
down there, as I knew I might deposit my portmanteau with her, though I
could not hope a night's lodging, that permission I found; but indeed
that was all, for she seemed in pain the few moments I stayed, lest I
should eat anything; but under pretence, that if my father knew she
received me; she might lose a little allowance she had from him for
support. My brother, who then lived with her, received me more cordially,
and procured me a bed with a school-fellow of ours, then a student in
Trinity College. He was a sensible good-natured lad, and as he became my
bed-fellow, I told him all my affairs. He said I should be welcome not
only to share his bed but his commons, which he would have brought to his
chamber while I continued with him. This he accordingly did, and though I
had not an elegant life, I had a very happy one, as my companion was
greatly beloved by all the young gentlemen that knew him, and received
frequent invitations, always bringing me with him wherever he went. My
brother, likewise, was frequently a sharer in our little parties of
recreation and entertainment; and my being capable to dress extremely
well, was far from making my company the less agreeable. My singing,
which had hitherto rendered me an idler as to my reading, being now quite
spoiled, I applied all my leisure hours to such books as my companion
studied (I know the critic will say here, "This young man's leisure hours
in the university must have been very few") I tell you, Sir, legebam, I
read or did read. If I did not improve, so as to please you, a pox of my
bringing up and my bad memory, for not retaining some scraps of Latin, to
lug in by head and shoulders, and make my female readers want an
interpreter.

My friend had a levee of young gentlemen every morning, who entertained
us with an account of all their adventures and different schemes to raise
money. There was one of them in particular, who did not belong to the
college, as he had been educated in the Romish religion, but was a
complete master of low humour, which will amuse young hearers, though not
create esteem; he had frequently breakfasted and dined with us, and as
frequently promised that he would one day or other give us a grand
entertainment at a tavern. We looked on him as a rattler, and had no
hopes of his keeping his word; but one evening, that three or four of us
were really at a loss how to compass a supper, he thundered at the door,
and jumping in, in full spirits, cried, come lads, come to Reyley's, I've
money enough.—Without saying more he flew for a coach, as there was a
standing of them near, and hurrying us all into it, ordered to drive to
the tavern. My dear lads, said he, how I bless the occasion that brings
us together Nectar, Ambrosia, Champagne, Burgundy, Turtles and Ortolans,
are at your service. Now regale my boys; I have, besides the most
extraordinary story to tell you, that you must laugh at in spite of your
teeth: any man that can hear it, and not burst his sides, will absolutely
give me offence. No, I'm determined to kill you first with good eating
and drinking, and bring you alive with laughter. By this time we were set
down, and Willy, for so the lads called him, stepped majestically up to
the bar, and ordered the coach to be paid for. Now gentlemen, said he,
walk to the larder, and let every man fix on what he likes best, as the
place was well stocked with fish, fowl, beef, mutton, ham and tongues. A
supper was soon concluded on, but when he heard there could no ortolans
be had, he was quite out of temper with the waiter, not fellow, said he,
that I ever eat one, but that I'm told they are damned expensive. Can't
you let us lave a pheasant or a turtle? He assured him they could not be
had. Well then, said he, bring up Burgundy, Champagne, Claret, Port,
Mountain and Sack. It may be supposed his talking at this rate procured
us the best room in the house, where we were no sooner seated, than the
waiter brought a bottle of each of the wines he had ordered. Go fetch
them up by dozens you rascal, said he and in the meantime order your
matter to make an inundation of rum, and a sea of rack punch. He had
talked all this without permitting us to utter our astonishment. We all
knew he was kept very poorly as to his pocket, very seldom having two
shillings to command, which made us quite impatient to know on what
foundation this mighty fabric was erected. He besought us to suspend our
curiosity till we had drank one bottle apiece; which was done before
supper was ready. In the meantime he exerted all his humour to divert us
from coming to his fifth act, as he termed it, before we had attended to
the first; so that other conversation arising, the bottle moving briskly
about, and the entrance of supper, a most welcome sight to a parcel of
hungry sophisters, kept us from further enquiry. Before supper was well
over, a fiddler, a harper, and a piper, came to know if our honours
wanted music; and as the wine put our spirits a little more upon a par
with Willy's, we unanimously voted the band of music into the room, where
they struck up immediately, and added much to our enjoyment, as they were
ordered not to play but such tunes as were demanded. This mirth kept us
awake till near four in the morning; at which time, having all drank too
freely, it was necessary to come to an eclaircissement about the
reckoning. Willy called the waiter, who had made out our bill upwards of
twelve pounds. After he had received this, he insisted on our drinking
the parting bottle, and hearing the history of his acquisition.

You must know, said he, my mother is the most arrant old hypocrite this
day upon earth. She has money hid in every hole and corner of the house:
sometimes she lends it out to use; and frequently in a morning, when she
is in the midst of her devotion over her beads, she calls my brother to
be sure to arrest such a man, and take care that the interest is paid for
such and such sums. She does not allow me a shilling from year to year,
nor have I any comfort but what I industriously procure by stealing from
her. She generally keeps her cash in a Christmas box, which she guards
like the apple of her eye, and which I have made a thousand unsuccessful
attempts to steal. Last night my better genius inspired me with a
stratagem, which, not to anticipate your pleasure, you shall particularly
hear: she has been a long time teasing me to go to confession, and to
make my soul, as the terms it, with father Murphy:—and when I have
refused her, she cried, Jesus, Mary and Joseph, take you out of my sight;
if you were but with Mary and Joseph, my cares would be all over. I went
home last night, and she was just lain down in bed. I entered the
chamber, and falling on my knees, besought her blessing and forgiveness
of all my crimes, as I had been with father Murphy, and he had enjoined
me first to do that, and then fast for three days, incessantly praying to
Mary and Joseph. The old woman was so delighted with this account, that
she sat up in the bed, and besought Mary and Joseph to take me into their
special protection. In the meantime, said he, I lost not the fair
opportunity of diving into the pocket under her head for a Christmas box,
which I have triumphantly brought off without the least suspicion, and my
dear mother has had a peaceable night's rest through my deception. The
moment I got the prize I flew to you, my dear boys, without ever
examining the contents; so saying, he pulled out the box; threw it on the
table, and desired one who sat next to him to count it out pro bono
publico. The lad found it weighty, and concluded it contained at least
twenty pieces; but upon unscrewing it there appeared, to our mutual
confusion, the lead of a woman's sleeve, and about a dozen of large black
patches. By G—d, said Willy; we are totally ruined; the old woman has
lost her nose, and these are the patches she puts on it, which I have
mistaken for a box of the same size that she keeps her cash in.

How the reckoning was to be paid became now seriously the question, for
five shillings was not in the company. Some of the lads took their hats,
and made the best of their way out, so that only myself and two others
remained to see the catastrophe. He besought us to go and leave him to
his meditations, for I know, said he, if the worst comes to the worst,
the old woman will redeem me: But damn it, said he, I'll try another
stratagem. Upon this he called the waiter, and asked where his master
was? The boy told him in bed. Well, said he, go ask him if he can change
me a fifty pound bank note. The boy brought word he could not, but if his
honour would sign the bill, and leave his direction, it was the same
thing. This he readily did, and departed in high spirits. He came to us
the next evening, and told us his mother had paid the bill upon sight,
without the least hesitation; from whence, said he, I conclude she is
either gone mad, or else very near her end.

In my walks through the city, I met the unfortunate Captain Poekrich, who
told me he was just returned from Shane's Castle, which journey he took
at my instigation, and had not got as much by it as paid his expenses;
however, he said, Mr. O'Neill had entertained him, and spoke very kindly
of me. Well, Captain, said I, I am sorry you had no better success, but
your disappointment there, was not more intolerable than mine in the
hundred a year.

During my residence in the college I became acquainted with an agreeable
set of people, some of whom it may not be improper to name. Colonel
Newburgh, that I have formerly mentioned, is both a lover and professor
of music and poetry. He was intimate with Mr. Burroughs, then a Master of
Arts in the College, and introduced me to that gentleman, who was upon
many occasions very kind to me. He has a fine Poetical Genius, and has
published some specimens of it. Upon the death of Mr. Pope, one
Dalicourt, a clergyman, and an indifferent poet, wrote an elegy, in which
he represented death in a charnel house, feeding his ravenous jaws on
departed merit. Upon this occasion Mr. Burroughs wrote the following
epigram:

When Dalicourt shall yield to fate,
And death the hapless poet eat;
If merit be his chief regale,
Poor death will have a sorry meal.

Amongst this company, I met with Mr. The. Cibber, whose late untimely end
may render some anecdotes of him now the more acceptable to my reader;
and as I study their entertainment more than regularity, I hope they will
pardon my digressions.

Old Mr. Cibber, who knew the precarious life of a player, determined, by
giving his son a good education, to qualify him for a better state; and
to this end he sent him to a university, and intended him for the law or
physic; but Theophilus had so strong a propensity to the stage, that the
first thing he ever disobliged his father in, was becoming a player. That
he excelled in several comic parts, has never been disputed even by his
enemies, of .which I believe no man ever had more. The Mock Doctor and
Scrub he was inimitable in, even to the last. Sir Courtly-Nice, Sir
Fopling Flutter, Sir Novelty Fashion, and Lord Foppington, were parts in
which he was generally applauded, and his being so seamed with the
smallpox, made the coxcomb more ridiculous by his playing it. Old Cibber
frequently declared to my mother, that he would never have believed
Theophilus was his son, but that he knew the mother of him was too proud
to be a whore.

On his first arrival in Dublin he was very well received, and entertained
in some of the best families, as I myself have been witness. The story of
his domestic infelicity was little known in Ireland; and his being rather
the gentleman than the comedian in private conversation, made him doubly
acceptable. Mr. Sheridan had then lately made his appearance, who being
the son of a clergyman, educated in their own university, and having a
pretty knack at spouting, became the favourite of the town in tragedy;
nor was Mr. Cibber less so in his comic capacity. But Mr. Sheridan, being
of a proud aspiring temper, took offence that anyone should be applauded
but himself; in consequence of which, he picked a quarrel with
Theophilus, about a tragedy robe, that he was to have worn in the part of
Cato, and made this pretence to dismiss a numerous and polite audience.
Cibber, who knew the nature of an audience much better than Sheridan,
when he found they murmured about being treated in this manner, came from
behind the scenes in the dress of Syphax, and offered to read the part of
Cato, if they would permit the play to proceed. The audience accepted of
him, and he acquitted himself to their satisfaction. ln the meantime,
Sheridan goes to the college, and acquaints the lads there that Cibber
had used him extremely ill, and had the impudence to attempt Cato, and to
keep the company after he had warned them to depart. This he alleged was
done to undermine his interest with the public, and to prepossess them in
Cibber's favour, who wanted to have the management of the Theatre in his
own hands. The young gentlemen, irritated by these insinuations, went in
a considerable body to the theatre, the next night that Cibber appeared,
bred a great disturbance, broke up the company, and obliged Theophilus to
procure the safety of his life, by making his escape through a window.

Upon this a literary dispute commenced between Theophilus Cibber,
comedian, and Thomas Sheridan, tragedian; which, on Cibber's part, was
supported with true wit and humour, wherein he exposed his antagonist,
and fairly confuted all his arguments. Sheridan who had neither wit,
candour or justice on his side, had recourse to malignity and dirt,
bringing over in a cruel manner Mr. Cibber's family affairs, which,
admitting the worst, had no connection with the present contest. However,
Cibber rallied him very genteelly on this head; and though Sheridan was
then perfectly idolized, Cibber got the laugh against him through the
whole dispute, as may be seen by looking over it pamphlet published in
Dublin, called Cibber and Sheridan, or the Dublin Miscellany.

But the many disturbances Mr. Sheridan's capricious, splenetic and
haughty temper has since occasioned in Dublin, and his frequently
affronting persons superior to him in birth and fortune, as if he
supported the town, instead of the town supporting him, at length cured
them of their partiality to this theatrical bashaw, and encouraged them 
to take arms and tear the house down about his ears. Upon this he came to
London, and practised all the arts of puffing himself off that had proved
so beneficial to him in Ireland; but played a whole season at Covent-
Garden, with universal disapprobation. He again returned to Dublin, and
upon a proper submission to the public, was again permitted to play; but
his ambition and envy made him decline admitting any one into the
company, whereof he was manager, whose merits could stand in any degree
of competition with his own, or who could at any time eclipse his glory.
This he endeavoured to gloss over, by decorating the play-house with
silver branches and new scenes: but as the nobility and gentry had too
long indulged his vanity, they at once forsook him, and subscribed to an
entire new play-house, which is now under the management of Mr. Woodward
and Mr. Barry, who have each of them merit to deserve encouragement, and
modesty enough to make a proper use of it.

Poor Theophilus, after encountering a thousand difficulties here, in
endeavouring to establish himself at the theatre in the Hay-market, was
going over to Barry and Woodward together with the surprising Maddox and
others, who were altogether shipwrecked, and every soul perished on the
coast of Scotland, 1758.

Mr. Sheridan, since his last defeat, is again returned here, and very
modestly proposes to talk four times in public, on the subject of
elocution, for which every hearer is to pay one guinea. Orator Henly
would have talked on the time subject four hundred times for one
sixpence, and he was a parson himself; and at least as good a scholar as
Mr. Sheridan; how he then, who is only a parson's son, can suppose a
nation will be so infatuated as to countenance this project is difficult
to account for.

I cannot help taking notice here of a speech made by Peter Daly, Esq, an
excellent Hibernian lawyer, who values himself on speaking with the
accent of his native country. He was employed for the defendant, in a
suit which Sheridan had commenced against Mr. Kelly, a gentleman of
fortune, for kicking him behind the scenes and pulling his nose
(treatment indeed a little too severe.) As soon as the cause was read
over Mr. Daly. stood up, and said, my Lord, I am employed as counshell
for —— Kelly, Esquire; but I don't undershtand who thish. Thomash
Sheridan, Gentleman, is. Sheridan's counsel answered, it was Mr.
Sheridan, patentee of the Theatre-Royal in Smock-Alley. Oh! says he, I
undershtand tish Mr. Sheridan the actor: well, I have heard of gentlemen
shailors and gentlemen tailors, but it's the firsht I heard of gentlemen
actors or gentlemen merry-andrews.

Some scribblers employed like me, in writing their own commentaries,
would swell their pages with the most pompous characters of themselves,
and endeavour to make matter of the most trivial circumstances of their
lives: nay, there are such as have drawn fictitious, menial and
insignificant persons, and made their hours of rising, going to bed, and
recreation, subjects for the pen. For my own part, being strictly
confined within the peals of truth, from which nothing can induce me to
deviate; I will rather pass over such pages of my story, as seem dull to
myself, than impose stupidity on my readers, merely because it is a part
of my adventures. For this reason, I shall briefly declare, that after I
had been near half a year with my friends in Trinity College, I received
a sum of money from a lady formerly mentioned herein to whom I
communicated my then present state by letter, with a particular detail of
what had befallen me at Shane's Castle; but a the lady conjured me never
to mention it, I have that regard to her memory, to be obedient to her
commands, though I fancy anyone who has read the foregoing part of this
work will be able, through the characters I have drawn, to trace the
dream from whence this bounty flowed. It behoved me to consider upon the
receipt of this, that it was my all, and therefore I was to make the most
provident use of it. I consulted my brother on this head, and told him at
the same time, I had a great desire to see Scotland, where I was told
provisions and learning were exceeding cheap. He assured me, that if I
could retire anywhere, till it was in his power to provide for me, he
would then demonstrate the sincerity of his affection towards me: that it
was very shocking to him, to see his family to cruelly separated, and to
find my father deaf to all his entreaties in my favour. In a strange
kingdom, said he, you may possibly meet with something to make you happy;
in the meantime, what consolation a correspondence with me can afford you
shall constantly have; and, my dearest Jack, I will strenuously exert all
my faculties in the college, which I shall enter in a few days, to obtain
some provision, that may enable me to lighten your distresses by an
allowance. Upon this. I determined to visit that kingdom, and in a few
days after taking leave of my worthy friends, and returning them thanks
for my past subsistence, over a little entertainment I had provided, they
accompanied me on board a Scotch collier, wherein I took my passage to a
sea port of Scotland, and arrived there the next day.



CHAPTER X.
I Arrive in Scotland.

Though the North of Ireland, which is said to resemble this kingdom very
much, afforded a most gloomy picture of miserable cottages, and hungry
inhabitants, yet this transcended it in that respect to the highest
degree; besides, the sharp biting air from the sea procured a keen
appetite, and the place afforded little or nothing to allay it. The
Captain with whom I came brought me to the best inn in the town (though
the worst in reality I had ever seen.) There happened to be a Mountebank
Doctor there at the same time, with whom I dined, and whose ignorance
afforded me much entertainment. But I confess he made one remark that was
not altogether absurd; for, said he, people may think me a fool, for
exposing the person of a gentleman on a public stage to a rabble; but I
have this day picked up five pounds among them for medicines, that never
stood me in ten shillings: Now, Sir, am I, who receives money, in this
manner, more guilty of folly than those who pay it to me? I could not but
acknowledge the balance of folly due to the people, which greatly pleased
the empiric.

The first sight of persons, places or things, is apt to impress a lasting
like or dislike to them on the mind; and so little did I relish North-
Britain, from its present appearance of poverty, formality and hypocrisy,
that when I retired at night to rest I resolved to go back to Dublin with
the first ship; but providence, the sole director of events, ordered it
otherwise. I had in my portmanteau, which was under my bed, some
tolerable clothes; about a dozen of fine shirts, and several pairs of
shoes, stockings and breeches, a little collection of the English
classics, and some other books; at the bottom of all which I had
deposited my cash; having only in my pocket about one pound fifteen
shillings. I went to bed at eleven o'clock at night, and at two in the
morning was awaked by a terrible voice, crying, "The house is on fire,
make the best of your way." My clothes and breeches lying on a chair
beside me, I had presence of mind enough to gather in my arms, and
running down stairs, had no occasion for a candle, the flames of the
adjacent buildings supplying sufficient light; and though I was almost
suffocated with smoke, I made my way into the street, naked as I was,
where I beheld a great crowd, amongst whom I mixed, and turning my eyes
towards the inn, beheld it all in a flame. I thanked God for the
preservation of my life, and put on my clothes, but my shoes and
stockings were consumed with the rest of my baggage; nor did I grieve
much at the accident, as I found enough in my pocket to keep me from
starving in a strange country, till I could hear from Ireland. I got into
a miserable ale-house, where I was glad to find admittance into a dirty
bed, being almost dead with standing in the cold bare-footed. I could
not, however, compose myself to sleep, but lay in the utmost pain and
sorrow, eagerly wishing for the morning. When I had lain about an hour in
this condition, the house quite still, and no creature near me, I felt
something come like a man's hand, as I thought, on my breast, and then
alternately over every part of my body. The melancholy frame of my mind
made this more terrible than can be imagined: I covered my head, thought
over my prayers, but had not power to utter a syllable, of to put out my
hand to feel. Sometimes I conjectured it was a robber, other times I
thought it a witch; at length I concluded it was the devil, and,
continued watching, sweating and praying till daybreak; for the
supernatural being laid itself all along behind me on the bed, and so
continued till returning light gave me courage to undeceive myself, and
behold it was a large greyhound that belonged to the house. As soon as I
had purchased a pair of shoes, stockings, and a hat, I went to enquire
for my host at the inn, and to pay my reckoning: I found the poor family
in the ruins of their house, in the extremest confusion. It seems a
servant, who attended the stables, had dropped a candle in the hay-loft,
and being afraid to mention it, after doing all he could, to extinguish
the fire, made his escape, and in his fright took the key of the stable
door with him, by which means some horses were burnt alive. The fellow
returned when the fire had spread too far to be put out; and by his
candid confession, and assiduity to save what could be preserved, removed
any suspicions that might arise of his having done it wilfully. The
people of the inn saved most of their valuable effects, and were just
going to abandon the house to the flames, when their daughter, a pretty
girl about nineteen; recollected of me, and endangered her own life to
preserve mine, otherwise I must have perished in the fire.—I thanked my
fair deliverer, whose comeliness I had before admired; and to whose
resolution and good-nature I stood indebted for life. The family enquired
what loss I had sustained, but as mentioning money, they had not seen,
might only induce them to think I boasted of more than I possessed, I
answered, I had in my portmanteau some clothes and books of no great
value. They would accept no payment for my entertainment the preceding
day, and made me many tenders of service, which, not knowing how to
return, I declined accepting of. The young girl seemed more intent on my
welfare than even the father and mother; and as I was obliged to continue
in my bunting lodging, came in the afternoon and brought some tea to me,
of which I told her I was very fond, and could get none in the town. She
begged I would tell her if I had lost my money with my clothes, or had
any about me. This led me to own to her, that I really had a trifle in my
portmanteau, which as I knew my speaking off would nothing avail, and
make me liable to be thought a deceiver, I imagined it most prudent to be
silent about; especially as I had, after buying the things I wanted,
enough to sustain nature till I heard from my friends. Then, said she,
with some emotion, you'll continue in town. I told her I would not; for
having had two such terrible disasters, the very first night of my
landing in a strange kingdom, I was determined to go to Glasgow, a city
about thirty Scots miles from thence, and wait there in some obscure
place till I could make an appearance. She took her leave with looks that
I was unwilling to understand, and promised to come in the morning with
some tea to me. After her departure I sat like a forlorn pilgrim in the
chimney, there being no conversable creature near me, nor had I even a
book to make company of. I could not drink their ale, which is only
bottled small beer, that, when it is uncorked, flies a foot or two out of
the bottle, but my landlord, unwilling that I should take up his house
for nothing, told me he had gid brondy, if my honour would have some; in
compliance with my condition I called for half a pint, which cost but
two-pence half-penny, and which was indeed genuine. Having treated the
family with the best part of it, I mixed the remainder with some water
and sugar, which I found a most comfortable cordial to my afflictions;
and was enjoying myself with it by the fireside; when two brawny
Highland-men entered, and called plentifully for ale and brandy. They
seated themselves next me, and talked Erse or Irish, which I no more
understood than Arabic; nor indeed was I less at a loss when they
attempted to speak English, their language abounding with so many quaint
expressions, that it requires some time to comprehend it. As I sat with
my drink beside me, more to entitle me to house-room than from any
fondness to it, I happened, unguardedly, to spurt a little through my
teeth into the floor. The fellow who sat next me, conceiving I had done
it in derision to him and his friend, cried, damn your Erish saul, die
blaw in my lugg. My not understanding him, and knowing I meant no
offence, made me burst into laughter. Upon which, seeing him put his hand
in his pocket, and draw out a large clasp knife, I ran to the other side
of the house; and well I did, or I had been dead that instant, for he
threw it after me with such violence, that had it met with my body
instead of a settle bed, wherein it quivered for some time, I had been
the innocent victim of a proud ignorant fool. His friend, and all the
people of the house, now got between me and him, and, I suppose, pleaded
for me in his own damned jargon. When he was so far pacified as to
hearken to reason, the man of the house told me he was a great Laird, and
that blowing in a man's ear was, amongst the highland-men, the greatest
affront could be offered; that when I spit out, his Lairdship imagined I
had blown in his ear; and therefore would certainly have put me to death,
but that they assured him I was a stranger, and an unfortunate young
gentleman, who had lost his baggage in the late fire. This I was obliged
to confirm myself in the mot submissive and respectful manner, calling
him my Lord at every word, though all his apparel was not worth a crown.
He would then fain have had me drink with him, and told me, as I was a
gentleman, he would permit me to keep him company, but I had too much
terror on my spirits to relish the great honour he offered me, and
therefore pleading incapacity to drink, and long want of rest, I begged
leave to retire to bed; but lest I should again tormented with a supposed
apparition, I besought my landlord to let his son sleep with me, which he
obligingly did; and, to complete my adversities, I got the Scot's fiddle
(i.e. the itch) which I continued to play most harmoniously, while I
remained in that kingdom.

My fair friend failed not in her appointment the succeeding morning; she
brought with her a quantity of fine tea and sugar, which the insisted on
my accepting of, and stayed to breakfast with me. In the meantime I told
her the narrow escape I had from the Highland-man's vengeance. She seemed
much affected at it, and said, "I would I were a mon for his sake." Then
madam, said I, I should lose the pleasure of your being a woman. At this
a modest blush spread itself over her cheek. Alas! Sir, said she, I fear
that can be no pleasure to you. Do you fear it, Madam? then may I hope
you wish it were? She answered me with tears that deeply touched me, and
made, me apprehensive she would think me serious, whereas what I spoke
was merely words of course; but as I could neither think of marrying,
her, or taking any ungenerous advantage of a passion that I had
unwillingly inspired, I told her I was determined the next day to leave
town. At this she renewed her tears, which so effectually unmanned me,
that though I knew not why, I could not avoid mingling mine with hers;
and, for the first time, I tenderly embraced her, desiring to know the
occasion of hers? You go away to-morrow, said she, and I shall never see
you more; I wish I never had seen you. It became now no longer a mystery,
that my departure was repugnant to her wishes; and willing at once to
cure her of all her regard, I told her the unhappy circumstances I was
in, the uncertainty I had of receiving supplies from Ireland, and the
certain ruin that must attend my staying here; all which afforded her but
a more ample scope to show her disinterested regard. She said she was her
parents' only child, that they were able to give her a handsome fortune,
that they had each of them taken a liking to me, and as they had now
removed into another house, I might have all accommodations there till I
was better provided for. In the meantime; said she, whether you do or do
not stay, I insist on your receiving a small token of my good-wishes for
you; so saying, she pulled out a wrought purse with some money, and
presented it to me. I absolutely refused to accept of it, as I assured
her I should never have it in my power to repay what it might contain;
that perhaps it might be her father's property; and to consider that I
was a stranger, and a vagabond for anything she could know to the
contrary.  She assured me, that she was convinced I was what my looks and
behaviour spoke me, and therefore made no doubt I would return the trifle
she then lent me, when it was convenient; that it was really her own,
which she had been saving for some years, and was happy in an opportunity
of disposing of it to such advantage. Upon this I accepted it, and found
it contained two guineas and some silver, which I promised to repay, but
told her I must go to Glasgow the next day. To this she very reluctantly
consented, conjuring me to write to her as often as possible, and
recommending it to me to take leave of her parents, which I did that day.
They procured me a very bad horse to pursue my journey, and directed me
where to set up when I came to Glasgow. I set out early the next morning
by the road I was directed to, and was told I might easily arrive that
night where I purposed going. It was a most terrible day for wind, sleet
and snow, and having neither whip or spur, it would be as easy to find
the perpetual motion, as to give any motion to my Galloway; and indeed
the road was so intolerably bad and dirty, that it was almost impossible
for him to mend his pace: in short, when he had sauntered with me for
five or six miles, wherein I neither saw house, tree; or any living
creature, but beheld a prospect as dreary as imagination can form, he
made a full stop, and would by no means proceed an inch farther. Had I no
horse I could have made some shift to walk, but I was under a necessity
of lodging this lazy creature somewhere, or becoming answerable for him.
I had not even a switch or goad, to drive him, and therefore in this
tempestuous weather I had no remedy but to alight, and by throwing stones
at his posteriors, keep him still before me: in the meantime every step I
took I was up to my ankles, and if I went from the highway to seek a
cleaner passage, my gentleman would stand stock still till I came back
through the dirt to renew the battery of his bum. At length, being
extremely enraged, I came quite near his hinder parts to have one sound
blow at him for revenge; but he was even with me, for before I discharged
my shot he lifted up his hind foot, and gave me a violent blow in my
stomach, that quite stunned me for some moments. When I recovered myself,
I found him like the wooden horse in Don Quixote, in the same spot and
without motion. Being no longer able to tramp after him I got on his
back, and taking a buckle from my shoe, pricked him with the tongue of
it. This made him a little more alert, and finding I had means to punish
him, he began to trot on, but stumbled so frequently, that, being a bad
rider, I was satisfied to let him pick his steps, lest he should break my
neck. In this miserable condition I passed the whole day, and the
approach of night became still more dreadful; but it advanced, and before
I saw any remedy I was enveloped in darkness; so throwing the reins
loose, I committed myself to the economy of my carrier, who I imagined,
for his own sake, would find out a resting place. At length I discovered
a light at a great distance, and directed my nag towards it; but he now
stumbled worse than ever, being every moment on his knees, and he making
one uncommon plunge, I found myself up to my waist in water: I disengaged
myself from him as well as possible, and by God's providence got on land,
and left him there to shift for himself. As I still kept the light in my
eye, I pursued it, not without a thousand falls by the way; and at last,
to my great joy, discovered an inn close to the seaside. As soon as I
obtained admittance here, I observed a large fire in the kitchen, and a
good supper dressing, circumstances that added not a little to my
felicity. I told my host, in a few words, the tragic adventures of the
day, and the catastrophe of my horse, whom I concluded was drowned. He
immediately sent two men in quell of him, and, as I was all wet and
dirty, brought me some dry clothing: this and the fire, with a large
glass of brandy, soon brought me to myself. The men returned with the
Galloway safe and sound, and the landlord assured me, that he was an old
stager there, and knew every step of the road as well as a horse could
do, but that he always played those pranks when he got a stranger or a
bad rider upon him; for it seems he went into the lough only to get rid
of me, and the men met him very seriously walking towards the inn.

The landlord told me there were some gentlemen in the parlour, and that
if I chose to sup with them he would introduce me, which he accordingly
did: they had a number of written papers before them, and seemed to be on
some debate. When we entered, these, however, were soon set aside, and a
large bowl of punch, pipes and tobacco introduced: after two or three
glasses passed about supper was served in, and either it was the best I
had ever partaken of, or the apprehensions of starving I had all day
entertained, made me imagine it such; so that it may be concluded I eat
very heartily. I made the gentlemen extremely merry at the ill treatment
I had received from my horse, and they in return related many humorous
adventures. By this time the bowl was again placed on the table, and one
of the company proposed for a toast, the King. Having let my glass stand
some time, I was called on to drink it, and the toast; having never in my
life known a professed Jacobite, I very innocently drank King George.
After I had finished my glass they insisted I had not drank the toast,
and must drink again. I told them I hoped I had understood the intention
of the toast, though I had not repeated the express words; for, said I,
it is not to be supposed we drink the King of France or Spain, with whom
we are now at war. No Sir, said one of the gentlemen, very gravely, when
we drink the King, we drink the true and lawful sovereign of Great-
Britain. Well, Sir, said I, I am right still, I drank King George. You
mean the Elector of Hanover, Sir, said he, we acknowledge no such monarch
in this part of the world: we never saw him, Sir, never even smoked a
pipe with him; and therefore, Sir, ewe mean, by drinking the King James,
running on with the pretender's titles, if you'll drink our toast so
explained, we shall look on you as a sensible young fellow, and a worthy
member of society: if not, Sir, you are only to drink three bumpers in a
breath, by way of forfeit. I told them, I'd sooner drink the whole bowl
than such a toast. Upon my soul, said one of them, he's a loyal subject,
and ought to be encouraged: I dare say the Elector will bountifully
provide for him, when he hears what great fatigues he would undergo for
his sake. Here, said he, is a pretty smock-faced boy, heartbroken all day
with a bad road and a worse horse, and yet still, to show his zeal for
the illustrious house of Hanover, he would drink a bowl of excellent rum
punch, sooner than a single glass to the most high, most mighty, and most
puissant Prince James, by the Grace of God, &c. The humorous manner in
which all this was spoken, left me in some doubt whether the gentlemen
jested; but, by the course of their conversation, it was evident they
were serious. I told them, if they even harboured such shameful
principles, I wondered they would so freely divulge them, when they knew
they exposed themselves to information and punishment. They laughed
heartily at this, and asked who in Scotland would take such an
information? I answered, any magistrate. No, no, child, said one of them,
the whole nation is of the same mind, and if you live but two years,
you'll see that man, whose health you refused to drink, on the throne of
England. I told him it was a lie, and I hoped to see him hanged first. By
G——d, said he, I'll be hanged if it is not so: but young man, said he,
don't be so apt to make use of those two bad words, you lie, they have
cost many a better man than yourself his life. You don't know, perhaps,
who you speak to, or if you did, a man could only punish you with a birch
rod. This put me in a violent passion, which only served to raise a laugh
against me; my smock face bespoke me no champion, and they had too much
discretion either to retort ill language or use me cruelly, which was
entirely in their power. Their dialect did not speak them Scotsmen, nor
indeed their behaviour in this respect.

I should have observed, that the landlord, who seemed to know these
gentlemen, came in frequently and drank a glass with us. He was likewise
present when I gave the lie so freely, and, upon that, suddenly left the
room. In about half an hour after I heard a confused number of voices, in
a riotous manner, crying, Charley, Charley, Charley; huzza from Charley;
damn them that won't drink Charley. I began to be in a panic, and looking
earnestly, at the gentleman I had offended, asked what that noise meant?
No harm to you, said he, upon my soul; 'tis some drunken fellows, I
suppose, but be it what it will you shall not be hurt, upon my honour.
This gave me a kind of certainty, that mob meant me mischief; and I was
too soon confirmed of it, for suddenly about five or six of the most
bloody-looking villains forced open the parlour door, and demanded the
life of that traitor who had spoken against his prince. My adversary in
the contest now became an advocate for my life; for, immediately placing
himself between me and the ruffians, he swore they should kill him before
they hurt the hair of my head; and, to prove he was sincere, pulled out a
pistol from his side pocket, which he presented to the breast of one of
the assassins. Now, gentlemen; said he, you are all embarked in a
glorious cause, a cause that will do honour to our posterity; do we draw
our swords in justification of our Prince, and sheath them in children
and school-boys? This poor child here has had a wrong education, and
imbibed principles of which he is not qualified to judge; must he,
therefore, be murdered? No, let us persuade youth to our cause by virtue
and clemency, and not by slaughter and oppression. These are the
instruments of tyranny, and not of justice; the boy has spoke rashly, yet
honestly as to what he believes. What one of you would hear your lawful
Prince spoken little of? He looks on the Elector of Hanover as his King,
and while he thinks him so, is honourable in defending his cause;
therefore, gentlemen, if you have the smallest respect for me, or the
commission I carry, depart from whence you came. I know you meant this
well to me, but had I not been here, it might have proved a fatal night
to our cause; eat and drink what you please, be merry amongst.
yourselves, and never attempt the life of an innocent man, who is not in
arms against you.

After respectfully attending to this harangue they made their obedience,
and departed one by one, with looks that spoke the pain it was to them to
depart without making me a sacrifice.—When they were gone he told me,
that though he had thus parleyed with them, my sleeping in the house
would not be safe. He, therefore, desired one of the gentlemen to go and
amuse them with liquor in the kitchen, while the other brought his two
horses to the parlour window: out of this we both went, and taking upon
himself, to see my reckoning paid, and my horse sent home, we set out
about two o'clock in the morning for Glasgow; and as we galloped every
step of the way, and had excellent cattle, we arrived there by daybreak.
When he had put me within the walls of the city, he said, young man, you
are now safe, and for God's sake keep yourself so, by having a watchful
guard over your tongue, and never meddling with matters foreign to your
understanding, and inconsistent with your interest. Saying this, he
turned his horses' heads about, and taking one by the bridle, rode off as
fast as possible.

This adventure will seem the less mysterious to my readers, when I
observe, that it happened about a year or two before the late rebellion;
and that this company, whom I fell amongst, were some of the agents of
that affair, who were collecting men and sowing sedition all over North
Britain. I must confess they were not the worst sort of them, and am
amazed a gentleman, who was capable to behave in so noble a manner to me,
could be led into so detestable a scheme.

Though my loyalty had nearly cost me my life, yet it happily saved my
money, which was some consolation to me; and as a man who possesses that
needs little or no recommendation in a strange city, I made up to the
first good inn I found open; and being unfit for anything but sleep,
immediately went to bed, and never once stirred till about twelve o'clock
at noon, when I was awaked by the sound of bells playing a new song,
called, "If 'tis joy to wound a lover." I imagined either that I had got
a ringing in my head by cold, or else was still asleep. I sat up in bed
and listened more attentively, and then heard a song out of Comus played,
which to me sounded something like the Captain's glass music before
mentioned. To remove all doubts I dressed myself as quick as possible,
and went into the street, hearing it still louder; As I advanced near the
prison, I saw a door open at the bottom of it, and after ascending a
number of stone steps came into a little apartment, where a man set
striking with his fist pieces of wood, ranged like the keys of a
harpsichord, which occasioned the music from bells that were hung at the
top of the house; each bell had a hammer at the out-side, from whence
there was a communication to the keys below by a wire; and the person who
played this instrument wore gauntlets of leather on the ball of each
hand, to prevent being hurt by the violent blows he was obliged to
strike.

When he left off playing he looked at his watch, and obligingly asked me
if I was a stranger? I told him I was, and mere admiration had brought me
here, Then Sir, said he, have you a mind for any particular tune? I told
him if he could play, "Was ever nymph like Rosomond," he would give me
great pleasure. He struck it up directly, and though it is difficult even
to sing, performed it in a masterly manner. When his time for this
employment was expired we had some musical chat; by which he discovered
that I was an admirer. of that science, and therefore gave me an
invitation to dinner. As I was pleased to make an acquaintance, I
embraced the offer; and went to his house, but was so extremely dirty,
that I was quite ashamed of myself when I saw all his family genteelly
dressed: to apologize for my appearance, needed no more than a recital of
the accidents I had met with; and as truth carries conviction with it, my
relation was readily credited. I told Mr. R——, that having lost my linen,
I was at a loss where to buy any, or how to get them made up. His wife
told me she would serve me in both respects, for which purpose I gave her
a guinea; and as their son was exactly of my size, and a student in the
college, they for the present kindly supplied my wants from his wardrobe.
Being thus in a capacity to go abroad, the gentleman, after dinner,
brought me to see the city, and show me all the most curious edifices in
it; the principal of which is a fine old church, formerly a cathedral,
but now converted into a kirk, where, as Swift says:

The seats their usual custom keep
Of lodging folks disposed to sleep.

And I seriously assure my readers, that I have attended many sermons in
this kingdom, but cannot take upon me to say that there were ever four of
the congregation five minutes awake, after the text was given out. That
part, indeed, I observed the people in general took a memorandum of; and
as if that part been the only purport of their coming hither, they laid
their heads back directly to repose; so that I can compare a kirk to
nothing but the description given by Mr. Thomson of the castle of
indolence.

It is to be observed that I lodged hitherto at an inn, where the
civilities I received from Mr. R—— and his family naturally led me to
invite them; and as he introduced me to many of his acquaintances, who
were lovers of music, we sometimes had a little concert there, on all
which occasions the expense fell upon me. The man of the house finding me
ready to pay his first and second bills, made no objection to giving me
credit for whatever I called. My never having been in debt, and an
absolute stranger to the nature and consequences of it, made me too
liberal in respect to answering reckonings. The man, however, finding I
brought company to his house, was as obliging as possible, and gave me
all imaginable encouragement, saying, "He loved to see a young gentleman
generous and free-hearted, and observing, that all persons from Ireland
were naturally so." Thus sung the Siren, while I, with less fortitude
than a Ulysses, placidly attended to the delusive strain. He persevered
in the most assiduous application of the mysteries of his callings, to
lull me into a good opinion of himself and his family; told me how many
extraordinary things he had done to assist his friends, and what
satisfaction it gave him when any of them had occasion for his purse or
his interest; closing the whole with telling me, he had a brother that
died abroad, who resembled me so strongly, that he never saw me without
transport, and looked on me with the same regard and affection he did on
him.

Would not a person of riper judgment than myself believe all this? I saw
no motive the man could have for these professions, except sincerity; but
a little time furnished me with another explanation of them: He took no
small pains to find out my dependence and connections and as he learned
my father was a beneficed clergyman, and my family in general reputable,
he doubled his industry to get me roundly in his books. For this purpose,
when I came home of an afternoon, if there was no company, he took care
to have tea and coffee, of which his wife and himself partook; and
likewise an elegant supper and punch, made so sweet and so enticing, that
at length I began to grow fond of it. Here I first experienced the
Lethean qualities of drinking; I found it raised my spirits for the time,
and obliterated the remembrance of all my vexations, though I generally
paid for it by a terrible headache in the morning. One evening he told me
there had been an Irish clergyman at his house, who knew my family
extremely well, and had been a tenant to my grand-uncle; that he was to
be there: the same night, and would be glad to drink a bottle of wine
with me. I was overjoyed at the news, and waited with the utmost
impatience for the interview. At length my landlord told me the gentleman
was in his parlour, and desired the favour of my company. I went, and was
not a little surprised to see a mean-looking old fat man, dressed in
black, with the breast of his coat embroidered with snuff: I say
surprised, because a clergyman and a polite gentleman were ideas united
in my mind; neither did I ever know a clergyman. educated in Ireland who
was not such. When I entered the room, father Luttrel, for by that name
he passed, got up, and suddenly catching me in his arms, embraced me very
eagerly, at the same time kissing me, by which I was near poisoned with
the effluvia of brandy and tobacco. My dear child, said he; the divil
burn myshelf, but I am glad to shee you. When I disengaged myself from
him, I turned to my landlord, and asked him where the clergyman was? He
answered, this was the doctor, and a worthy gentleman as ever left the
kingdom of Ireland: Oh! My dear, said the doctor (with a confounded twang
of the foreigner, and the brogue upon his face, as Mr. Farquhar has
happily expressed it,) I am no minishter as you think, I am an honest
friar, and not ashamed to own it; and, upon the word of a clergyman, I
love your father's child, though I never saw your father to be sure; but
your worthy grand uncle, brigadier Meade, I have drank many a bottle of
wine with, and for his sake, the divil burn me, but I'd go to Ithaly to
serve you——come, landlord, said he, let's have a bottle of the best in
the house; you have got a worthy gentleman for your lodger, let me tell
you; he is the lawful heir to four thousand a year, and if he could eat
gold he might have it. This harangue he had delivered before he left me
time to express my astonishment. Sir, said I fancy you must be mistaken
in the person, because I am not heir to a shilling a year that know of.
Pshaw, my dear, hold your tongue, replied the doctor, the divel burn me
but I know you better than you do yourself. Landlord, make haste with the
wine, and my dear child want for nothing, I'll be the best friend you
ever met with: if you want money let me know, and I'll supply you, though
I'm only a poor priest, subsisting here upon charity.—I did not know what
to make of all this, but presently the landlord returned with the wine,
and some punch for me. As I was telling you, says he to mine host, you
have a man of consequence in your house, and I hope you'll treat him as
such. The devil burn me, but I'll tell you a good story about the
brigadier: come, drink. When the brigadier was near seventy, and a fine
lusty portly man he was, he complained of a black swelling in one of his
legs; the doctors and surgeons said it was a mortification, and nothing,
would save his life but cutting it off. How long will it be, said the
general, before it will kill me. If I do not submit to the operation?
They told him in that case he could not survive beyond twelve o'clock the
next day. Very well, said he, I'm satisfied; I have been in many battles
and never lost a limb, please God I'll go whole to my grave: I shall have
time enough to settle my affairs, and take leave of my friends, that's
sufficient for a man of my years. Upon this he signed his will, and made
all his estate over to his young wife; who afterwards married Blundel of
Kilkenny; invited all his acquaintances to a splendid entertainment, the
mirth of which he never interrupted, by telling them his condition, but
drank his bottle and cracked his joke as freely as the best of them: The
next morning he sent for a clergyman, and settled his spiritual matters;
after which he called his wife, and taking her tenderly by the hand,
said, my dear, I hope have been a kind father to you, husband I was too
old to be; I am upon the point of leaving you, and would die quite
contented if I could see you well married before I go. My dear, said she,
why do you talk thus? you have no ailment. But I have, said he, I now
feel it, and so expired.—-I must digress:

Thus a heart unconscious of premeditated guilt, freely resigns itself to
the hands of a being whose essence is mercy.—Happy the mortal who can
obey the summons of his creator, however dreadfully announced, on this
side immortality.

Though we have many rare examples of heroic virtue in the annals of
Britain, none has afforded a more ample scope for admiration, than the
life and death of Major General Wolfe; and I hope the little tribute I
have offered to his memory in the following lines, will atone for the
freedom I have taken of running away from my subject.

Tried, proved and lost, immortal Wolfe, thy doom,
"Gives meditation, even to madness room;"
Just when we learnt thy virtues to adore,
Alas! we learnt those virtues were no more.
Had Gallic thousands to thy manes bled,
'Twould ill compensate such a Briton dead;
Who, when Herculean labours he had past,
Resigned existence cheerfully at last;
Midst deadly pangs with fortitude admired,
Anxious the fate of British arms enquired
Was told the Gauls precipitately flew,
Content, he cried—and bade the world adieu.

Well, says the critic, where's the connection? What has all this to do
with the matter in hand? I'll tell you, Sir, if you won't say I'm
impertinent for the parallel, that I think the general, who died in his
bed in the manner before described, showed almost as much magnanimity in
meeting his fate, as he who so nobly embraced it in the field of honour.
Now, good Sir, if you'll proceed to the next paragraph, you'll find the
adventure of the friar laboriously prosecuted. When he had finished his
story, and about five bottles of wine, he took his leave of his dear
country-man, and allowed me the felicity of standing good in my
landlord's book for that, and a supper, as I learned when I looked over
the general account: he likewise every day favoured me with his good
company, every day renewed his liberal protestations (particularly that
he would go to Ithaly to serve me) and every day enormously increased my
debt; the last article indeed without my privity, as I naturally
concluded he paid at least for himself at the bar.

One morning at breakfast I discovered a kind of gloom overspread the
countenances of my host and his spouse: I enquired the occasion of it,
and received for answer, that a considerable bill had been drawn on them,
and that they had no place to apply for money but where it was due; that
to be sure everyone wanted their own, and therefore they would be glad if
I settled with them. As I had not three-pence in my pocket, the truth of
which they were not strangers to, I told them, that as to settling I was
willing to do it, but as to paying it was not in my power.

Pshaw! Pshaw! says the man, a gentleman of your dependencies can't want
money or friends; you may draw a bill upon your father by any Merchant in
the city, and have an immediate return; or if you can get any one to pass
their word for you, you shall have credit as long as you think proper.—
These words, were scarcely uttered, when Father Luttrel entered, with his
usual salute, the devil burn me but I'm glad to see you my dear child,
I'd go to Ithaly to serve you: do you want anything I can do? This I
thought extremely fortunate at such an exigence, and as the man and his
wife politely left the room, told him the whole story.—And how much do
you owe him, my dear child, said he? I really don't know, but will
enquire. Well, well, make yourshelf easy about it (here he called for a
bottle of wine and waived the discourse) When it was finished, he
directed me to have my bill drawn out against night, and he would come,
and make matters easy. Highly enraptured at his behaviour, I,
communicated our conference to mine host. Look you there, Sir, said he, I
told you the doctor was a worthy gentleman, and one whose word I'd accept
for a hundred pounds

Not to dwell too long upon trifles, he came at night sure enough; but
when the question was put home to him, in relation to becoming security
for me, he said, the devil burn him if he would; because he had made a
vow against ever doing it for mankind.—When the landlord upbraided him
with encouraging me in extravagance, and flattering him with great
expectations of his money, he said, To be sure, if he is the man he
pretends to be, he may pay you, for aught I know; but I am not clear in
that point by any means. You know he is no friend of mine, or I'd answer
for him upon the word of a clergyman; but the devil burn me if I can say
any more now, than to advise you to get your money the best way you can.
I would not have you put him in prison, though that's certainly the
surest way, but God forbid you should take so harsh a measure; yet if you
did, his friends, if he has any, would not let him lie for any trifling
demand like yours. After much discourse to the same purpose, he heartily
wished us a good night. Nothing but an absolute insensibility of the
impending danger could now have supported my spirits. My landlord.
however, did not seem to despair, but only entreated me to write as soon
as possible to my friends, as fourteen pounds was a great sum to be out
of pocket.—I promised I would, though heaven knows I knew not where to
apply; yet I had reason to hope Mr. O'Neill would upon such an occasion,
show one last proof of his regard; and therefore, I determined to address
myself to him the next post. The succeeding morning very early I went to
the coffee-house, and there met the musician formerly mentioned, who,
insisted on my taking a dinner with him, as he was to have some agreeable
company. I'm going to market, said he, and if you'll step to my house and
divert yourself with the harpsichord till I come I shall take it kind, as
my wife is quite alone:—pleased to avoid the importunities I expected at
home, I embraced his offer.

Having fiddled away a few hours, he entered with a look of anxiety and
importance, and demanded in a peremptory manner how much I owed at the
inn? I told him I had not seen the account, but I heard the man mention
fourteen pounds. Can you pay him, said he? I answered in the negative.
When do you think you can? I don't know till I hear from Ireland. Well,
said he, you may think my abruptness impertinent, but you'll excuse it
when I tell you I am an Englishman, and your friend; the scoundrel, your
landlord, has taken a writ against you, which I learned by mere accident
from a namesake of his, who is a lawyer; and therefore, I hope I shall
have the good fortune to protect you from falling into his hands. The
influence I have with the lawyer will prevent your being suddenly
surprised, except you go into his house, which I hope you'll have
prudence sufficient to avoid after this advertisement. Confounded at the
melancholy prospect of a yet unexperienced stroke of adversity, I advised
with my friend what was to be done. Nothing, said he; but to keep out of
the way till you can settle with your landlord; for he is one of the most
artful and obdurate villains this day upon earth. But where can I stay,
said I, without pence for my pocket? Leave that to me; and in the
meantime pluck up your spirits, and think no more about it.—I endeavoured
to take his council, but the dreadful apprehensions I entertained were
visible in my countenance.

I gave Mr. R—— a particular detail of the treachery of my worthy
acquaintance the friar, for which he promised to afford me ample
satisfaction; assuring me, that by the laws of Scotland he was liable to
transportation.

Both his wife and himself exerted their good-nature in A peculiar manner;
to make my condition sit easy on me. Mr. R—— at  night lent me half a
guinea, and took a lodging for me at a friend's house of his near the
water-side, where he begged  I would live with as much frugality and
privacy as possible. Before he left me he called for a pint of wine,
which lay before me at the fire-side, in a spacious cleanly kitchen.—N.B.
It was an English house. My friend had left me Allan Ramsays's Works,
which I was entirely taken up with, when someone said, "My service to
you, Sir." Looking up, I saw a well-dressed jolly man, with a punch-bowl
in his hand. Certain that I beheld the aspect of a catchpole, I fell into
a tremble, having a sympathetic aversion to the presence of an Isgram;
but my confusion was completed, when he sat down opposite to me, and
said, "Pray, young spark, may I crave your name?" I had not power to
reply, Pray, said he again, is not your name Pilkington? Sir, said I.
don't expose me further, I'll go where you please. Hoity, toity, said he,
are you out of your senses? I only ask you a civil question. I tell you,
Sir, replied I, my name is Pilkington, I know your business, and only
request you'll send for my friend, Mr. R——, who brought me here, before
you put me in prison. Upon this he called for a private room and candles,
and having desired me to follow him, immediately shut the door. Pray,
Sir, said he, whose son are you? I told him. Is your father living? I
answered, he is. What brought you here? I replied as well as horror and
despair would admit me to do. And pray, Sir, what did you mean by my
taking you to prison? I suppose, said I, you know that too well to need
an explanation. Why, child, said he, have you robbed any person? No, Sir.
Have you killed anyone? No, Sir. Then what do you take me for? A
constable, Sir, said I. No, my poor boy, said he, I am commander of a
ship, and a near relation of Matt. Pilkington's. Do you know nothing of
your cousin Dick Pilkington? As I had a retentive memory of past
occurrences, I recollected, that when I was very young, such a relation
had taken leave of my brother and self, and made us some handsome
present, with a promise to bring us a black and a monkey at his return
from the East-Indies, the expectation of which made me more particularly
carry him in my mind for so many years.

After calling for a bottle of wine, and ordering some supper, he demanded
a succinct account of all my past proceedings, which as Othello says, I
delivered

From my childish days,
To the very moment wherein he bade me tell it.

After having listened to me with a paternal attention and expressed his
sorrow and astonishment at the separation of my father and mother, he
inveighed bitterly against the inhumanity of the former, and said, Now,
my dear boy, I am transported to meet with you, as it has pleased God to
enable me, without diminishing my own circumstances, to make you happy.
The debt you are so uneasy about, I'll give you money to pay to-morrow,
as I shall be obliged to attend business the whole day, or I fancy I have
cash enough about me; so saying, he pulled out a massy purse, and
throwing the gold all upon the table, desired me to take as much as I
wanted. This I declined: Come, come, boy, said he, you are as welcome as
my heart, take it freely. I still refused. Nay then, said he, I must
needs give it, there take it all, and ten times more is at your service.
Sir, said I, I should not know what to do with so much money, and perhaps
I may be robbed. Why, that's true boy, said he, well, 'tis all your own,
take twenty guineas, and I'll be your agent for the future.

As my cousin was well known in the house; he made the man and his family
come to supper with us; and, in short, a universal joy took place, as
they were social agreeable people, and seemed really to participate in
our satisfaction. The Captain sat up pretty late, and enjoyed himself and
company with unfeigned rapture. Before we went to bed, he brought me into
his chamber, and opening a large sea chest, which contained things of
immense value, desired me to look over it, and take what I pleased; but
as he could not prevail on me to comply with his generous request, he
took a handsome chased gold watch, and a cluster brilliant diamond ring,
and insisted on my accepting of them, as an earnest of what he would
hereafter do.—These my vanity tempted me to receive, and my reader may
conclude, I slept as little this night as I did the night of the
apparition, or on that of the imaginary gift before-mentioned.

At breakfast the next morning the Captain told me, that while I was
reading the night before he was contemplating my face, where the
lineaments of my father were so strongly marked out, that he who knew him
a schoolboy would almost have sworn it as himself, if he had not seen him
since his maturity; but as he remembered his having two boys, he was,
confident I must have been tone of them. As his occasions called him out
till three o'clock, I had that interval of time to settle my affair, and
went with a light heart to my friend. He was greatly surprised to see me,
and said, with emotion, good God! Sir, why do you come abroad? I told him
the danger was over. What, then you have paid the man, said he? No, Sir,
but I have got money to do it. Oh! then you have heard from Ireland. Not
a word, said I. But, not to keep him in suspense, I told him the lucky
accident that had befallen me, and returned him thanks, as the occasion
of it. He could scarcely credit my relation, but the watch and ring were
authentic witnesses in its behalf. I returned him his half-guinea, and
entreated he would go and settle the affair for me, giving him money for
that purpose. When he returned he told me he never knew so monstrous an
imposition, and that he would by no means pay for the parts of the
account which properly belonged to the friar. He therefore insisted on
their being subtracted from the other charges, which were likewise
exorbitant; yet admitting them, his real demand on me was only nine
pounds. I represented to him, said he, that if he persisted in claiming
more from you, I would have the whole matter scrutinized in a public
court; from whence he might be assured of the total loss of his
reputation, and consequently his chief custom. Upon this I tendered him
the money, which, after some prevarication he has accepted, and has given
me a receipt in full. He is now gone out to take a writ for the worthy
gentleman that would go to Italy to serve you.

Having thus quieted my mind, by discharging a debt of necessity, I became
impatient to dismiss a debt of honour that hung over me, namely, the
money so obligingly lent me in my distress, by the kind lass at the inn
before-mentioned; and as I could not think of returning the money without
some instance of my esteem, I asked my friend's wife, what present she
thought would be most acceptable to a young girl, the story of whose
good-nature I related to her. She demanded what price I would go to? I
answered, three or four guineas. Then, said she, I am acquainted with a
jeweller, who shall bring you a box of trinkets, and you may take your
choice. She accordingly did, and I singled out a ring with two hearts;
the one a ruby, and the other a diamond, which cost me four guineas.
This, with the cash I was indebted before, I sealed up in a box, and sent
them the same day by a trusty messenger, who was going to that place
express oh other business. At the same time I purchased, for my friend's
wife, a handsome gilt silver snuff box, which, with great difficulty, I
prevailed on her to take.


CHAPTER XI.
Frustrations of a Play-Writer. Conclusion of the Work

Having observed, that all those who give the world their own history,
break off at a period of time when they esteem themselves happy, I think,
in compliance with so laudable a custom, I must here, for the present,
terminate my narrative; and though what I offer in the succeeding pages
may have an equal chance of pleasing with the matter that precedes it,
yet I here apprize the readers, that they are to expect no more of that
connection, that I have hitherto, in spite of the natural tendency of my
pen, endeavoured to preserve.—My subscribers will possibly recollect,
that, in my proposals for this book, promised them a new comedy, never
offered to the stage; I confess I was about five years ago weak enough to
make an essay of that kind, before the numerous train of difficulties,
occurred to me that attends such an attempt: I foolishly took it into my
head, that to write a tolerable play, was to be immediately entitled to
the notice and patronage of the Manager, and made no doubt that his own
interest would lead him to foster the first efforts of fancy. Filled with
these Romantic ideas, and dreaming of nothing but a third night, I wrote
a letter to inform Mr. Garrick that I had such a piece; and to know when
he would condescend to give me an audience? In answer to which I was
honoured with the following message, and I have preserved it with all
imaginable care from that time to this, that young gentlemen may, from
example, learn to suppress any desire of writing for the stage, till they
have secured some interest with the nobility; as I do assure them, that
the Grand Seignior is not half so difficult of access, or half so
imperious as a manager, on receiving such a tender; and yet, considering
that their whole subsistence is drawn from dramatic writings, one would
expect some abatement of their dignity on these occasions. [Note: I have
been told of managers, that have kept authors dangling after them for
years; and when they have died for want in a prison, have modestly
adopted their performances.—But this is scarce credible.]

"Mr. Garrick's compliments to Mr. Pilkington, and he should gladly read
his performance, but it is not in his power to bring it out this or the
next season, he being engaged to more than he can possibly bring out in
that time: Mr. Garrick will willingly peruse it at the end of this
season, and, if approved, will let it down to be done in the course of
business, and in its turn."

Here those infatuated with the itch of scribbling, will be taught what
they have to expect from the exertion of their faculties; for as this was
written in Feb. 1755, I was to wait four months before the play was even
looked at, and then to the season after next season, or indeed to
perpetuity, before it had any chance of being exhibited. This was to my
genius (if I ever had any) what the miser calls a damper: It effectually
cloyed my appetite for play-writing, and, in consequence of it, I have
thrown the comedy into the condemned hold of my papers; nor can I even
hear the sight of it, much less offer it to the perusal of the judicious;
concluding, that Mr. Garrick knew by sympathy it was good for nothing,
though he never did see a line of it, nor never shall—So help me God.

Though experience has taught me, that to put a young writer out of
countenance, and out of conceit with his productions, is the most
delightful province, both of a bookseller and a manager; yet I have never
been able, by any means, to account for the causes of it; as it must
absolutely run counter to their own expectations of profit; which are
generally pretty sanguine. The great Mr. Garrick's behaviour, even to so
insignificant a person as myself, proves one part of my assertion; the
other will appear from the following little anecdote, equally authentic.
Mr. Garrick having, by his indifference, roused my indignation against
the inoffensive daughters of Apollo, I wrote a pamphlet in verse, which I
very indiscreetly entitled the Poet's Recantation.—I dedicated it to the
late munificent Duke of Marlborough, who sent me an answer in his own
writing, which, for his sake, will ever be dear to me.—The words are
expressly these

"By the bearer I send five guineas; though I have no fault to find with
your poem, yet I must desire it may not be dedicated to me."

As I owed the receipt of many unmerited favours to Sir Edward Montagu
(who is an honourable branch of that illustrious family. and who retains
the last, and only surviving spark of that generosity, that endeared to
the world, a Churchill, a Spencer, a Tyrconnel, and an Ormond; the
possession of whose virtues, is as inherent to him, as their descent of
blood,) I entreated permission to place my fugitive essay under the
sanction of his name; and though he did not absolutely give me the
liberty of doing, it in his polite letter, yet as he did not thereby
positively prohibit it, I resolved, at all events, to lay hold of that
occasion of appearing on the same page with a gentleman so universally
beloved; and as Sir Edward was so kind to enclose five guineas in his
letter, I thought myself with that sum, and the Duke's liberality,
qualified to look a bookseller in the face. Therefore, instigated by
vanity, and not having the fear of a repulse before my eyes, I went to
one in the city, with whom I had some former dealings, and desired him to
publish the pamphlet. He hummed over the title, shook his head, and
returning it, told me he was too much taken up with other things, but
would recommend me to Mr. Robinson in Ludgate-Street to whom he gave me a
note; though I was well dressed and had no symptom of the garreteer in my
aspect—He came out after a full half hour's pause, and with an ironical
smile on his countenance, said, well, Sir, what may your commands be?
(Though he knew from the note that was sent to him.) I delivered the
manuscript submissively into his hands, and told him I desired to have it
published. Published, Sir, said he, ha, ha, ha—you are a young author I
find; why it is not printed yet; but it won't do for me, Sir, your humble
servant, ha, ha, ha, and so left me to my meditations. Nothing but being
ipso facto master of ten pound ten could have made me persevere in this
business. He never read a tittle of it before he made that abrupt
conclusion; therefore I fancied that stupidity and dullness must have
been written on my visage, or it would be impossible I should meet two
such rebukes.—To this identical Mr. Robinson my mother told me she had
communicated her first volume, long before she went to Ireland; and he 
gave it as his opinion, that it would not answer the expense of paper and
print; for, Madam, said he, what's one Doctor Vanlewen, or one Parson
Pilkington to us? Or who can be entertained with anecdotes and characters
of persons utterly unknown in this part of the world?—How much even a
bookseller might be mistaken for once, the great sale of her productions
has declared.


The third and last effort, to get a fair hearing for my piece, was made
in this manner: I went to a printer with the money in my hand, who
instantly set a chair at the fireside for me. Sir, said I, shaking the
guineas, will you please to read this? Yes, Sir, said he, but—Nay, Sir,
but me no buts, read it; at this I jingled the cash.—Well, well, pretty
enough, pretty well indeed, said he-But, Sir, what am I to do with this?
It's out of my way to purchase anything. Sir, it's not out of your way to
take money, I hope? No; Sir, by no means. Then, Sir, in a few words, if
you print this, I'll pay you for it. Oh! your most humble servant, Sir,—
it shall be elegantly done. I suppose, Sir, you mean to pay before-hand,
because—Nay, Sir, make no apology, I have the money here. Why the truth
is, Sir, we have so many reams to send to pastry-cooks every month, that
it would amaze you, and faith some smart pretty things too; but the age
is depraved, Sir; ah, Sir, the age is tasteless. A bargain being thus
concluded, to the satisfaction of both parties, the piece soon after made
its appearance, and the writer of the Monthly Review, took notice of it
in this manner;

The POET'S RECANTATION, &c.

What right this gentleman has to call himself a poet we don't know,
except his claim is extrajudice from the Rev. Mr. Matthew, or his mother
the ingenious Lætitia Pilkington; however, the youth tags his rhymes
dapperly enough.

Pleased that I had not a severer censure passed on my piece, I was once
more reconciled to the Muses; to give my readers some idea of it, I
transcribe from memory a few of the lines, as I can't endure to keep a
copy of anything I write—The first part was declaiming against the nine,
and only used as an introduction to subsequent thoughts.

Oh Marlborough, did a soul like thine
In every noble bosom shine
Were every peer in Britain graced
With like munificence and taste,
Dejected merit would be sought,
And genius cherished as it ought
Or could Northumberland impart
The various virtues of his heart,
They might amend perverse mankind,
Yet leave sufficient stock behind.

A great man's porter, I insist,
Must still be a physiognomist,
And taught by instinct to declare
What motive brings each mortal there,
No men alive can tell you better
The real purport of a letter;
And some from dire experience know
'Tis by this general rule they go.

In England, Italy or Greece,
Few poets' clothes are of a piece;
Though pitying providence had lent
A coat and hat for their content;
Though with a countenance serene
They viewed their shirt and neckcloth clean,
The porter spies, in heat of talking,
A gaping chasm in their stocking;
Or if by chance the stocking's whole,
Be sure the shoe's without a sole:
From whence he, cautiously discreet,
Commences judgment at the feet;
And if the bard is faulty there,
The porter leaves him to despair.

In early youth they thought it good
To bid me pray for daily food;
So I, from day to day, was fed,
And just received diurnal bread;
Ye great this last petition hear,
And grant me bread for all the year.



LETTERS OF LÆTITIA PILKINGTON
Introduction


In order to make some compensation for suppressing an unlucky abortive
comedy, I shall here present to my readers a collection of letters, that
passed between the late Lord Kingsborough and my mother; for as I was her
amanuensis, she dictated her thoughts to me, and from thence transcribed
her own fair copies. Upon the other hand, before she delivered his
lordship's original letters to him, as has been mentioned in her third
volume, she made me exactly copy every one of them; the truth of which I
can satisfy any of my subscribers in, who have a curiosity to be more
fully informed, by referring them to some persons of distinction and
veracity, who saw the letters, and knew both his lordship and my mother
at the time the correspondence was carried on.

If anything should be found offensive in the following letters, I hope it
will be imputed to me, John Carteret Pilkington; as I declare I am
altogether ignorant of what is meant by the initials and the dashes.



LETTER I.
From Lord KINGSBOROUGH, in the country, to PILKINGTON in Dublin.


Abbe Boyle, March 22, 1748.

MADAM,

I SHOULD be as insensible not to feel, as I should be ungrateful not to
own the pleasure I receive from your most agreeable correspondence; and
should think myself still happier, had I the smallest claim from my own
merit to the praises you are kind enough to bestow upon me; however,
Madam, I am so vain as to believe you think what you say of me, as Mrs.
Pilkington's sincerity has never yet been called in question.

Should I attempt to comply with your request, in correcting anything that
fell from your pen, I must arrogate to myself a title I know I am unequal
to; for had Longinus seen your writings, Madam, he must, as a man of
taste, have admired them; but, as a man of prudence, would never have
presumed to alter what was so inimitably elegant.

As I find I have undeservedly acquired the good opinion of the only lady
I am solicitous to please, I shall make it my study to act up to the
character the happiness of your imagination has given me, by a
perseverance in which I may possibly attain a path to that glorious
summit you have placed me upon, and be in reality what Mrs. Pilkington is
so generous to think me.

In compliance with your desire, I have sent back the poem,[see note]
though I confess with reluctance; but in this, as in everything else, I
shall endeavour to show that obedience and respect wherewith I've the
honour to be

Madam,

Your most obliged,

and ever devoted,

humble servant,

KINGSBOROUGH.

P. S. I have taken the liberty to enclose notes for thirty pounds, could
I have found one for twenty more would have sent it; but own I delay it
till next post with some pleasure, as it will• give me another
opportunity to pay my respects.

*Note: This poem was the dedication to her second vol. beginning,

"To thee within whose heaven-illumined breast
Resides each virtue that adorns the blessed."



LETTER II.
From Mrs. PILKINGTON to Lord KINGSBOROUGH, at Abbe Boyle.

My LORD,

EVERY instance of your highly valued favour gives me new reason to
condemn myself for having judged so uncharitably of my own species, as to
believe it not productive of one great, noble, or disinterested soul:
'twas a faith experience had bigoted me to, till my illustrious
Kingsborough, like a ray of brilliant light, dispersed the gloom from my
fancy, and displayed every grace, excellence and virtue, that ever
adorned the human race, conspicuously shining in one young nobleman.

When a base world I laboured to detest,
And banish social feelings from my breast;
When a long train of falsehood and deceit
Taught me myself and human kind to hate;
To look on promises as vain discourse,
And kind professions only words of course;
'Twas thine alone my frenzy to remove;
And call me back to friendship and to love;
Make me again my fellow-creature trust,
Because one man is excellent and just:
Were my opinion by the world esteemed,
In that, the world, is by yourself redeemed;
My arms again to friendship expand,
And give my heart as freely as my hand.

You see, my Lord, what a tautologist you have to deal with: I first tell
you my thoughts in prose, and repeat nearly the same in verse, but you
have kindness to overlook my failings; and all I am ambitious of in this
life, is being able to say or do anything that may express the gratitude
and esteem you have inspired the bosom of.

Your Lordship's,

most obliged

humble servant

LÆTITIA PILKINGTON

Golden-lane, Dublin

March 13 1748



LETTER III.
From Lord KINGSBOROUGH to MRS. PILKINGTON

Abbe Boyle, April 5, 1748.

Madam,

I SHOULD sooner have acknowledged the receipt of your agreeable letter,
but that it is the fate of us idle people to be always most hurried when
we are least able to tell how; but you will naturally judge, in what
manner I am circumstanced, when I tell you, that I  have stolen from
company who can be happy with a bottle, to enjoy the more rational
felicity of conversing with Mrs. Pilkington; I am not in the least
surprised, Madam, you should reproach a world, which could be so long
blind to such exalted merit. The compliment you honoured me with on that
head, not only makes me vain, but happy; and you may believe me, Madam,
that no wish of Mrs. Pilkington's shall be unobtained, that is within the
compass of my abilities to gratify. There is nothing ever endeared
fortune so much to me, as the power it gives me of demonstrating, beyond
professions, how sincerely I esteem and regard you.—But I am just called
from this pleasing talk, I must entreat you to forgive this hasty scrawl,
and be assured of the unalterable friendship of,

Madam,

Your most obliged,

humble servant,

KINGSBOROUGH.

P. S. If Mrs. Pilkington will let me know by her  answer, which I
impatiently expect, anything wherein my fortune or interest can serve
her, she may command both.


LETTER IV.
From Mrs. PILKINGTON to Lord KINGSBOROUGH.

My Lord,

AFTER many attempts to write your Lordship a proper answer to your last
flow of angelic benevolence and greatness of mind, I have sat down to
write you a true one, and to you, as my guardian angel, pour forth all my
soul; since to answer you as I ought demands both the pen and the spirit
of a Kingsborough.

Whose hand as prompt the indigent befriends,
As wakeful nature to creation tends.

I may say on the receipt of so many undeserved tenders of service, from
one who is so amply qualified to assist me, as Henry the fourth did, when
he heard his son had conquered the rebels.

And wherefore should this good news make me sick?
Will fortune never come with both hands full?
But write her fairest words in blackest ink.

Had my story been known to my most munificent patron, before repeated
griefs had overcome my spirit, and made me incapable of enjoying anything
on this side of the grave; had he then so nobly offered to rescue me from
further disappointments and affliction: perhaps it might have had the
effect his generosity now wishes; but, alas! my Lord, I have no relish
for life, and that goodness that would endeavour to raise, but sinks the
expiring flame; as is one should profusely shed oil into a lamp, where
the wick was burned to an inch. I confess to you, my Lord, I have had
philosophy enough to smile at the rudest shocks of adverse fortune; but
this unsolicited, unthought of proof of manly virtue covers me with
tears: yet I have a child, a son, who merits that name, by a most
assiduous duty and constancy to me. He was nursed at my bosom, and is now
my only joy. If Lord Kingsborough will think of a provision, for him,
instead of his heart-broken parent, he will let my eyes behold what only
can elevate my heart.—You know him, my Lord, that is, you have seen him;
but forgive the partiality of a mother when she says you do not know him,
because your Lordship could not experience, as I have done, the
worthiness of his disposition.—That his father has cruelly abandoned him
on my account, makes it a double duty on me to exert my prayers to
heaven, and interest upon earth, to gain him a something that may guard
him when I am no more, from what Shakespeare terms

The spurns
That patient merit from the unworthy take.

But I have surely exhausted your patience, though 'tis impossible, my
Lord, to wear out your good manners; therefore, lest you should conclude,
I have quite taken leave of my own; I must, however, reluctantly break
off, with appealing to your own superior sense for a description of that
nameless respect, with which,

I am,

My Lord, &c.

LÆTITIA PILKINGTON

Dublin, April 9, 1748



LETTER V.
Answer to the foregoing, from Lord KINGSBOROUGH

Abbe Boyle, April 13, 1748.

MADAM,

YOUR letter found me alone. I expected a fund of humour and entertainment
on the receipt of it; but, good God! how much was I affected at your
alteration of style. Surely, Madam, you are troubled with vapours, and
this must be the effect of them. When I last had the honour to see you,
you were in full health and spirits, neither did I see more vivacity in
any person living. For heaven's sake, Mrs. Pilkington, be yourself and
think no more of quitting a world, wherein the longer you live the more
you will be admired.—As to your son, who I believe is a deserving young
gentleman, you may rest assured, that my inclinations are, and warmest
endeavours shall be, to serve him; which Mr. Pilkington will be convinced
of as soon as I come to town.

You were so obliging to promise, in one of your former letters, to
entertain me with a transcript of your humorous epistle from Colonel D——
m; I shall take it extremely kind, Madam, if you will, at a leisure hour 
send it to me; for though nothing can equal the native flowings of your
pen, yet when you court the tragic sister, you win her so effectually to
your assistance, that, as somebody says, you beguile us of our tears. It
is needless to repeat to you, Madam, what I have before sincerely said,
because yourself must confess, that nothing can do me so much honour as
promoting the welfare of Mrs. Pilkington; to whom

I am, &c.

KINGSBOROUGH.

P. S., I beg, dear Madam, you'll send something to raise my spirits,
which your last has much depressed.



LETTER VI.
From Mrs. PILKINGTON to Lord KINGSBOROUGH.

Dublin, April 18, 1748

My LORD,

AS you desire me to be merry, whether I will or not, my duty obliges me
to comply with your injunction, and rattle out everything I think
entertaining without once considering who I am prating to. I assure you,
my Lord, if I was not old enough to be your mother, the world would say
we carried on an intrigue; nay, those who have not seen how roughly
master time has handled me, give shrewd innuendoes, that it is not for
nothing some people are so great. Your Lordship's hand and seal is
already known in the post-office; and, but for the causes aforesaid,
there might possibly be an action of damages against you, or a formal
citation to appear in Facie Ecclesiae, and good reason. Why, forsooth, if
a reverend gentleman of the gown chose to distress his wife, why should
any stirring young nobleman take upon him to protect and defend her?—But 
you ask me, my Lord, for the Colonel's letter, whose character, as well
as decency would permit, I have drawn in my second volume; the most of
which your Lordship has seen in manuscript, and I hope soon to have the
pleasure to present to you the whole in print. I wrote to the Colonel
some time before I left London, at an hour when a trivial assistance
would have been highly acceptable. I addressed him in the most solemn
style, and endeavoured to awaken his pity by a true and pathetic recital
of my state. I took care to remind him of his promises to me, which had
at his serious hours been very liberal; he answered me thus:


You old D——l,

WHEN you were something handsome, I told you I loved you, as I told every
woman that came in my way; but, by G——d, my dear little creature, I never
cared a halfpenny for you; and so you now begin to talk to me like a
death's head, or a memento mori. I thought you had more sense than to
preach that to me, when I am like yourself, obstinate and old, which I
always despised, as you know. You, tell me you are in distress: very
well; I am not.—And pray, Madam, what's your misfortunes to me? Must I
break a ten guinea bet at White's, to give you one, because you are
unfortunate? That would indeed help to make me so, as I should repent it
all my life—Oh! thou beautiful ruin! thou admirable antique! thou
venerable matron! thou poetical Sybil! in short, thou dear fine worthy
ancient gentlewoman!

Your most obedient,

humble servant,

D——.

P. S. You want to go to eat, I want to go to game; once more your humble
servant.

Having satisfied your Lordship with what you requested, I leave you to
admire at the brutality of the writer, but do assure you the Colonel
wrote his genuine sentiment. During the time I was favoured with his
visits, he asked me one day if I ever heard how my brother Grub-street,
the laureate, had like to have his neck brought into a halter? I told him
no, Why, said he, our British Maecenas, as you term the Earl of
Chesterfield, was about twenty years ago forbid the Court, and very
justly too; for George owed him money, which he never meant to pay.—You
must know that previous to the birth-day, Colley sends his ode, finely
done up in gilt paper, or leather, or something, for the Royal
approbation. The Earl, who from his intimacy with Colley knew all this,
took care to have the start of him, one day at least. He likewise knew
the laureate's hand-writing; and, therefore having a book done just after
Cibber's fashion, he dressed a footman in the same livery to deliver the
supposed Ode. It was immediately handed to the Queen, and ran thus:—

An ODE

I.

I Colley Cibber, right or wrong,
Must celebrate this day;
And tune once more my tuneless song,
And strum the venal lay.

II.

Heaven spread through all the family
That broad illustrious glare,
That shine: so flat in every eye
And makes them all to stare.

III.

Heaven send the Prince of Royal grace,
A little whore and horse;
A little meaning in his face,
And money in his purse.

IV

And as I have a son like you,
May he Parnassus rule;
So shall the Crown, and laurel too,
Descend from fool to fool.

The Queen, said the Colonel, burst out a-crying after reading this; but
yet was so covetous that she would neither pay poor Chesterfield his
wife's portion, nor supply her own son with means to support the dignity
of a Prince. You must know, you little devil, continued the Colonel, I am
just come from White's, where I heard an excellent passage.—There's a
smock-faced lad, who has been introduced amongst us that we all know has
no means to support the appearance he makes, or the expenses he runs
into. He was at play with Lord B——, and having a run of very ill fortune,
cried, well, I believe if I played for my backside I should lose it. Lord
B—— very gravely answered,—indeed, Sir, that would be a loss to you.

Just after this, Lord B—— engaged in play with young H——, who is known to
be a natural son; but the tables turned on him, and he lost every bet he
made. Losers have always leave to speak: Lord B—— therefore cried, with
some heat,—I never yet knew a bastard but what was a son of a whore. The
young gentleman, with great readiness of countenance, said, indeed then,
my Lord, I did; for my sister is a bastard, and yet not a son of a whore;
which entirely raised the laugh against Lord B——.

Now, my Lord, you find how much I can deviate from myself, when inspired
by the prospect of giving, you a transitory entertainment; but having
filled my whole sheet, I must wish your Lordship a good night.

L. PILKINGTON.



LETTER VII.
From Lord KINGSBOROUGH to MRS. PILKINGTON

Abbe Boyle, April 29, 1748.

Madam,

I HAVE the honour to transmit this to you by my brother, and shall in a
short time, have the happiness to thank you in person for the infinite
delight your last has afforded to myself and friends, who unanimously
join with me, in confessing you are, as I have ever esteemed you, Madam,
unrivalled in wit, ease and vivacity.

I entreat you will forgive my not entering upon all the particulars I
long to communicate, as I reserve them for a whole afternoon's discourse
with you in Dublin; in the meantime believe me,

Dear Madam,

most respectfully,

your obliged,

humble servant,

KINGSBOROUGH.

P. S. I make bold to send the twenty pound bill I formerly mentioned.



LETTER VIII.
From Mrs. PILKINGTON

MY LORD,

THIS morning Cornet King did me the honour to bring your Lordship's
letter; and though I had not the happiness of his acquaintance, yet I
imagined it possible to detain him a few moments, as I concluded every
person allied to Lord Kingsborough must be easy and affable. When he had
favoured me with your obliging epistle he was for retiring; but I
entreated he would condescend, as his noble brother had frequently done,
to bless my humble abode with his presence; and would you believe me, my
Lord, I put your dear letter into my breast, and suspended even a woman's
curiosity to know its contents, in hopes to engage him in a little chat.—
But he pulled out his watch, and told me he was absolutely obliged to go
in ten minutes. I told him I hated a watch, and could not see how that
machine was useful to any, except those who were tied to hours.—Well,
Madam, said he, but I am one of that number, and therefore must depart.
In short, my Lord, he left me: and as I will not attempt to veil my
opinion to you, I take him to be what Falstaff merrily describes Lord
John of Lancaster to have been, "A cold blooded boy, that makes many fish
meals, and has contracted a kind of male green sickness."—Your Lordship
will certainly think me impudent for making comparisons, which are seldom
found to please, whatever degree of similarity may subsist; but certainly
Lord John was a brave man, notwithstanding the freedoms this fat knight
took with his character; and the cornet may be extremely communicative
and entertaining, though I had not the luck to take him in the vein.

You see, my. Lord, how I ramble from my point in view, which was to thank
your Lordships for this last proof of your liberality. I have laid it out
in some plate, on which I have ordered your Lordship's arms to be
engraved, and upon that account only shall be extremely vain of it. In
the meantime, my Lord, as you seldom deny any request of mine, I must beg
your acceptance of a half-length picture, which a painter lately
prevailed on me to let him draw; because, though the man is not eminent,
he has made a strong likeness; in which no person ever succeeded before,
except Mr. Hone, in London.—If your Lordship can find one space at Abbe
Boyle, that the elegance of your taste has not filled up, give my poor
resemblance a place there, that it may sometimes reveal to your Lordship
your own virtues, which everyone but yourself sufficiently know and
admire, and be a memorial of that gratitude wherewith I am,

My Lord,

Your Lordship's,

most devoted

humble servant,

LÆTITIA PILKINGTON

Dublin,

May 2, 1748



LETTER IX.
To Mrs. PILKINGTON.

Abbe Boyle, May 12, 1748

MADAM,

I AM honoured with your letter, and enraptured at the picture you promise
me, since anything that resembles Mrs. Pilkington must give pleasure: I
shall place it where I would the original, might I have the happiness of
her company, in my best apartment, and hope the contemplation of it may
better qualify me to hold a correspondence with you, by inspiring me with
some of that wit which so lavishly distils from your pen. I often wonder,
Madam, when I receive your letters, how I have the courage to answer
them, and expose all my errors to so accurate a judge; and this nothing
but a confidence in your good-nature could possibly tempt me to do.—I
thought by this time I should have seen Mrs. Pilkington, and thanked her
myself for all the marks of esteem she is so obliging to honour me with;
but as unavoidable business will engage me some time longer in the
country, your writing frequently, Madam, is the only relief I can hope
for.—I have just received an epistle from our poor friend John Brown,
[see note] I heartily wish that he may get the better of his unhappy
affair. He tells me you have been kind enough to visit him in his
confinement, and speaks of you as all gentlemen of true taste generally
do. I think it extremely good of Mrs. Pilkington to give him her
conversation, which must render even a prison delightful. Do me the
honour Madam, when you next see him, to tell him he is attended with my
best wishes, as I really have not time to write my thoughts to him; and
if you have charity for me, who am equally confined by being far from
Mrs. Pilkington, write me a whole sheet, the first opportunity, with as
many of your own flights as possible: rest assured, dear Madam, I am, and
ever will be,

Your sincerely devoted,

humble servant,

KINGSBOROUGH

*Note: This gentleman is John Browne, of the Neal, Esq.



LETTER X.
From Mrs. PILKINGTON to Lord KINGSBOROUGH.

My LORD,

WHAT will you think of your friend Mr. Brown, when I tell your Lordship
he has absolutely made love to me, and wrote a sonnet in my praise? He
conjured me not to mention a syllable of it to Lord Kingsborough, from
which moment I have been ready to die with impatience to let your
Lordship into the secret; and after transcribing some of his stanzas, I
desire the favour of your Lordship's determination, whether his style is
Platonic or otherwise.

I.

Fortune's malice I defy,
While my beauteous fair one's nigh;
Let Euphrosyne incline,
Are not both the Indies mine?

II.

Oh! were both the Indies mine,
From the Ganges to the Rhine,
With a world what should I do,
But give all to purchase you.

III.

Riches, honour, health and ease,
All without you cannot please;
But with you the world's my own,
And an humble turf a throne.

IV.

Smile, then smile, my favourite fair,
Crown a passion so sincere:
Oh! reward me, and 'tis odds,
But you lift me to the gods.


I need not tell Lord Kingsborough where Mr. Brown has borrowed his last
sentiment, because I know he is too conversant with Horace not to find it
readily out; but I can't imagine how my smiling could raise our author so
high, even if I was young and handsome. Upon the whole, My Lord, I fancy
it was written more to show our friend's wit and politeness, than to make
a conquest of an old woman. One thing indeed renders it something
uncommon, that a gentleman, who owns himself he expects to receive
sentence of death in a short time, should be so very volatile; but this
may serve as a proof, that his conscience does not accuse him of
murdering his antagonist, who I really believe from all accounts, had as
much fair play for his life, as gentlemen usually have who fight duels: I
could myself aver, from what I know of Mr. Brown;

That he would place honour on one hand, and death on t'other,
And look on both indifferently
Nay, I'll venture to affirm,
That he loves the name of honour more than he fears death.

Don't imagine, my Lord, I speak thus of Mr. Brown because he has written
in my praise; for I assure your Lordship, I have received compliments of
the kind from men whom I very heartily despise, particularly A——w F——t,
Esq, who, since I have removed to Fownes's street, is placed directly
opposite to my window every morning, and whose presence is sufficient to
damp the genial inspirations of the muse, when it brings incest and
murder so strongly in view. This worthy gentleman, whose amour with his
sister must render him detestable to all posterity, supposed, that by a
few fulsome panegyrics, he could silence my pen upon that subject: but
really, my Lord, there was not the least occasion for all this, because I
never meddle with those who don't meddle with me; and though I ever
looked on F——t as the last abject wretch upon earth, yet I thought him
too incorrigible for the lash, and his crime of too heinous a nature to
be even thought of without freezing the blood.

I presented your Lordship's commands to Mr. Brown; and though he was
pleased to find his adversity had not divested him of your Lordship's
good wishes, yet he was sadly mortified at not receiving a letter.—Upon
this a controversy arose between us, whether Lord Kingsborough loved him
or myself best. The contest was very warm, but a nobleman just happening
to come in, kindly ended the dispute, by advising both parties to appeal
to your Lordship for a decision of this debate; so, my Lord, it lies in
suspense, till I am favoured with your answer.—In the meantime, I fear my
visits here will be seriously attended with one very bad consequence; for
there is a lady distinguished by the name of Dirty Daly, who, I am told,
will pull my cap: however, there is no virtue without enduring
persecution, and if the gentlewoman should fall foul of my head-cloths,
she won't soil her hands; but I shan't venture to return the compliment,
lest I should dirty mine: for by all accounts, she has not had a clean
cap on these twelve months.

The person who came to our friend brought a very uncommon piece of news
with him; namely, that Leeson, the brewer's son, was actually going to be
created a peer of this realm. Having Mr. Brown's diamond pencil in my
hand at that instant, a fine pane of glass in the window was spoiled with
this inscription:

The son of a brewer created a Peer,
Wine makes Lords, I've been told, and pray why should not beer?


But when I get leave to prate this way to your Lordship, I never know
when to leave off. 'Tis now full time to close all this with two lines
that are very applicable to my wishes,

Blessed be the father from whose loins you sprung,
And blest the mother at whose breast you hung.


LÆTITIA PILKINGTON.

Dublin, May 13, 1748.



LETTER XI.
From Lord KINGSBOROUGH to MRS. PILKINGTON

Abbe Boyle, May 209, 1748.

Madam,

I confess I don't think Mr. Brown's verses Platonic, and cannot but
admire at his fortitude to write in his present situation; but I find,
Madam, you are as happy and generous, in defending those you honour with
your esteem, as your pen is fatal to such as deservedly fail under its
censure. Mr. F——t is a gentleman whom I really do not know, nor do I wish
for his acquaintance. I am sorry poor Leeson has disobliged Mrs.
Pilkington, and hope the epigram may not be understood or published, as I
think him an inoffensive creature; besides that, I have a particular
regard for C——t P——n, his brother-in-law. As to Mr. Brown, who has known
me from my infancy, I have a great value for him; but when a lady is put
in competition with a gentleman, let him ask his own breast on which side
judgment is to be decreed.

I sincerely concur with you in opinion, Madam, that our friend is
innocent of the murder though unluckily guilty of the manslaughter; which
I am certain himself as well as his friends, wish had never happened.
Your quotation from Shakespeare on that matter is very just, and a true
character of Mr. Brown, in a few words. I have wrote a long letter to him
this post, by which he will know have not forgot him.—I hope his answer
will bring me the pleasing news of his enlargement, as the trial, I am
told, comes on in a few days.

I entreat the favour of you, Madam, if you should have any occasion for
money, during my absence, to let Mark White, my agent, know it; who is
desired by me to supply you without limitation; and you cannot more
effectually oblige me than in commanding my Fortune.—All I hope on my
part is, that you will still think me worthy of being esteemed, Madam,

Your most obliged,

and most obedient,

humble servant,

KINGSBOROUGH.

P. S. You were so kind to repeat some verses you wrote on an unfortunate
lady some time ago; I shall be much obliged to you for a copy of that
admirable poem.



LETTER XII.
From Mrs. PILKINGTON to Lord KINGSBOROUGH.

My Dear LORD,

FOR so you must permit the most obliged creature upon earth henceforth to
term you. If your recent bounty of fifty pounds were already exhausted, I
must certainly have been extravagant; and that, the treasures of the east
could never make me. I would be liberal, had Providence entrusted me with
the means, but never profuse or ostentatious. I have no passions that
could lead me into expense. I neither like public or private amusements.
I neither study dress or fashion, but wear what is decent and convenient.
If I am superfluous in any point, 'tis in dressing out my son; for which
I know how I am censured: but I  do it as much to mortify his father and
his partisans, as to show the world what your Lordship's goodness can
enable an afflicted mother to do.

The permission your Lordship has given me to call on Mr. White, is a
proof of your unlimited kindness; yet I can't help thinking, my Lord, it
would manifest great want of modesty in me to make the least use of so
noble an indulgence. I know no advantage money could be of to me, but to
serve those who are in distress; and I have no need to be an agent for
our Lordship in that respect, who finds so much felicity in doing it
yourself: in short, my dear Lord, I want nothing but a sight of you; and
if ever I receive a favour, it must be immediately from your own
benevolent hand. The verses your Lordship demands of me, are very
incorrect, as they were written like a letter, and never intended to see
the light. I know your Lordship will overlook their imperfections, as you
do those of their author; and therefore, sans reserve, I shall submit
them to your superior judgment.—I believe I told you, my Lord, that when
I lodged in Green-Street, Grosvenor-Square, the most beautiful and
accomplished young lady I had ever beheld came to entreat I would write a
letter for her; but before she could tell me the substance of it, she
fell into an agony of tears, from which she was with difficulty
recovered: in short, she was obliged to go home in a chair, without being
able to tell me what she came about. It was the third morning after she
had first attempted to speak, that, with the mildest exhortations to
repose a confidence in one who sincerely pitied her, and assurances of
friendship, secrecy and assiduity to serve her, she told her story in a
simple but eloquent manner, which I the same day put into the dress in
which I here transcribe it:

To heaven and you, repentant I confess
At once my shame, contrition and distress;
And, oh! if pity may await a crime
That sullies honour to remotest time,
Judge from this faithful picture of my state,
Whether that pity should my crime await;
Covered with crimson blushes while I tell,
From white-robed truth and virtue how I fell;
From spotless innocence, from meek eyed peace,
A prey to horror, victim to disgrace.

Four summers passed since this dejected frame,
Was clad in sweetness, and enriched with fame;
Within my breast no sentiment arose,
That vestal maids might scruple to disclose;
The best of mothers, lavished on my mind,
Each heaven-taught precept to improve designed;
Bid guiltless joy on all my moments wait,
Blind to a thought of my succeeding fate,
Oh! had my soul each bright perfection shared,
Had all the beauties of my form been spared,
A noble fortitude had steeled my breast
The serpent wiles of mankind to detest;
To guard my virtue from the fatal stain,
These tears attempt to wash away in vain.

A youth by nature and by art possessed
Of all that melts the sympathetic breast;
Such sweet persuasion on whose accents hung,
That while he spoke I thought an angel sung;
Whose kneeling vows in fond profusion given,
Appeared to me the registers of heaven;
With all the arts deception could inspire,
Taught me to love, to pity, to admire;
Eternal truth each broken sentence filled,
Through every vital boundless rapture thrilled:
My honest soul each abject doubt disdained,
Yet rolling years his suit was unobtained
Till imprecations, hermits might deceive,
Made me to endless infamy a slave;
Dashed the rich cup whence social comforts flow,
And left me heir to everlasting woe.

Can I forget the still, the solemn night,
Scene of my joy, my ruin, my delight?
When modest Cynthia veiled her silver face,
Too chaste to evidence my sad disgrace;
When with affected piety of look
His impious hands unclosed the sacred book,
And joined our hearts with that celestial chain
Which death can only disunite again;
The mystic ring upon my finger placed,
Emblem of love, unchangeable and chaste;
Then Tarquin-like to my embraces flew,
While every angel from my side withdrew.

Own, wretch obdurate, though you can't relent,
Your present state is distant from content;
Her you abandoned in pursuit of wealth,
Had ease, good humour, sprightliness, and health;
Had love to cheer, should every comfort fail,
And temper gentle as the southern gale;
Unlike thy cankered, thy misshapen bride,
Fraught with detraction, enmity and pride
Who while her coffers burst with gems and plate,
Grudges each tasteless morsel that you eat;
Whose fiend-like soul aspires at no content,
But the infernal pleasure to torment;
Whose conversation may prevent my curse,
Since hell contains no punishment that's worse.
Here would I close the grief-awaiting tale,
And o'er the sequel cast a sable veil
To dumb obscurity the ills consign
That adverse fortune destined to be mine;
But though my heart at every sentence bleed,
My sex's welfare prompts me to proceed.

With hope and fear, alternate conflicts spent
Two tedious days since my destroyer went;
I sighed, I loved, I looked, I longed in vain,
And every moment was an age of pain;
No streaming tear could give my woes relief,
Tears the poor refuge of a common grief;
The third a fever's burning heat expressed,
The potent fury of a flame suppressed.
Vain was recourse to tenderness or art,
Sorrow and shame were written on my heart;
And wild distraction let my tongue reveal,
The fatal secret, reason would conceal.

Life from the great, the rich, the happy flies,
But grief's immortal, and it never dies;
Else why, ye powers, did I this stroke survive?
Why am I still in misery alive?
Perhaps the hour new vigour I acquired
Some hero perished, or some bard expired;
Some whose benevolence the world had shared
Have fallen, whilst wretchedness itself was spared.

When new-born health her balmy influence shed,
And o'er my cheek a vermil-tincture spread,
A tender mother, to compassion wrought,
The fatal cause of my affliction sought;
Told him in words that might a Nero melt
The stings her daughter in his absence felt;
While from her eye the tear of pity stole,
That spoke the kind sensations of her soul
But to her pleadings no regard was shown,
The wretch was callous as the frigid zone:
Then 'gainst her life her trembling hand she bent,
Nor e'er returned to tell me the event;
No longer worthy her esteem to claim,
She left me full of agony and shame.

Oh thou to nature's visitings unknown,
From whom these evils took their rise alone,
This tragic tale unshaken who can hear,
Nor pay the generous tribute of a tear;
Know that when worldly artifice shall sail,
To aweful heaven's tribunal I'll appeal;
Of joys eternal, let thy soul despair,
For clad in terrors I'll arraign thee there ;
My bleeding mother shall confront thy sight,
And furies snatch thee from the realms of light.


You see, my Lord, the whole piece is irregular and indigested, so that
nothing but your desire could induce me to give it under my hand. If
there is anything in it pleasing to Lord Kingsborough, I must entirely
impute it to his partiality to me.

I am this instant going to mortify Mr. Brown with your Lordship's last
letter; for as he is now at liberty, it might give him a flow of spirits
that would endanger his health, if I did not take them down a little, by
letting him know I have the uppermost place in your Lordship's heart;
which to deserve it is the only wish of

My Lord,

Your most dutiful,

humble servant,

LÆTITIA PILKINGTON

Dublin.



LETTER XIII.
From Lord KINGSBOROUGH to MRS. PILKINGTON

Abbe Boyle,

MADAM,

I HAVE been guilty of an indelicacy in my last, for which I can hardly
forgive myself, but that I know Mrs. Pilkington is too gentle to
misunderstand what I wrote without reflection. I could scarcely ever come
into her presence, after presuming to mention Mr. White. I stand most
genteelly corrected by your answer, Madam, and again assure you, upon my
honour, I wrote without thought; and though this is but pleading guilty
to one crime, in order to wipe out another, yet I had rather be looked on
as giddy than unpolite: in short, Mrs. Pilkington, this is the only
excuse I can make. How can you be so blind to your own excellence, to
condemn the most pathetic and poetical piece that ever fell from the pen
of mortal? I never differed in opinion with you, Madam, except in this;—
and I challenge you to show a line in it, that is not replete with that
ease, harmony and sweetness, peculiar to Euphrosyne [see note:], and
which the Lesbian poetess was never equal to. Certainly, Madam, some
tasteless person has put you out of temper with that poem, for were it
the work of another, a lady of your candour would undoubtedly commend it.
[Note: Euphrosyne—A name by which Mrs. Pilkington was known among her
correspondents.]

You know, Madam, I am neither connoisseur or critic, yet I certainly can
feel what enraptures my sense, and melts my soul to a feminine weakness.
I have conceived from your poem the warmest esteem for the deluded fair
one, and the utmost indignation at her betrayer; and as 'tis more than
probable, from what you say, Madam, that the amiable creature is not even
now above indigence, your doing me the honour to present to her the two
fifty pound notes enclosed herein, will unspeakably oblige me.

To enumerate the many unparalleled beauties of that piece is impossible,
though I have read it so frequently as to have it by heart: what you
modestly call irregularity, I think the chief spirit of such a
performance, as we naturally suppose you wrote in the same style in which
the unhappy Lady spoke; and we know that in this, as in painting, bold,
free, and masterly strokes, are the evident proofs of an original.

I can't help observing, that the abruptness of the conclusion adds much
to the dignity of the piece, though I wish the lady had not carried her
resentment so far, as to put him in eternal punishment; since she
confesses that the one allotted to him in a wife, was sufficient even for
the worst of crimes, and I am heartily of her opinion. The mother was
very precipitate to her own destruction; for had she held her tongue, the
lady might have passed for a maid with any old bachelor in England, and
the good woman have had a handsome revenue to keep the secret inviolable;
a task really hard on an old woman.

I assure you, Madam; I should not have said so much on this topic, but I
have been labouring to fill a whole sheet of paper with something; but
even my nonsense may show Mrs Pilkington, I have sense enough to aspire
at the reputation of her

Real admirer,

and most obliged

humble servant,

KINGSBOROUGH.

P. S. If you should not readily hear of the lady, do me the favour,
Madam, to dispose of the bills as you think proper.



LETTER XIV.
From Mrs. PILKINGTON to Lord KINGSBOROUGH.

My LORD,

TO evade your bounty, is as impossible as to parry Jove's thunder, and I
have met it when I most sought to shun it. I shall not tease your
Lordship with endeavouring to express what I think of you; for this, my
Lord, would be but giving pain to your virtues, and show how defective
both my thoughts and our language is. For my part, I can find no words to
dress the sensations of my soul in, and therefore must be silent about
them, hoping that the heart which is capable of inspiring them, may
define what I own myself unequal to; but I sincerely declare to you, my
Lord, I have had so much money of late, that I have been at a loss what
to do with it. Bishops, Priests and Deans liberally supply me, without my
being at the pains to solicit their benevolence. I receive sums of money
from unknown hands; nay, even the ladies now begin to honour me with
their correspondence and contributions.—I went the other day to my
printer to receive some arrears, and saw there a formal stiff fellow in
black, with his own lank hair, who I concluded was a parson. I asked
Powel who he was. He told me the great Mr. Wesley, and that he was
certain I should be highly delighted with his conversation, if I would do
him the favour to stay to dinner. As my curiosity was up, I consented to
the invitation; but though I started every subject that could possibly
seduce him into a general conversation, yet I. could not, for the soul of
me, wrench a sentence from him, more than that it would give him all
imaginable pleasure if he could prevail on me to go and hear him preach.
Yes, Sir, said I, but I would fain hear you talk first: I am told you are
a gentleman and a scholar. For my part, Sir, when I go to church, it is
to that established by law; to which, notwithstanding that some of her
clergy are little better than they should be, I am so heartily
reconciled, that it will be a hard matter now to make a Methodist of me.—
—Well, Madam, said Mr. Wesley, if you'll let me wait on you at your
house, we will then, over a dish of tea, converse of this matter. As I
was impatient to hear what this sanctified Levite had to advance, I said
I should expect him at breakfast the next morning. Madam, said he, if God
is willing, I will go, and I am not without hopes of seeing you a sister
in Christ.

He came according to appointment at eight o'clock, and at his entrance
made me a very courtly bow. I was surprised, even before he spoke, to see
the extraordinary alteration in his countenance; the muscles of which
were the preceding day dropped to that flatness, that his visage was a
perfect blank; but they were now braced up to their proper functions, and
he appeared a sprightly young fellow.

I never suffered more pain, Madam, said he, than I did yesterday, lest
Mrs. Pilkington should believe me the stupid animal I affected: but I may
be sincere enough to tell you, Madam, this seeming sadness and solemnity
is of the utmost use in my vocation and, you know, Madam, as Falstaff
says, "May not a man labour in his vocation?" Powel and his wife were
Anabaptists, but are now followers of me; and 'tis natural to suppose
I'll obtain as many as I can, as well as Mrs. Pilkington endeavours to
fill her subscription list; upon which, Madam, I beg to be incog. and so
saying, he presented me with a couple of guineas.—Now, Doctor, said I, do
you consider what you've been about? How do you know, that the moment you
depart, I may not take the pen and publish all this? Madam, said he, I
know by your writings, that it is not in your nature to do a premeditated
injury to one who has reposed a confidence in your honour and
understanding; and besides, not one of my followers would believe a
syllable of it, I have so effectually gained an ascendency over their
faith. I told Mr. Wesley, his opinion of me was just as

"I'd not betray my trust to gain the universe."

He then talked of books, plays, music, painting, statuary; and in short,
every subject that could convince me he was a man of taste and true
breeding. Now, Madam, said he, as I've been so candid with you, it is
entirely in your power to serve me, by speaking kindly of me to Powel's
family.—I promised to speak the truth, that I never received more
satisfaction from the discourse of any divine in my life, nor ever knew
one who was half so honest and ingenuous.—Upon the whole, my Lord, I saw
no difference between this prophet and other gentlemen, but that he drank
for breakfast milk and warm water, instead of tea and milk. —What I say
to my honoured friend, Lord Kingsborough, will, I am certain, go no
farther; especially, my Lord, when it is a desire of mine that this
interview should be kept secret.

Mr. Wesley had scarce departed, when I was visited by another clergyman,
who first subscribed very generously to my writings, and then said;—I
hope, Mrs. Pilkington, you have made no mention of me? Of you, Sir, said
I; upon my word I don't even know you. My name, Madam, said he, is J——b;
I had the favour to see you at the Archbishop of Dublin's, at Tallaght,
many years ago. Oh! Sir, I now recollect you, you came home with me in a
coach. Yes, Madam, said he, and I hope you will never repeat the
indiscretion I was guilty of at that time. Indeed, Sir, it never once
entered into my head; but now you have been so obliging to remind me of
it, I shall be able to make two or three admirable pages on the subject.
For heaven's sake, good Madam, said he, don't entirely ruin me; I have a
wife, who is already jealous, and such a thing might be the parting of
us. After bantering the parson a little more, I promised to be as silent
as the grave.—Having made his mind easy, he sat down and gave me the
following little history of his marriage:

You must know, my Lord, he is an English gentleman, and consequently has
a good living in Ireland. As he was on his road from London to Chester,
he happened to be taken suddenly ill, and stopped at a neat little house,
some small distance from the highway, where he was very hospitably
received by a young gentleman and his sister, who kept the house. They
prevailed on him to stay all night, and amongst other discourse the young
gentleman told Mr. J——b, that his sister and himself had ten thousand
pounds apiece, and lived very comfortably upon the interest of it; so
that by carefully avoiding extremes, they were always able to entertain
their friends genteelly. The parson is a lusty jolly fellow, not endowed
with any qualities, that may prevent his rising in the church, such as
wit, or too strong perception, therefore he said but little, and retired
to rest. In the morning he prepared to pursue his journey, but the young
lady insisted on his staying one day more for her sake; this he
accordingly did, but never, as he assured me, made the least tender of
love to her. The third morning he set out, and got as far as Parkgate;
but being detained there by contrary winds, was overtaken by the young
gentleman, who spoke to him in this concise manner:

Sir, my sister, who is a worthy modest girl, has taken a fancy to you,
and says she can't be happy without you. As I love her too well, not to
do all in my power to make her easy, I have myself come to ask you in
marriage for her; so, Sir, if you will accept my offer, do me the favour
to go back with me.—Mr. J——b, who had a great liking to the lady, readily
received his proposal, went back, and was married the next day.—He
received her fortune very justly, and, but that her extreme fondness
makes her liable to jealousy, they would be the happiest couple on earth.

Pray, my Lord, when I grow like the Archbishop of Sangrada in Gil Blas, a
little tedious and dull, and so forth, be so obliging to tell me of it,
before I expose myself; for though I have scribbled so much here I am in
the humour to write as much more.

I am, My Lord, &c.

LÆTITIA PILKINGTON

P.S. The pane of glass the epigram was on I broke, and shall never think
of it more.



LETTER XV.
From Lord KINGSBOROUGH to MRS. PILKINGTON

Abbe Boyle,

MADAM,

I HAVE been extremely happy in the characters of the two clergymen, and
Mrs. Pilkington may depend on it, I'll never impart any passage in her
letters she would wish concealed.—I can't help admiring how your head can
possibly furnish such variety of public and private entertainment; for I
take it for granted you have a number of troublesome correspondents
besides myself, who are, like me, perpetually sending you stupid letters
to provoke you to write good ones; and this, Madam, you certainly do,
besides supplying the public with an elegant repast in your Memoirs, I am
pleased to find the world seems penitent for the injuries it has offered
to the greatest and best of her sex, and endeavours to make some
atonement for its former malignity. I wish to God, dear Mrs Pilkington,
you would write a panegyric on the world; I'm certain it would sell, and
I could promise you five hundred subscribers to it.

If it were possible for Mrs. Pilkington's genius to flag, there would be
no necessity for my being the first to tell her of it; that truth, I have
been told, authors first learn from their booksellers.—The longest letter
Mrs. Pilkington ever wrote seemed to me, who feel the graces of her
style, an epigram, or a specimen of something excellent, that created a
thirst for more.—I'm obliged to you, Madam, for obliterating the two
lines, though it's a pity anything of yours should be lost. I will make
it my business to let Leeson know how much he is indebted to your
goodness, and I dare answer for his gratitude. Pray, Madam, in your next,
let me know how you approve my scheme for a new subscription. Mrs.
Pilkington, who can render the minutest trifles agreeable, will have a
fine field to display the brilliancy of her parts, when she has all the
world for her subject, and convince the universe that she was sent upon
earth as a pattern of vivacity, for dull authors to imitate and. improve
by. I've the honour to be, in great haste,

Madam,

Your most devoted,

humble servant,

KINGSBOROUGH.


LETTER XIV.
Answer to Lord KINGSBOROUGH.

Dublin

My LORD,

YOU desired me to write on the world, I took the pen, and these lines
came from the very bottom of my soul.

I

Call me not to a world I hate,
Call me not to vile mankind,
Move me from folly and deceit,
Content and virtue let me find.

II.

Know all ye splendid, rich and gay,
Know all ye wretches, worldly wise
Like mine your span is but a day,
And flattering hopes are mere surmise;

III

I know you all, you know not me,
Beneath your ken, by fortune placed,
My sorrows with disdain you see,
And my distresses with distaste.

IV.

Cursed be the head that first devised
A bar from each sublime tie;
Bid wealthy knaves, and fools be prized,
And merit in oblivion lie.

V.

Is it a boast to say thy hand,
Almighty guardian of the just,
Made me the strokes of fate withstand,
While e'er in thee I placed my trust?

VI.

No—let me to an age depraved,
An age of infidels declare,
Thy servant never was deceived,
When fondly she confided there.

VII.

I seek the cot, I seek the cell,
I seek the mountain, stream or grove;
Lead me contentment where you dwell,
With concord, piety, and love.

VIII.

Lead me to some inspiring vill,
Near a romantic structure reared;
Where virtue and religion still
Bloom by corruption unimpaired.

IX.

Where health and jollity robust
Spread a rich glow o'er every face
Where not the meanest sold his trust,
For title, grandeur, wealth or place.

X.

If there be such a spot on earth,
Oh! God of an all-searching eye
Though not from such I drew my birth,
In such contented let me die.


I am entirely of Hamlet's opinion with regard to the world. "Fie on't,
oh! fie! 'Tis an unweeded garden that grows to weeds, Things rank and
gross in. nature possess it merely."

LÆTITIA PILKINGTON.



POEMS BY JOHN PILKINGTON
With remarks on their production and reception

Various have been the poetical essays that I have occasionally written,
but few I esteem worth presenting to my readers; for as I find so great a
genius as Dr. Swift has been severely censured for inserting trifling
pieces in his collection, what could I expect if I presumed to do it?
When it may with propriety be said, that my best attempt in that way,
must be infinitely inferior to his worst; however, I confess I wish this
reflection had fallen from one, who professed less friendship for the
Dean than Lord Orrery.

Such pieces I have dispersed in the magazines and newspapers, and shall
only select those, where the choice of the subject may make some
atonement for my defects; I think it was in June, 1755, a report was
spread and published, that Lord Ligonier (then Sir John) died suddenly; a
gentleman to whom mankind in general, and myself in particular, stand
largely indebted. This furnished me with an opportunity of writing the
following lines.

Who could forbid the bursting tear to flow
Or stop th' impulsive energy of woe?
When baleful murmurs sung in every ear,
That spoke the death of generous Ligonier?

Deprived of him, our warlike legions pine,
Whose presence cheered the terror-striking line;
Whose dauntless courage, and resistless hand,
Won admiration from each foreign land.

Receive our incense, ye protecting powers,
That heart-afflicting sorrow is not ours;
For unborn ages be that stroke reserved;
Yet spare those virtues we've but ill deserved.

See at his name the soldiery revive:
Hear how they echo, Ligonier's alive!
See they invoke their matchless hero forth,
Warmed with a sense of his experienced worth;
Whose animating soul inspires them all,
And with confusion strikes th'insulting Gaul.

If yet for Britain, or her sons repose,
Benignant heaven, accustomed mercy knows,
To a long period of succeeding years,
Protract his fate, protract a nation's tears.

And when that power, which calls the just away,
invites his spirit to the realms of day,
Above the tomb, where he and goodness lies,
May fame still hover, and may laurel rise.

To this nobleman, I had likewise the honour (by his own permission) to
inscribe the following essay, on the death of that beloved Prince,
Charles Spencer, Duke of Marlborough, which was published in the
Universal Magazine soon after the lamented event that occasioned it.

SUSPIRIA ardens evixit ad aethera virtus.

NOT the dread pangs that nature disunite,
E'er urged by death the spirit wings her flight.
When dire convulsions shake the human frame,
Glow on each limb, and every nerve inflame:
Not latest groans of all I dearest prize,
Or pendant ruin hovering o'er my eyes;
Could grief sincerer in my soul create,
Than noble Spencer's unexpected fate.

When sleep assumes dominion o'er the sense,
And horrid dreams alternately commence,
What new-born joy the rising morn attends,
When 'midst a conflict the delusion ends?
O! could some angel to my soul proclaim,
Thy death, lamented hero! But a dream,
Thy life, Britannia's choicest gem, restore,
Lost on a bleak, unhospitable shore;*
This loathed existence, for a while endear,
By fond persuasions, virtue still were here;
That still a patron injured worth might find,
Still thy example rectify mankind;
Lost in a torrent of unbounded joy,
I'd chase these griefs that my content destroy,
* Germany, where his Grace died

Not, ever honoured Marlborough that thine ear,
Was prompt as providence my plaint to hear;
Not that thy bounty, like the rapid main,
No limit learned, its ardour to restrain:
'Midst ruined fortune helpless genius prized;
Nor my afflicted mother's woe despised;
To know thy virtues by minute detail,
Bid us at once to human-kind appeal:
Each day, each hour, each interval of thine,
Displayed some instance of a soul benign;
Whether you wiped the agonizing tear,
Or bid dejection be of better cheer;
Planned patriot systems in Britannia's cause,
Or gave to science succour and applause;
Shone in domestic, on in social light,
In acts of tenderness, or acts polite.
To form the whole unanimously blend,
The patriot, hero, gentleman and friend.

While fame and conquest all their laurels spread,
With deathless garlands to enwreath his head;
While wasteful ruins on the Gallic plain*,
The recent marks of his success remain;
While earth revered, and wondering powers above,
Hailed him the pattern of connubial love;:
By all regretted, and by all admired,
From earth immortal Marlborough retired
*Cherbourg destroyed, under his Grace's command, August 8, 1758

Bear him, ye cherubs, to eternal rest,
A bright, angelic, unpolluted guest;
Fitly adapted to adorn that sphere,
Who gained the summit of perfection here.

Having-occasion, a few days after the above appeared, to pay my respects
to Sir Edward Montagu, I brought one of the Magazines in my pocket, and
had the honour to present it to him: he was so obliging to read the
verses over, and to tell me that he approved of them; and as Sir Edward
knew my circumstances, added to these civilities a handsome present: But
pray, said he, Mr. Pilkington, have you sent it to any other of the
family? I said, I hoped they would see it. Why, said he, the present Duke
is a most worthy and liberal young nobleman; and I think if he saw this,
he would do something to serve you; and so I likewise believe would the
Earl of Pembroke. I hinted the difficulty of obtaining access to those
noblemen; and Sir Edward generously said, make use of my name, say you
came from me. Accordingly the Sunday morning succeeding, I tore the page
on which the lines were printed, out of the pamphlet, and enclosed them
in a letter to his grace, making use of the passport I was favoured with,
left my letter with his grace's porter, and told him I should be at the
Smyrna coffee-house, just over the way, for two hours But oh! tempora
mutadi erant, the moments elapsed, without affording an answer good or
bad.

This, however, did not prevent my taking the same method with the Earl,
except with this difference, that as I imagined the letter might not have
been given to his Grace, but to some steward or secretary (which is
indeed too frequently the case) I made my servant wait for his Lordship
at the Opera-house, and to give it in to his own hand. When he called for
an answer, he was told there was none; but as both the Duke and the Earl
have subscribed to this book, 'tis possible, whatever mistakes have been
committed by their servants, or mine, may be rectified; if not, sum in
loco quae ante fueram.

I had, however, the honour to present the Magazine to Lord Ligonier, at
St. James's, who received it with an affability peculiar to those who are
exalted by their own virtues, and afterwards made me a compliment equal
to the greatness of his soul. It was indeed kindly reported, that I
received a present of some hundreds from one of his Grace's family, upon
this account; which served to make a troublesome and persecuting set of
creditors ten times more assiduous than usual to ruin and oppress me: But
it has pleased the Almighty hitherto to protect me from their sanguine
and destructive emissaries, which mercy, I hope, he will continue, till
his providence enables me prove, that not the want of principle, but the
want of means, has for some time, disenabled me to settle with them, or
transact my own affairs, which has given rise to a thousand calamities.

I confess, I'm inclined to believe the answer delivered at Lord
Pembroke's, was one of those which servants are very liberal in giving to
every messenger who comes without a laced livery; and the more so, as
upon my formerly enclosing the following little Ode to his Lordship,
which I had addressed to the late Duke of Marlborough, on the marriage of
his amiable daughter with that nobleman, it was kindly received by them
both, and was an introduction to my adding their illustrious names to my
list.

An ODE to his Grace the Duke of MARLBOROUGH

I.

THE Florist with delighted eye
Views the carnation's various dye,
And twisting woodbine spring;
All summer's pride his joys excite,
Reward his labours with delight
And cheer his voice to sing.

II.

With what transcendent comfort blessed,
Is then the kind paternal breast,
When all his hopes to crown
He sees the object of his care
In each sublimer virtue share,
That may demand renown.

III.

See Churchill* from the realms divine
The spreading glories of thy line,
Like Nile's diffusive stream;
A thousand different courses take
Its bounties while the world partake
And hail thy aweful name.
*The great John, Duke of Marlborough

IV.

Not the emblazoning herald's art
Can such effulgent rays impart,
As virtue can bestow;
For this to Spencer's god like race,
While the fixed planets hold a place.
Shall praise spontaneous flow.

V.

To thee illustrious Pembroke's given
All we believe of promised heaven,
Taste, purity, and truth;
Celestial harmony of mind,
A graceful form, a temper kind
And rosy-tinctured youth.

VI.

Pembroke*, of whom each purling stream.
And haunted grove resounds the name
To all the muses dear;
From whose august illumined race,
The sweet Arcadian tale took place,
Which lovers raptured hear.
*The Countess of Pembroke's Arcadia.

VII.

When Hymen lights his sacred brand,
And beauty yields her trembling hand,
To supplicating love;
Exulting joy takes instant place,
Unbidden smiles deck every face,
While heaven and earth approve.

VIII.

Even I, my Lord, a bliss partake
That willing gratitude would speak,
Were flowing numbers mine;
Fit each perfection to impart,
That e'er enriched a princely heart,
For then I'd picture thine.

As I have glanced at the inconveniences that arise from servants' opening
their masters' letters, and dictating answers to them, I sincerely wish
that the ingenious author of High Life Below Stairs, had added one scene
to his excellent satire, where he has happily displayed the absurdity and
impertinence of a set, whom in his preface he terms, "a very large and
useful body of people," large they are to infinity, but useful in
general, as little as they can possibly render themselves; and I know,
that the insolence of some of those mercenary dependents, has diminished
the lustre of many of the noblest names that ever enriched the historic,
or poetic page: for if they are entrusted by their masters to confer any
favour, they will be certain to annex to it a gross insult, or sarcasm of
their own, in order to abstract from any comfort a benefit might inspire.

I will not be so cruel as to descend to particulars in this case, as it
might deprive some persons of bread, who may from this admonition learn
to demean themselves with less brutality; for as the writer of the satire
has given room to suspect those important members of society wear their
master's clothes, and assume their titles, it is possible they may
likewise read their books; and in that case I should, perhaps, find some
of their Graces to be bruisers, or have the street door slapped in my
face, while their masters were purposely waiting to see me.

Nevertheless, to show my dramatic abilities, I can't help supposing the
drum scene, in the farce, continued a little longer, before the alarm
comes that promiscuously lodges their Ladyships in the pantry, and his
Grace in the coal-hole. To anyone who has read the farce, it will be
intelligible; to those who have not, I wish it may prove an incitement to
do it; as look upon it as a proper monitor for every noble and every
truly generous person in England to have by them, till the enormous vice
and iniquity there lashed, is utterly reclaimed.

I think the best place to introduce a circumstance that perhaps, escaped
the writer's knowledge, is in the second act, before the merriment
commences, and just after Lovel, the liberal master of the house, has
made his exit.

Enter Philip in a great passion, with a letter sealed in his hand.

PHILLIP.

This house is pestered with letters, it would employ ten porters to
answer them; yet I'll take great care they get nothing by it; for the
fool, my master, would soon put it out of his power to regale us, if he
saw one half of them.
DUKE.

Is that a specimen in your hand, Mr. Phil? Prithee let's see it, it may
afford us a laugh before the fiddler comes.
PHILLIP.

Ay, ay, per bonum publicam, your Grace may divert the company with it; a
shabby fellow brought it, and had the impudence to tell me he was a
gentleman.
Sir HARRY.

A journeyman gentleman, I suppose, the most contemptible caricature in
nature. When our blockhead came first to his estate, he used to be at the
pains of answering those troublesome gentry, and sent me, with a devil to
him, to ferret them out, in places that disgusted my nature; but I soon
cured him of it, by putting his answer in the sinking fund, and giving
the more rational reply a gentleman should always do.—We know nothing of
you, and wonder at your assurance to trouble people of consequence.
DUKE.

Fort bien, Sir Harry, am verite bien, nous tout rendrons meme reponses.
My sapskull values himself on being a politician, and thinks he manages
matters with marvellous secrecy; but when I come to brush his clothes in
the morning, I find in his pockets the whole business of the day, and
take proper measures to frustrate any designs he may have, that I esteem
mal a propos; for such papers as I think I shall have plague with, I put
out of the way; and if he enquires for them, declare point blank I know
nothing at all of the matter.
Lady BAB.

Why my Lady is the most romanticalest idiot alive; she's perpetually
corresponding with poits, and would be weak enough to give the creatures
all her card-money, but I peaches their morrility. I tells my lady as
how, I hears bad carcters of them from different tredes persons, and
she's too much taken up with pleasures to make pertiklur enquiry; so I
twines her round my finger. I always gives our clerk of the kitchen as my
autor, and he lies with so good a grace, that his news passes for
autentic.
DUKE.

Now avec permission, je lisez le lettre pour ce bien compagne. (opens the
letter)

Sir HARRY.

I'll beg a dust of your Grace's Strasbourg, to keep up my spirits, and to
prevent infection first.

DUKE.

Vous etes bien venu Monsieur. (Reaches his box) (Reads) Dear Sir.—
Blackfriars.

OMNES.
ha, ha, ha
DUKE.

Stay, stay, a commoner may have intimates; pray has any of this noble
company ever been on the other side of London-Bridge?

Lady CHARLOTTE.

Why does your Grace ask?

DUKE.

Only a whim, my Lady, to know whether the inhabitants walk uprightly as
we do, or go upon all fours; cannibals they undoubtedly are—but
pronograde—I'll proceed in the epistle (reads affectedly, minding no
stops.)

If the memory of that love which subsisted between us in our boyish days,
is not by time and long absence quite effaced, you'll certainly be
pleased to hear that your old school-fellow, Dick Grapple, is still in
being, though almost naked, upon the British shore.

DUKE.

(to the company) Was ever such nonsense heard of? That if he loved his
old friend, he'd be glad to hear he was almost naked.—[reads] The story
of my shipwreck, and other calamities, is too tedious for a letter,
especially to a member of parliament, as I hear you are.

DUKE.

That's a sneer, he hears when all the world knows Lovel's in the Court
Calendar.(reads) It was by  mere accident I heard of you.—

PHILIP.

And it will be mere miracle if he ever hears of you.(reads.) If you'll
order your servants to give me admittance, 'tis in my power to serve you
in regard to your affairs at home.—

KITTY.

Another Freeman, I warrant! he wants to inspect the pantry.—

DUKE(reads)

and it may be in your capacity, if it is your inclination, to save from
ruin your most obsequious, most devoted, most obliged, most obedient,
most—O! Lard! I can remember no more, Timothy Lickspittle.

Lady BAB.

Surely you wrongs him, my Lord Duke! let me see, no faith, 'tis Ricard
Gapple, if I can read.

DUKE

'Tis all one, my Lady, R, R, R, Richard Grapple, being properly
pronounced. Oh! your ladyship has not the true idiom de la Francois,
patience un peu de temps; but, Pox on't, you read very well for an Earl's
daughter too—.

As I would not wilfully infringe the laws of the stage-wright, by
swelling this scene to a greater length than the rules of the drama admit
of, I shall close it, with wishing, that, amongst the hurry of the
company, the letter may be dropped, and found by Lovel, who I would have
overjoyed to hear a young gentleman is in London, that had preserved his
life in a party of swimming; and I could wish, that instead of turning
the scoundrel, Philip, out of his house, he would send him to Newgate,
for breaking open his letter; which, according to the laws of England, is
as much felony as forcing a lock. Indeed, if one half the nobility and
gentry knew in what a ludicrous manner their most private concerns are
treated through this channel, they would be a little more circumspect
about letters.

This digression I have made for common benefit, and, therefore, I am
satisfied the sensible part of my readers will take it as 'tis meant. I
shall now return to my talk, of gathering from an immense lumber of
rhymes, condemned to oblivion, those I think the most tolerable; though I
do assure my readers, I have never yet wrote one couplet that pleased
myself. What I may do hereafter, if the world should be more partial to
my lays than I am myself, is yet to be known. The best apology I can make
for my faults, is the true one, that I am condemned like a spider, to
spin all out of myself, not having had one book, as I observed before, to
assist me; one friend to revise me; nor one moment to bestow on them the
necessary corrections I knew they wanted: so that I am confident, their
having been well received by the learned and the judicious, must entirely
have been the result of that frankness and candour ever resident in great
minds.

An ELEGAIC ESSAY,
On the death of the Right Honourable the Marquis of Lindsay, son to his
Grace the Duke of Ancaster, written 1759.

Manibus date lilia plenis.

WHEN, for Britannia's punishment of late,
Fallen was the lovely offspring of the great,
Stopped were the pitying accents of my tongue,
And the lamented babe a while unsung.

At length in sable Majesty arrayed,
With down-cast look appeared the tragic maid;
An awful horror chilled me ere she spoke,
When silence thus the pensive fair one broke.

Oh! would'st thou learn eternally to weep,
And constant converse with dejection keep,
Contemn the themes that giddy mirth excite,
Pursuing anguish through her dreary flight;
Whether shrill echoes from the cottage rise,
Of filial, social, or maternal cries;
Or steadfast friendship, like a statue placed,
Weeps o'er the ruins of a friend deceased.
On such attend, for such attune thy string,
No grief's too humble for the muse to sing.

O should sublimer sympathy alarm,
And all thy soul to nobler subjects warm,
See where too sad, too wide a field appears,
The generous, beauteous, Ancaster in tears.
Who can be silent, and behold her mourn,
The hope of ages at a Lindsay's urn?
Though from her eyes incessant sorrows fall
'Twill not her treasure from the grave recall;
Nor o'er that cheek a vivid gloom expand,
Damped by; the dew of death's remorseless hand.
No more his prattle shall inspire delight,
The live-long day, or tedious winter night;
Wake all a father's fondness as it flows,
And all a mother's happiness compose;
There solemn silence has assumed her reign,
Fruitless are tears, and invocations vain.
Say, death, thou bane of human prospects, say,
Why is perfection soonest snatched away?
Why should thy dart on Bertie's cradle fall,
While for thy aid a thousand wretches call?
Couldst thou not take the desolate, the blind,
The poor that succour seek in vain to find?
Give them oblivion, and to Albion spare,
Virtue's fond pledge, and worth's apparent heir.

Thus humble shrubs of wild luxuriant race,
That lend the landscape no enlivening grace,
Oft have a tempest's rapid force withstood,
That rent the noblest cedar in the wood;
And princely Bertie, like a victim fell,
While I survived, the mournful tale to tell.

As I have formerly mentioned, that my ambition was to praise, and at the
same time to avoid the ignominious appellation of a parasite, I have made
most of my panegyrics upon the dead, from whom no future favour can
possibly be expected; but a censorious world must confess, that I have
been happy in the choice of my subjects; and though ingratitude, or
insensibility, silenced the more eminent sons of Apollo upon the themes I
have honoured my pen by, surely nobody will condemn me for the following
attempt.

On the death of the late Right Honourable the Countess of SHAFTESBURY.

WHY o'er my soul impends this deadly dew?
The matchless Shaftesbury's no more, 'tis true;
And weeping orphans, with regret, shall find
So much perfection is not left behind.
Can friendship with her from immortal bliss,
'Midst the rough tumults of a world like this?
Or grieve the recompense, too soon she found,
Of days, that virtue and religion crowned?
Yet, can philosophy the seas assuage,
Or calm a tempest in its maddened rage?
From recent wounds, the quick sensation take,
Or bid a wretch tormented cease to speak?
Though in the regions of eternal rest
We know thy soul's superlatively blessed;
Yet were thy virtues to the world so dear,
Relenting nature, still must wish 'em here.
Even I—this melting weakness must confess,
While tears my sorrow—more than words express.
I join the weeping melancholy train,
That mourn the kindest of her sex in vain.

As this admirable lady's whole life was employed in the service of the
distressed, and the encouragement of every liberal science, to which the
elegance of her taste aptly inclined her; and as there is no reason to
doubt, but that every person of genius, more or less, partook of her
well-judged liberality; I must confess, I blushed at the depravity of my
species, to see her pass to the grave unnoticed by them, and only
lamented in domestic life, where she shone with incomparable lustre. Lord
Shaftesbury, whom, if I dare transcribe my thoughts, I would pronounce
the best of men; and, if I did, I should find no murmur to oppose it—was
long inconsolable for her loss; and her honest attendants, to whom her
ladyship was constantly a mother, speak of her to this day with tear-
streaming eyes.

I can't help observing here, how great an effect good example may have on
the minds of inferiors: the lady I speak of, was, as his Lordship now is,
mild, affable, polite, learned, and easy of access; the servants, by
frequently having the happiness to hear and see them, became the echoes
of their benignity, and were as widely different from those preposterous
characters I have drawn, as good is from bad; go, for the great may take
my simple word for it, that an imperious servant, is like a ridiculous
ambassador, and every enormity he commits, appears to be either copied
after, or done by the positive order of the person he represents, and is
placed to his account, whether right or wrong; in short, 'tis an
invariable maxim, that a brutish master makes a brutish man.

To give one instance of this, I shall recite a little story: A poetical
friend of mine, who is allowed to have some merit in his compositions,
addressed a poem to a certain great man, just returned from his travels.
Undoubtedly, he was accompanied from thence by a train of rascally
foreigners, who having been bred in a state of slavery, imagined they
could impose it on the free-born natives of these islands, and that they
might with impunity treat such persons here, as they had seen men of
capacity used abroad: this is indeed, the best construction I can put
upon what is to follow. The verses he wrote were, according to my
opinion, very pretty in their kind; and as he favoured me with the
inspection of his papers, and made me the confidant of his expectations,
he invited me to breakfast on the morning he expected to receive the
great man's answer.—We were scarcely seated at tea, when a fellow
entered, who lacked nothing but whiskers, to complete the head of a
Saracen; but he had the apparel of a gentleman. My friend (a man of
address) asked him to sit down; No, said he, Monsieur, I have not de time
to lose avec you; is your name so and so? Yes, answered the gentleman.
Then mine Lord D—— sent you dat and dat, said he, and so retired, leaving
some papers on the table. My friend took them up with great fortitude and
composure, and found his own verses torn across, and another piece
written in an attorney's hand, which we at first apprehended was a bill
in chancery, by its prolixity, and the formality it was drawn up with;
but when we came to read it, We had a full half-hour's merriment—for such
a complication of bombast and nonsense never was huddled together before:
I remember some of the lines ran thus:

"And now, my Lord, that you are safe come back,
what is there more for Britain's sons to lack?
And now, my Lord, that you are safe come home,
we hope no more in foreign realms you'll roam.
And now, my Lord, that you are here again,
The Muse with pleasure does take up her pen.
And now, my Lord, as you are so polite,
you'll know the merits of what poets write."

In short, "and now, my Lord," was the beginning of every second line,
through the whole performance, which was closely penned on a large sheet
of post paper.

My friend, after ruminating a little, said, "Really, if the great man is
a rational creature, such a piece of stuff must excite his resentment;
but why should he therefore affront me? I am determined, let what will be
the issue, to reverse my compliment, and tell him in a poignant satire,
what opinion his country really entertains of him."

I entreated him to desist from so rash and unprofitable an undertaking,
as it might do him hurt, and could by no means procure him any
satisfaction; for if my L——d himself was capable of such ill manners, he
must be incorrigible; and if the fellow dared to take such a freedom,
without his privity, he would consequently serve all letters that were
presented at the house, in the same manner.

Notwithstanding my most earnest remonstrances, he wrote the following
lines, and would have published them in such a manner, as to be
comprehended by the meanest understanding; but that he was in a few days
after obliged to go abroad, and has since lost his life in the service of
his country. Nor should I give them a place here, if I thought the person
they were intended to lash could ever be guessed at; all I mean hereby,
is to verify by demonstration, how much it is in the power of an ignorant
pert servant, to bring severe reflections on the life and morals of his
master.

I dare do all that may become a man,
Who dares do more is none.
SHAKESPEARE

CURSED be the bard, through penury or fear,
That henceforth fawns on a degenerate Peer;
In a false mirror, vies to let him see,
Not what he is—but what he ought to be.
High as his titles would adapt his praise,
To them imaginary trophies raise;
If forced by fortune—or compelled by want
I spoke you worthy—witness I recant:
The harmless panegyric I bestowed,
Not from your virtue, but my fancy flowed;
Henceforth, my L——d, with a minuter care,
I'll represent you—reptile as you are:
But hold—Italian bravos may be bought,
And blood be spilled for writing as I ought;
Amongst your *** sordid Gallic train,
A brave assassin can't be sought in vain,
Monsieur, your valet, will the office do;
You can encourage, and protect him too.

Heaven, says my L——d, with an assuming brow
Per Ben parlare—wat de matter now?
Did I for this in foreign brothels shine,
And on the vice of human-kind refine?
At distant courts, display my beardless face,
Purchase their P——, impertinence and lace?
Ransack endearing Italy and France,
My voice to model, and reform my dance?
At last returning elegantly bred,
With empty pockets and sonorous head,
Aid me, oh Monsieur! aid thy injured Lord,
I'll draw out anything—except my sword;
A passive trophy, 'tis for great ones meant,
Let soldiers use it, j'ai pour l'ornament.

Vere it mine case, says Monsisieur—he should feel
Mine vakened wrath, and die in de Bastille;
A Peer of France consults no vulgar laws,
Nor for his acts assigns a public cause.
Oh! glorious thought, the raptured *** replied,
But here that pleasing comfort is denied.

A servant enters, may it please your ***,
A Briton pines with sorrow in his face;
Entreats your charity his pains to ease.
I'm absent,—sick,—or busy—what you please.
An opera singer now an audience waits,
Open the doors, unbar the folding gates;
Tell Signor Numsculini—he may come,
I knew him in-ti-mate-ly well at Rome.
Salve, Signor—your benefit draws nigh,
Accept this fifty pound, pardonne moi;
Business of consequence demands me now,
Signor, your slave devoted—makes a bow.

A shabby brother of Apollo's tribe
Entreats your *** will to his work subscribe.
Tell him I would—but that I never read.
The writer shakes his head—'tis plain indeed.

Now fiddlers, pimps, and parasites attend,
Studious to cringe, dissemble, and commend.
No honest hand, displays the dull poltroon,
No faithful tongue, proclaims him a baboon;
A coxcomb, fribble, or Sir Courtly Nice,
With Jackdaws pertness, and a Monkey's vice,
Soothing each grovelling passion of the soul,
They make a moving puppet of the whole;
Till all disorders, nature that impair,
Call of his *** and leaves a rotten heir.

I am confident, that none of my candid readers will once surmise the
foregoing libel proceeded from me, as I never use gall in my ink; and I
can appeal for the truth of this to ***** he is extremely obliged to me;
**** it is much in my power to ****; though **** the many promises he
made to the lady, **** yet this sensible man **** my want of resentment,
**** say and to do **** that **** should in honour, prudence, and good
policy be ashamed of; **** I am not in the least chagrined at his
treatment of me, nor do I, **** he will at length relent, **** pay me
**** I live in hopes of, **** is **** shall destroy some materials, ****
falling into less prudent hands, **** on the word of a freemason, ****
this intricate passage, ****, one calendar month **** at liberty, to
write less mysteriously.
Note: This paragraph was obstructed, and mangled in this manner by some
small particles of the sand of the river Pactolus flying in the author's
eyes, on Friday the 8th of Feb. 1760.

I told my readers some pages past, that I had never yet written anything
in verse to please myself; but a few nights ago I was seized with a
sudden impulse to scribble, and scribble I did, the following little
piece; and whether it be owing to a defect in my judgment or to the
general fondness parents have to their newest born offspring, I esteem it
the most like poetry of any attempt I have yet made. This was inserted in
the British Chronicle, Monday Jan. 21.

ODE to his Excellency Field Marshal General Lord Viscount Ligonier, Jan.
1, 1760.

I

Unpensioned for the annual song,
The willing numbers glide along,
To hail the rising year;
That lets a raptured nation view
Their favourite blessing live in you,
Time-honoured Ligonier.

II

Daughter of Paeon* give him health,
Parent of day increase his wealth,
And radiant influence shed;
Around his hospitable dome
The hapless soldier's constant home,
And sure resource for bread.
*Note: Hygeia the Goddess of Health.
III.

Thy presence cheers the drooping Muse,
Nor these her lonely strain refuse,
Inspired by love sincere;
Whatever fate thy bard attends,
For thee to heaven his prayer ascends,
And heaven regards his prayer.

A fine subject is certainly the happiest inspirer of easy verse; if the
piece cited, has any tincture of the latter, it must have been derived
from the former; which was likewise the case in the two following essays.

On seeing the right honourable Elizabeth, Countess of Northumberland at
St. James's Sunday, Dec. 9, 1759

SMIT with amazement at a form so bright,
Where splendour, ease, and dignity unite:
Where at a glance is evidently seen,
The regal greatness that bespeaks a queen,
At thy approach unbidden we retire,
And wrapped in awful steadfastness admire,
As if some beauteous deity appeared
Seen to be loved, and known to be revered;
The demi-crescent* harbingers the way,
While wondering crowds their adoration pay.
*Note: The half-moon worn in the cap of her Ladyship's page that precedes
her chair

Well may thy presence, noble Piercy raise
Incense of blessings, monuments of praise;
For, midst the grateful multitude there's few,
But more or less have been obliged to you.

Whatever heaven in former ages gave
To deck the learned, munificent or brave,
In Percy's form and manners we behold
With all the lustre it appeared of old;
Whose high descent is manifestly shown,
By native ease, and "graces all her own."

On hearing a description of Lord Lyttleton's new house in Worcestershire.

TO cherish arts, and sciences to aid,
That pile superb was generously essayed;
Whose spacious dome, and whose extensive plan,
Justly displayed the spirit of the man.
Oh! should an ill-timed penury control
The native flowings of thy liberal soul,
Place but thyself amidst the wide domain,
'Twill all that's great and excellent contain.


Perhaps nothing said of myself, in the course of this book, will do me
half so much honour in the opinion of its readers, as to tell them that,
to the unwearied bounties of these illustrious persons I owe my present
existence; and, therefore, if anything I have now written, or hereafter
may write, affords the least entertainment, the kind preservers of my
life, the defenders of my liberty, and the sources of my support, must
take the merit of it. Yes, ye good and great, if I attempted to suppress
the enthusiastic impulse of my gratitude, it would overwhelm me; though
to enumerate half your kindnesses would employ all my remaining pages:
yet to record a Shaftesbury, a Hartford, a Germain, a Lyttleton, a
Guildford, a North, a Cardigan, a Leeds, a sensible Whitehead, and a
Bridgeman, amongst the foremost, who, deaf to all the calumnies
malignantly propagated for my ruin, assisted me and mine with an
unlimited benevolence, is no less than my duty at the same time that I
consider it, as the amplest encomium on myself and my posterity. In one
of my essays published in Lloyd's paper, (which I heard some judges say
is the best extant) I recommended it to seven of the most opulent
booksellers, to hire seven of the most profound critics, and shut them up
seven years, in seven different garrets, to compose seven hundred
commentaries on me and my writings. I am not doubtful but this volume
will afford them infinite matter to display the energy of their talents
on, as there are numerous accidental errors in them, as well as the
unavoidable faults of nature; therefore whenever a letter is misplaced,
or a stop omitted, it will be kindly imputed to the author's ignorance;
for men who have no talents themselves, nor no pretensions to shine in
any branch of science, find infinite satisfaction in depreciating the
attempts of others, nay, they make a tolerable livelihood of it; so that
it is more than possible the blunders of the press corrector, and mine
united, may afford them some good dinners.

But in order to allay the zest of their entertainment, I must appeal to
the less rigid and more friendly reader, by asking how it was possible
for a man either to write or correct, with a mind distracted by ten
thousand wants, cares and anxieties? I had scarce proposed a
subscription, when it was industriously rumoured, I would never publish a
book; and though this did not withhold superior minds from contributing
to its appearance, yet to the base, the vulgar, and the ignorant,
wretches with whom I had no connection, it was a perpetual fund for the
most cruel and unjust reflections; insomuch that a faithful servant
[Elizabeth Rainbut], who has adhered to me with a disinterested regard
through all my adversities, frequently came in, with tears in her eyes,
to complain of the insults she met with on my account: such as: If your
master thinks to cheat the public with his pretended book, you must not
cheat us.—The poor girl, who knew the integrity of my principles, and the
frequency of my being honoured with letters and messages from persons of
the first distinction in Great Britain and Ireland, and who likewise knew
I was at the same time employed in preparing these pages for the press,
engaged in my cause with an Amazonian fortitude; and could only content
her by promising to prosecute them for defamation, as soon as I got a
little respite from the baneful effects of their unprovoked malice; which
promise, though I detest law suits, I yet mean to fulfil.

This has obliged me to hurry on an abrupt conclusion to the story of my
life, and has indeed almost concluded my life itself; for what between a
constitution, alas! too delicate for my condition, and the frequent
shocks, alarms and tremors that attend a state of voluntary imprisonment,
my spirits are exhausted, my ideas contracted, and my relish for life and
its enjoyments absolutely stagnated. Add to all this, that by a violent
cold which fell upon my glands, by going out too soon after a fever,
before I left Ireland, my speech is rendered unpleasing, to those who
have not been familiarly conversant with me. This carries a ten-fold
affliction with it, as it renders me shy of entering into any discourse,
or accepting the invitations of my superiors, that might otherwise be
advantageous to me; and makes me frequently look like an idiot, when I
really have enough to say for myself; besides, the ill-natured part of
mankind, who make all human infirmities the subject of ridicule, are but
too apt to impute it to a cause I should blush to name; but surely my
offspring, when seen, will be the truest vindication in that respect, if
health, bloom, or complexion in them, are admitted as evidences on a
father's behalf.

I shall only now present to my readers two letters, which will enable
them to judge with what degree of public good opinion, and private
esteem, I left Ireland; the one from the Earl of Clanricarde, and the
other from Baron Dawson, whose name I've taken the freedom to mention
before:—to two such eminently sensible, and indisputably excellent
persons, I need scarce make an apology for thus publicly showing the
pride I take in being thought well of by them, as such testimonials will,
at one view, render me more service in the sight of the praiseworthy,
than all the slander that envy can invent or malignity propagate, will
avail to my disadvantage.

To Mr. PILIKINGTON, in Margaret-Street, Cavendish-Square.


Sir,

I Yesterday received at Southampton the letter you I did me the favour to
write me; and I now take the first opportunity of assuring you, that the
sense I  have of the bad treatment Mrs. Pilkington very undeservedly
received, would alone be a sufficient inducement for my complying with
your desire, did I not think that so promising a genius ought to be
encouraged.

You may very readily command my name, and if you will let me know how I
am to convey the money, will immediately do it. You do me a great deal of
honour in supposing me equal to the ticklish task of an author; the book,
I believe, you mean, is the Memoirs of the Marquis of Clanricarde,
published by me; if you think it will afford you any pleasure, I dare say 
Mr. Dodsley will readily, on mentioning it to him as a request of mine,
lend you a volume.

I am, in, great haste, which I hope you will excuse,

SIR

Your most obedient servant,

CLANRICARDE,

Belmont, near Westmeon,

Hants,

October 20 1757.

To Mr. JOHN CARTERET PILKINGTON, in Margaret-Street, Cavendish-Square,
London.

Dublin, Nov. 22, 1757.

SIR,

ON my coming to town to attend the term, I found, among others, which my
servant had neglected to send me, two letters from you; I am willing to
be a subscriber to your undertaking, and wish you success in it.

I am,

SIR,

Your humble servant,

ARTHUR DAWSON.

P.S. My wife is obliged to you for your present.

I promised, at my first setting out, some more animadversions on my
quondam step-dame; but having been so long treating of persons of
consequence, I cannot again descend so low; besides, it might give pain
to a father's heart, which, however cold to me now, by time, absence, and
misrepresentation, may, by some future event, be taught, how dearly, how
tenderly, its repose is wished by the poor lost one it has abandoned;
who, through a life of painful vicissitudes, has never ceased to solicit
the Almighty for his prosperity and welfare, nor done one act to bring
dishonour upon his name.

FINIS
