The History of King Richard the Third
By
Thomas More & Anon.


Bibliographic Note.

The text is from the folio edition of Sir Thomas More's Works,
London, 1557. The continuation is from the edition of Hardyng's
Chironicle, printed by Richard Grafton, 1543. This Ex-classics
edition is taken from the version by J. Rawson Lumby, DD, Cambridge
University Press, 1883. Title Page



The History of King Richard the Third
(Unfinished)
By Thomas More

King Edward of that name the fourth, after that he had lived
fifty and three years, seven months, and five days, and thereof
reigned two and twenty years, one month, and eight days, died at
Westminster the ninth day of April, the year of or redemption, a
thousand four hundred four score and three, leaving much fair issue,
that is to wit, Edward the Prince, thirteen year of age: Richard Duke
of York, two year younger: Elizabeth, whose fortune and grace was
after to be Queen, wife unto King Henry the seventh, and mother unto
the eighth: Cecily not so fortunate as fair: Brigette, which
representing the virtue of her, whose name she bore, professed and
observed a religious life in Dartford, an house of close Nuns: Anne,
that was after honourably married unto Thomas, then Lord Howard, and
after Earl of Surrey. And Katheryne which long time tossed in either
fortune sometime in wealth, oft in adversity, at the last, if this be
the last, for yet she liveth, is by the benignity of her Nephew, King
Henry the eighth, in very prosperous estate, and worthy her birth and
virtue.

This noble Prince deceased at his Palace of Westminster, and
with great funeral honour and heaviness of his people from thence
conveyed, was entered at Windsor. A King of such governance and
behaviour in time of peace (for in war each party must needs be
other's enemy) that there was never any Prince of this land attaining
the Crown by battle, so heartily beloved with the substance of the
people: nor he himself so specially in any part of his life, as at
the time of his death. Which favour and affection yet after his
decease, by the cruelty, mischief, and trouble of the tempestuous
world that followed, highly toward him more increased. At such time
as he died, the displeasure of those that bore him grudge, for King
Henry's sake the sixth, whom he deposed, was well assuaged, and in
effect quenched, in that that many of them were dead in more than
twenty years of his reign, a great part of a long life. And many of
them in the mean season grown into his favour, of which he was never
strange.

He was a goodly personage, and very princely to behold, of
heart courageous, politic in council, in adversity nothing abashed,
in prosperity, rather joyful than proud, in peace just and merciful,
in war, sharp and fierce, in the field, bold and hardy, and natheless
no farther than wisdom would, adventurous. Whose wars who so well
consider, he shall no less commend his wisdom where he voided, than
his manhood where he vanquished. He was of visage lovely, of body
mighty, strong, and clean made: Howbeit in his latter days with over
liberal diet, somewhat corpulent and boorly, and natheless not
uncomely, he was of youth greatly given to fleshly wantonness: from
which health of body in great prosperity and fortune, without a
special grace hardly refraineth. This fault not greatly grieved the
people: for neither could any one man's pleasure, stretch and extend
to the displeasure of very many, and was without violence, and over
that in his latter days: blessed and well loved. In which time of his
latter days, this Realm was in quiet and prosperous estate: no fear
of outward enemies, no war in hand, nor none toward, but such as no
man looked for: the people toward the Prince, not in a constrained
fear, but in a willing and loving obedience: among themselves, the
commons in good peace. The Lords whom he knew at variance, himself in
his death bed appeased. He had left all gathering of money (which is
the only thing that withdraweth the hearts of Englishmen from the
Prince) nor any thing intendeth he to take in hand, by which he
should be driven thereto, for his tribute out of France he had before
obtained. And the year foregoing his death, he had obtained Berwick.
And albeit that all the time of his reign, he was with his people, so
benign, courteous and so familiar, that no part of his virtues was
more esteemed: yet that condition in the end of his days (in which
many princes by a long continued sovereignty, decline in to a proud
port from debonair behaviour of their beginning) marvellously in him
grew and increased: so far forth that in the Summer the last that
ever he saw, his highness being at Windsor in hunting, sent for the
Mayor and Aldermen of London to him, for none other errand, but to
have them hunt and be merry with him, where he made them not so
straitly, but so friendly and so familiar cheer, and sent venison
from thence so freely into the City, that no one thing in many days
before, gave him either more hearts or more hearty favour among the
common people, which oftentimes more esteem and take for greater
kindness, a little courtesy, than a great benefit. So deceased (as I
have said) this noble King, in that time, in which his life was most
desired. Whose love of his people and their entire affection toward
him, had been to his noble children (having in themselves also as
many gifts of nature, as many Princely virtues, as much goodly
towardness as their age could receive) a marvellous fortress and sure
armour, if division and dissension of their friends, had not unarmed
them, and left them destitute, and the execrable desire of
sovereignty, provoked him to their destruction, which if either kind
or kindness had holden place, must needs have been their chief
defence. For Richard the Duke of Gloucester, by nature their Uncle,
by office their Protector, to their father beholden, to themselves by
oath and allegiance bound, all the bands broken that bind man and man
together, without any respect of God or the world, unnaturally
contrived to bereave them, not only their dignity, but also their
lives. But forasmuch as this Duke's demeanour ministreth in effect
all the whole matter whereof this book shall entreat, it is therefore
convenient, somewhat to show you ere we farther go, what manner of
man this was, that could find in his heart, so much mischief to
conceive.

Richard Duke of York, a noble man and a mighty, began not
by war, but by law, to challenge the crown, putting his claim into
the parliament. Where his cause was either for right or favour so
farforth advanced, that King Henry his blood (albeit he had a goodly
Prince) utterly rejected, the Crown was by authority of parliament
entailed unto the Duke of York and his issue male in remainder
immediately after the death of King Henry. But the Duke not enduring
so long to tarry, but intending under pretext of dissension and
debate arising in the realm, to prevent his time, and take upon him
the rule in King Harry his life, was with many nobles of the realm at
Wakefield slain, leaving three sons, Edward, George, and Richard. All
three as they were great states of birth, so were they great and
stately of stomach, greedy and ambitious of authority, and impatient
of partners. Edward revenging his father's death, deprived King
Henry, and attained the crown. George Duke of Clarence was a goodly
noble Prince, and at all points fortunate, if either his own ambition
had not set him against his brother, or the envy of his enemies, his
brother against him. For were it by the Queen and the Lords of her
blood which highly maligned the King's kindred (as women commonly not
of malice but of nature hate them whom their husbands love) or were
it a proud appetite of the Duke himself intending to be King: at the
lest wise heinous Treason was there laid to his charge, and finally
were he faulty, were he faultless, attainted was he by parliament,
and judged to the death, and thereupon hastily drowned in a butt of
Malmsey, whose death King Edward (albeit he commanded it) when he
wist it was done, piteously bewailed and sorrowfully repented.

Richard the third son, of whom we now entreat, was in wit and
courage equal with either of them, in body and prowess far under them
both, little of stature, ill featured of limbs, crook-backed, his
left should much higher than his right, hard favoured of visage, and
such as is in states called warly, in other men otherwise, he was
malicious, wrathful, envious, and from afore his birth, ever froward.
It is for truth reported, that the Duchess his mother had so much ado
in her travail, that she could not be delivered of him uncut: and
that he came into the world with the feet forward, as men be born
outward, and (as the fame runneth) also not untoothed, whither men of
hatred report above the truth, or else that nature changed her course
in his beginning, which in the course of his life many things
unnaturally committed. None evil captain was he in the war, as to
which his disposition was more meetly than for peace. Sundry
victories had he, and sometime overthrows, but never in default as
for his own person, either of hardiness or politic order, free was he
called of dispense, and somewhat above his power liberal, with large
gifts he got him unsteadfast friendship, for which he was fain to
pill and spoil in other places, and get him steadfast hatred. He was
close and secret, a deep dissimuler, lowly of countenance, arrogant
of heart, outwardly companionable where he inwardly hated, not
letting to kiss whom he thought to kill: dispitous and cruel, not for
evil will always, but after for ambition, and either for the surety
or increase of his estate. Friend and foe was much what indifferent,
where his advantage grew, he spared no man death, whose life
withstood his purpose. He slew with his own hands King Henry the
sixth, being prisoner in the Tower, as men constantly say, and that
without commandment or knowledge of the King, which would undoubtedly
if he had intended that thing, have appointed that butcherly office,
to some other than his own born brother.

Some wise men also ween, that his drift covertly conveyed,
lacked not in helping forth his brother of Clarence to his death:
which he resisted openly, howbeit somewhat (as men deemed) more
faintly than he that were heartily minded to his wealth. And they
that thus deem, think that he long time in King Edward's life,
forethought to be King in case that that King his brother (whose life
he looked that evil diet should shorten) should happen to decease (as
in deed he did) while his children were young. And they deem, that
for this intent he was glad of his brother's death that Duke of
Clarence, whose life must needs have hindered him so intending,
whither the same Duke of Clarence had he kept him true to his nephew
the young King, or enterprised to be King himself. But of all this
Pointe, is there no certainty, and whoso divineth upon conjectures,
may as well shoot to far as to short. Howbeit this have I by credible
information learned, that the self night in which King Edward died,
one Mistlebrooke long ere morning, came in great haste to the house
of one Pottier dwelling in Redcross Street without Cripplegate: and
when he was with hasty rapping quickly let in, he showed unto Pottier
that King Edward was departed. By my truth man quod Pottier then will
my master the Duke of Gloucester be King. What cause he had so to
think hard it is to say, whether he being toward him, any thing knew
that he such thing purposed, or otherwise had any inkling thereof:
for he was not likely to speak it of nought.

But now to return to the course of this history, were it that
the Duke of Gloucester had of old foreminded this conclusion, or was
now at erst thereunto moved, and put in hope by the occasion of the
tender age of the young Princes, his Nephews (as opportunity and
likelihood of speed, putteth a man in courage of that he never
intended) certain is it that he contrived their destruction, with the
usurpation of the regal dignity upon himself. And for as much as he
well wist and helped to maintain, a long continued grudge and heart
burning between the Queen's kindred and the King's blood either party
envying other's authority, he now thought that their division should
be (as it was in deed) a fortherly beginning to the pursuit of his
intent, and a sure ground for the foundation of all his building if
he might first under the pretext of revenging of old displeasure,
abuse the anger and ignorance of the one party, to the destruction of
the other: and then win to his purpose as many as he could: and those
that could not be won, might be lost ere they looked therefore. For
of one thing was he certain, that if his intent were perceived, he
should soon have made peace between the both parties, with his own
blood.

King Edward in his life, albeit that this dissension between
his friends somewhat irked him: yet in his good health he somewhat
the less regarded it, because he thought whatsoever business should
fall between them, himself should always be able to rule both the
parties.

But in his last sickness, when he received his natural
strengthen so far enfeebled, that he despaired all recovery, then he
considering the youth of his children, albeit he nothing less
mistrusted than that that happened, yet well foreseeing that many
harms might grow by their debate, while the youth of his children
should lack discretion of themselves and good council, of their
friends, of which either party should council for their own commodity
and rather by pleasant advice to win themselves favour, than by
profitable advertisement to do the children good, he called some of
them before him that were at variance, and in especial the Lord
Marquis Dorset the Queen's son by her first husband, and Richard the
Lord Hastings, a noble man, then Lord Chamberlain against whom the
Queen specially grudged, for that great favour the King bore him, and
also for that she thought him secretly familiar with the King in
wanton company. Her kindred also bore him sore, as well for that the
King had made him captain of Calais (which office the Lord Rivers,
brother to the Queen claimed of the King's former promise as for
divers other great gifts which he received, that they looked for.

When these Lords with divers other of both the parties were
come in presence, the King lifting up himself and underset with
pillows, as it is reported on this wise said unto them. My Lords, my
dear kinsmen and allies, in what plight I lie you see, and I feel. By
which the less while I look to live with you, the more deeply am I
moved to care in what case I leave you, for such as I leave you, such
be my children like to find you. Which if they should (that God
forbid) find you at variance, might hap to fall themselves at war ere
their discretion would serve to set you at peace. Ye see their youth,
of which I reckon the only surety to rest in your concord. For it
sufficeth not that all you love them, if each of you hate other. If
they were men, your faithfulness haply would suffice. But childhood
must be maintained by men's authority, and slipper youth underpropped
with elder council, which neither they can have, but ye give it, nor
ye give it, if ye agree not. For where each laboureth to break that
the other maketh, and for hated of each other's person, impugneth
each other's council, there must it needs be long ere any good
conclusion go forward. And also while either party laboureth to be
chief, flattery shall have more place than plain and faithful advice,
of which must needs ensue the evil bringing up of the Prince, whose
mind in tender youth infect, shall readily fall to mischief and riot,
and draw down with this noble realm to ruin, but if grace turn him to
wisdom: which if God send, then they that by evil means before
pleased him best, shall after fall farthest out of favour, so that
ever at length evil drifts draw to nought, and good plain ways
prosper. Great variance hath there long been between you, not always
for great causes. Some time a thing right well intended, our
misconstruction turneth unto worse or a small displeasure done us,
either our own affection or evil tongues aggrieveth. But this wot I
well ye never had so great cause of hatred, as ye have of love. That
we be all men, that we be Christian men, this shall I leave for
preachers to tell you (and yet I wot ne'er whither any preacher's
words ought more to move you, than his that is by and by going to the
place that they all preach of.) But this that I desire you to
remember, that the one part of you is of my blood, the other of mine
allies, and each of you with other, either of kindred or affinity,
which spiritual kindred of affinity, if the sacraments of Christ's
Church, bear that weight with us that would God they did, should no
less move us to charity, than the respected of fleshly consanguinity.
Our Lord forbid, that you love together the worse, for the self cause
that you ought to love the better. And yet that happeneth. And no
where find we so deadly debate, as among them, which by nature and
law most ought to agree together. Such a pestilent serpent is
ambition and desire of vainglory and sovereignty, which among states
where he once entereth creepeth forth so far, till with division and
variance he turneth all to mischief. First longing to be next the
best, afterwards equal with the best, and at last chief and above the
best. Of which immoderate appetite of worship, and thereby of debate
and dissension what loss what sorrow, what trouble hath within these
few years grown in this realm, I pray God as well forget as we well
remember.

Which things if I could as well have foreseen, as I have with
my more pain than pleasure proved, by God's blessed Lady (that was
ever his oath) I would never have won the courtesy of men's knees,
with the loss of so many heads. But sithen things passed cannot be
again called, much ought we the more beware, by what occasion we have
taken so great hurt afore, that we eftesoon fall not in that occasion
again. Now be those griefs passed, and all is (God be thanked) quiet,
and likely right well to prosper in wealthful peace under your
cousins my children, if God send them life and you love. Of which two
things, the less loss were they by whom though God did his pleasure,
yet should the Realm always find King's and peradventure as good
King's. But if you among yourselves in a child's reign fall at
debate, many a good man shall perish and haply he too, and ye too,
ere this land find peace again. Wherefore in these last words that
ever I look to speak with you: I exhort you and require you all, for
the love that I have ever born to you, for the love that our Lord
beareth to us all, from this time forward, all griefs forgotten, each
of you love other. Which I verily trust you will, if ye any thing
earthly regard, either God or your King, affinity or kindred, this
realm, your own country, or your own surety. And therewithal the King
no longer enduring to sit up, laid him down on his right side, his
face toward them: and none was there present that could refrain from
weeping. But the Lords recomforting him with as good words as they
could, and answering for the time as they thought to stand with his
pleasure, there in his presence (as by their words appeared each
forgave other, and joined their hands together, when (as it after
appeared by their deeds) their hearts, were far asunder.

As soon as the King was departed, that noble prince his son
drew toward London, which at the time of his decease, kept his
household at Ludlow in Wales. Which country being far off from the
law and recourse to justice, was begun to be far out of good will and
waxen wild, robbers and rievers walking at liberty uncorrected. And
for this encheason the prince was in the life of his father sent
thither, to the end that the authority of his presence, should 
refrain evil disposed persons from the boldness of their former
outrages, to the governance and ordering of this young prince at his
sending thither, was there appointed Sir Antony Wodvile Lord Rivers
and brother unto the Queen, a right honourable man, as valiant of
hand as politic in council. Adjoined were there unto him other of the
same party, and in effect every one as he was nearest of kin unto the
Queen, so was planted next about the prince. That drift by the Queen
not unwisely devised, whereby her blood might of youth be rooted in
the prince's favour, the Duke of Gloucester turned unto their
destruction, and upon that ground set the foundation of all his
unhappy building. For whomsoever he perceived, either at variance
with them, or bearing himself their favour, he broke unto them, some
by mouth, some by writing and secret messengers, that it neither was
reason nor in any wise to be suffered, that the young King their
master and kinsman, should be in the hands and custody of his
mother's kindred, sequestered in manner from their company and
attendance, of which every one ought him as faithful service as they,
and many of them far more honourable part of kin than his mother's
side: whose blood (quod he) saving the King's pleasure, was full
unmeetly to be matched with his: which now to be as who say removed
from the King, and the less noble to be left about him, is (quod he)
neither honourable to his majesty, nor unto us, and also to his grace
no surety to have the mightiest of his friends from him, and unto us
no little jeopardy, to suffer our well proved evil willers, to grow
in overgreat authority with the prince in youth, namely which is
light of belief and soon persuaded. Ye remember I trow King Edward
himself, albeit he was a man of age and of discretion, yet was he in
many things ruled by the bend, more than stood either with his
honour, or our profit, or with the commodity of any man else, except
only the immoderate advancement of themselves. Which whither they
sorer thirsted after their own weal, or our woe, it were hard I ween
to guess. And if some folk's  friendship had not holden better place
with the King, than any respect of kindred, they might peradventure
easily have been trapped and brought to confusion some of us ere
this. Why not as easily as they have done some other already, as near
of his royal blood as we. But our Lord hath wrought his will, and
thank be to his grace that peril is past. Howbeit as great is
growing, if we suffer this young King in our enemies' hand, which
without his witting, might abuse the name of his commandment, to any
of our undoing, which thing God and good provision forbid. Of which
good provision none of us hath any thing the less need, for the late
made atonement, in which the King's pleasure had more place than the
parties' wills. Nor none of us I believe is so unwise, oversoon to
trust a new friend made of an old foe, or to think that an hourly
kindness, suddenly contract in one hour, continued yet scant a
fortnight, should be deeper settled in their stomachs: than a long
accustomed malice many years rooted.

With these words and writings and such other, the Duke of
Gloucester soon set afire, them that were of themselves ethe to
kindle, and in special twain, Edward Duke of Buckingham, and Richard
Lord Hastings and Chamberlain, both men of honour and of great power.
The one by long succession from his ancestry, the other by his office
and the King's favour. These two not bearing each to other so much
love, as hatred both unto the Queen's part: in this point accorded
together with the Duke of Gloucester, that they would utterly amove
from the King's company, all his mother's friends, under the name of
their enemies. Upon this concluded, the Duke of Gloucester
understanding, that the Lords which at that time were about the King,
intended to bring him up to his Coronation, accompanied with such
power of their friends, that it should be hard for him to bring his
purpose to pass, without the gathering and great assemble of people
and in manner of open war, whereof the end he wist was doubtuous, and
in which the King being on their side, his part should have the face
and name of a rebellion: he secretly therefore by divers means,
caused the Queen to be persuaded, and brought in the mind, that it
neither were need, and also should be jeopardous, the King to come up
strong. For where as now every Lord loved other, and none other thing
studied upon, but about the Coronation and honour of the King: if the
Lords of her kindred should assemble in the King's name much people,
they should give the Lords atwixt whom and them had been sometime
debate, to fear and suspect, lest they should gather this people, not
for the King's safeguard whom no man impugned, but for their
destruction, having more regard to their old variance, than their new
atonement. For which cause they should assemble on the other party
much people against for their defence, whose power she wist well far
stretched. And thus should all the realm fall on a roar. And of all
the hurt that thereof should ensue, which was likely not to be
little, and the most harm there like to fall where she least would,
all the world would put her and her kindred in the weight, and say
that they had unwisely and untruly also, broken the amity and peace
that the King her husband so prudently made, between his kin and hers
in his death bed, and which the other party faithfully observed.

The Queen being in this wise persuaded, such word sent unto her
son, and unto her brother being about the King, and over that the
Duke of Gloucester himself and other Lords the chief of his band,
wrote unto the King so reverently, and to the Queen's friends, there
so lovingly, that they nothing Earthly mistrusting, brought the King
up in great haste, not in good speed, with a sober company. Now was
the King in his way to London gone, from Northampton, when these
Dukes of Gloucester and Buckingham came thither. Where remained
behind, the Lord Rivers the King's uncle, intending on the morrow to
follow the King, and be with him at Stony Stratford eleven miles
thence, early ere he departed. So was there made that night much
friendly cheer between these Dukes and the Lord Rivers a great while.
But incontinent after that they were openly with great courtesy
departed, and the Lord Rivers lodged, the Dukes secretly with a few
of their most privy friends, set them down in council, wherein they
spent a great part of the night. And at their rising in the dawning
of the day, they sent about privily to their servants in their inns
and lodgings about, giving the commandment to make themselves shortly
ready, for their Lords were to horsebackward. Upon which messages,
many of their folk were attendant, when many of the Lord River's
servants were unready. Now had these Dukes taken also into their
custody the keys of the inn, that none should pass forth without
their licence. And over this in the high way toward Stony Stratford
where the King lay, they had bestowed certain of their folk, that
should send back again, and compel to return, any man that were
gotten out of Northampton toward Stony Stratford, till they should
give other licence. For as much as the Dukes themselves intended for
the show of their diligence, to be the first that should that day
attend upon the King's highness out of that town: thus bore they folk
in hand. But when the Lord Rivers understood the gates closed, and
the ways on every side beset, neither his servants nor himself
suffered to go out, perceiving well so great a thing without his
knowledge not begun for nought, comparing this manner present with
this last night's cheer, in so few hours so great a change
marvellously misliked. How be it sith he could not get away, and keep
himself close, he would not, lest he should seem to hide himself for
some secret fear of his own fault, whereof he saw no such cause in
himself: he determined upon the surety of his own conscience, to go
boldly to them, and inquire what this matter might mean. Whom as soon
as they saw, they began to quarrel with him, and say, that he
intended to set distance between the King and them, and to bring them
to confusion, but it should not lie in his power. And when he began
(as he was a very well spoken man,) in goodly wise to excuse himself,
they tarried not the end of his answer, but shortly took him and put
him in ward, and that done, forthwith went to horseback, and took the
way to Stony Stratford. Where they found the King with his company
ready to leap on horseback, and depart forward, to leave that lodging
for them, because it was too strait for both companies. And as soon
as they came in his presence, they light down with all their company
about them. To whom the Duke of Buckingham said, go afore Gentlemen
and yeomen, keep your rooms. And thus in a goodly array, they came to
the King, and on their knees in very humble wise, salved his grace:
which received them in very joyous and amiable manner, nothing
earthly knowing nor mistrusting as yet. But even by and by in his
presence, they picked a quarrel to the Lord Richard Gray, the King's
other brother by his mother, saying that he with the Lord Marquis his
brother and the Lord Rivers his uncle, had compassed to rule the King
and the realm, and to set variance among the states, and to subdue
and destroy the noble blood of the realm. Toward the accomplishing
whereof, they said that the Lord Marquis had entered into the Tower
of London, and thence taken out the King's Treasure, and sent men to
the sea. All which thing these Dukes wist well were done for good
purposes and necessary by the whole council at London, saving that
somewhat they must say. Unto which words, the King answered, what my
brother Marquis hath done I cannot say. But in good faith I dare well
answer for mine uncle Rivers and my brother here, that they be
innocent of any such matters. Yea my liege quod the Duke of
Buckingham they have kept their dealing in these matters far from the
knowledge of your good grace. And forthwith they arrested the Lord
Richard and Sir Thomas Vaughan knighte, in the King's presence, and
brought the King and all back unto Northampton, where they took again
further council. And there they sent away from the King whom it
pleased them, and set new servants about him, such as liked them
better than him. At which dealing he wept and was nothing content, 
but it booted not. And at dinner the Duke of Gloucester sent a dish
from his own table to the Lord Rivers, praying him to be of good
cheer, all should be well enough. And he thanked the Duke, and prayed
the messenger to bear it to his nephew the Lord Richard with the same
message for his comfort, who he thought had more need of comfort, as
one to whom such adversity was strange. But himself had been all his
days in ure therewith, and therefore could bear it the better. But
for all this comfortable courtesy of the Duke of Gloucester he sent
the Lord Rivers and the Lord Richard with Sir Thomas Vaughan into the
North country into divers places to prison, and afterward all to
Pontefract, where they were in conclusion beheaded.

In this wise the Duke of Gloucester took upon himself the order
and governance of the young King, whom with much honour and humble
reverence he conveyed upward toward the city. But anon the tidings of
this matter came hastily to the Queen, a little before the midnight
following, and that in the sorest wise that the King her son was
taken, her brother, her son and her other friends arrested, and sent
no man wist whither, to be done with God wot what. With which tidings
the Queen in great fright and heaviness, bewailing her child's ruin,
her friends' mischance, and her own infortune, damning the time that
ever she dissuaded the gathering of power about the King, got herself
in all the haste possible with her younger son and her daughters out
of the Palace of Westminster in which she then lay, into the
Sanctuary, lodging herself and her company there in the Abbot's
place.

Now came there in one likewise not long after midnight, from
the Lord Chamberlain unto the archbishop of York then Chancellor of
England to his place not far from Westminster. And for that he showed
his servants that he had tidings of so great importance, that his
master gave him in charge, not to forbear his rest, they letted not
to wake him, nor he to admit this messenger in to his bed side. Of
whom he heard, that these Dukes were gone back with the King's grace
from Stony Stratford unto Northampton. Notwithstanding Sir quod he,
my Lord sendeth your Lordship word, that there is no fear. For he
assureth you that all shall be well. I assure him quod the Archbishop
be it as well as it will, it will never be so well as we have seen
it. And thereupon by and by after the messenger departed, he caused
in all the haste all his servants to be called up, and so with his
own household about him, and every man weaponed, he took the great
Seal with him, and came yet before day unto the Queen. About whom he
found much heaviness, rumble, haste and business, carriage and
conveyance of her stuff into Sanctuary, chests, coffers, packs,
fardels, trusses, all on men's backs, no man unoccupied; some lading,
some going, some discharging, some coming for more, some breaking
down the walls to bring in the next way, and some yet drew to them
that holpe to carry a wronged way. The Queen herself sat alone alow
on the rushes all desolate and dismayed, whom the Archbishop
comforted in the best manner he could, showing her that he trusted
the matter was nothing so sore as she took it for. And that he was
put in good hope and out of fear, by the message sent him from the
Lord Chamberlain. Ah woe worth him, quod she, for he is one of them
that laboureth to destroy me and my blood. Madame quod he, be ye of
good cheer. For I assure you if they crown any other King than your
son, whom they now have with them, we shall on the morrow crown his
brother whom you have here with you. And here is the great Seal,
which in likewise as that noble prince your husband delivered it unto
me, so here I deliver it unto you, to the use and behoof of your son,
and therewith he betook her the great Seal, and departed home again,
yet in the dawning of the day. By which time he might in his chamber
window, see all the Thames full of boats of the Duke of Gloucester's
servants, watching that no man should go to Sanctuary, nor none could
pass unsearched. Then was there great commotion and murmur as well in
other places about, as specially in the city, the people diversely
divining upon this dealing. And some Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen
either for favour of the Queen, or for fear of themselves, assembled
in sundry companies, and went flockmeal in harness: and many also,
for that they reckoned this demeanour attempted, not so specially
against the other Lords, as against the King himself in the
disturbance of his Coronation. But then by and by the Lords assembled
together at London. Toward which meeting, the Archbishop of York
fearing that it would be ascribed (as it was in deed) to his overmuch
lightness, that he had so suddenly had yielded up the great seal to
the Queen, to whom the custody thereof nothing pertained, without
especial commandment, of the King, secretly sent for the Seal again,
and brought it with him after the customable manner. And at this
meeting, the Lord Hastings, whose truth toward the King no man
doubted nor needed to doubt, persuaded the Lords to believe, that the
Duke of Gloucester, was sure and fastly faithful to his prince, and
that the Lord Rivers and Lord Richard with the other knights were for
matters attempted by them against the Dukes of Gloucester and
Buckingham, put under arrest for their surety, not for the King's
jeopardy: and that they were also in safeguard, and there no longer
should remain, than till the matter were, not by the Dukes only, but
also by all the other Lords of the King's council indifferently
examined, and by other discretions ordered, and either judged or
appeased. But one thing he advised them beware, that they judged not
the matter to farforth, ere they knew the truth, nor turning their
private grudges into the common hurt, irritating and provoking men
unto anger, and disturbing the King's Coronation, toward which the
Dukes were coming up, that they might peradventure bring the matter
so far out of joint, that it should never be brought in frame again.
Which strife if it should hap as it were likely to come to a field,
though both parties were in all things equal, yet should the
authority be on that side where the King is himself. With these
persuasions of the Lord Hastings, whereof part himself believed, of
part he wist the contrary, these commotions were somewhat appeased.
But specially, by that that the Dukes of Gloucester and Buckingham
were so near, and came so shortly on with the King, in none other
manner, with none other voice or semblance, than to his coronation,
causing the fame to be blown about, that these Lords and knights
which were taken, had contrived the destruction of the Dukes of 
Gloucester and Buckingham, and of other the noble blood of the Realm,
to the end that themselves would alone, demean and govern the King at
their pleasure. And for the colourable proof thereof, such of the
Duke's servants as rode with the carts of their stuff that were taken
(among which stuff no marvel though some were harness, which at the
breaking up of that household, must needs either be brought away or
cast away) they showed unto the people all the way as they went: lo
here be the barrels of harness that this traitors had privily
conveyed in their carriage to destroy the noble Lords with all. This
devise all be it that it made the matter to wise men more unlikely,
well perceiving that the intenders of such a purpose, would rather 
have had their harness on the backs, than to have bound them up in
barrels, yet much part of the common people were therewith very well
satisfied, and said it were alms to hang them.

When the King approached near to the city, Edmond Shaw
goldsmith then Mayor, with William White and John Mathew sheriff, and
all the other aldermen in scarlet with five hundred horse of the
citizens in violet, received him reverently at Harnesy: and riding
from thence, accompanied him in to the city, which he entered the
fourth day of May, the first and last year of his reign. But the Duke
of Gloucester bore him in open sight so reverently to the Prince,
with all semblance of lowliness, that from the great obloquy in which
he was so late before, he was suddenly fallen in so great trust, that
at the council next assembled, he was made the only man chose and
thought most meet, to be Protector of the King and his realm, so
(that were it destiny or were it folly) the lamb was betaken to the
wolf to keep. At which council also the Archbishop of York Chancellor
of England, which had delivered up the great Seal to the Queen, was
thereof greatly reproved, and the Seal taken from him and delivered
to doctor Russell, bishop of Lincoln, a wise man and a good and of
much experience, and one of the best learned men undoubtedly that
England had in his time. Divers Lords and knights were appointed unto
divers rooms. The Lord Chamberlain and some other, kept still their
offices that they had before. Now all were it so that the Protector
so sore thirsted for the finishing of that he had begun, that thought
every day a year till it were achieved, yet durst he no further
attempt as long as had but half his prey in his hand: well witting
that if he deposed the one brother, all the Realm would fall to the
other, if he either remained in Sanctuary, or should haply be shortly
conveyed to his farther liberty. Wherefore incontinent at the next
meeting of the Lords at the council, he proposed unto them, that it
was a heinous deed of the Queen, and proceeding of great malice
toward the King's councillors, that she should keep in Sanctuary the
King's brother from him, whose special pleasure and comfort were to
have his brother with him. And that by her done to none other intent,
but to bring all the Lords in obloquy and murmur of the people. As
though they were not to be trusted with the King's brother, that by
the assent of the nobles of the land were appointed as the King's
nearest friends, to the tuition of his own royal person. The
prosperity whereof standeth (quod he) not all in keeping from enemies
or ill viand, but partly also in recreation and moderate pleasure:
which he cannot in this tender youth take in the company of ancient
persons, but in the familiar conversation of those that be neither
far under, nor far above his age. And nathless of estate convenient
to accompany his noble majesty. Wherefore with whom rather than with
his own brother? And if any man think this consideration light (Which
I think no man thinketh that loveth the King) let him consider that
sometime without small things greater cannot stand. And verily it
redoundeth greatly to the dishonour both of the King's highness and
of all us that been about his grace, to have it run in every man's
mouth, not in this realm only, but also in other lands (as evil words
walk far:) that the King's brother should be fain to keep Sanctuary.
For every man will ween, that no man will so do for nought. And such
evil opinion once fastened in men's hearts, hard it is to wrest out,
and may grow to more grief than any man here can divine.

Wherefore me thinketh it were not worst to send unto the Queen
for the redress of this matter, some honourable trusty man, such as
both tendereth the King's weal, and the honour of his council, and is
also in favour and credence with her. For all which considerations,
none seemeth me more meetly than our reverent father here present, my
Lord Cardinal, who may in this matter do most good of any man, if it
please him to take the pain. Which I doubt not of his goodness he
will not refuse, for the King's sake and ours, and wealth of the
young Duke himself the King's most honourable brother, and after my
sovereign Lord himself, my most dear Nephew: considered that thereby
shall be ceased the slanderous rumour and obloquy now going and the
hurts avoided that thereof might ensue, and much rest and quiet grow
to all the realm. And if she be percase so obstinate, and so
precisely set upon her own will, that neither his wise and faithful
advertisement can move her, nor any man's reason content her: then
shall we by mine advice, by the King's authority fetch him out of
that prison, and bring him to his noble presence, in whose continual
company he shall be so well cherished and so honourably entreated,
that all the world shall to our honour and her reproach, perceive
that it was only malice, frowardeness, or folly, that caused her to
keep him there. This is my mind in this matter for this time, except
any of your Lordships any thing perceive to the contrary. For never
shall I by God's grace so wed myself to mine own will, but that I
shall be ready to change it upon your better advices.

When the Protector had said, all the council affirmed that the
motion was good and reasonable, and to the King and the Duke his
brother, honourable, and a thing that should cease great murmur in
the realm, if the mother might be by good means induced to deliver
him. Which thing the Archbishop of York, whom they all agreed also to
be thereto most convenient, took upon him to move her, and therein to
do his uttermost devoir.

Howbeit if she could be in no wise entreated with her good will
to deliver him, then thought he and such other as were of the
spirituality present, that it were not in any wise to be attempted to
take him out against her will. For it would be a thing that should
turn to the great grudge of all men, and high displeasure of God, if
the privilege of the holy place should now be broken?

Which had so many years been kept, which both Kings and Popes
so good had granted, so many had confirmed, and which holy ground was
more than five hundred year ago by Saint Peter his own person in
spirit, accompanied with great multitude of Angels, by night so
specially hallowed and dedicate to God, (for the proof whereof they
have yet in the Abbey Saint Peters cope to show) that from that time
hitherward, was there never so undevout a King, that durst that
sacred place violate, or so holy a Bishop that durst it presume to
consecrate. And therefore (quod the Archbishop of York) God forbid
that any man should for any thing earthly enterprise to break the
immunity, and liberty of that sacred Sanctuary, that hath been the
safeguard of so many a good man's life. And I trust (quod he) with
God's grace, we shall not need it. But for any manner need, I would
not we should do it. I trust that she shall be with reason contented,
and all thing in good manner obtained. And if it happen that I bring
it not so to pass, yet shall I toward it so farforth do my best, that
ye shall all well perceive, that no lack of my devoir, but the
mother's dread and womanish fear, shall be the let. Womanish fear,
nay womanish frowardness (quod the Duke of Buckingham.) For I dare
take it upon my soul, she well knoweth she needeth no such thing to
fear, either for her son or for herself. For as for her, here is no
man that will be at war with women. Would God some of the men of her
kin, were women too, and then should all be soon in rest. Howbeit
there is none of her kin the less loved, for that they be her kin,
but for their own evil deserving. And natheless if we loved neither
her nor her kin, yet were there no cause to think that we should hate
the King's noble brother, to whose Grace we ourselves be of kin.
Whose honour if she as much desired as our dishonour, and as much
regard took to his wealth, as to her own will, she would be as loath
to suffer him from the King, as any of us be. For if she have any
wit, (as would God she had as good will as she hath shrewd wit) she
reckoneth herself no wiser than she thinketh some that be here, of
whose faithful mind, she nothing doubteth, but verily believeth  and
knoweth, that they would be as sorry of his harm as herself, and yet
would have him from her if she bide there. And we all (I think)
content, that both be with her, if she come thence and bide in such
place where they may with their honour be.

Now then if she refuse in the deliverance of him, to follow the
council of them whose wisdom she knoweth, whose truth she well
trusteth: it is ethe to perceive, that frowardness letteth her, and
not fear. But go to suppose that she fear (as who may let her to fear
her own shadow) the more she feareth to deliver him, the more ought
we fear to leave him in her hands . For if she caste such fond
doubts, that she fear his hurt: then will she fear that he shall be
fetched thence. For she will soon think, that if men were set (Which
God forbid) upon so great a mischief, the sanctuary would little let
them. Which good men might as me thinketh without sin somewhat less
regard than they do.

Now then if she doubt lest he might be fetched from her, is it
not likely enough that she shall send him somewhere out of the realm?
Verily  I look for none other. And I doubt not but she now as sore
mindeth it, as we the let thereof. And if she might happen to bring
that to pass, (as it were no great mastery, we letting her alone) all
the world would say that we were a wise sort of councillors about a
King, that let his brother be cast away under our noses. And
therefore I ensure you faithfully for my mind, I will rather maugre
her mind, fetch him away, than leave him there, till her frowardness
or fond fear convey him away. And yet will I break no Sanctuary
therefore. For verily sith the privileges of that place and other
like, have been of long continued, I am not he that would be about to
break them. And in good faith if they were now to begin, I would not
be he that should be about to make them. Yet will I not say nay, but
that it is a deed of pity, that such men as the sea or their evil
debtors have brought in poverty, should have some place of liberty,
to keep their bodies out of the danger of their cruel creditors. And
also if the Crown happen (as it hath done) to come in question, while
either part taketh other as traitors, I will well there be some
places of refuge for both. But as for thieves, of which these places
be full, and which never fall from the craft, after they once fall
thereto, it is pity the sanctuary should serve them. And much more
manquellers whom God bade to take from the alter and kill them, if
their murder were wilful. And where it is otherwise there need we not
the sanctuaries that God appointed in the old law. For if either
necessity, his own defence, or misfortune draw him to that deed, a
pardon serveth which either the law granteth of course, or the King
of pity may.

Then look me now how few sanctuary men there be, whom any
favourable necessity compelled to go thither. And then see on the
other side what a sort there be commonly therein, of them whom wilful
unthriftiness hath brought to nought.

What a rabble of thieves, murderers, and malicious heinous
traitors, and that in two places specially. The one at the elbow of
the City, the other in the very bowels. I dare well avow it, weigh
the good that they do, with the hurt that cometh of them, and ye
shall find it much better to lack both, than have both. And this I
say, although they were not abused as they now be, and so long have
be, that I fear me ever they will be while men be afeared to set
their hands to the mendement: as though God and Saint Peter were the
Patrons of ungracious living.

Now unthrifts riot and run in debt upon the boldness of these
places: yea and rich men run thither with poor men's goods, there
they build, there they spend and bid their creditors go whistle them.
Men's wives run thither with their husband's plate, and say, they
dare not abide with their husbands for beating. Thieves bring thither
their stolen goods, and there live thereon. There devise they new
robberies, nightly they steal out, they rob and reave, and kill, and
come in again as though those places gave them not only a safeguard
for the harm they have done, but a licence also to do more. Howbeit
much of this mischief if wise men would set their hands to, it might
be amended, with great thank of God and no breach of the privilege.
The residue sith so long ago I wot near what Pope and what Prince
more piteous than politic: hath granted it and other men since of a
certain religious fear have not broken it, let us take a pain
therewith, and let it a God's name stand in force, as farforth as
reason will. Which is not fully so farforth, as may serve to let us
of the fetching forth of this noble man to his honour and wealth, out
of that place in which he neither is, nor can be a Sanctuary man.

A Sanctuary serveth always to defend the body of that man that
standeth in danger abroad, not of great hurt only, but also of lawful
hurt. For against unlawful harms, never Pope nor King intended to
privilege any one place. For that privilege hath every place. Knoweth
any man any place wherein it is lawful one man to do another wrong?
That no man unlawfully take hurt, that liberty, the King, the law,
and very nature forbiddeth in every place, and maketh to that regard
for every man every place a Sanctuary. But where a man is by lawful
means in peril, there needeth he the tuition of some special
privilege, which is the only ground and cause of all sanctuaries.
From which necessity this noble prince is far. Whose love to his
King, nature and kindred proveth, whose innocence to all the world,
his tender youth proveth. And so sanctuary as for him, neither none
he needeth, nor also none can have. Men come not to sanctuary as they
come to baptism, to require it by their Godfathers. He must ask it
himself that must have it. And reason, sith no man hath cause to have
it, but whose conscience of his own fault maketh him fain need to
require it, what will then hath yonder babe? which and if he had
discretion to require it, if need were, I dare say would now be right
angry with them that keep him there. And I would think without any
scruple of conscience, without any breach of privilege, to be
somewhat more homely with them that be there sanctuary men indeed.
For if one go to sanctuary with another man's goods, why should not
the King leaving his body at liberty, satisfy the part of his goods
even within the sanctuary? For neither King nor Pope can give any
place such a privilege, that it shall discharge a man of his debts
being able to pay.

And with that divers of the clergy that were present, whither
they said it for his pleasure, or as they thought, agreed plainly,
that by the law of God and of the church the goods of a sanctuary man
should be delivered in payment of his debts, and stolen goods to the
owner, and only liberty reserved him to get his living with the
labour of his hands. Verily  (quod the Duke) I think you say very
truth. And what if a man's wife will take sanctuary, because she list
to run from her husband: I would ween if she can allege none other
cause, he may lawfully without any displeasure to Saint Peter, take
her out of S. Peter's church by the arm. And if no body may be taken
out of sanctuary that sayeth he will bide there: Then if a child will
take sanctuary, because he feareth to go to school, his master must
let him alone. And as simple as that sample is, yet is there less
reason in our case, than in that. For therein though it be a childish
fear, yet is there at the leastwise some fear. And herein is there
none at all. And verily I have often heard of sanctuary men. But I
never heard erst of sanctuary children. And therefore as for the
conclusion of my mind, who so may have deserved to need it, if they
think it for their surety, let them keep it. But he cannot be no
sanctuary man, that neither hath wisdom to desire it, nor malice to
deserve it, whose life or liberty can by no lawful process stand in
jeopardy. And he that taketh one out of sanctuary to do him good, I
say plainly that he breaketh no sanctuary. When the Duke had done,
the temporal men whole, and good part of the spiritual also, thinking
none hurt earthly meant toward the young babe, condescended in
effect, that if he were not delivered, he should be fetched. Howbeit
they thought it all best, in the avoiding of all manner of rumour,
that the Lord Cardinal should first assay to get him with her good
will. And thereupon all the council came unto the star-chamber at
Westminster. And the Lord Cardinal leaving the Protector with the
council in the star-chamber, departed into the sanctuary to the
Queen, with divers other Lords with him, were it for the respect of
his honour, or that she should by presence of so many perceive that
this errand was not one man's mind, or were it for that the Protector
intended not in this matter to trust any one man alone, or else that
if she finally were determined to keep him, some of that company had
haply secret instruction incontinent maugre her mind to take him and
to leave her no respite to convey him, which she was likely to mind
after this matter broken to her, if her time would in any wise serve
her.

When the Queen and these Lords were come together in presence,
the Lord Cardinal showed unto her, that it was thought unto the
Protector and unto the whole council, that her keeping of the King's
brother in that place was the thing which highly souned, not only to
the great rumour of the people and their obloquy, but also to the
importable grief and displeasure of the King's royal majesty. To
whose grace it were as singular comfort, to have his natural brother
in company, as it was their both dishonour and all theirs and hers
also, to suffer him in sanctuary. As though the one brother stood in
danger and peril of the other. And he showed her that the council
therefore had sent him unto her, to require her the delivery of him,
that he might be brought unto the King's presence at his liberty, out
of that place which they reckoned as a prison. And there should he be
demeaned according to his estate. And she in this doing should both
do great good to the realm, pleasure to the council and profit to
herself, succour to her friends that were in distress, and over that
(which he wist well she specially tendered), not only great comfort
and honour to the King, but also to the young Duke himself, whose
both great wealth it were to be together, as well for many greater
causes, as also for their both disport and recreation: which thing
the Lord esteemed not slight, though it seem light, well pondering
that their youth without recreation and play, cannot endure nor any
estranger for the convenience of their both ages and estates, so
meetly in that point for any of them as either of them for other.

My Lord (quod the Queen:) I say not nay, but that it were very
convenient, that this gentleman whom ye require, were in the company
of the King his brother. And in good faith me thinketh it were as
great commodity to them both as for yet a while, to been in the
custody of their mother, the tender age considered of the elder of
them both, but special the younger, which besides his infancy that
also needeth good looking to, hath a while been so sore diseased
vexed with sickness, and is so newly rather a little amended than
well recovered, that I dare put no person earthly in trust with his
keeping but myself only, considering, that there is as physicians
say, and as we also find, double the peril in the reciduation, that
was in the first sickness, with which disease nature being
forelabored, forewearied and weakened, waxeth the less able to bear
out a new surfeit. And albeit there might be found other, that would
haply do their best unto him: yet is there none that either knoweth
better how to order him, than I that so long have kept him: or is
more tenderly like to cherish him, than his own mother that bore him.
No man denieth good madam (quod the Cardinal) but that your grace
were of all folk most necessary about your children: and so would all
the council, not only be content, but also glad that ye were, if it
might stand with your pleasure to be in such place as might stand
with their honour. But if you appoint yourself to tarry here, then
think they yet more convenient, that the Duke of York were with the
King honourably at his liberty to the comfort of them both, than here
as a sanctuary man to their both dishonour and obloquy: sith there is
not always so great necessity to have the child be with the mother,
but that occasion may sometime be such, that it should be more
expedient to keep him elsewhere. Which in this well appeareth that at
such time as your dearest son then prince and now King, should for
his honour and good order of the country, keep household in Wales far
out of your company: your grace was well content there with yourself.
Not very well content, quod the Queen: And yet the case is not like:
for the one was then in health, and the other is now sick. In which
case I marvel greatly that my Lord Protector is so desirous to have
him in his keeping where if the child in his sickness miscarried by
nature, yet might he run into slander and suspicion of fraud. And
where they call it a thing so sore against my child's honour and
theirs also, that he bideth in this place: it is all their honours
there to suffer him bide, where no man doubteth, he shall be best
kept. And that is here, while I am here, Which as yet intend not to
come forth and jeopard myself after other of my friends: which would
God were rather here in surety with me, than I were there in jeopardy
with them. Why Madame (quod another Lord) know you any thing why they
should be in jeopardy? Nay verily Sir quod she, nor why they should
be in prison neither, as they now be. But it is I trow no great
marvel though I fear, lest those that have not letted to put them in
duress without colour, will let as little to procure their
destruction without cause.

The Cardinal made a continuance to the other Lord, that he
should harp no more upon that string. And then said he to the Queen,
that he nothing doubted, but that those Lords of her honourable kin,
which as yet remained under arrest should upon the matter examined,
do well enough. And as toward her noble person, neither was nor could
be, any manner jeopardy. Whereby should I trust that (quod the Queen)
In that I am guiltless? As though they were guilty. In that I am with
their enemies better beloved than they? When they hate them for my
sake. In that I am so near of kin to the King? And how far be they
off, if that would help as God send grace it hurt not. And therefore
as for me, I purpose not as yet to depart hence. And as for this
gentleman my son, I mind that he shall be where I am till I see
further. For I assure you, for that I see some men so greedy without
any substantial cause to have him, this maketh me much the more
farther to deliver him. Truly Madame, quod he, and the farther that
you be to deliver him, the farther been other men to suffer you to
keep him, lest your causeless fear might cause you farther to convey
him. And many be there that think that he can have no privilege  in
this place, which neither can have will to ask it, nor malice to
deserve it. And therefore they reckon no privilege broken, though
they fetch him out. Which if ye finally refuse to deliver him, I
verily think they will. So much dread hath my Lord his uncle, for the
tender love he beareth him, lest your grace should hap to send him
away. A Sir quod the Queen, hath the Protector so tender zeal to him,
that he feareth nothing but lest he should escape him. Thinketh he
that I would send him hence, which neither is in the plight to send
out, and in what place could I reckon him sure, if he be not sure in
this the sanctuary whereof, was there never tyrant yet so devilish,
that durst presume to break. And I trust God as strong now to
withstand his adversaries, as ever he was. But my son can deserve no
sanctuary, and therefore he cannot have it. Forsooth he hath found a
goodly glose, by which that place that may defend a thief, may not
save an innocent. But he is in no jeopardy nor hath no need thereof.
Would God he had not. Troweth the Protector (I pray God he may prove
a Protector) troweth he that I perceive not whereunto his painted
process draweth? It is not honourable that the Duke bide here: it
were comfortable for them both that he were with his brother, because
the King lacketh a play-fellow be ye sure. I pray God send them both
better play-fellows than him, that maketh so high a matter upon such
a trifling pretext: as though there could none be found to play with
the King, but if his brother that hath no lust to play for sickness,
come out of sanctuary out of his safeguard, to play with him. As
though princes as young as they be, could not play but with their
peers, or children could not play but with their kindred, with whom
for the more part they agree much worse than with strangers. But the
child cannot require the privilege, who told him so? he shall here
him ask it and he will.

Howbeit this is a gay matter: Suppose he could not ask it,
suppose he would not ask it, suppose he would ask to go out, if I say
he shall not, if I ask the privilege but for myself, I say he that
against my will taketh out him, breaketh the sanctuary. Serveth this
liberty for my person only, or for my goods too? ye may not hence
take my horse from me: and may you take my child from me? he is also
my ward, for as my learned council showeth me, sith he hath nothing
by descent holden by knight's service, the law maketh, his mother his
guardian. Then may no man, I suppose take my ward from me out of
sanctuary, without the breach of the sanctuary. And if my privilege
could not serve him, nor he ask it for himself, yet sith the law
committeth to me the custody of him, I may require it for him, except
the law give a child a guardian only for his goods and his lands,
discharging him of the cure and safe keeping of his body, for which
only both lands and goods serve.

And if examples be sufficient to obtain privilege for my child,
I need not far to seeke. For in this place in which we now be (and
which is now in question whither my child may take benefit of it)
mine other son now King was born, and kept in his cradle, and
preserved to a more prosperous fortune, which I pray God long to
continue. And as all you know, this is not the first time that I have
taken sanctuary, for when my Lord my husband was banished and thrust
out of his kingdom, I fled hither being great with child, and here I
bore the Prince. And when my Lord my husband returned safe again and
had the victory, then went I hence to welcome him home, and from
hence I brought my babe the Prince unto his father, when he first
took him in his arms. And I pray God that my son's palace may be as
great safeguard to him now reigning, as this place was sometime to
the King's enemy. In which place I intend to keep his brother sith,
&c.

Wherefore here intend I to keep him since man's law serveth the
guardian to keep the infant. The law of nature will the mother keep
her child. God's law privilegeth the sanctuary, and the sanctuary my
son, sith I fear to put him in the protector's hands  that hath his
brother already, and were if both failed, inheritor to the crown. The
cause of my fear hath no man to do to examine. And yet fear I no
further than the law feareth which as learned men tell me forbiddeth
every man the custody of them, by whose death he may inherit less
land than a Kingdome. I can no more, but whosoever he be that
breaketh this holy sanctuary: I pray God shortly send him need of
sanctuary, when he may not come to it. For taken out of sanctuary
would I not my mortal enemy were.

The Lord Cardinal perceiving that the Queen waxed ever the
longer the farther off, and also that she began to kindle and chafe,
and speak sore biting words against the Protector, and such as he
neither believed, and was also loath to hear, he said unto her for a
final conclusion, that he would no longer dispute the matter. But if
she were content to deliver the Duke to him and to the other Lords
there present, he durst lay his own body and soul both in pledge, not
only for his surety but also for his estate. And if she would give
them a resolute answer to the contrary, he would forthwith depart
there with all, and shift whoso would with this business afterwards:
for he never intended more to move her in that matter, in which she
thought that he and all other save herself, lacked either wit or
truth. Wit if they were so dull, that they could nothing perceive
what the Protector intended: truth if they should procure her son to
be delivered into his hands , in whom they should perceive toward the
child any evil intended.

The Queen with these words stood a good while in a great study.
And forasmuch her seemed the Cardinal more ready to depart, than some
of the remnant, and the Protector himself ready at hand, so that she
verily  thought she could not keep him there, but that he should
incontinent be taken thence: and to convey him elsewhere, neither had
she time to serve her, nor place determined, nor persons appointed,
all thing unready this message came on her so suddenly, nothing less
looking for them to have him fetched out of sanctuary, which she
thought to be now beset in such places about, that he could not be
conveyed out untaken, and partly as she thought it might fortune her
fear to be false, so will she waste it was either needless or
bootless: wherefore if she should needs go from him, she deemed it
best to deliver him. And over that of the Cardinal's faith she
nothing doubted, nor of some other Lords neither, whom she there saw.
Which as she feared lest they might be deceived: so was she well
assured they would not be corrupted: Then thought she it should yet
make them the more warily to look to him, and the more circumspectly
to see to his surety, if she with her own hands betook him to them of
trust. And at the last she took the young Duke by the hand, and said
unto the Lords: my Lord (quod she) and all my Lords, I neither am so
unwise to mistrust your wits, nor so suspicious to mistrust your
truths. Of which I purpose to make you such a proof, as if either of
both lacked in you, might turn both me to great sorrow, the realm to
much harm, and you to great reproach. For lo here is (quod she) this
gentleman, whom I doubt not but I could here keep safe if I would,
whatsoever any man say. And I doubt not also but there be some abroad
so deadly enemies unto my blood, that if they wist where any of it
lay in their own body, they would let it out. We have also had
experience that the desire of a kingdom knoweth no kindred. The
brother hath been the brother's bane. And may the nephews be sure of
their uncle? Each of these children is other's defence while they be
asunder, and each of their lives lieth in the other's body. Keep one
safe and both be sure, and nothing for them both more perilous, than
to be both in one place. For what wise merchant adventureth all his
good in one ship? All this notwithstanding, here I deliver him and
his brother in him, to keep into your hands , of whom I shall ask
them both afore God and the world. Faithful ye be that wot I well and
I know well you be wise. Power and strength to keep him if ye list
neither lack ye of yourself, nor can lack help in this cause. And if
ye cannot else where, then may you leave him here. But only one thing
I beseech you for the trust that his father put in you ever, and for
trust that I put in you now, that as far as ye think that I fear to
much, be you well ware that to fear not as far to little. And
therewithal she said unto the child: farewell my own sweet son, God
send you good keeping, let me kiss you once yet ere you go, for God
knoweth when we shall kiss together again. And therewith she kissed
him, and blessed him, turned her back and wept and went her way,
leaving the child weeping as fast. When the Lord Cardinal and these
other Lords with him, had received this young Duke, they brought him
into the star-chamber where the Protector took him in his arms and
kissed him with these words:

Now welcome my Lord even with all my very heart. And he said in
that of likelihood  as he thought. Thereupon forthwith they brought
him to the King his brother into the bishops palace at Paul's, and
from thence through the city honourably into the tower, out of which
after that day they never came abroad.

When the Protector had both the children in his hands , he
opened himself more boldly, both to certain other men, and also
chiefly to the Duke of Buckingham. Although I know that many thought,
that this Duke was privy to all the Protector's council, even from
the beginning. And some of the Protector's friends said, that the
Duke was the first mover of the Protector to this matter, sending a
privy messenger unto him, straight after King Edward's death. But
other again which knew better the subtle wit of the Protector, deny
that he ever opened his enterprise to the Duke, until he had brought
to pass the things before rehearsed. But when he had imprisoned the
Queen's kinsfolk, and gotten both her sons into his own hands, than
he opened the rest of his purpose with less fear to them whom he
thought meet for the matter, and specially to the Duke: who being won
to his purpose, he thought his strength more than half increased. The
matter was broken unto the Duke, by subtle folks , and such as were
their craft masters in the handling of such wicked devices: who
declared unto him, that the young King was offended with him for his
kinsfolk's sakes, and that if he were ever able, he would revenge
them. Who would prick him forward thereunto, if they escaped (for
they would remember their imprisonment). Or else if they were put to
death, without doubt the young King would be careful for their
deaths, whose imprisonment was grievous unto him. And that with
repenting the Duke should nothing avail: for there was no way left to
redeem his offence by benefits: but he should sooner destroy himself
than save the King, who with his brother and his kinsfolk he saw in
such places imprisoned, as the Protector might with a beck destroy
them all: and that it were no doubt but he would do it indeed, if
there were any new enterprise attempted. And that it was likely that
as the Protector had provided privy guard for himself, so had he
spials for the Duke, and trains to catch him, if he should be against
him, and that peradventure from them, whom he least suspected. For
the state of things and the dispositions of men were then such, that
a man could not well tell whom he might trust, or whom he might fear.
These things and such like, being beaten into the Duke's mind,
brought him to that point, that where he had repented the way that he
had entered, yet would he go forth in the same: and since he had once
begun, he would stoutly go through. And therefore to this wicked
enterprise, which he believed could not be voided, he bent himself
and went through: and determined, that since the common mischief
could not be amended, he would turn it as much as he might to his own
commodity.

Then it was agreed, that the Protector should have the Duke's
aid to make him King, and that the Protector's only lawful son,
should marry the Duke's daughter, and that the Protector should grant
him the quiet possession of the Earldom of Hertford, which he claimed
as his inheritance, and could never obtain it in King Edward's time.
Besides these requests of the Duke, the Protector of his own mind
promised him a great quantity of the King's treasure and of his
household stuff. And when they were thus at a point between
themselves, they went about to prepare for the coronation of the
young King as they would have it seem. And that they might turn both
the eyes and minds of men, from perceiving of their drifts other
where the Lords being sent for from all parts of the realm, came
thick to that solemnity. But the Protector and the Duke, after that,
that they had set the Lord Cardinal, the Archbishop of York then Lord
Chancellor, the Bishop of Ely, the Lord Stanley and the Lord Hastings
then Lord Chamberlain, with many other noble men to commune and
devise about the coronation in one place: as fast were they in
another place contriving the contrary, and to make the Protector
King. To which council, albeit there were adhibit very few, and they
very secret: yet began there here and there about, some manner of
muttering among the people, as though all should not long be well,
though they neither wist what they feared nor wherefore: were it that
before such great things, men's hearts of a secret instinct of nature
misgiveth them. As the sea without wind swelleth of himself sometime
before a tempest: or were it that some one man haply somewhat
perceiving, filled many men with suspicion, though he showed few men
what he knew. Howbeit somewhat the dealing self made men to muse on
the matter, though the council were close. For little and little all
folk withdrew from the Tower, and drew to Crosbie's place in
Bishopsgate Street where the Protector kept his household. The
Protector had the resort, the King in manner desolate. While some for
their business made suit to them that had the doing, some were by
their friends secretly warned, that it might haply turn them to no
good, to be to much attendant about the King without the Protector's
appointment: which removed also divers of the prince's old servants
from him, and set new about him. Thus many things coming together
partly by chance, partly of purpose, caused at length, not common
people that wave with the wind, but wise men also and so Lords, yeke
to mark the matter and muse thereon: so farforth that the Lord
Stanley, that was after Earl of Darby, wisely mistrusted it, and said
unto the Lord Hastings, that he much misliked these two several
councils. For while we (quod he) talk of one matter in the one place,
little wot we whereof they talk in the other place. My Lord (quod the
Lord Hastings) on my life never doubt you. For while one man is there
which is never thence, never can there be thing once minded that
should sound amiss toward me, but it should be in mine ears ere it
were well out of their mouths. This meant he by Catesby, which was of
his near secret counsel, and whom he very familiarly used, and in his
most weighty matters put no man in so special trust, reckoning
himself to no man so lief, sith he well wist there was no man to him
so much beholden as was this Catesby, which was a man well learned in
the laws of this land, and by the special favour of the Lord
Chamberlain, in good authority and much rule bore in all the county
of Leicester where the Lord Chamberlain's power chiefly lay. But
surely great pity was it, that he had not had either more truth or
less wit. For his dissimulation only, kept all that mischief up. In
whom if the Lord Hastings had not put so special trust, the Lord
Stanley and he had departed with divers other Lords, and broken all
the dance, for many ill signs that he saw, which he now construes all
to the best. So surely thought he that there could be none harm
toward him in that council intended where Catesby was. And of truth
the Protector and the Duke of Buckingham made very good semblance
unto the Lord Hastings, and kept him much in company. And undoubtedly
the Protector loved him well, and loath was to have lost him, saving
for fear lest his life should have quailed their purpose. For which
cause he moved Catesby to prove with some words cast out afar off,
whither he could think it possible to win the Lord Hasting into their
part. But Catesby whither he assayed him or assayed him not, reported
unto them, that he found him so fast, and hard him speak so terrible
words, that he durst no further break. And of truth the Lord
Chamberlain of very trust showed unto Catesby, the mistrust that
other began to have in the matter. And therefore he fearing lest
their motions might with the Lord Hastings minish his credence,
whereunto only all the matter leaned, procured the Protector hastily
to rid him. And much the rather, for that he trusted by his death to
obtain much of the rule that the Lord Hastings bore in his country:
the only desire whereof, was the allective that induced him to be
partner and one special contriver of all this horrible treason.

Whereupon soon after that is to wit, on the Friday the
thirteenth day of June many Lords assembled in the tower, and there
sat in council, devising the honourable solemnity of the King's
coronation, of which the time appointed so near approached, that the
pageants and subtleties were in making day and night at Westminster,
and much victual killed therefore, that afterward was cast away.
These Lords so sitting together communing of this matter, the
Protector came in among them, first about nine of the clock, saluting
them courteously, and excusing himself that he had been from them so
long, saying merely that he had been asleep that day. And after a
little talking with them, he said unto the Bishop of Ely: my Lord you
have very good strawberries at your garden in Holborn, I require you
let us have a mess of them. Gladly my Lord, quod he, would God I had
some better thing as ready to your pleasure as that. And therewith in
all the haste he sent his servant for a mess of strawberries. The
Protector set the Lords fast in communing, and thereupon praying them
to spare him for a little while, departed thence. And soon after one
hour between ten and eleven he returned into the chamber among them,
all changed with a wonderful sore angry countenance, knitting the
brows, frowning and fretting and knawing on his lips and so sat him
down, in his place: all the Lords much dismayed and sore marvelling
of this manner of sudden change, and what thing should him ail. Then
when he had sitten still a while, thus he began: what were they
worthy to have, that compass and imagine the destruction of me, being
so near of blood unto the King and Protector of his royal person and
his realm. At this question, all the Lords sat sore astonied, musing
much by whom this question should be meant, of which every man wist
himself clear. Then the Lord Chamberlain, as he that for the love
between them thought he might be boldest with him, answered and said,
that they were worthy to be punished as heinous traitors whatsoever
they were. And all the other affirmed the same. That is (quod he)
yonder sorceress my brother's wife and other with her meaning the
Queen. At these words many of the other Lords were greatly abashed
that favoured her. But the Lord Hastings was in his mind better
content, that it was moved by her, than by any other whom he loved
better: Albeit his heart somewhat grudged, that he was not afore,
made of council in this matter as he was of the taking of her
kindred, and of their putting to death, which were by his assent
before, devised to be beheaded at Pontefract, this self same day, in
which he was not ware that it was by other devised, that himself
should the same day be beheaded at London. Then said the Protector:
ye shall all se in what wise that sorceress and that other witch of
her council Shore's wife with their affinity, have by their sorcery
and witchcraft wasted my body. And therewith he plucked up his
doublet sleeve to his elbow upon his left arm, where he showed a
wearish withered arm and small, as it was never other. And thereupon
every man's mind sore misgave them, well perceiving that this matter
was but a quarrel. For well they wist, that the Queen was too wise to
go about any such folly. And also if she would, yet would she of all
folk least make Shore's wife of counsel, whom of all women she most
hated, as that concubine whom the King her husband had most loved.
And also no man was there present, but well knew that his arm was
ever such since his birth. Natheless the Lord Chamberlain (which from
the death of King Edward kept Shore's wife, on whom he somewhat doted
in the King's life, saving as it is said he that while forbore her of
reverence toward his King, or else of a certain kind of fidelity to
his friend) answered and said: certainly my Lord if they have so
heinously done, and they be worthy heinous punishment. What quod the
Protector thou servest me I ween with ifs and with ands, I tell the
they have so done, and that I will make good on thy body traitor. And
therewith as in a great anger, he clapped his fist upon the board a
great rap. At which token given, one cried treason without the
chamber. Therewith a door clapped, and in come there rushing men in
harness as many as the chamber might hold. And anon the Protector
said to the Lord Hastings: I arrest thee traitor. What me my Lord
quod he. Yea the traitor, quod the Protector.

And another let fly at the Lord Stanley which shrunk at the
stroke and fell under the table, or else his head had been cleft to
the teeth: for as shortly as he shrank, yet ran the blood about his
ears. Then were they all quickly bestowed in divers chambers, except
the Lord Chamberlain, whom the Protector bade speed and shrive him
apace, for by saint Paul (quod he) I will not to dinner till I see
thy head off. It booted him not to ask why but heavily he took a
priest at adventure, and made a short shrift, for a longer would not
be suffered, the Protector made so much haste to dinner: which he
might not go to till this were done for the saving of his oath.

So was he brought forth into the green beside the chapel within
the tower, and his head laid down upon a long log of timber, and
there stricken off, and afterward his body with the head entered at
Windsor beside the body of King Edward, whose both souls our Lord
pardon.

A marvellous case is it to hear, either the warnings of that he
should have voided, or the tokens of that he could not void. For the
self night next before his death, the Lord Stanley sent a trusty
secret messenger unto him at midnight in all the haste, requiring him
to rise and ride away with him, for he was disposed utterly no longer
to bide: he had so fearful a dream, in which him thought that a boar
with his tusks so raced them both by the heads, that the blood ran
about both their shoulders. And forasmuch as the Protector gave the
boar for his cognisance, this dream made so fearful an impression in
his heart, that he was thoroughly determined no longer to tarry, but
had his horse ready, if the Lord Hastings would go with him to ride
so far yet the same night, that they should be out of danger ere day.
Ay good Lord quod the Lord Hastings to this messenger, leaneth my
Lord thy master so much to such trifles, and hath such faith in
dreams, which either his own fear fantasieth or do rise in the
night's rest by reason of his day thoughts? Tell him it is plain
witchcraft to believe in such dreams: which if they were tokens of
things to come, why thinketh he not that we might be as likely to
make them true by our going if we were caught and brought back (as
friends fail fleers) for then had the boar a cause likely to race us
with his tusks, as folk that fled for some falsehood, wherefore
either is there no peril, nor none there is in deed: or if any be, it
is rather in going than biding. And if we should needs cost fall in
peril one way or other: yet had I lever that men should see it were
by other men's falsehood, than think it were either our own fault or
faint heart. And therefore go to thy master man, and commend me to
him and pray him be merry and have no fear: for I ensure him I am as
sure of the man that he wotteth of, as I am of my own hand. God send
grace Sir quod the messenger, and went his way.

Certain is it also, that in the riding toward the tower, the
same morning in which he was beheaded, his horse twice or thrice
stumbled with him almost to the falling, which thing albeit each man
wot well daily happeneth to them to whom no such mischance is toward:
yet hath it been of an old rite and custom, observed as a token often
times notably foregoing some great misfortune. Now this that
followeth was no warning, but an enemious scorned. The same morning
ere he were up, came a knight unto him, as it were of courtesy to
accompany him to the council, but of truth sent by the Protector to
haste him thitherward, with whom he was of secret confederacy in that
purpose, a mean man at that time, and now of great authority . This 
knight when it happed the Lord Chamberlain by the way to stay his
horse, and commune a while with a priest whom he met in the Tower
Street, broke his tale and said merely to him: what my Lord I pray
you come on, whereto talk you so long with that priest, you have no
need of a priest yet: and therewith he laughed upon him, as though he
would say, ye shall have soon. But so little wist the other what he
meant, and so little mistrusted, that he was never merrier nor never
so full of good hope in his life: which self thing is often seen a
sign of change. But I shall rather let any thing pass me, than the
vain surety of man's mind so near his death. Upon the very tower
wharf so near the place where his head was off so soon after, there
met he with one Hastings a pursuivant of his own name. And of their
meeting in that place, he was put in remembrance of another time, in
which it had happened them before, to meet in like manner together in
the same place. At which other time the Lord Chamberlain had been
accused unto King Edward, by the Lord Rivers the Queen's brother, in
such wise that he was for the while (but it lasted not long) far
fallen into the King's indignation, and stood in great fear of
himself. And forasmuch as he now met this pursuivant in the same
place that jeopardy so well passed: it gave him great pleasure to
talk with him thereof with whom he had before talked thereof, in the
same place while he was therein. And therefore he said: Ah Hastings,
art you remembered when I met thee here once with an heavy heart: Yea
my Lord (quod he) that remember I well, and thanked be God they got
no good, nor ye none harm thereby. Thou wouldest say so quod he, if
thou knewest as much as I know, which few know else as yet and more
shall shortly. That meant he by the Lords of the Queen's kindred that
were taken before, and should that day be beheaded at Pontefract:
which he well wist, but nothing ware that the axe hang over his own
head. In faith man quod he, I was never so sorry, nor never stood in
so great dread in my life, as I did when thou and I met here. And lo
how the world is turned, now stand mine enemies in that danger (as
thou mayest hap to hear more hereafter) and I never in my life so
merry, nor never in so great surety. O good God, the blindness of our
mortal nature, when he most feared, he was in good surety: when he
reckoned himself surest, he lost his life, and that within two hours
after. Thus ended this honourable man, a good knight and a gentle, of
great authority with his prince, of living somewhat desolate, plain
and open to his enemy, and secret to his friend: ethe to beguile, as
he that of good heart and courage forestudied no perils. A loving man
and passing well beloved. Very faithful, and trusty enough, trusting
to much.

Now flew the fame of this Lord's death, swiftly through the
city, and so forth farther about like a wind in every man's ear. But
the Protector immediately after dinner, intending to set some colour
upon the matter, sent in all the haste for many substantial men out
of the city into the Tower. And at their coming, himself with the
Duke of Buckingham, stood harnessed in old ill faring briganders,
such as no man should ween that they would vouchsafe to have put upon
their backs, except that some sudden necessity had constrained them.
And then the Protector showed them, that the Lord Chamberlain, and
other of his conspiracy, had contrived to have suddenly destroyed him
and the Duke, there the same day in the council. And what they
intended further, was as yet not well known. Of which their treason
he never had knowledge before ten of the clock the same forenoon.
Which sudden fear drove them to put on for their defence such harness
as came next to hand. And so had God holpen them, that the mischief
turned upon them that would have done it. And this he required them
to report. Every man answered him fair, as though no man mistrusted
the matter which of truth no man believed. Yet for the further
appeasing of the people's mind, he sent immediately after diner in
all the haste, one herald of arms, with a proclamation to be made
through the city in the King's name, containing that the Lord
Hastings with divers other of his traitorous purpose, had before
conspired the same day, to have slain the Lord Protector and the Duke
of Buckingham sitting in the council, and after to have taken upon
them to rule the King and the realm at their pleasure, and thereby to
pill and spoil whom they list uncontrolled. And much matter was there
in the proclamation devised, to the slander of the Lord Chamberlain,
as that he was an evil counsellor to the King's father, enticing him
to many things highly redounding to the minishing of his honour, and
to the universal hurt of his realm, by his evil company, sinister
procuring, and ungracious ensample, as well in many other things as
in the vicious living and inordinate abusion of his body, both with
many other, and also specially with Shore's wife, which was one also
of his most secret council of this heinous treason, with whom he lay
nightly, and namely the night last passed next before his death, so
that it was the less marvel, if ungracious living brought him to an
unhappy ending: which he was now put unto, by the most dread
commandment of the King's highness and of his honourable and faithful
council, both for his demerits, being so openly taken in his falsely
conceived treason, and also lest the delaying of his execution, might
have encouraged other mischievous persons partners of his conspiracy,
to gather and assemble themselves together in making some great
commotion for his deliverance, whose hope now being by his well
deserved death politically repressed, all the realm should by God's
grace rest in good quiet and peace. Now was this proclamation made
within two hours after that he was beheaded, and it was so curiously
indicted, and so fair written in parchment in so well a set hand, and
therewith of itself so long a process, that every child might well
perceive, that it was prepared before. For all the time between his
death and the proclaiming could scant have sufficed unto the bare
writing alone, all had it been but in paper and scribbled forth in
haste at adventure. So that upon the proclaiming thereof, one that
was school master of Paul's of chance standing by, and comparing the
shortness of the time with the length of the matter, said unto them
that stood about him here is a gay goodly cast, foul cast away for
haste. And a merchant answered him, that it was written by prophesy.

Now then by and by, as it were for anger not for covetise, the
Protector sent into the house of Shore's wife (for her husband
dwelled not with her) and spoiled her of all that ever she had, above
the value of two or three thousand marks, and sent her body to
prison. And when he had a while laid unto her for the manner sake,
that she went about to bewitch him, and that she was of council with
the Lord Chamberlain to destroy him: in conclusion, when that no
colour could fasten upon these matters, then he laid heinously to her
charge, and the thing that she herself could not deny, that all the
world wist was true, and that natheless every man laughed at to hear
it then so suddenly so highly taken, that she was naught of her body.
And for this cause (as a goodly continent prince clean and faultless
of himself, sent out of heaven into this vicious world for the
amendment of men's manners) he caused the Bishop of London to put her
to open penance, going before the cross in procession upon a Sunday
with a taper in her hand. In which she went in countenance and pace
demure so womanly, and albeit she were out of all array save her
kirtle only: yet went she so fair and lovely, namely while the
wondering of the people cast a comely red in her cheeks (of which she
before had most missed) that her great shame won her much praise,
among those that were more amorous of her body than curious of her
soul. And many good folk also that hated her living, and glad were to
see sin corrected: yet pitied they more her penance, than rejoiced
therein, when they considered that the Protector procured it, more of
a corrupt intent than any virtuous affection.

This woman was born in London, worshipfully friended, honestly
brought up, and very well married, saving somewhat too soon, her
husband an honest citizen, young and goodly and of good substance.
But forasmuch as they were coupled ere she were well ripe, she not
very fervently loved, for whom she never longed. Which was haply the
thing, that the more easily made her incline unto the King's appetite
when he required her. Howbeit the respect of his royalty, the hope of
gay apparel, ease, pleasure and other wanton wealth, was able soon to
pierce a soft tender heart. But when the King had abused her, anon
her husband (as he was an honest man and one that could his good, not
presuming to touch a King's concubine) left her up to him all
together. When the King died, the Lord Chamberlain took her. Which in
the King's days, albeit he was sore enamoured upon her, yet he
forbore her, either for reverence, or for a certain friendly
faithfulness. Proper she was and fair: nothing in her body that you
would have changed, but if you would have wished her somewhat higher.
Thus say they that knew her in her youth. Albeit some that now see
her (for yet she liveth) deem her never to have been well visaged.
Whose judgement seemeth me somewhat like, as though men should guess
the beauty of one long before departed, by her scalp taken out of the
charnel house: for now is she old lean, withered and dried up,
nothing left but rivelled skin and hard bone. And yet being even
such: whoso well advise her visage, might guess and devise which
parts now filled, would make it a fair face. Yet she delighted not
men so much in her beauty, as in her pleasant behaviour. For a proper
wit had she, and could both read well and write, merry in company,
ready and quick of answer, neither mute nor full of babble, sometime
taunting without displeasure not without disport.

The King would say that he had three concubines, which in three
divers properties diversely excelled. One the merriest, another the
wiliest, the third the holiest harlot in his realm, as one whom no
man could get out of the church lightly to any place, but it were to
his bed. The other two were somewhat greater parsonages, and
natheless of their humility content to be nameless, and to forbear
the praise of those properties. But the merriest was this Shore's
wife, in whom the King therefore took special pleasure. For many he
had, but her he loved, whose favour to say the truth (for sin it were
to belie the devil) she never abused to any man's hurt, but to many a
man's comfort and relief: where the King took displeasure, she would
mitigate and appease his mind: where men were out of favour, she
would bring them in his grace. For many that had highly offended, she
obtained pardon. Of great forfeitures she got men remission. And
finally in many weighty suits, she stood many men in great stead,
either for none, or very small rewards, and those rather gay than
rich: either for that she was content with the deed self well done,
or for that she delighted to be sued unto, and to show what she was
able to do with the King, or for that wanton women and wealthy be not
always covetous. I doubt not some shall think this woman too slight a
thing, to be written of and set among the remembrances of great
matters: which they shall specially think, that haply shall esteem
her only by that they now see her. But me seemeth the chance so much
the more worthy to be remembered, in how much she is now in the more
beggarly condition, unfriended and worn out of acquaintance, after
good substance, after as great favour with the prince, after as great
suit and seeking to with all those that those days had business to
speed, as many other men were in their times, which be now famous,
only by the infamy of their ill deeds. Her doings were not much less,
albeit they be much less remembered, because they were not so evil.
For men use if they have an evil turn, to write it in marble: and 
whoso doth us a good turn, we write it in dust which is not worst
proved by her: for at this day she beggeth of many at this day
living, that at this day had begged if she had not been.

Now was it so devised by the Protector and his council, that
the self day in which the Lord Chamberlain was beheaded in the tower
of London, and about the selfsame hour, was there not without his
assent beheaded at Pontefract, the fore remembered Lords and knights
that were taken from the King at Northampton and Stony Stratford.
Which thing was done in the presence and by the order of Sir Richard
Ratcliff knight, whose service the Protector specially used in the
council and in the execution of such lawless enterprises, as a man
that had been long secret with him, having experience of the world
and a shrewd wit, short and rude in speech, rough and boistious of
behaviour, bold in mischief, as far from pity as from all fear of
God. This knight bringing them out of the prison to the scaffold, and
showing to the people about that they were traitors, not suffering
them to speak and declare their innocence lest their words might have
inclined men to pity them, and to hate the Protector and his part:
caused them hastily without judgement, process, or manner of order to
be beheaded, and without other earthly guilt, but only that they were
good men, to be true to the King and to nigh to the Queen.

Now when the Lord Chamberlain and these other Lords were thus
beheaded and rid out of the way: then thought the Protector, that
while men mused what the matter meant, while the Lords of the realm
were about him out of their own strengths, while no man wist what to
think nor whom to trust, ere ever they should have space to dispute
and digest the matter and make parties: it were best hastily to
pursue his purpose, and put himself in possession of the crown, ere
men could have time to devise any ways to resist. But now was all the
study, by what mean this matter being of itself so heinous, might be
first broken to the people, in such wise that it might be well taken.
To this council they took divers, such as they thought meetly to be
trusted, likely to be induced to the part, and able to stand them in
stead, either by power or policy.

Among whom, they made of Council Edmund Shaw knight then Mayor
of London, which upon trust of his own advancement, whereof he was of
a proud heart highly desirous, should frame the city to their
appetite. Of spiritual men they took such as had wit, and were in
authority among the people for opinion of their learning, and had no
scrupulous conscience.

Among these had they John Shaw clerk brother to the Mayor, and
friar Penker provincial of the Augustine friars both doctors of
divinity, both great preachers, both of more learning than virtue, of
more fame than learning. For they were before greatly esteemed among
the people: but after that never. Of these two the one had a sermon
in praise of the Protector before the coronation, the other after,
both so full of tedious flattery, that no man's ears could abide
them. Penker in his sermon so lost his voice that he was fain to
leave off and come down in the midst. Doctor Shaw by his sermon lost
his honesty, and soon after his life, for very shame of the world,
into which he durst never after come abroad. But the friar forced for
no shame, and so it harmed him the less. Howbeit some doubt and many
think, that Penker was not of council of the matter before the
coronation, but after the common manner fell to flattery after:
namely sith his sermon was not incontinent upon it, but at S. Mary
Hospital at the Easter after. But certain is it, that Doctor Shaw was
of council in the beginning, so far forth that they determined that
he should first break the matter in a sermon at Paul's Cross, in
which he should by the authority of his preaching, incline the people
to the Protector's ghostly purpose. But now was all the labour and
study, in the devise of some convenient pretext, for which the people
should be content, to depose the prince and accept the Protector for
King. In which divers things they devised. But the chief thing and
the weighty of all that invention, rested in this that they should
allege bastardy, either in King Edward himself, or in his children,
or both. So that he should seem disabled to inherit the crown by the
Duke of York, and the prince by him. To lay bastardy in King Edward,
sounded openly to the rebuke of the Protector's own mother, which was
mother to them both: for in that point could be none other colour,
but to pretend that his own mother was one adulteress which not
withstanding to further this purpose he letted not: but natheless he
would the point should be less and more favourably handled, not even
fully plain and directly, but that the matter should be touched
aslope craftily, as though men spared in that point to speak all the
truth for fear of his displeasure. But the other point concerning the
bastardy that they devised to surmise in King Edward's children, that
would he should be openly declared and enforced to the uttermost. The
colour and pretext whereof cannot be well perceived, but if we first
repeat you some things long before done about King Edward's marriage.

After that King Edward the fourth had deposed King Henry the
sixth, and was in peaceable possession of the realm, determining
himself to marry, as it was requisite both for himself and for the
realm, he sent over in embassiate, the Earl of Warwick with other
noble men in his company unto Spain, to entreat and conclude a
marriage between King Edward and the King's daughter of Spain. In
which thing the Earl of Warwick found the parties so toward and
willing, that he speedily according to his instructions, without any
difficulty brought the matter to very good conclusion.

Now happed it that in the mean season, there came to make a
suit by petition to the King, Dame Elizabeth Gray which was after his
Queen, at that time a widow borne of noble blood, specially by her
mother, which was Duchess of Bedford ere she married the Lord
Woodfield her father. Howbeit this Dame Elizabeth herself being in
service with Queen Margaret, wife unto King Henry the sixth was
married unto one John Gray a squire whom King Henry made knight upon
the field that he had on Shrove Tuesday at Saint Alban's against King
Edward. And little while enjoyed he that knighthood, for he was at
the same field slain. After which done, and the Earl of Warwick being
in his embassiate about the afore remembered marriage, this poor lady
made humble suit unto the King, that she might be restored unto such
small lands as her late husband had given her in jointure. Whom when
the King beheld, and heard her speak, as she was both fair, of a good
favour, moderate of stature, well made and very wise: he not only
pitied her, but also waxed enamoured on her. And taking her afterward
secretly aside, began to enter in talking more familiarly. Whose
appetite when she perceived, she virtuously denied him. But that did
she so wisely, and with so good manner, and words so well set, that
she rather kindled his desire than quenched it. And finally after
many a meeting, much wooing and many great promises, she well espied
the King's affection toward her so greatly increased, that she durst
somewhat the more boldly say her mind, as to him whose heart she
perceived more firmly set, than to fall off for a word. And in
conclusion she showed him plain, that as she wist herself too simple
to be his wife, so thought she herself too good to be his concubine.
The King much marvelling of her constancy, as he that had not been
wont elsewhere to be so stiffly said nay, so much esteemed her
continence and chastity, that he set her virtue in the stead of
possession and riches. And thus taking council of his desire,
determined in all possible haste to marry her. And after he was thus
appointed, and had between them twain ensured her: then asked he
council of his other friends, and that in such manner, as they might
ethe perceive it booted not greatly to say nay.

Notwithstanding the Duchess of York his mother was so sore
moved therewith, that she dissuaded the marriage as much as she
possibly might alleging that it was in his honour, profit, and surety
also, to marry in a noble progeny out of his realm, whereupon
depended great strength to his estate by the affinity and great
possibility of increase of his possessions. And that he could not
well otherwise do, standing that the Earl of Warwick had so far moved
already. Which were not likely to take it well, if all his voyage
were in such wise frustrate, and his appointments deluded. And she
said also that it was not princely to marry his own subject, no great
occasion leading thereunto, no possessions, or other commodities,
depending thereupon, but only as it were a rich man that would marry
his maid, only for a little wanton dotage upon her person. In which
marriage many more commend the maiden's fortune, than the master's
wisdom. And yet therein she said was more honesty, than honour in
this marriage. Forasmuch as there is between no merchant and his own
maid so great difference, as between the King and this widow. In 
whose person albeit there was nothing to be misliked, yet was there
she said: nothing so excellent, but it might be found in divers
other, that were more meetly (quod she) for your estate, and maidens
also, whereas the only widowhood of Elizabeth Gray though she were in
all other things convenient for you, should yet suffice as me seemeth
to refrain you from her marriage, sith it is an unfitting thing, and
a very blemish, and high disparagement, to the sacred majesty of a
prince, that ought as nigh to approach priesthood in cleanness as he
doth in dignity, to be defouled with bigamy in his first marriage.

The King when his mother had said, made her answer part in
earnest part in play merely, as he that wist himself out of her rule.
And albeit he would gladly that she should take it well, yet was at a
point in his own mind, took she it well or otherwise. Howbeit
somewhat to satisfy her he said, that albeit marriage being a
spiritual thing, ought rather to be made for the respect of God where
his grace inclineth the parties to love together as he trusted it was
in his than for the regard of any temporal advantage: yet natheless
him seemed that this marriage even worldly considered, was not
unprofitable. For he reckoned the amity of no earthly nation so
necessary for him, as the friendship of his own. Which he thought
likely to bear him so much the more hearty favour in that he
disdained not to marry with one of his own land. And yet if outward
alliance were thought so requisite, he would find the means to enter
thereinto, much better by other of his kin, where all the parties
could be contented, than to marry himself, whom he should haply never
love, and for the possibility of more possessions, lose the fruit and
pleasure of this that he had already. For small pleasure taketh a man
of all that ever he hath beside, if he be wived against his appetite.
And I doubt not quod he but there be as ye say other, that be in
every point comparable with her. And therefore I let not them that
like them to wed them. No more is it reason that it mislike any man,
that I marry where it liketh me. And I am sure that my cousin of
Warwick neither loveth me so little, to grudge at that I love, nor is
so unreasonable to look that I should in choice of a wife, rather
then be ruled by his eye, than by mine own: as though I were a ward
that were bound to marry by the appointment of a guardian. I would
not be a King with that condition, to forbear mine own liberty in
choice of my own marriage. As for possibility of more inheritance by
new affinity in strange lands, is oft the occasion of more trouble
than profit. And we have already title by that means, to so much as
sufficeth to get and keep well in one man's days. That she is a widow
and hath already children, by God's blessed Lady I am a bachelor and
have some too: and so each of us hath a proof that neither of us is
like to be barren. And therefore madam I pray you be content, I trust
in God she shall bring forth a young prince, that shall please you.
And as for the bigamy, let the bishop hardly lay it in my way, when I
come to take orders. For I understand it is forbidden a priest, but I
never wist it yet that it was forbidden a prince.  The Duchess with
these words nothing appeased, and seeing the King so set thereon that
she could not pull him back, so highly she disdained it, that under
pretext of her duty to Godward, she devised to disturb this marriage,
and rather to help that he should marry one Dame Elizabeth Lucy, whom
the King had also not long before gotten with child. Wherefore the
King's mother objected openly against his marriage, as it were in
discharge of her conscience, that the King was sure to Dame Elizabeth
Lucy and her husband before God. By reason of which words, such
obstacle was made in the matter, that either the Bishops durst not,
or the King would not, proceed to the solemnisation of this wedding,
till these same were clearly purged, and the truth well and openly
testified. Whereupon Dame Elizabeth Lucy was sent for. And albeit
that she was by the King's mother and many other put in good comfort,
to affirm that she was ensure unto the King: yet when she was
solemnly sworn to say the truth, she confessed that they were never
ensured. Howbeit she said his grace spake so loving words unto her,
that she verily hoped he would have married her. And that if it had
not been for such kind words, she would never have showed such
kindness to him, to let him so kindly get her with child. This
examination solemnly taken, when it was clearly perceived that there
was none impediment, the King with great feast and honourable
solemnity, married Dame Elisabeth Gray and her crowned Queen that was
his enemy's wife, and many time had prayed full heartily for his
loss. In which God loved her better, than to grant her boon.

But when the Earl of Warwick understood of this marriage, he
took it so highly that his embassiate was deluded, that for very
anger and disdain, he at his return assembled a great puissance
against the King, and came so fast upon him ere he could be able to
resist, that he was fain to void the realm and flee into Holland for
succour.

Where he remained for the space of two years, leaving his new
wife in Westminster in sanctuary, where she was delivered of Edward
the prince, of whom we before have spoken. In which mean time the
Earl of Warwick took out of prison and set up against Henry the sixth
which was before by King Edward deposed and that much what by the
power of the Earl of Warwick: which was a wise man and a courageous
warrior, and of such strength, what for his lands his alliance and
favour with all the people, that he made kings and put down kings
almost at his pleasure, and not impossible to have attained it
himself, if he had not reckoned it a greater thing to make a King
than to be a King. But nothing lasteth always, for in conclusion King
Edward returned, and with much less number than he had, at Barnet on
the Easter day field, slew the Earl of Warwick with many other great
estates of that party, and so stably attained the crown again, that
he peaceably enjoyed it until his dying day: and in such plight left
it, that it could not be lost, but by the discord of his very
friends, or falsehood of his feigned friends.

I have rehearsed this business about this marriage somewhat the
more at length, because it might thereby the better appear how
slippery a ground the Protector builded his colour, by which he
pretended King Edward's children to be bastards. But that invention
simple as it was, it liked them to whom it sufficed to have somewhat
to say, while they were sure to be compelled to no larger proof than
themselves list to make.

Now then as I began to show you, it was by the Protector and
his council concluded, that this doctor Shaw should in a sermon at
Paul's Cross, signify to the people, that neither King Edward
himself, nor the Duke of Clarence, were lawfully begotten, nor were
not the very children of the Duke of York, but gotten unlawfully by
other persons by the advoutry of the Duchess their mother. And that
also Dame Elizabeth Lucy was verily the wife of King Edward, and so
the prince and all his children bastards that were gotten upon the
Queen. According to this devise, doctor Shaw the Sunday after at
Paul's Cross in a great audience (as always assembled great number to
his preaching) he took for his theme Spuria vitulamina non agent
radices altas. That is to say bastard slips shall never take deep
root. Thereupon when he had showed the great grace that God giveth
and secretly infoundeth in the right generation after the laws of
matrimony, then declared he that commonly those children lacked that
grace, and for the punishment of their parents were for the most part
unhappy, which were gotten in haste and specially in advoutry. Of
which, though some by the ignorance of the world and the truth hid
from knowledge inherited for the season other men's lands, yet God
always so provideth, that it continueth not in their blood long, but
the truth coming to light, the rightful inheritors be restored, and
the bastard slip pulled up, ere it can be rooted deep. And when he
had laid for the proof and confirmation of this sentence, certain
ensamples taken out of the old testament and other ancient histories,
then began he to descend into the praise of the Lord Richard late
Duke of York, calling him father to the Lord Protector, and declared
the title of his heirs unto the crown, to whom it was after the death
of King Henry the sixth entailed by authority of parliament. Then
showed he that his very right heir of his body lawfully begotten, was
only the Lord Protector. For he declared then, that King Edward was
never lawfully married, unto the Queen, but was before God, husband
unto Dame Elizabeth Lucy, and so his children bastards. And besides
that, neither King Edward himself, nor the Duke of Clarence among
those that were secret in the household, were reckoned very surely
for the children of the noble Duke, as those that by their favours
more resembled other known men than him. From whose virtuous
conditions, he said, that very noble prince, the special pattern of
knightly prowess, as well in all princely behaviour as in the
lineaments and favour of his visage, represented the very face of the
noble Duke his father. This is quod he, the father's own figure, this
is his own countenance, the very print of his visage, the sure
undoubted image, the plain express likeness of that noble Duke.

Now was it before devised, that in the speaking of these words,
the Protector should have come in among the people to the sermonward,
to the end that those words meeting with his presence, might have
been taken among the hearers, as though the Holy Ghost had put them
in the preacher's mouth, and should have moved the people even there,
to cry Richard King Richard, that it might have been after said, that
he was specially chosen by God and in manner by miracle. But this
device quailed either by the Protector's negligence, or the
preacher's overmuch diligence. For while the Protector found by the
way tarrying lest he should prevent those words, and the doctor
fearing that he should come ere his sermon could come to those words
hasted his matter thereto: he was come to them and past them and
entered into other matters ere the Protector came. Whom when he
beheld coming, he suddenly left the matter, with which he was in
hand, and without any deduction thereunto, out of all order, and out
of all frame, began to repeat those words again: this is the very
noble prince, the special patron of knightly prowess, which as well
in all princely behaviour, as in the lineaments and favour of his
visage, representeth the very face of the noble Duke of York his
father. This is the father's own figure, this his own countenance,
the very print of his visage, the sure undoubted image, the plain
express likeness of the noble Duke, whose remembrance can never die
while he liveth. While these words were in speaking, the Protector
accompanied with the Duke of Buckingham, went through the people into
the place where the doctors commonly stand in the upper story, where
he stood to hearken the sermon. But the people were so far from
crying King Richard, that they stood as they had been turned into
stones, for wonder of this shameful sermon. After which once ended,
the preacher got him home and never after durst look out for shame,
but keep him out of sight like an owl. And when he once asked one
that had been his old friend, what the people talked of him, all were
it that his own conscience well showed him that they talked no good,
yet when the other answered him that there was in every man's mouth
spoken of him much shame, it so struck him to the heart, that within
few days after he withered and consumed away. Then on the Tuesday
following this sermon, there came unto the guild hall in London the
Duke of Buckingham, accompanied with divers Lords and knights, more
than haply knew the message that they brought. And there in the east
end of the hall where the Mayor keepeth the hustings, the Mayor and
all the aldermen being assembled about him, all the commons of the
city, gathered before them, after silence commanded upon great pain
in the Protector's name: the Duke stood up, and (as he was neither
unlearned, and of nature marvellously well spoken) he said unto the
people with a clear and a loud voice in this manner of wise.

Friends, for the zeal and hearty favour that we bear you, we be
come to break unto you, of a matter right great and weighty, and no
less weighty, than pleasing to God and profitable to all the realm:
nor to no part of the realm more profitable, than to you the citizens
of this noble city. For why, that thing that we wot well ye have long
time lacked and sore longed for, that ye would have given great good
for, that ye would have gone far to fetch, that thing we be come
hither to bring you, without your labour, pain, cost, adventure or
jeopardy. What thing is that? certes the surety of your own bodies,
the quiet of your wives and your daughters, the safeguard of your
goods: of all which things in times past ye stood ever more in doubt.
For who was there of you all, that would reckon himself Lord of his
own good, among so many grins and traps as was set therefore, among
so much pilling and polling, among so may taxes and tallages, of
which there was never end, and often time no need: or if any were, it
rather grew of riot and unreasonable waste, than any necessary or
honourable charge. So that there was daily pilled from good men and
honest, great substance of goods to be lashed out among unthrifts so
farforth that fifteens sufficed not, nor any usual names of known
taxes: but under an easy name of benevolence and good will, the
commissioners so much of every man took, as no man would with his
good will have given. As though the name of benevolence, had
signified that every man should pay, not what himself of his good
will list to grant, but what the King of his good will list to take.
Which never asked little, but every thing was hawsed above the
measure: amercements turned into fines, fines into ransoms, small
trespass to misprision, misprision into treason. Whereof I think no
man looketh that we should remember you of examples by name, as
though Burdett were forgotten, that was for a word spoken in haste,
cruelly beheaded, by the misconstruing of the laws of this realm for
the prince's pleasure: with no less honour to Markham then Chief
Justice, that left his office rather than he would assent to that
judgement, than to the dishonesty of those, that either for fear or
flattery gave that judgement. What, Coke your own worshipful
neighbour alderman and Mayor of this noble city, who is of you either
so negligent that he knoweth not, or so forgetful that he remembereth
not, or so hard hearted that he pitieth not, that worshipful man's
loss? What speak we of loss? his utter spoil and undeserved
destruction, only for that it happed those to favour him, whom the
prince favoured not. We need not I suppose to rehearse of these any
more by name, sith there be I doubt not many here present, that
either in themselves or their nigh friends, have known as well their
goods as their persons greatly endangered, either by feigned
quarrels, or small matters aggrieved with heinous names. And also
there was no crime so great, of which there could lack a pretext. For
sith the King preventing the time of his inheritance attained the
crown by battle: it sufficed in a rich man for a pretext of treason,
to have been of kindred or alliance near familiarity or leger
acquaintance with any of those that were at any time the King's
enemies, which was at one time and other, more than half the realm.
Thus were neither your goods in surety and yet they brought your
bodies in jeopardy beside the common adventure of open war, which
albeit that it is ever the will and occasion of much mischief, yet is
it never so mischievous, as where any people fall at distance among
themselves, nor in none earthly nation so deadly and so pestilent, as
when it happeneth among us and among us never so long continued
dissension, nor so many battles in the season, nor so cruel and
deadly fought, as was in the King's days that dead is God forgive it
his soul. In whose time and by whose occasion, what about the getting
of the garland, keeping it, losing and winning again, it hath cost
more English blood than hath twice the winning of France.

In which inward war among ourselves, hath been so great
effusion of the ancient noble blood of this realm, that scarcely the
half remaineth, to the great enfeebling of this noble land, beside
many a good town ransacked and spoiled, by them that have been going
to the field or coming from thence. And peace long after not much
surer than war. So that no time was there in which rich men for their
money, and great men for their lands or some other for some fear or
some displeasure were not out of peril. For whom trusted he that
mistrusted his own brother? whom spared he that killed his own
brother? or who could perfectly love him, if his own brother could
not? what manner of folk he most favoured, we shall for his honour
spare to speak of, howbeit this wot you well all, that whoso was
best, bore always least rule, and more suit was in his days unto
Shore's wife a vile and abominable strumpet, than to all the Lords in
England, except unto those that made her their proctor which simple
woman was well named and honest, till the King for his wanton lust
and sinful affection bereft her from her husband a right honest
substantial young man among you. And in that point which in good
faith I am sorry to speak of, saving that it is in vain to keep in
council that thing that all men know, the King's greedy appetite was
insatiable, and everywhere over all the realm intolerable. For no
woman was there anywhere young or old, rich or poor, whom he set his
eye upon, in whom he anything liked either person or favour, speech,
pace, or countenance, but without any fear of God, or respect of his
honour, murmur or grudge of the world, he would importunely pursue
his appetite, and have her, to the great destruction of many a good
woman, and great dolour to their husband, and their other friends,
which being honest people of themselves, so much regard the cleanness
of their house, the chastity of their wives and their children, that
them were lever to lose all that they have beside, than to have such
a villainy done them. And all were it that with this and other
importable dealing, the realm was in every part annoyed: yet
specially ye here the citizens of this noble city, as well for that
among you is most plenty of all such things as minister matter to
such injuries, as for that you were nearest at hand, sith that near
here about was commonly his most abiding. And yet be ye the people
whom he had as singular cause well and kindly to entreat, as any part
of his realm, not only for that the prince by this noble city, as his
special chamber and the special well renowned city of his realm, much
honourable fame receiveth among all other nations: but also for that
ye not without your great caste and sundry perils and jeopardies in
all his wars, bore ever your special favour to his part which your
kind minds borne to the house of York, sith he hath nothing worthily
acquitted, there is of that house that now by God's grace better
shall, which thing to show you is the whole some and effect of this
our present errand. It shall not I wot well need that I rehearse you
again that ye have already hard, of him that can better tell it, and
of whom I am sure ye will better believe it. And reason is that it so
be. I am not so proud to look therefore, that ye should reckon my
words of as great authority as the preachers of the word of God,
namely a man so cunning and so wise that no man better wotteth what
he should say, and thereto so good and virtuous that he would not say
the thing which he wist he should not say, in the pulpit namely into
which none honest man cometh to lie, which honourable preacher ye
well remember substantially declared unto you at Paul's Cross on
Sunday last past, the right and title that the most excellent Prince
Richard Duke of Gloucester now Protector of this realm, hath unto the
crown and kingdom of the same. For as that worshipful man groundly
made open unto you, the children of King Edward the fourth were never
lawfully begotten, forasmuch as the King (living his very wife Dame
Elizabeth Lucy) was never lawfully married unto the Queen their
mother, whose blood saving that he set voluptuous pleasure before his
honour, was full unmeetly to be matched with his, and the mingling of
whose bloods together, hath been the effusion of great part of the
noble blood of this realm. Whereby it may well seem that marriage not
well made, of which there is so much mischief grown. For lack of
which lawful accoupling, and also of other things, which the said
worshipful doctor rather signified than fully explained, and which
things shall not be spoken for me as the thing wherein every man
forebeareth to say that he knoweth in avoiding displeasure of my
noble Lord Protector, bearing as nature requireth a filial reverence
to the Duchess his mother, for these cause I say before remembered,
that is to wit for lack of other issue lawfully coming of the late
noble prince Richard Duke of York to whose royal blood the crown of
England and of France, is by the high authority of parliament
entailed, the right and title of the same, is by the just course of
inheritance according to the common law of this land, devolute and
come unto the most excellent prince the Lord Protector as to the very
lawfully begotten son of the fore remembered noble Duke of York.
Which thing well considered, and the great knightly prowess pondered,
with manifold virtues which in his noble person singularly abound,
the nobles and commons also of this realm, and specially of the north
parts, not willing any bastard blood to have the rule of the land,
nor the abusions before in the same used any longer to continue, have
condescended and fully determined to make humble petition unto the
most puissant prince, the Lord Protector: that it may like his grace
at our humble request, to take upon him the guiding and governance of
this realm, to the wealth and increase of the same, according to his
very right and just title. Which thing I wot it well he will be loath
to take upon him, as he whose wisdom well perceiveth the labour and
study both of mind and of body that shall come therewith, to
whomsoever so well occupy that room, as I dare say he will if he take
it. which room I warn you well is no child's office. And that the
great wise man well perceived. When he said: Vae regno cuius rex puer
est. Woe is that Realm, that hath a child to their King. Wherefore so
much the more cause have we to thank God, that this noble personage
which is so righteously entitled thereunto, is of so sad age, and
thereto of so great wisdom joined with so great experience: which
albeit he will be loath as I have said to take it upon him: yet shall
he to our petition in that behalf the more graciously incline if ye
the worshipful citizens of this the chief city of this realm, join
with us the nobles in our said request. which for your own weal we
doubt not but ye will, and natheless I heartily pray you so to do,
whereby you shall do great profit to all this realm beside in
choosing them so good a King, and unto yourself special commodity, to
whom his majesty shall ever after bear so much the more tender
favour, in how much he shall perceive you the more prone and
benevolently minded toward his election. Wherein dear friends what
mind you have, we require you plainly to show us. When the Duke had
said, and looked that the people whom he hoped that the Mayor had
framed before, should after this proposition made, have cried King
Richard, King Richard: all was hushed and mute, and not one word
answered thereunto. Wherewith the Duke was marvellously abashed, and
taking the Mayor near to him, with the other that were about him
privy to that matter, said unto them softly what meaneth this, that
this people be so still. Sir quod the Mayor percase they perceive you
not well. That shall we mend (quod he) if that will help. And by and
by somewhat louder, he rehearsed them the same matter again in other
order and other words, so well and ornately, and natheless so
evidently and plain, with voice gesture and countenance so comely and
so convenient, that every man much marvelled that heard him, and
thought that they never had in their lives heard so evil a tale so
well told. But were it for wonder or fear, or that each look that
other should speak first: not one word was there answered of all the
people that stood before, but all was as still as the midnight, not
so much as rowning among them, by which they might seem to come what
was best to do, when the Mayor saw this he with other partners of
that council, drew about the Duke and said that the people had not
been accustomed there to be spoken unto but by the Recorder, which is
the mouth of the city, and haply to him they will answer.

With that the Recorder called Fitzwilliam a sad man and an
honest, which was so new come into that office that he never had
spoken to the people before, and loath was with that matter to begin,
notwithstanding thereunto commanded by the Mayor, made rehearsal to
the commons of that the Duke had twice rehearsed them himself. But
the Recorder so tempered his tale, that he showed every thing as the
Duke's words and no part of his own. But all this nothing no change
made in the people which always after one, stood as they had been men
amazed, whereupon the Duke rowned unto the Mayor and said: This is a
marvellous obstinate silence, and therewith he turned unto the people
again with these words: dear friends we come to move you to that
thing which peradventure we not so greatly needed, but that the Lords
of this realm and the commons of other parties, might have sufficed,
saving that we such love bear you, and so much set by you, that we
would not gladly do without you, that thing in which to be partners
is your weal and honour which as it seemeth, either you see not or
way not. Wherefore we require you give answer one or other, whether
you be minded as all the nobles of the realm be, to have this noble
Prince now Protector to be your King or not. At these words the
people began to whisper among themselves secretly, that the voice was
neither loud nor distinct, but as it were the sound of a swarm of
bees, till at the last in the neither end of the hall, a bushment of
the Duke's servants and Nashfield's and others belonging to the
Protector, with some 'prentices and lads that thrust into the hall
among the press, began suddenly at men's backs to cry out as loud as
their throats would give: King Richard King Richard, and threw up
their caps in token of joy. And they that stood before, cast back
their heads marvelling thereof, but nothing they said. And when the
Duke and the Mayor saw this manner, they wisely turned it to their
purpose. And said it was a goodly cry and a joyful to hear, every man
with one voice no man saying nay. Wherefore friends, quod the Duke,
since that we perceive it is all your whole minds to have this
nobleman for your King whereof we shall make his grace so effectual
report, that we doubt not but it shall redound unto your great weal
and commodity: we require ye that ye tomorrow go with us and we with
you unto his noble grace, to make our humble request unto him in
manner before remembered. And therewith the Lords came down, and the
company dissolved and departed, the more part all sad, some with glad
semblance that were not very merry, and some of those that came
thither with the Duke, not able to dissemble their sorrow, were fain
at his back to turn their face to the wall, while the dolour of their
heart burst out at their eyes. Then on the morrow after, the Mayor
with all the aldermen and chief commoners of the city in their best
manner apparelled, assembling themselves together resorted unto
Bainarde's Castle where the Protector lay. To which place repaired
also according to their appointment the Duke of Buckingham, with
divers noble men with him, beside many knights and other gentlemen.
And thereupon the Duke sent word unto the Lord Protector, of the
being there of a great and honourable company, to move a great matter
unto his grace.

Whereupon the Protector made difficulty to come out unto them,
but if he first knew some part of their errand, as though he doubted
and partly distrusted the coming of such number unto him so suddenly,
without any warning or knowledge, whither they came for good or harm,
then the Duke when he had showed this unto the Mayor and other, that
they might thereby see how little the Protector looked for this
matter, they sent unto him by the messenger such loving message
again, and therewith so humbly besought him to vouchsafe that they
might resort to his presence, to purpose their intent, of which they
would unto none other person any part disclose, that at the last he
came forth of his chamber, and yet not down unto them, but stood
above in a gallery over them, where they might see him and speak to
him, as though he would not yet come to near them till he wist what
they meant. And thereupon the Duke of Buckingham first made humble
petition unto him, on the behalf of them all, that his grace would
pardon them and licence them to purpose unto his grace the intent of
their coming without his displeasure, without which pardon obtained,
they durst not be bold to move him of that matter. In which albeit
they meant as much honour to his grace as wealth to all the realm
beside, yet were they not sure how his grace would take it, whom they
would in no wise offend. Then the Protector as he was very gentle of
himself, and also longed sore to wit what they meant, gave him leave
to purpose what him liked, verily trusting for the good mind that he
bore them all, none of them any thing would intend unto him ward,
wherewith he ought to be grieved. When the Duke had this leave and
pardon to speak, then waxed he bold to show him their intent and
purpose, with all the causes moving them thereto as ye before have
heard, and finally to beseech his grace, that it would like him of
his accustomed goodness and zeal unto the realm, now with his eye of
pity, to behold the long contrived distress and decay of the same and
to set his gracious hands  to the redress and amendment thereof, by
taking upon him the crown and governance of this realm, according to
his right and title lawfully descended unto him, and to the laud of
God, profit of the land, and unto his grace so much the more honour
and less pain, in that never prince reigned upon any people, that
were so glad to live under his obeisance as the people of this realm
under his. When the Protector had heard the proposition, he looked
very strangely thereat, and answered: That all were it that he partly
knew the things by them alleged to be true: yet such entire love he
bore unto King Edward and his children, that so much more regarded
his honour in other realms about, than the crown of any one, of which
he was never desirous, that he could not find in his heart in this
point to incline to their desire. For in all other nations where the
truth were not well known, it should peradventure be thought, that it
were his own ambitious mind and device, to depose the prince and take
himself the crown. With which infamy he would not have his honour
stained for any crown. In which he had ever perceived much more
labour and pain, the pleasure to him that so would so use it, as he
that would not were not worthy to have it. Not withstanding he not
only pardoned them the motion that they made him, but also thanked
them for the love and hearty favour they bore him, praying them for
his sake to give and bear the same to the Prince, under whom he was
and would be content to live, and with his labour and council as far
as should like the King to use him, he would do his uttermost devoir
to set the realm in good state. Which was already in this little
while of his protectorship (the praise given to God) well begun, in
that the malice of such as were before occasion of the contrary and
of new intended to be, were now partly by good policy, partly more by
God's special providence than man's provision repressed. Upon this
answer given, the Duke by the Protector's licence, a little rowned,
as well with other noble men about him as with the Mayor and Recorder
of London. And after that upon like pardon desired and obtained, he
showed aloud unto the Protector, that for a final conclusion, that
the realm was appointed King Edward's line should not any longer
reign upon them, both for that they had so far gone, that it was now
no surety to retreat, as for that they thought it for the weal
universal to take that way although they had not yet begun it.
Wherefore if it would like his grace to take the crown upon him, they
would humbly beseech him thereunto. If he would give them a resolute
answer to the contrary, which they would be loath to hear, then must
they needs seek and should not fail to find some other noble man that
would. These words much moved the Protector, which else as every man
may wit, would never of likelihood have inclined thereunto. But when
he saw there was none other way, but that either he must take it or
else he and his both go from it, he said unto the Lords and commons:
Sith we perceive well that all the realm is so set, whereof we be
very sorry that they will not suffer in any wise King Edward's line
to govern them, whom no man earthly can govern again their wills, and
we well also perceive, that no man is there, to whom the crown can by
so just title appertain as to our self, as very right heir lawfully
begotten of the body of our most dear father Richard late Duke of
York, to which title is now joined your election, the nobles and
commons of this realm, which we of all titles possible take for most
effectual: we be content and agree favourably to incline to your
petition and request, and according to the same, here we take upon us
the royal estate, pre-eminence and Kingdom of the two noble realms,
England and France, the one from this day forward by us and our heirs
to rule, govern and defend, the other by God's grace and your good
help to get again and subdue, and established for ever in due
obedience unto this realm of England, the advancement whereof we
never ask of God longer to live than we intend to procure. With this
there was a great shout, crying Richard King Richard. And then the
Lords went up to the King (for so was he from that time called) and
the people departed, talking diversely of the matter every man as his
fantasy gave him. But much they talked and marvelled of the manner of
this dealing, that the matter was on both parts made so strange, as
though neither had ever communed with other thereof before, when that
themselves well wist there was no man so dull that heard them, but he
perceived well enough, that all the matter was made between them.
Howbeit some excused that again, and said all must be done in good
order though. And men must sometime for the manner sake not be aknown
what they know. For at the consecration of a bishop, every man
wotteth well by the paying for his bulls, that he purposeth to be
one, and though he pay for nothing else. And yet must he be twice
asked whether he will be bishop or no, and he must twice say nay, and
at the third time take it as compelled there unto by his own will.
And in a stage play all the people know right well, that he that
playeth the Sultan is percase a souter. Yet if one should can so
little good, to show out of season what acquaintance he hath with
him, and call him by his own name while he standeth in his majesty,
one of his tormentors might hap to break his head, and worthy for
marring of the play. And so they said that these matters be King's
games, as it were stage plays, and for the more part played upon
scaffolds. In which poor men be but the lookers-on. And they that
wise be, will meddle no farther. For they that sometime step up and
play with them, when they cannot play their parts, they disorder the
play and do themselves no good.

The next day the Protector with a great train went to
Westminster hall and there when he had placed himself in the court of
the King's bench, declared to the audience, that he would take upon
him the crown in that place there, where the King himself sitteth and
ministreth the law: because he considered that it was the chiefest
duty of a King to minister the laws. Then with as pleasant an oration
as he could, he went about to win unto him, the nobles, the
merchants, the artificers, and in conclusion all kind of men. But
specially the lawyers of this realm. And finally to the intent that
no man should hate him for fear, and that his deceitful clemency
might get him the good will of the people, when he had declared the
discommodity of discord, and the commodities of concord and unity, he
made an open proclamation, that he did put out of his mind all
enmities, and that he there did openly pardon all offences committed
against him. And to the intent that he might show a proof thereof, he
commanded that one Fogge whom he had long deadly hated, should be
brought then before him. Who being brought out of the sanctuary by
(for thither had he fled, for fear of him) in the sight of the
people, he took him by the hand. which thing the common people
rejoiced at and praised, but wise men took it for a vanity. In his
return homeward, whom so ever he met he saluted. For a mind that
knoweth itself guilty, is in a manner dejected to a servile flattery.

When he had begun his reign the twenty sixth day of June, after
this mockish selection, than was he crowned the sixth day of July.
And that solemnity was furnished for the most part, with the self-
same provision that was appointed for the Coronation of his nephew.

Now fell there mischiefs thick. And as the thing evil gotten is
never well kept: through all the time of his reign, never ceased
there cruel death and slaughter, till his own destruction ended it.
But as he finished his time with the best death, and the most
righteous, that is to wit his own: so began he with the most piteous
and wicked, I mean the lamentable murder of his innocent nephews, the
young King and his tender brother. Whose death and final unfortune
hath natheless so far come in question, that some remain yet in
doubt, whither they were in his days destroyed or no. Not for that
only that Perkin Warbeck, by many folk's  malice, and more folk's 
folly, so long space abusing the world, was as well with princes as
the poorer people, reputed and taken for the younger of those two,
but for that also that all things were in late days so covertly
demeaned, one thing pretended and another meant, that there was
nothing so plain and openly proved, but that yet for the common
custom of close and covert dealing, men had it ever inwardly suspect,
as many well counterfeited jewels make the true mistrusted. Howbeit
concerning that opinion, with the occasions moving either party, we
shall have place more at large to entreat, if we hereafter happen to
write the time of the late noble prince of famous memory King Henry
the seventh, or percase that history of Perkin in any compendious
process by itself. But in the mean time for this present matter, I
shall rehearse you the dolorous end of those babes, not after every
way that I have heard, but after that way that I have so heard by
such men and by such means, as me thinketh it were hard but it should
be true.

King Richard after his coronation, taking his way to Gloucester
to visit in his new honour, the town of which he bore the name of his
old, devised as he rode, to fulfil that thing which he before had
intended. And forasmuch as his mind gave him, that his nephews
living, men would not reckon that he could have right to the realm,
he thought therefore without delay to rid them, as though the killing
of his kinsmen, could amend his cause, and make him a kindly King.
Whereupon he sent one John Green whom he specially trusted, unto Sir
Robert Brakenbery constable of the Tower, with a letter and credence
also, that the same Sir Robert should in any wise put the two
children to death. This John Green did his errand unto Brakenbery
kneeling before our Lady in the Tower, who plainly answered that he
would never put them to death to die therefore, with which answer
John Green returning recounted the same to King Richard at Warwick
yet in his way. Wherewith he took such displeasure and thought, that
the same night, he said unto a secret page of his: Ah whom shall a
man trust? those that I have brought up myself, those that I had went
would most surely serve me, even those fail me, and at my commandment
will do nothing for me. Sir quod his page there lieth one on your
pallet without, that I dare well say to do your grace pleasure, the
thing were right hard that he would refuse, meaning by this Sir James
Tyrell, which was a man of right goodly personage, and for nature's
gifts, worthy to have served a much better prince, if he had well
served God, and by grace obtained as much truth and good will as he
had strength and wit. The man had an high heart, and sore longed
upward, not rising yet so fast as he had hoped, being hindered and
kept under by the means of Sir Richard Ratcliffe and Sir William
Catesby, which longing for no more partners of the prince's favour, 
and namely not for him, whose pride they wist would bear no peer,
kept him by secret drifts out of all secret trust. which thing this
page well had marked and known. Wherefore this occasion offered, of
very special friendship he took his time to put him forward, and by
such wise do him good, that all the enemies he had except the devil,
could never have done him so much hurt. For upon this page's words
King Richard arose. (For this communication had he sitting at the
draught, a convenient carpet for such a council) and came out in to
the pallet chamber, on which he found in bed Sir James and Sir Thomas
Tyrrel, of person like and brethren of blood, but nothing of kin in
conditions. Then said the King merely to them: What sirs be ye in bed
so soon, and calling up Sir James, broke to him secretly his mind in
this mischievous matter. In which he found him nothing strange.
Wherefore on the morrow he sent him to Brakenbury with a letter, by
which he was commanded to deliver Sir James all the keys of the Tower
for one night, to the end he might there accomplish the King's
pleasure, in such thing as he had given him commandment. After which
letter delivered and the keys received, Sir James appointed the night
next ensuing to destroy them, devising before and preparing the
means. The prince as soon as the Protector left that name and took
himself as King, had it showed unto him, that he should not reign,
but his uncle should have the crown. At which word the prince sore
abashed, began to sigh and said: Alas I would my uncle would let me
have my life yet, though I lose my Kingdome. Then he that told him
the tale, used him with good words, and put him in the best comfort
he could. But forthwith was the prince and his brother both shut up,
and all other removed from them, only one called Black Will or
William Slaughter except, set to serve them and see them sure. After
which time the prince never tied his points, nor aught wrought of
himself, but with that young babe his brother, lingered in thought
and heaviness till this traitorous death, delivered them of that
wretchedness. For Sir James Tyrrel devised that they should be
murdered in their beds. To the execution whereof, he appointed Miles
Forest one of the four that kept them, a fellow fleshed in murder
before time. To him he joined one John Dighton his own horsekeeper, a
big broad square strong knave. Then all the other being removed from
them, this Miles Forest and John Dighton, about midnight (the silly
children lying in their beds) came into the chamber, and suddenly
lapped them up among the clothes so bewrapped them and entangled them
keeping down by force the featherbed and pillows hard unto their
mouths, that within a while smoored and stifled, their breath
failing, they gave up to God their innocent souls into the joys of
heaven, leaving to the tormentors their bodies dead in the bed.

Which after that the wretches perceived, first by the
struggling with the pains of death, and after long lying still, to be
thoroughly dead: they laid their bodies naked out upon the bed, and
fetched Sir James to see them. Which upon the sight of them, caused
those murderers to bury them at the stair foot, meetly deep in the
ground under a great heap of stones. Than rode Sir James in great
haste to King Richard, and showed him all the manner of the murder,
who gave him great thanks, and as some say there made him knight. But
he allowed not as I have heard, the burying in so vile a corner,
saying that he would have them buried in a better place, because they
were a King's sons. Whereupon they say that a priest of Sir Robert
Brakenbury took up the bodies again, and secretly entered them in
such place, as by the occasion of his death, which only knew it could
never since come to light. Very truth is it and well known, that at
such time as Sir James Tyrell was in the Tower, for treason committed
against the most famous prince King Henry the seventh, both Dighton
and he were examined, and confessed the murder in manner above
written, but whither the bodies were removed they could nothing tell.
And thus as I have learned of them that much knew and little cause
had to lie, were these two noble princes, these innocent tender 
children, born of most royal blood, brought up in great wealth,
likely long to live to reign and rule in the realm, by traitorous
tyranny taken, deprived of their estate, shortly shut up in prison,
and privily saline and murdered, their bodies cast God wot where by
the cruel ambition of their unnatural uncle and his dispiteous
tormentors. Which things on every part well pondered: God never gave
this world a more notable example, neither in what unsurety standeth
this worldly well, or what mischief worketh the proud enterprise of
an high heart, or finally what wretched end ensueth such dispiteous
cruelty. For first to begin with the ministers, Miles Forest at Saint
Martin's piecemeal rotted away. Dighton in deed walketh on alive in
good possibility to be hanged ere he die. But Sir James Tyrrel died
at Tower Hill, beheaded for treason. King Richard himself as ye shall
hereafter hear, slain in the field, hacked and hewed of his enemies'
hands , harried on horseback dead, his hair in despite torn and
tugged like a cur dog. And the mischief that he took, within less
than three years of the mischief that he did. And yet all the mean
time spent in much pain and trouble outward, much fear anguish and
sorrow within. For I have heard by credible report of such as were
secret with his chamberers, that after this abominable deed done, he
never had quiet in his mind, he never thought himself sure.

Where he went abroad, his eyes whirled about, his body privily
fenced, his hand ever on his dagger, his countenance and manner like
one always ready to strike again, he took ill rest a-nights, lay long
waking and musing, sore wearied with care and watch, rather slumbered
than slept, troubled with fearful dreams, suddenly sometime started
up, leapt out of his bed and run about the chamber, so was his
restless heart continually tossed and tumbled with the tedious
impression and stormy remembrance of his abominable deed. Now had he
outward no long time in rest. For hereupon soon after began the
conspiracy or rather good confederation, between the Duke of
Buckingham and many other gentlemen against him. The occasion
whereupon the King and the Duke fell out, is of divers folk divers
wise pretended. This Duke as I have for certain been informed, as
soon as the Duke of Gloucester upon the death of King Edward came to
York, and there had solemn funeral service for King Edward, sent
thither in the most secret wise he could, one Pearsall his trusty
servant, who came in to John Ward a chamberer of like secret trust
with the Duke of Gloucester, desiring that in the most close and
covert manner, he might be admitted to the presence and speech of his
master. And the Duke of Gloucester advertised of his desire, caused
him in the dead of the night after all other folk avoided, to be
brought unto him in his secret chamber, where Pearsall after his
master's recommendation showed him, that he had secretly sent him to
show him, that in this new world he would take such part as he would,
and wait upon him with a thousand good fellows if need were. The
messenger sent back with thanks, and some secret instruction of the
Protector's mind: yet met him again with farther message from the
Duke his master, within a few days after at Nottingham: whither the
Protector from York with many gentlemen of the North country to the
number of six hundred horses, was come on his way to London-ward. And
after secret meeting and communication had, eftsoon, departed.
Whereupon at Northampton the Duke met with the Protector himself,
with three hundred horses and from thence still continued with,
partner of all his devices, till that after his coronation they
departed as it seemed very great friends at Gloucester. From whence
as soon as the Duke came home, he so lightly turned from him and so
highly conspired against him, that a man would marvel whereof the
change grew. And surely the occasion of their variance is of divers
men diversely reported. Some have I heard say, that the Duke a little
before the coronation among other things, required of the Protector
the Duke of Hereford's lands, to which he pretended himself just
inheritor. And forasmuch as the title which he claimed by
inheritance, was somewhat interlaced with the title to the crown by
the line of King Henry before deprived: the Protector conceived such
indignation, that he rejected the Duke's request with many spiteful
and minatory words. which so wounded his heart with hatred and
mistrust, that he never after could endure to look aright on King
Richard, but ever feared his own life, so farforth that when the
Protector rode through London toward his coronation, he feigned
himself sick, because he would not ride with him. And the other 
taking it in evil part, sent him word to rise, and come ride or he
would make him be carried. Whereupon he rode on with evil will, and
that notwithstanding on the morrow rose from the feast feigning
himself sick, and King Richard said it was done in hatred and despite
of him. And they say that ever after continually each of them lived
in such hatred and distrust of other, that the Duke verily looked to
have been murdered at Gloucester. From which nathless he in fair
manner departed. But surely some right secret at the days deny this:
and many right wise men, think it unlikely, (the deep dissimuling
nature of those both men considered, and what need in that green
world the Protector had of the Duke, and in what peril the Duke stood
if he fell once in suspicion of the tyrant) that either the Protector
would give the Duke occasion of displeasure, or the Duke the
Protector occasion of mistrust. And utterly men think, that if King
Richard had any such opinion conceived: he would never have suffered
him to escape his hands. Very truth it is, the Duke was an high
minded man, and evil could bear the glory of another, so that I have
heard of some that said they saw it, that the Duke at such time as
the crown was first set upon the Protector's head, his eye could not
abide the sight thereof, but wried his head another way. But men say
that he was of truth not well at ease, and that both to King Richard
well known, and not ill taken, nor any demand of the Duke's
uncourteously rejected, but he both with great gifts and high
behests, in most loving trusty manner departed at Gloucester. But
soon after his coming home to Brecknock, having there in his custody
by the commandment of King Richard, doctor Morton bishop of Ely, who
as ye before heard was taken in the council at the Tower, waxed with
him familiar. Whose wisdom abused his pride to his own deliverance
and the Duke's destruction. The bishop was a man of great natural
wit, very well learned, and honourable in behaviour, lacking no wise
ways to win favour. He had been fast upon the part of King Henry
while that part was in wealth, and natheless left it not nor forsook
it in woe, but fled the realm with the Queen and the prince, while
King Edward had the King in prison, never came home but to the field.
After which lost, and that part utterly subdued, the other for his
fast faith and wisdom, not only was content to receive him, but also
wooed him to come and had him from thenceforth both in secret trust
and very special favour, which he nothing deceived. For he being as
ye have heard after King Edward's death, first taken by the tyrant
for his truth to the King, found the mean to set this Duke in his
top, joined gentlemen together in aid of King Henry, devising first
the marriage between him and King Edward's daughter, by which his
faith declared and good service to both his masters at once, with
infinite benefit to the realm, by the conjunction of those two bloods
in one, whose several titles had long enquieted the land, he fled the
realm, went to Rome, never minding more to meddle with the world till
the noble prince King Henry the seventh got him home again, made him
archbishop of Canterbury and Chancellor of England whereunto the Pope
joined the honour of Cardinal. Thus living many days in as much
honour as one man might well wish, ended them so godly, that his
death with God's mercy well changed his life. This man therefore as I
was about to tell you, by the long and often alternate proof, as well
of prosperity as adverse fortune, had gotten by great experience the
very mother and masters of wisdom, a deep insight in politic worldly
drifts. Whereby perceiving now this Duke glad to come with him, fed
him with fair words and many pleasant praises. And perceiving by the
process of their communications, the Duke's pride now and then baulk
out a little braid of envy toward the glory of the King, and thereby
feeling him ethe to fall out if the matter were well handled: he
craftily sought the ways to prick him forward taking always the
occasion of his coming and so keeping himself close within his bonds,
that he rather seemed him to follow him than to lead him. For when
the Duke first began to praise and boast the King, and show how much
profit the realm should take by his reign: my Lord Morton answered:
surely my Lord folly were it for me to lie, for if I would swear the
contrary, your lordship would not I ween believe, but that if the
world would have gone as I would have wished, King Henry's son had
had the crown and not King Edward. But after that God had ordered him
to lose it, and King Edward to reign, I was never so mad, that I
would with a dead man strive against the quick. So was I to King
Edward faithful chaplain, and glad would have been that his child had
succeeded him. Howbeit if the secret judgement of God have otherwise
provided: I purpose not to spurn against a prick, nor labour to set
up that God pulleth down. And as for the late Protector and now King.
And even there he left, saying that he had already meddled to much
with the world, and would from that day meddle with his book and his
beads and no farther. Then longed the Duke sore to hear what he would
have said, because he ended with the King and there so suddenly
stopped, and exhorted him so familiarly between them twain, to be so
bold to say whatsoever he thought, whereof he faithfully promised
there should never come hurt and peradventure more good than he would
ween, and that himself intended to use his faithful secret advice and
counsel which he said was the only cause for which he procured of the
King to have him in his custody where he might reckon himself at
home, and else had he been put in the hands  of them, with whom he
should not have found the like favour. The bishop right humbly
thanked him and said, in good faith my Lord I love not much to talk
much of princes, as thing not all out of peril, though the word be
without fault forasmuch as it shall not be taken as the party meant
it, but as it pleaseth the prince to consider it. And ever I think on
sop's tale, that where the lion had proclaimed that on pain of death
there should none horned beast abide in that wood, one that had in
his forehead a bunch of flesh, fled away a great pace. The fox that
saw him run so fast, asked him whither he made all that haste. And he
answered, in faith I neither wot nor reck, so I were once hence
because of this proclamation made of horned beasts. What fool quod
the fox thou mayest abide well enough, the lion meant not by thee,
for it is none horn that is in thine head. No marry quod he that wot
I well enough. But what and he call it an horn, where am I then? The
Duke laughed merely at the tale, and said, my Lord I warrant you,
neither the lion nor the boar shall pique any matter at any thing
here spoken, for it shall never come near their ear. In good faith
Sir said the bishop if it did, the thing that I was about to say,
taken as well as afore God I meant it, could deserve but thank. And
yet taken as I ween it would, might happen to turn me to little good
and you to less. Then longed the Duke yet much more to wit what it
was. Whereupon the bishop said: in good faith my Lord, as for the
late Protector, sith he is now King in possession, I purpose not to
dispute his title. But for the weal of this realm, whereof his grace
hath now the governance, and whereof I am myself one poor member, I
was about to wish, that to those good abilities whereof he hath
already right many, little needing my praise: it might yet have
pleased God for the better store, to have given him some of such
other excellent virtues meet for the rule of a realm, as our Lord
hath planted in the person of your grace.



The History of King Richard the Third
(Continued)
From the edition of Hardyng's Chronicle, printed by Richard Grafton,
1543


By which words the Duke perceiving that the Bishop bore unto
him his good heart and favour, mistrusted not to enter more plain
communication with him so far, that at the last the Bishop declared
himself to be one of them that would gladly help that Richard, who
then usurped the crown, might be deposed, if he had known how it
might conveniently be brought to pass that such a person as had true
title of inheritance unto the same, might be restored thereunto. Upon
this the said Duke, knowing the Bishop to be a man of prudence and
fidelity, opened to him all his whole heart and intent, saying, my
Lord, I have devised the way of the blood of both of King Edward and
of King Henry the sixth, that is left, being coupled by marriage and
affinity may be restored unto the crown, being by just and true title
due unto them both, (for King Richard he called not the brother of
King Edward the fourth, but his enemy and mortal foe). The way that
the Duke had devised was this, that they should with all speed and
celerity find means to send for Henry Earl of Richmond (whom the
rumour went immediately upon knowledge of King Edward's death to have
been delivered out of prison with Francis Duke of Brittany) and the
same Henry to help with all their power and strength, so that the
said Henry would first, by his faithful oath, promise that
immediately upon the obtaining the crown, he would marry and take to
wife Elizabeth, the elder daughter of Edward the fourth. The Bishop
of Ely right well allowed both the device and purpose of the Duke,
and also the manner and way how the matter should be brought to
effect, and found means that Reynold Bray, servant with Margaret
mother of the said Henry then married to Thomas Stanley, came to the
Duke into Wales, and the Duke's mind thoroughly perceived and known,
with great speed returned to the said Margaret, advertising the same
of all things which was between the Duke and him concerning as well
the common weal of the realm, as also the advancement of her and her
blood that had been debated.

Now it came so to pass that the Duke of Buckingham and the Lady
Margaret mother to the said Henry, had been in communication of the
same matter before, and that the said Lady Margaret had devised the
same mean and way for the deposition of King Richard and bringing in
of Henry her son, the which the Duke now broke unto the Bishop of
Ely, whereupon there rested no more, forasmuch as she perceived the
Duke now willing to prosecute and further the said device, but that
she should find the means that this matter might be broken unto Queen
Elizabeth, the wife of King Edward the fourth then being in
sanctuary. And here upon which she caused one Lewes that was her
physician, in his own name and as though it came of himself, to break
this matter unto the Queen, saying that if she would consent and
agree thereunto, a mean might be found how to restore again the blood
of King Edward and King Henry the sixth unto the crown, and to be
avenged of King Richard for the murder of King Edward's children, and
then declared that there was beyond the sea Henry Earl of Richmond,
which was of the blood of King Henry the sixth, whom if she would be
content that he marry might Elizabeth her eldest daughter, there
should of his side be made right many friends, and she for her part
might help in like manner, whereby no doubt it should come to pass
that he should possess the crown by most rightful inheritance. Which
matter, when she heard it, it liked her exceedingly well, insomuch as
she counselled the said physician to break the same unto his mistress
the Lady Margaret and know her mind therein, promising upon her word
that she would make all the friends of King Edward to take part with
the said Henry if he would be sworn that when he came to the
possession of the crown, he would immediately take in marriage
Elizabeth her eldest daughter, or else if she lived not at that time,
that then he would take Cicely her youngest daughter.

Whereupon the said Lewes returned unto the Lady Margaret his
mistress declaring unto her the whole mind and intent of the Queen.
So that then it was shortly agreed between these two women, that with
all speed this matter should be set forward, insomuch that the Lady
Margaret broke this matter unto Reynold Bray, willing him to move and
set forward the same with all such as he should perceive either able
to do good or willing thereunto. Then had the Queen devised that one
Christopher (whom the aforesaid Lewes the physician had promoted into
her service) should be sent into Brittany to Henry to give him
knowledge of their minds here, and that he should prepare and appoint
himself ready and to come into Wales, where he should find aid and
help enough ready to receive him.

But then shortly after came unto her knowledge that the Duke of
Buckingham had of himself afore intended the same matter, whereupon
she thought it should be meet to send some messenger of more
reputation and credit than was this Christopher, and so kept him at
home, and then sent Hugh Conway with a great sum of money, willing
him to declare unto Henry all things, and that he should haste him to
come and to land in Wales as is aforesaid. And after him one Richard
Guilford out of Kent sent one Thomas Ramney with the same message,
the which two messengers came in manner both at one time into
Brittany to the Earl Henry, and declared unto him all their
commissions. The which message, when Henry had received and
thoroughly heard, it rejoiced his heart, and he gave thanks unto God,
full purposing with all convenient speed to take his journey towards
England, desiring the aid and help of the Duke of Brittany, with
promise of thankful recompense when God should send him to come to
his right. The Duke of Brittany notwithstanding that he had not long
after been required by Thomas Hutton purposely sent to him from King
Richard in message with money eftsoons to imprison the said Henry
Earl of Richmond and there continually to keep and hold the same from
coming into England, yet with all gladness and favour inclined to the
desire of Henry and aided him as he might with men, money, ships and
other necessaries. But Henry while he might accordingly appoint and
furnish himself, remained in Brittany sending afore the said Hugh
Conway and Thomas Ramney, which two were to him very true and
faithful, to bear tidings into England unto his friends of his
coming, as also for seeing such dangers as might befall, and avoiding
such traps and snares as by Richard the third and his complices might
be set for him and for all his other company that he should bring
with him.

In the meantime, the friends of Henry with all care, study, and
diligence wrought all things unto their purpose belonging. And though
all this were as secretly wrought and conveyed as among so great a
number was possible to be, yet privy knowledge thereof came to the
ears of King Richard, who although he were at the first hearing much
abashed, yet thought best to dissemble the matter as though he had no
knowledge thereof, while might secretly gather unto him power and
strength, and by secret spial among the people get more perfect
knowledge of the whole matters and chief authors and contrivers of
the same. And because he knew the chief and principal of them, as
unto whom his own conscience knew that he had given most just causes
of enmity, he thought it necessary first of all to dispatch the same
Duke out of the way. Wherefore, unto the Duke he addressed letters
enforced and replenished with all humanity, friendship, familiarity
and sweetness of words, willing and desiring the same to come unto
him with all convenient speed. And further gave in commandment to the
messenger that carried the letters that he should in his behalf make
many high and gay promises unto the Duke and by all gentle means
persuade the same to come unto him. But the Duke, mistrusting the
fair words and promises so suddenly offered of him, of whose wily
crafts and means he knew sundry examples afore practiced, desired the
King his pardon, excusing himself that he was diseased and sick, and
that he might be ascertained, that if it possible were for him to
come, he would not absent himself from his grace. This excuse the
King would not admit, but eftsoons directed unto the Duke other
letters of a more rough sort, not without menacing and threatening
unless he would according to his duty repair unto him at his calling,
whereunto the Duke plainly made answer that he would not come to him
whom he knew to be his enemy. And immediately the Duke prepared
himself to make war against him, and persuaded all his complices and
partakers of his intent with all possible expedition, some in one
place and some in another, to stir against King Richard. And by this
means and manner, at one time and hour, Thomas Marquis of Dorchester
raised an army within the County of York, being himself late come
forth of sanctuary, and by the means and help of Thomas Rowell,
preserved and saved from peril of death. And in Devonshire, Edward
Courtnay with his brother Peter, Bishop of Exeter, raised in like
manner an army, and in Kent, Richard Guilford accompanied with
certain other gentleman raised up the people, as is aforesaid, and
all this was done in manner in one moment. But the King, who had in
the meantime gathered together great power and strength, thinking it
not to be best by pursuing everyone of his enemies to disparkle his
company in small flocks, determined to let pass all the others, and
with all his whole puissance to set upon the chief head, that is to
say the Duke of Buckingham: so taking his journey from London he went
towards Salisbury to the intent that he might set upon the said Duke,
in case he might have perfect knowledge that the same lay in any
field embattled. And now was the King within two days journey of
Salisbury when the Duke attempted to meet him, which Duke being
accompanied with great strength of Welshmen, whom he had enforced
thereunto and coerced, more by lordly commandment than by liberal
wages and hire, which thing indeed was the cause that they fell from
him and forsook him. Wherefore he being suddenly forsaken of his men,
was of necessity constrained to flee, in which doing, as a man cast
in sudden and therefore great fear, of this his sudden change of
fortune, and by reason of the same fear not knowing where to be come,
nor where to hide his head, nor what in such case best to do, he
secretly conveyed himself into the house of Humphrey Bannister, in
whom he had conceived a sure hope and confidence to find faithful and
trusty unto him, because the same had been and then was his servant,
intending therefore to remain in secret until he might either raise a
new army, or else by some means convey himself into Brittany to Henry
Earl of Richmond. But as soon as the others, which had attempted the
same enterprise against the King, acknowledge that the Duke was
forsaken of his company and fled and could not be found, they being
stricken with sudden fear, made every man for himself such shift as
he might, and being in utter despair of their health and life, either
got them to sanctuaries or desert places, or else assayed to escape
oversea, and many of them indeed arrived safely in Brittany, among
whom were these whose names ensue. Peter Courtney Bishop of Exeter
with his brother Edward Earl of Devonshire, Thomas Marquis of
Dorchester with his son Thomas being a very young child, John
Bourshere, John Welsh, Edward Woodville a stout man of arms and
brother to Elizabeth the Queen, Robert Willoughby, Giles Daubeney,
Thomas Arundel, John Cheney with his two brethren, William Berkeley,
William Brandon with Thomas his brother, Richard Edgecome, and all
these for the most part knights. Also John Halliwell, Edward Pointz
an excellent good captain and Christopher Urswick, but John Morton
the Bishop of Ely at the same self time together with sundry of the
nobles and gentlemen sailed into Flanders.

But Richard the king, who was now come to Salisbury and had
gotten perfect knowledge that all these parties sought to flee the
realm, with all diligence and haste that might be, sent to all the
port towns there about, to make sure stay that none of them might
pass untaken, and made proclamation that whosoever should bring him
knowledge, where the Duke of Buckingham were to be had, should have
for his reward, if he were a bondman, his freedom, and if he were
free, his pardon and besides that, a thousand pounds of money.

Furthermore because he understood by Thomas Hutton newly
returned out of Brittany, of whom afore is mentioned, that Francis
Duke of Brittany would not only not hold Henry Earl of Richmond in
prison for his sake, but also was ready to help the same Henry with
men, money and ships in all that he might against him, he set divers
and sundry ships in places convenient by all the sea coasts to
Brittany-ward that if Henry should come that way, he might either be
taken before his arrival, or else might be kept from landing in any
coast of England. And furthermore in every coast and corner of the
realm, laid wonderful wait and watch to take partly any other of his
enemies, and especially the said Duke of Buckingham. Whereupon the
said Humphrey Bannister (were it for meed or for losing his life and
goods,) disclosed him unto the King's inquisitors, who immediately
took him, and forthwith all brought him to Salisbury where King
Richard was. The Duke being diligently examined uttered without any
manner refusal or sticking, all such things as he knew, trusting that
for his plain confession he should have liberty to speak with the
King, which he made most instant and humble petition that he might
do. But as soon as he had confessed his offence towards King Richard,
he was out of hand beheaded. And this death of the Duke received at
the hands of King Richard whom he had before holpen in his affairs
and purposes beyond all God's forebode.

While these things were in hand in England, Henry Earl of
Richmond made ready his host strength to the number of five thousand
Bretons and fifteen ships, the day appointed of his departure being
now come, which was the twelfth day of the month of October, in the
year of our Lord God a thousand four hundred fourscore and four, and
the second year of the reign of King Richard and having a fair wind,
hoisted up the sails and set forward, but towards the night came such
a tempest that they were dispersed from one another some into
Brittany and some into Normandy. But the ship in which Henry was,
with one other ship, tossed all the night with the waves of the sea
and tempest, when the morning came, it waxed somewhat calm and fair
weather, and they were come toward the south part of England, by a
haven or port called Poole, where the said Henry saw all the shores
and banks set full of harnessed men, which were soldiers appointed
there to wait by King Richard, as we have said before, for the coming
and landing of the Earl. While Henry there abode he gave commandment,
that no man should land before the coming of the other ships. And in
the meantime that he waited for them, he sent a little boat with a
few in it aland to know what they were that stood on the shore, his
friends or enemies. To whom those soldiers, being before taught but
they should say, answered that they were the friends of Henry, and
were appointed by the Duke of Buckingham there to abide his coming
and to conduct him to those castles and holds, where his tents
pavilions and artillery for the war lay, and where remained for him a
great power that intended now with all speed to set upon King Richard
while he was now fled for fear and clean without provision, and
therefore besought him to come aland.

Henry suspecting this to be but fraud, after that he saw none
of his ships appeared, hoisted up the sails, having a marvellous good
wind, even appointed him of God to deliver him from that great
jeopardy, and sailed back again into Normandy. And after his landing
there, he and his company after their labours, arrested them for the
space of three days, determining to go from thence afoot into
Brittany, and in the meanwhile sent messengers unto Charles the
French King, the son of Louis that a little before departed,
beseeching him of liberty and licence to pass through Normandy into
Brittany. The young King Charles, being sorry for his fortune, was
not only ready and well pleased to grant his passage, but also sent
him money to help him further in his journey. But Henry before that
he knew the King his mind (not doubting of his great humanity and
gentleness), had sent away his ships towards Brittany, and had set
himself forwards in his journey, but made no great haste till the
messengers returned, which great gentleness when he received from the
King, rejoiced his heart and with a lusty stomach and good hope set
forward into Brittany, there to take farther counsel of his affairs.

And when he was in Brittany, he received from his friends out
of England knowledge that the Duke of Buckingham was beheaded, and
that the Marquis of Dorchester with a great number of the noblemen of
England had been there a little before to seek him, and that they
were now in Vannes a city in Brittany. The which things being known
to the Earl, he on the one part to greatly lament the death and evil
chance of his chief and principal friend, but yet on the other part
he greatly rejoiced in that he had so many and noble men to take his
part in the battle. And therefore conceiving a good hope and opinion
that his purpose should well frame and come to pass, determined with
himself with all expedition to set forward, and thereupon went to a
place in Brittany called Redon, and from thence sent the Marquis with
all the other noblemen that they should come to him. Then when they
heard that Henry was safe returned into Brittany rejoiced not a
little, for they had thought he had landed in England, and so fallen
into the hands of King Richard, and they made not a little haste till
they were come unto him. The which when they met after great joy and
gladness as well of their part of his, they began to talk of their
prepensed matters, and now was Christmas come, on the which day they
all together assembled in the church and there swore faith and truth
one to another. And Henry swore first, promising that as soon as he
should possess the crown of England, that he would marry Elizabeth
the daughter of King Edward the fourth and afterwards they swore
fealty and homage unto him, even as though he had already been King,
and so from that time forth did take him, promising him that they
would spend both their lives and goods with him, and that Richard
should no longer reign over them. When this was done, Henry declared
all these things to the Duke of Brittany, praying and desiring him
now of help, and that he would aid him with a greater number of men,
and also to lend him a friendly and honest sum of money, that he
might now recover his right and inheritance of the crown of England,
unto the which he was called and desired by all the Lords and
nobility of the realm, and which (God willing) he was most assured to
possess, and after his possession he would most faithfully restore
the same again. The Duke promised him aid, upon the trust whereof he
began to make ready his ships that they might with all expedition be
ready to sail, but no time should be lost. In the which time King
Richard was again returned to London, and had taken divers of them
that were of this conspiracy that is to say George Brown, Roger
Clifford, Thomas Salinger, knights. Also Thomas Ram, Robert Clifford
and divers others whom he caused to be put to death.

After this he called a Parliament, wherein was decreed that all
the lords that were fled out of the land should be reputed and taken
as enemies to the realm, and all their lands and goods to be forfeit
and confiscate. And not content with that prey, which was no small
thing, he he called also a great tax and sum of money to be levied of
the people. For the large gifts and liberality that he first used, to
buy the favours and friendships of many, had now brought him in need.
But nothing was more like than that Thomas Stanley should have been
reputed and taken for one of those enemies, because of the working of
Margaret his wife, which was mother unto Henry Earl of Richmond, the
which was noted for the chief head and worker of this conspiracy. But 
forasmuch as it was thought that was to small purpose that women
could do, Thomas being nothing faulty was delivered and commanded
that he should not suffer Margaret his wife to have any servants
about her, neither that she should not go abroad, but to be shut up
and that from thenceforth she should send no message neither to her
son nor to any of her other friends, whereby any hurt might be
wrought against the King, the which commandment was accomplished. And
by the authority of the same Parliament a peace was concluded with
the Scots, which a little before had skirmished with the borderers.
Which thing brought to pass, the King supposed all conspiracy to be
clean avoided, for as much of the Duke with other of his company were
put to death, and also certain other banished. Yet for all this, King
Richard was daily vexed and troubled, partly mistrusting his own
strength, and partly fearing the coming of Henry with his company, so
that he lived but in a miserable case. And because that he would not
so continue any longer, he determined with himself to put away the
cause of this his fear and business, either by policy or else by
strength. And after that he had thus purposed with himself, he
thought nothing better than to tempt the Duke of Brittany yet once
again either with money, prayer or some other special reward, because
that he had in keeping the Earl Henry, and most chiefly, because he
knew that it was only he that might deliver him from all his trouble
by delivering or imprisoning the said Henry. Wherefore incontinently
he sent unto the Duke certain ambassadors the which should promise
unto him, beside other great rewards that they brought with them, to
give him the yearly all the revenues of all the lands of Henry and of
all the other lords there being with him, if he would after the
receipt of the ambassadors put them in prison. The ambassadors, being
departed and come where the Duke lay, could not have communication
with him, forasmuch as by extreme sickness his wits were feeble and
weak. Wherefore one Peter Landose his treasurer a man both of
pregnant wit and great authority, took the matter in hand. For which
cause he was afterward hated of all the lords of Brittany. With this
Peter the English ambassadors had communication, and declaring to him
the King his message desired him instantly, forasmuch as they knew
that he might bring their purpose to pass, that he would grant unto
King Richard his request, and he should have the yearly revenues of
all the lands of the said lords. Peter, considering that he was
greatly hated of the lords of his own nation, thought that if he
might bring to pass through King Richard to have all these great
possessions and the yearly revenues, he should then be able to match
with them well enough and not to care a rush for them, whereupon he
answered the ambassadors that he would do that King Richard did
desire, if he broke not promise with him. And this did he not for any
hatred that he bore unto Henry, for he hated him not, for not long
before he saved his life where the Earl Henry was in great jeopardy.
But such was the good fortune of England, that this crafty compact
took no place, for while the letters and messengers ran between Peter
and King Richard, John the Bishop of Ely being then in Flanders was
certified by a priest, which came out of England whose name was
Christopher Urswick, of all the whole circumstance of this device and
purpose. Whereupon with all speed the said Bishop caused the said
priest the same day to carry knowledge thereof into Brittany to Henry
Earl of Richmond, willing him with all the other noblemen to dispatch
themselves with all possible haste into France. Henry was then in
Vannes, when he heard of this fraud without tarriance sent
Christopher unto Charles the French King desiring license that Henry
with the other noblemen might safely come into France, which thing
being soon obtained, the messenger returned with speed to his Lord
and Prince.

Then the Earl Henry setting all his business in as good stay
and order as he might, talked little and made few a counsel thereof,
and for the more expedition, he caused the Earl of Pembroke secretly
to cause all the noblemen to take their horses, dissembling to ride
unto the Duke of Brittany: but when they came to the uttermost parts
thereof, they should forsake the way that led them toward the Duke,
and to make into France with all that ever they might. Then they,
doing in everything as they were bidden, lost no time but so sped
them that shortly they obtained and got into the County of Anjou.
Henry then within two days following, being then still at Vannes took
four or five of his servants with him and feigned as though he would
have ridden thereby to visit a friend of his; and forasmuch as there
were many English men left there in the town, no man suspected
anything, but after that he had kept the right way for the space of
five miles, he forsook that and turned straight into a wood that was
thereby, and took upon him his servants apparel, and put his apparel
upon his servant and so took but one of them with him, on whom he
waited as though he had been the servant and the other the master.
And with all convenient and speedy haste so set forth upon their
journey that no time was lost, and obeyed no more tarriance by the
way, than only the baiting of their horses, so that shortly he
recovered the coasts of Anjou, where all his other company was.

But within four days after that the Earl was thus escaped Peter
received from King Richard the confirmation of the grant and promises
made for the betraying of Henry and the other nobles. Wherefore the
said Peter sent out after him horses and men with such expedition and
speed to have taken him, that scarcely the Earl was entered France
one hour but they were at his heels. The English then then being
above the number of three hundred at Vannes, hearing that the Earl
and all the nobles were fled so suddenly and without any of their
knowledge, were astonied and in manner despaired of their lives.

But it happened contrary to their expectation for the Duke of
Brittany, taking the matter so unkindly that Henry should be so used
with him that for fear he should be compelled to flee his land, was
not a little vexed with Peter, to whom (although that he was ignorant
of the fraud and craft that had been wrought by him) yet he laid the
whole fault in him, and therefore called unto him Edward Poynings and
Edward Woodville, delivering unto them the foresaid money that Henry
before had desired the Duke to lend him toward the charge of his
journey, and commanded them to convey and conduct all the Englishman
his servants unto him paying their expenses, and to deliver the said
sum of money unto the Earl. When the Earl saw his men, and heard the
comfortable news, he not a little rejoiced, desiring the messengers
that returned to show unto the Duke, that he trusted ere long time to
show himself not to be unthankful for this great kindness that he now
showed unto him. And within a few days after, the Earl went unto
Charles the French King, to whom after he had rendered thanks for the
great benefits and kindness that he had received of him, the cause of
his coming first declared, then he besought him of his help and aid,
which should be an immortal benefit to him and his lords, of whom
generally he was called unto the kingdom, forasmuch as they so
abhorred the tyranny of King Richard. Charles promised him help and
bade him to be of good cheer and to take no care, for he would gladly
declare unto him his benevolence. And the same time Charles removed
and took with him Henry and all the other noblemen.

While Henry remained there, John Earl of Oxford (of whom is
before spoken) which was put in prison by King Edward the fourth in
the Castle of Hammes with also James Blunt captain of that castle,
and John Fortescue knight, porter of the town of Calais, came unto
him. But James the captain, because he left his wife in the castle,
did furnish the same with a good garrison of men before his
departure.

Henry, when he saw the Earl, was out of measure glad that so
noble a man and of great experience in battle, and so valiant and
hardy a knight, whom he had thought to be most fateful and sure, for
so much as he had, in the time of King Edward the fourth, continual
battle with him in defending of King Henry the sixth, thought that
now he was so well appointed that he could not desire to be better,
and therefore communicated to him all his whole affairs, to be
ordered and ruled only by him. Not long after Charles the French King
removed again to Paris, whom Henry followed, and there again moved
and besought the King as he had most favourably and kindly
entertained him all this time, not only in words but also in deeds,
that it would likewise please him yet so much further to extend his
favour and benevolence unto him, that now he would aid and help them
forward in his journey, that not only he, but also all the Lords and
nobility of England might justly have cause to knowledge and confess
that by the mean of his favour and goodness they were restored again
to the possession of their inheritances, which without him they could
not well bring to pass.
In the meanwhile, his fortune was such, that many English men came
over daily out of England unto him, and many which were then in
Paris, among whom were divers students that fell unto his part both
more and less, and specially there was one, whose name was Richard
Foxe a priest, being a man of a singular good wit and learning, whom
Henry straightaway retained and committed all his secrets unto him
and whom also afterwards he promoted to many high promotions, and at
the last he made him Bishop of Winchester.

King Richard then, hearing of all this conspiracy and of the
great aid that daily went over to Henry, thought yet for all this,
that if he might bring to pass that Henry should not couple in
marriage with the blood of King Edward, that then he should do well
enough with him and keep him from the possession of the crown. Then
devised he with himself all the ways and means that might be how to
bring this to pass. And first he thought it to be best with fair and
large promises to attempt the Queen, whose favour obtained, he
doubted not but shortly to find the means to have both her daughters
out of her hands into his own, and then rested nothing but if he
himself might find the means afterward to marry one of the same
daughters, whereby he thought he should make all sure and safe to the
utter disappointing of Henry. Whereupon he sent unto the Queen, then
being in the sanctuary, divers and sundry messengers that should
excuse and purge him of his fact afore done towards her, setting
forth the matter with pleasant words and high promises both to her
and also her son Thomas Lord Marquis of Dorset, of all things that
could be desired. These messengers being men of gravity, handled the
Queen so craftily that anon she began to be allured and to hearken
unto them favourably, so that in conclusion she promised to be
obedient to the King in his requests (forgetting the injuries he had
done to her before, and on the other part not remembering the promise
that she made to Margaret, Henry's mother). And first she delivered
both her daughters into the hands of King Richard, then after she
said privily for the Lord Marquis her son being then at Paris with
Henry (as you have heard) willing him to forsake Henry with whom he
was, speedily to return into England, for all things was pardoned and
forgiven, and she again in favour and friendship of the King, and it
should be highly for his advancement and honour.

King Richard (when Queen Elizabeth was thus brought into a
fool's paradise) after he had received all his brother's daughters
from the sanctuary into his palace, thought their now remained
nothing to be done, but only the casting away and destroying of his
own wife, which thing he had wholly purposed and decreed within
himself. And there was nothing that feared him so much from this most
cruel and detestable murder as the losing of the good opinion that he
thought the people had conceived of him, far as ye have heard before,
he feigned himself to be a good man and thought the people had
esteemed him even so. Notwithstanding shortly after, his foresaid
ungracious purpose overcame all this honest fear. And first of all,
he found himself grieved with the barrenness of his wife, that she
was unfruitful and brought forth no children, complaining thereof
very grievously unto the nobles of this realm, and chiefly above
other unto Thomas Rotherham, then Archbishop of York (whom he had
delivered a little before out of prison), the which Bishop did gather
of this, that the Queen should be rid out of the way, ere it were
long after (such experience had he of King Richard's complexion, who
had practised many like things not long before) and at the same time
also he made divers of his secret friends privy of the same his
conjecture.

After this he caused a rumour to run among the common people
(but he would not have the author known) that the Queen was dead, to
the intent that she hearing this marvellous rumour, should take so
grievous a conceit that anon after she should fall into some great
disease, so that he would assay that way, in case it should chance
her afterward to be sick, dead, or otherwise murdered, that then the
people right imputed her death unto the thought she took, or else to
sickness. But when the Queen heard of so horrible rumour of her death
sprung abroad among the common people, she suspected the matter and
supposed the world to be at an end with her, and incontinently, she
went to the King with a lamentable countenance, and with weeping
tears asked him, whether she had done anything whereby he might judge
her worthy to suffer death. The King made answer with a smiling and
dissimuling countenance and with flattering words, bidding her to be
of good comfort and to pluck up her heart for there was no such thing
toward her that he knew. But howsoever it fortuned, either by sorrow
or else by poisoning, within a few days after the Queen was dead and
afterward was buried in the Abbey of Westminster. This is the same
Anne, one of Richard the Earl of Warwick's daughters, which once was
contacted to Prince Edward, King Henry the sixth his son.

The King being thus delivered of his wife fantasied apace Lady
Elizabeth his niece, desiring in any wise to marry with her, but
because that all men, yea and the maiden herself, abhorred this
unlawful desire, as a thing most detestable, he determined with
himself to make no great haste in the matter, chiefly for that he was
in a peck of troubles, fearing lest that of the noblemen some would
forsake him and run unto Henry his part, the other at the least would
favour the secret conspiracy made again him, so that of his end there
was almost no doubt. Also the more part of the common people were in
so great despair, that many of them had rather to be accounted of the
number of his enemies, than to put themselves in jeopardy both of
loss of body and goods in taking of his part.

And amongst those noblemen whom he feared, first was Thomas
Stanley and William his brother, Gilbert Talbot, and other great
number, of whose purpose though King Richard was ignorant,
nevertheless he trusted not one of them, and least of all Thomas
Stanley, because he had married Henry's mother, as it may well appear
by this that followeth. For when the said, this would have departed
from the court until his own mansion for his recreation (as he said)
the truth was, because he would be in a readiness to receive Henry
and aid him at his coming into the realm. But the kingdom did let
him, and would not suffer him to depart, until such time as he had
left in the court behind him George Strange, his son and heir, for a
pledge. And while King Richard was thus wrapped in fear, and care of
the tumult that was to come, lo, even then tidings came that Henry
was entered into the land, and that the Castle of Hammes was prepared
to receive Henry by the means of the Earl of Oxford which then was 
fled, with James Blunt keeper of the castle, unto Henry.

Then King Richard, thinking at the beginning to stay all this
matter, sent forth with all haste the greater part that were then at
Calais to recover the said castle again. Those that were in the
castle, when they saw their adversaries make towards them, speedily
they armed themselves to defence, and in all haste sent messengers to
Henry, desiring him of aid. Henry forthwith sent the Earl of Oxford
with a chosen sort of men to assist them, and at their first coming
they laid siege not far from the castle. And while King Richard's men
turned back having an eye towards them, Thomas Brandon, with thirty
valiant men of the other side, got over a water into the castle, to
strength them that were within. Then they that were within laid hard
to their charge that were without; on the other side, the Earl of
Oxford so valiantly assailed them of the back side that they were
glad to make proclamatiunto them that were within, that if they would
be content to give over the castle, they should have free liberty to
depart with all that ever they had. The Earl of Oxford hearing this,
which came only to save his friends from hurt, and namely James
Blunt's wife, was contented with this condition and departed in
safeguard with all his friends, returning back to Henry, which was in
Paris. After this, King Richard was informed that the French king was
weary of Henry and his company, and would do nothing for him, whereby
Henry was now not able in manner to help himself, so that it was not
possible that he should prevail or go forward in the enterprise that
he thought to have taken in hand against King Richard. King Richard
being brought thus into a fool's paradise, thought himself to be out
of all fear, and that there was no cause why he should, being so
sure, once to wake out of his sleep or trouble himself any further,
and therefore called back his Navy of ships that then was ready upon
the sea, which was fully furnished to have scoured the seas. But yet
for the more surety, lest he should be suddenly oppressed, he gave
commandment to the great men dwelling by the seaside (and especially
the Welshmen) to watch night and day, lest his adversaries should
have any opportunity to enter into the land. As the fashion is in
time of war that those that dwelt by the sea side should make beacons
in the highest places there about, which might be seen afar off, so
that when it should chance their enemies to arrive toward the land,
by and by they should fire their beacons and raise the country, to
the intent that quickly from place to place they might be ascertained
of all the whole matter, and also to arm themselves speedily against
their enemies.

And so to come to our purpose again, King Richard through the
aforesaid tidings, began to be more careless and reckless, as who
say, he had no power to withstand of the destiny that hung over his
head. Such is the provident justice of God, that a man doth least 
know, provide and beware when the vengeance of God is even at hand
for his offences. And to go forth, at that time when Henry the Earl
of Richmond remained in France entreating and suing for aid and help
of the Frenchmen, many of the chief noblemen, which had the realm in
governance (because of the young age of Charles the King), fell
somewhat at dissension, of the which variance, Louis the Prince of
Orleans was the chief and head, which because he had married Joan the
King's sister looked to have been chief Governor of all the realm. By
the which means it came to pass, that one man had the principal
governance of the realm. And therefore Henry the Earl was constrained
to sue unto all the nobles severally one after another desiring and 
praying them of aid and help in his purpose, and thus the matter was
prolonged. In the meantime Thomas the Marquis of Dorset (of whom we
spoke afore) was privily sent for to come home by his mother, partly
mistrusting that Henry should not prevail, and partly for the great
and large promises that King Richard had made to her for him before.
Which letters when the said Marquis had received, he believing all
things that his mother wrote unto him, and also thinking that Henry
should never prevail, and that the Frenchmen did but mock and delay
with him, he suddenly in the night-time conveyed himself out of Paris
and with great speed made towards Flanders. The which thing when the
Earl and other of the English Lords heard of, they were sore astonied
and amazed, and with all speed purchased of Charles the King a
licence and commandment that the Marquis might be stayed, wheresoever
he were found within the Dominion of France, chiefly for that he was
secret of their counsel and knew all their purpose. The commandment
was quickly obtained and posts made forth every way, among whom one
Humphrey Cheney playing the part of a good bloodhound so truly
smelled out and followed the trace, that by and by he found out and
took the Marquis, and so handled and persuaded him with gentle and
good words, that shortly after he was content to return.

Then Henry, being delivered of this chance, thought it best to
prolong the matter no further lest he should lose both the present
opportunity and also weary his friends that looked for him in
England. Wherefore he made haste and set forward with a small army
obtained of the French king, of whom he also borrowed some money, and
some of other his friends, for the which he left the Marquis and John
Burchere behind for a pledge. And so setting forward came to Rouen,
and while he tarried there and prepared shipping at the haven of
Seine, tidings came to him that King Richard's wife was dead, and
purposed to marry with the lady Elizabeth, King Edward's eldest
daughter being his neice, and that he had married Cicely her sister
to a man's son of the land far underneath her degree. At the which
thing, Henry was saw amazed and troubled, thinking that by this means
all his purpose was dashed, for that there was no other way for him
to come to the kingdom but only by the marriage of one of King
Edward's daughters. And by this means also he feared lest his friends
in England would shrink from him for lack of an honest title. But
after they had consulted upon the matter, they thought it best to
tarry a little to prove if they might get more help and make more
friends. And among all other, they thought it best to adjoin the Lord
Herbert unto them, which was a man of great power in Wales, and that
should be brought to pass by this means, for that the Lord Herbert
had a sister marriable, whom Henry would be content to marry if he
would take their part. And to bring all this matter to pass messages
were sent to Henry the Earl of Northumberland, which had married the
other sister, so that he should bring this matter about, but the ways
were so beset that the messengers could not come to him.

And in the mean the season came very good tidings from John ap
Morgan, a temporal lawyer, which signified unto them that Sir Rhys ap
Thomas, a noble and valiant man, and John Savage favoured his part
earnestly, and also Sir Reynold Bray had prepared a great sum of
money to wage battle on his part and to help him, and therefore he
would they should make haste with all that ever they could, and make
toward Wales.

Then Henry speedily prepared himself because he would linger
his friends no longer. And after that he had made his prayer unto
Almighty God that he might have good success in his journey, only
with two thousand men and a few ships in the kalends of August he
sailed from the haven of Seine, and the seventh day after which was
the twenty second day of August, he arrived in Wales about sunset and
landed at Milford Haven, and in the part which is called the Dale,
where he was very joyfully received. Here he had contrary tidings
brought to that he heard in Normandy afore, that Sir Rhys ap Thomas
and John Savage, with all that ever they could make, were of King
Richard's part.

Notwithstanding, they had such tidings sent them from the men
of Pembroke by a valiant gentleman, whose name was Arnold Butler,
that it rejoiced all their hearts, which was, that if all former
offences might be remitted, they would be in a readiness to stick
unto their own Gaspard the Earl. Then Henry's company by this means
being increased, departed from Hereford five mile toward Cardigan,
and then while he refreshed his men, suddenly came rumour unto him
that the Lord Herbert, which dwelled at Carmarthen, was nigh at hand
with a great army of men. At the which rumour there was a great stir
amongst them, every man took himself to his weapon and made
themselves ready if need were to fight, and a little while they were
all afraid, till such time as Henry had sent out horsemen to try the
truth, which when they came again, declared that all things was quiet
and that there was no such thing. But most of all Master Griffiths, a
very noble man, did comfort them and gladden their hearts which
although before he had joined himself to the Lord Herbert, at that
very time he cleaved to Henry with such company as he had, though
they were but few, and the same time came John ap Morgan unto him.
Henry went still forward and tarried almost in no place, because he
would make sure work and the better speed, he invaded such places
afore that they were armed against him, the which places he beat down
with very little strength. But afterward, having knowledge by his
spies that the Lord Herbert and Sir Rhys were in a readiness to give
him battle, he determined to set upon them, and either to put them to
flight or else to make them swear homage and fealty unto him, and to
take them with him in his host against King Richard. And because he
would ascertain his friends in England how all the matter went
forward with him, he sent his most trusty friends to the lady
Margaret his mother, to Stanley, to Talbot, and two other of his most
special friends with certain commandments. The effect of the
commandments were, that he intended with the help of his friends to
pass over Severn and by Shrewsbury to make toward London.

Therefore he desired them with those that were of their
counsel, in time and place convenient, to meet him. So the messenger
is going forth with these commissions, Henry went forward toward the
Shrewsbury, and in the way met with Sir Rhys ap Thomas with a great
number of men which came unto him and was of his part. For two days
afore Henry promised him to be chief ruler of all Wales as soon as he
came to the crown (if he would come to him) which afterward he gave
to him indeed. In the meantime the messengers executing the message
diligently returned back again with large rewards of them to whom
they were sent, and came to Henry the same day he entered into
Shrewsbury and showed how all his friends were in a readiness to do
the uttermost that lay in them. This tidings put Henry in such great
hope, that he went forth with a courage and came to the town of
Newport and there set up his tents upon a little hill, and there lay
all night. At night came to him Sir Gilbert Talbot with above two
hundred men. After that they went forth to Stafford and while they
were there, William Stanley came to him with a few after him, and
when he had talked a little with him, returned back again to his host
which he had prepared. From thence he went to Lichfield and that
night lay without the town, but in the morning betime he entered into
the city and was received honourably. A day or two afore, Thomas
Stanley was there with five thousand men armed, which, when he knew
of Henry's coming, forthwith went afore to a village called
Adderstone there to tarry till Henry came. This he did to avoid
suspicion, being afraid lest King Richard knowing his intent would
have put his sunto death, which, as I told you before, was left with
him as a pledge for his father. But King Richard in the meantime,
which then was at Nottingham, hearing that Henry with a few more of
banished men was entered into Wales, so lightly regarded to the
matter, that he thought it was not much to be passed upon, for that
he came in with so few in number, and that the Lord Herbert and Sir
Rhys, which were rulers of all Wales, would either kill him, or else
take him and bring him alive. But afterward, when he remembered
himself that oftentimes a small matter in battle, if it be not looked
unto betimes, would make at the last a great stir, he thought it best
to remedy the matter betimes and commanded Henry the Earl of
Northumberland with other of the nobles of the realm (whom he thought
had set more by him than by their own goods) to raise up an army and
to come to him with speed. Also he sent divers messengers with
letters to Robert Brackenbury, keeper of the Tower of London,
commanding him to come unto him in all haste, and to bring with him,
as fellows in battle, Thomas Bircher, Walter Hungerford and divers
other knights, whom he did not a little suspect.

In this time it was showed that Henry was come to Shrewsbury
without any hurt. With the which tidings, the King began to rage and
make exclamation against them, that contrary to their faiths they had
utterly deceived him, and then he began to mistrust all men, and wist
not whom he might trust, so that he thought it best to set forth
himself against his adversaries. And forthwith he sent out spies to
know which way Henry did take. They when they had done their
diligence returned back again and showed him how that Henry was come
to Lichfield. The which thing after he knew, because now there was a
great number of soldiers come together, by and by his men set in
array, he commanded them forward, and to go for and for together, and
by that way which they kept they heard say, their enemies were
coming. The suspect persons he put in the midst, he himself with
those he trusted came behind, with wings of horsemen running on every
side. And thus keeping their order, about sunset came unto Leicester.

When Henry in the mean season had removed from Lichfield unto
the next village called Tamworth, in the midway he met with Walter
Hungerford, Thomas Bircher and many other more, which had promised to
aid him afore. And for because they perceived that they were
suspected of King Richard, and lest they should be brought violently
unto him, being their enemy, they forsook Robert Brackenbury their
captain and in the night-time stole privily away and went to Henry.
Unto whom there chanced by the way that was worthy to be marked,
which was that Henry, although he was a man of noble courage and also
his company did daily increase, yet for all that stood in great fear
because he was uncertain of Thomas Stanley which, as I told you
before, for the fear of putting his sons to death, inclined as yet
unto no part, and that the matter was not so slender of King Richard,
as report was made to him of his friends.

Wherefore, as all afraid without a cause, he took only twenty
men with him, and started his journey as a man in despair and half
musing with himself what was best to be done. And to aggravate the
matter, tidings was brought him that King Richard was coming near to
meet him with a great and huge host of men. And while he thus
lingered for fear behind, his host came afore to the town of
Tamworth, and because it was then dark night, he lost both his
company and also his way, then wandering from place to place, at last
came to a little village three mile from his host, being full of
fear, and lest he should fall into the danger of the scoutwatch he
durst not ask a question on any man, and partly for the fear that was
present, and partly for that was to come delayed there that night and
took this for a sign or a prognostication of some great plague that
was to come, and the other part of his host was no less abashed
seeing his absence for that time. When in the morning Henry came to
them in the light of the day he excused the matter that he was not
absent because he had lost his way, but rather of purpose, because he
would commune with his privy friends which would not be seen in the
day. And after that he went privily to Adderstone where Thomas
Stanley and William his brother did dwell.  Here Henry, Thomas, and
William met and took other by the hand with loving salutations and
were glad one of another. Then after they counselled together of
their meeting with King Richard whom they perceived not then to be
far from them. That day withdrew toward night, in the evening John
Savage, Brittany Sanford, Simon Digby with many other had forsaken
King Richard and came to Henry with a great power of men, which power
and strength set Henry aloft again. In the mean season King Richard
which purposed to go through thick and thin in this matter came to
Bosworth a little beyond Leicester where the place of battle should
be (as a man would say the high justice of God, which could not be
avoided, hanging over his head, and called him to a place where he
should suffer worthy punishment for his detestable offences) and
there he set up his tents and rested that night. Afore he went to
bed, he made an oration to his company with great vehemence,
persuading and exhorting them manfully to fight. And afterward, as it
was said, he had a horrible dream in his sleep, seeming that he saw
horrible devils appear unto him and pulling and hauling of him that
he could take no rest, which vision filled full of fear and also of
heavy care when he waked. For by and by after, being sore grieved in
his mind, he did prognosticate of this dream the evil luck and heavy
chance that after came to him, and he came not with so cheerful
countenance unto his company as he was wont to do. Then, lest they
should think that he had this heaviness for the fear of his enemies,
he stood up and rehearsed unto them all his dream. But I think that
this was not a dream, but rather his conscience pricked with the
sharp sting of his mischievous offences, which although they do not
prick alway, yet most commonly they will bite most toward the latter
day, representing unto us not only themselves, but also the terrible
punishment that is ordained for the same, as the sight of the devil
tearing and hauling us, so that thereby (if we have grace) we may
take an occasiunto be penitent, or else for lack of the same die in
desperation. Now to come to my purpose again, the next day after,
King Richard having all things in readiness went forth with the army
out of his tents, and began to set his men in array; first the
forward set forth a marvellous length both of horsemen and also of
footmen, a very terrible company to them that should see them afar
off; and in the foremost part of all he ordered the bowmen as a
strong fortress for them that came after, and over this John the Duke
of Norfolk was head captain. After him followed the King with a
mighty sort of men.

And in this while, Henry, being departed from the communication
of his friends, without any tarrying pitched his tents near his
enemies and lay there all night and commanded his men to be in a
readiness. In the morning he sent also to Thomas Stanley, being then
in the midst betwixt both hosts, that he should come near with his
army. He sent word again that he should set his men in an order till
he came; with the which answer, otherwise than he had thought or than
the matter did require, he was not a little abashed and stood as it
were in doubt. Yet for all that he tarried not, but with all speed
set his men in an order, the forward was but slender, because his
number was but few, the archers were set in the foremost part. Over
them John the Earl of Oxford was head captain. In the right wing he
set Gilbert Talbot. In the left he put John Savage. And he himself
with the help of Thomas Stanley followed with one company of horsemen
and a few footmen, for all his his whole company were scant five
thousand besides both the Stanleys with their company, of the which
William Stanley had three thousand. The King his army was double to
all this. And so when both armies were all in a readiness and began
for to come within the sight of other, they bragged forth themselves
of both parties, looking only for the sign and token of striking
together. Betwixt both hosts, there was a morass which Henry left on
his right hand purposely as a defence of his men, he found the means
also to have the bright sun on his back, that it might dazzle the
eyes of his enemies.

But the King, when he saw Henry pass over the morass, commanded
his men with all violence to set upon them. They by and by with a
sudden clamour let arrows fly at them. On the other side they paid
them home manfully again with the same. But when they came near
together they laid on valiantly with swords. The Earl of Oxford
fearing lest in the meantime King Richard's multitude should have
compassed in his men, which were but a few, he commanded them by
fives they should not move forward past ten foot, the which
commandment known, they knit themselves together and ceased not in
fighting: their adversaries being afraid suspected some craft or
guile and began to break off, and many of the same part were not much
grieved therewith, because they were as glad the King should be lost
as saved, and therefore they fought with less courage. Then the Earl
of Oxford, with his men thick together, struck on more freshlier. The
other of the other part did likewise the same. And while the first
wards of the battle had fought so manfully, Richard perceived by his
spies Henry afar off with a few company of armed men. Afterward
coming near, Richard knew him by signs and tokens, then being
inflamed with an anger, furiously struck the horse with the spurs and
ran out of the one side of the host, and like a lion ran at him. On
the other side Henry, perceiving him coming, was very desirous to
meet him. Richard at the first setting forth killed divers that stood
before him, and again he threw down Henry's banner and William
Brandon the bearer also, he ran at Cheney, a man of great might,
which came for to meet him, and with great violence overthrew him to
the ground, and thus he made himself a way through them for to come
to Henry. But Henry kept better tack with him than his men would have
thought, which then was almost in despair of the victory. And even at
that time lo there came William Stanley to aid them with three
thousand men, and even at the very same time the residue of King
Richard's men were put to flight. Then Richard fighting alone in the
midst of all his enemies was overthrown and slain. In the meantime
the Earl of Oxford in the forward, after he had fought manfully a
little while, put the residue to flight of whom he slew a great
number. But a great number more, which followed Richard more for fear
than for love, held their hands from fighting and went away without
hurt for that they looked not for his safeguard, but rather for his
destruction. There were slain in this conflict not many more than one
thousand of the which these were noblemen: John  Duke of Norfolk,
Walter Ferris, Robert Brackenbury, Richard Radcliffe and many other
more. And within two days after, William Catesby lawyer with certain
other of his fellows was put to death at Leicester, and among those
that ran away was Francis Lovell, Humphrey Stafford, with Thomas his
brother, and many other more that ran into sanctuary at Colchester in
Essex. There was of the captives a great number, because that when
King Richard was slain, every man cast down his weapon and yielded
himself to Henry, of the which the more part would have done so at
the beginning, if it had not been for fear of King Richard's spies,
which then wandered in every place. And amongst these, the nobles
were the Earl of Northumberland, the Earl of Surrey, of the which the
Earl of Surrey was put in prison, the other as a friend was received
into favour. Henry at that field lost not above a hundred men amongst
whom the chief was William Brandon which bore Henry's banner. This
battle was fought on the twenty seventh day of the month of August,
in the year of our Lord one thousand four hundred and eighty-six. The
conflict endured more than two hours. Richard might (as the fame
went) have saved himself if he would have fled away, for those that
were about him, when they saw his men from the beginning fight but
faintly and that some were run away to the other part, suspected
treason and willed him to fly, and when the matter was manifest that
all hope of victory was passed, they brought him a swift horse. He
putting aside all hope and trust that was in flying, made (as it was
said) this answer, that this day he would have either an end of
battle or else of his life, such was his great audacity and
manfulness which because he did see certainly that in this day he
should obtain the kingdom quietly all days of his life or else lose
both forever, he entered in amongst them, as it was declared before,
intending utterly either to lose all or else to win all. And so the
wretch died, having the end that all such were wont to have, which in
the stead of law, honesty and all godliness follow their own
appetite, villainy and all wickedness. And plainly this is an example
which cannot be expressed, to fear them which will not suffer one
hour to be otherwise spent than in cruelty, mischief and all devilish
fashions. Henry when he had thus obtained the victory he fell down on
his knees and, with many prayers and thanks, referred all to the
goodness of God. Then after he stood up being wonderfully replenished
with joy, and went up upon a little hill and there gave great
commendations to his soldiers, commanding them that were hurt to be
healed and the dead to be buried; afterward he gave mortal thanks to
his noble captains promising them that he would never forget their
benefit. The multitude in the meantime with one voice and one mind
proclaimed him King. When Thomas Stanley saw that, he took King
Richard his crown which was found amongst the spoil, and by and by
put it upon Henry's head as though he had been then created King by
the election of the people as it was wont to be in the old time, and
this was the first token of his felicity. After this King Henry with
his company and carriage went to Leicester toward night to bed,
where, after he had refreshed his company well for the space of two
days, that they might the better go toward London, King Richard's
body was brought naked over a horse back, the head and the arms
hanging on the one side and the legs on the other, and carried into
the Greyfriars of Leicester, and surely it was but a miserable sight
look upon, yet it was good enough considering his wretched living,
and there without any solemnity was buried two days after. He reigned
two years two months and one day. He was but of a small stature
having but a deformed body, the one shoulder was higher than the
other, he had a short face and a cruel look which did betoken malice,
guile and deceit. And while he did muse upon any thing standing, he
would bite his underlip continually, whereby a man might perceive his
cruel nature within his wretched body strived and chafed always
within himself, also the dagger which he bore about him, he would
always be chopping of it in and out. He had a sharp and pregnant wit,
subtle, and to dissimule and feign very meet. He had also a proud and
cruel mind, which never went from him to the hour of his death, which
he had rather suffer by the cruel sword, though all his company did
forsake him, than by shameful flight he would favour his life, which
after might fortune by sickness or other condign punishment shortly
to perish.

The End of The History of King Richard III.
