THE METAMORPHOSIS OF AJAX
BY
SIR JOHN HARINGTON


INTRODUCTION

Long before Thomas Crapper, there was John Harington. Born in
1560 and dying in 1612, he was a courtier (and godson) to Queen
Elizabeth I of England. Though he held various minor offices,
he was principally a literary man, poet, translator and inventor
of the flush toilet. His works included the first English 
translation of Ariosto's Orlando Furioso, which he produced as a
punishment, ordered by Queen Elizabeth, for having shown a 
translation of some naughty parts of it to her ladies-in-waiting.
He was intermittently in and out of favour with the queen, in, 
because of his wit, learning and poetical talents; out, because 
of his cheekiness and scurrility. On his return from a failed 
expedition to quell rebels in Ireland, he faced the full force 
of her anger: "'Go home,' she said. I did not stay to bidden 
twice; if all the Irish rebels had been at my heels, I should
not have had better speed, for I did now flee from one whom I
both loved and feared too." He was soon back in favour again,
and survived the downfall and execution of his patron, the Earl
of Essex, to become a sardonic observer of the drunkenness and
ribaldry of the court of Elizabeth's successor, James I & VI. 
His account of the intrigues and roistering was published in 
1769 as Nugae Antiquae ("Ancient trifles") and is well worth
reading.

A New Discourse of a Stale Subject, called The Metamorphosis of 
Ajax (1596) is a book impossible to classify. It starts with 
a long prologue justifying its subject, with many examples from
Biblical and classical sources relating to excretion and the 
disposal of sewage, before describing his invention – the first 
flush toilet. He had installed one in his own house, and 
persuaded some of his friends to do the same. There then follows
his "Apology", a mock description of his trial for having
written on so unworthy a subject, which ends, of course, with
his triumphant acquittal.

The book was widely circulated in manuscript before being 
finally printed. Some critics have interpreted it allegorically
 as an attack on the faults of the times, which should be 
flushed away. Certainly it is full of direct and coded 
references to the politics and great men of the day, and this
 contributed to its great popularity at the time, but also to
 its subsequent obscurity when these were no longer topical.
 It is also full, however, of jokes and scatological puns 
(there are two in the title) as well as obscure learning, 
the whole presented in a droll and deadpan manner, still 
entertaining today to those with a taste for Rabelaisian humour. 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL AND EDITORIAL NOTE

This edition of The Metamorphosis of Ajax is taken from a limited
edition by Charles Whittingham, 1814. This included Harington's own
notes in the margins; identified here by "Side note." Other notes
have been provided by the Ex-Classics Project. The spelling has 
been modernised and obsolete words standardised using the primary 
spelling used by the OED.

Latin has been translated, as follows:
* Quotations from the Vulgate Bible have been taken from the Authorised
(King James) version.
* Others have been taken from public domain sources if available; the
translator has been credited in each case.
* Uncredited translations are by the Ex-Classics Project. 

The Glossary is the work of the Ex-Classics project


TITLE PAGE OF ORIGINAL EDITION

A
NEW DISCOURSE
OF A
STALE SUBJECT;
CALLED THE
METAMORPHOSIS OF AJAX.

WRITTEN BY MISACMOS,
TO HIS FRIEND AND COUSIN PH1LOSTILPNOS.


{Illustration 1 – Publisher's device}
AT LONDON:
Printed by Richard Field, dwelling in the BlackFriars.

1596.



ADVERTISEMENT.

THE tracts which constitute the following volume, are perhaps the
first specimens of the Rabelaisian satire our language has to boast.
They are replete with that kind of humour which distinguishes the
writings of the French Lucian, and partake of their grossness.

The extreme rarity of these once popular trifles, renders it
doubtful whether Swift or Sterne were acquainted with them; yet
there are passages in the writings of both these eccentric writers,
so strongly resemblant to some parts of the present volume, as
almost to induce a suspicion that they had seen them: this
resemblance, however, may have arisen from the circumstance of their
being, like our author, imitators of Rabelais and the other early
French writers of facetiae.

Of the Metamorphosis of Ajax, the avowed purport is the description
of a species of watercloset which Sir John Harington had invented
and erected at Kelston, his seat near Bath; but he has contrived to
make it the vehicle of much diverting matter, evincing his extensive
reading: he has also interspersed numerous satiric touches and
allusions to cotemporary persons and events; many of which are now
necessarily obscure, and which were no doubt one of the causes of
its great popularity at the time of publication.

Elizabeth, however she might be diverted with the humour of this
whimsical performance, affected to be much displeased, and forbade
its author the court in consequence: like most satiric writings it
procured the writer many enemies; and it is supposed that he owed
his good fortune in escaping a Starchamber suit to the favour of the
queen<1>, who is said to have conceived much disquiet on being told
he had aimed a shaft at Leicester.

The Metamorphosis of Ajax, for which a license was refused, appears
to have been twice reprinted within a few months; the first edition
bears in the title the name of Richard Field, who also printed the
first and second editions of the author's translation of Ariosto.
This first edition appears to have been published previous to the
third of August 1596. The book was in a subsequent impression put
forth without the name of the printer; and this edition, according
to a copy collated on the present occasion, must have appeared in or
before the month of September in the same year, having at the bottom
of the title, Printed 1596. A third edition, evidently an attempt at
an exact facsimile of the latter, but differing in several minute
particulars, sufficient to demonstrate that the press had been
entirely reset, is in possession of the editor.

The Anatomy appears to have been published at the same time, or very
shortly after; in October 1596, a former possessor of the copy above
referred to, appears to have acquired this part of the work by gift:
it should be remarked, however, that the signatures are continued
through this part, which appears to have been reprinted with the
Metamorphosis. The two editions have been compared, but the
variations are chiefly typographical; indeed, they amount to very
little more, except the occasional occurrence of a marginal note in
one copy, which is not to be found in the other.

The Apology it is probable soon followed; and here a new signature,
A a, commences: of' this part two editions have also been collated;
one of which has some marginal references which are wanting in the
other.

A curious presentation copy of the book from Sir J. Harington, to
his friend Thomas Markham, was formerly in the collection of Mr.
Reed, and is now enshrined in the noble library at Hodnet. Some
marginal notes in the handwriting of Sir John, and a MS. dedication
which enrich this copy, are now given from an accurate transcript
furnished by a friend. The MS. notes occur in the Metamorphosis, and
are here marked by being in Italics.

Neither of the editions have followed the orthography of the author,
as appears by comparison with the MS. papers remaining, written by
him; and they differ so materially in this respect, that it should
seem the printers of that period used the licence of adopting their
own mode, without reference to the author's MS. The incongruity of
the same word spelt several ways within a short passage, marks the
then unsettled state of orthography; the difficulty of reducing it
to what might be presumed to have been that of the writer, amid the
discordance of the printed copies, induced the editor to modernize
it, except in such instances where the preservation of the old
spelling seemed to afford an elucidation of the text, as in the case
of a few double-entendres depending upon similarity of sound; but
in, no instance has a genuine old word been supplied by its modern
substitute.

The extraordinary rarity of copies of the following tracts, may in
some degree be accounted for by their popular nature. The admirers
of this species of composition will not be displeased to be brought
acquainted with a book, of which very few complete copies are now
known to exist, and which certainly has something more than mere
rarity to boast; for although its author everywhere manifests his
propensity to punning, yet it should be considered that it was the
most popular species of wit in his time, and it will be acknowledged
that there is a fund of genuine humour in the following volume,
perhaps not exceeded in any production of the more recent imitators
of Rabelais.

In renewing these facetious trifles, it was at first the intention
of the editor to have annexed a few illustrations which had occurred
to him in the perusal, and a brief biographical sketch of the
author; this part of his plan is at present suspended; for the bulk
of the volume, and the small number of copies printed, will render
it sufficiently expensive without these additions, which might be
held supererogatory by many purchasers of the book. If however a
sufficient number to defray the expenses of the impression, should
intimate a wish for the completion of his plan, he will still be
proud to lay before them the materials he has collected, in a small
supplement.

The following Copy of a Letter from Sir J. Harington to Lady Dowager
Russell, concerning his "Metamorphosis of Ajax," from the Burghley
Papers in Lord Lansdown's MS. Library, Vol. lxxxii. No. 88, may not
unaptly be here subjoined.

Right honourable & my special good Lady, having written not long
since this fantastical treatise, & putting it to the print under a
covert name. The first two leaves of it, (wherein is almost nothing
but all scurrile & toying matter) was showed my Lord Treasurer, by
my ill hap as I count it, if his goodness & honourable disposition
do not the better interpret it; which makes me now thus bold to
entreat your honour to send his Lordship the rest of it which I have
before now for the most part of it, read unto you, humbly praying
you, to deliver your favourable censure of it, at least so far that
it is pleasant and harmless.

And for the devise itself, I know my Lord would not leave it, if it
were at Tiballs for 1000l. and to do his Lordship service, I will
ride thither, and instruct his workmen to do it for less than a
thousand pence.

And that I may confess truly & frankly to you (my best Lady, that
have even from my childhood ever so specially favoured me) I was the
willinger to write such a toy as this, because I had lain me thought
almost buried in the country these three or four years, and I
thought this would give some occasion to have me thought of and
talked of. Not as he that burned the temple of Diana to make him
famous; not as Absolon that burned Joab's corn, to make him come to
speech with him: But rather as Sophocles to save himself from a writ
of dotage, showed the work he was presently in hand with. I observe
this, that in all commonwealths, the gown and the sword rule all;
and that the pen is above the sword, they that wear plumes above
their helmets do therein (though they know it not) confess according
to the saying Caedant arma togae.<2>) My education hath been such,
and I trust my limbs and spirit both are such, as neither shall be
defective to the service of my prince & country, whether it be with
writing or weapon; only my desire is my service may be accepted, and
I doubt not, but it shall be acceptable; to the which his Lordship's
good conceit of me, I count would be a good step, and to that good
conceit your honour's commendation I persuade me would be a good
means. So I humbly take my leave this xiijth of August. (1596)
Your honour's most bound
John Harington.



NOTES TO THE ADVERTISEMENT

1. In the first book of Harington's epigrams, he has one addressed
"To Master Cooke, the queen's attorney," that was incited to call
Misacmos into the Star-chamber, but refused it; saying, he that
could give another a venu had a sure ward for himself.

Epig. xlv. Book 1.
Those that of dainty fare make dear provision,
If some bad Cooks mar it with dressing evil,
Are wont to say in jest, but just derision,
The meat from God, the Cooks came from the devil:
But if this dish, though draff in apparition,
Were made thus sauc'd, a service not uncivil,
Say ye that taste and not digest the book,
The devil go with the meat, God with the Cook.

Several other epigrams relating to his Metamorphosis of Ajax,
alluding to Elizabeth's displeasure, &c. will be found in the same
collection, some of which I have subjoined at the end of this
advertisement.

2. Caedant arma togae] "Let arms yield to the toga" i.e. let
military power yield to civil.



DEDICATION


To the Right worshipful THOMAS MARKHAM Esquire this be d[edicate]d.
I will not say much to you in the beginning of my book because I
have said perhaps more than enough of you in the end.

I pray you take it well for I doubt not but some will take it ill,
but if they do it will be because they do ill understand it; your
interest is much in the work because it is most in the writer. so I
end the iijd of August 1596
By the Author.



A LETTER WRITTEN BY A GENTLEMAN OF GOOD WORTH, TO THE
AUTHOR OF THIS BOOK.

SIR,

I have heard much of your house, of your pictures, of your walks, of
your ponds, and of your two boats, that came one by land and the
other by sea from London-bridge, and met both at Bath-bridge; all
which, God willing (if I live another summer), I will come of
purpose to see; as also a swimming place, where, if one may believe
your brother Francis, Diana did bathe her, and Acteon see her
without horns. But to deal plainly with you, there be three special
things that I have heard much boasted of, and therefore would
willingliest see. The one a fountain standing on pillars, like that
in Ariosto,<1> under which you may dine and sup: the second a
shooting close, with a twelve score mark to every point of the card,
in which I hear you have hit a mark that many shoot at; viz. to make
a barren stony land fruitful with a little cost: the third is a
thing that I cannot name well without save-reverence, and yet it
sounds not unlike the shooting place, but it is in plain English a
s—g place.<2> Though if it be so sweet and so cleanly as I hear, it
is a wrong to it to use save-reverence; for one told me it is as
sweet as my parlour; and I would think discourtesy, one should say,
save-reverence my parlour. But if I might entreat you (as you partly
promised me at your last being here) to set down the manner of it in
writing, so plain as our gross wits here may understand it, or to
cause your man, M. Combe (who I understand can paint prettily) make
a draft or plot thereof to be well conceived, you should make many
of your friends much beholding to you; and perhaps you might cause
reformation in many houses that you wish well unto, that will think
no scorn to follow your good example. Nay, to tell you my opinion
seriously, if you have so easy, so cheap, and so infallible a way
for avoiding such annoyances in great houses, you may not only
pleasure many great persons, but do her majesty good service in her
palace of Greenwich, and other stately houses that are oft annoyed
with such savours, as where many mouths be fed can hardly be
avoided. Also you might be a great benefactor to the city of London,
and all other populous towns, who stand in great need of such
conveyances. But all my fear is, that your pen having been inured to
so high discourse,

Of dames, of knights, of arms, of love's delight,

will now disdain to take so base a subject,

Of vaults, of sinks, privies, and draughts to write.

But herein let a public benefit expel a private bashfulness; and if
you must now and then break the rules de slovilitate morum,<3> with
some of these homely words, you see I have broken the ice to you;
and you know the old saying, pens may blot, but they cannot blush.
And as old Tarlton was wont to say, this same excellent word save-
reverence, makes it all mannerly. Once this I dare assure you, if
you can but tell a homely tale of this in prose, as cleanly, as you
have told in verse a bawdy tale or two in Orlando mannerly, it may
pass among the sourest censurers very currently. And I thus
expecting your answer hereto, at your convenient leisure, I commit
you to God this - of - 1596.
Your loving cousin,
????????????. [Philostilpnos]<4>



NOTES TO A LETTER WRITTEN BY A GENTLEMAN

1. a fountain standing on pillars, like that in Ariosto] Side note:
43. Canto.

2. sh—g place:] Side note: A shooting place written with Pythagoras'
letter.

3. de slovilitate morum] "Of slovenly manners." A pun on De
Civilitas Morum "Of civil manners", a famous work of instruction by
Erasmus of Rotterdam. Slovilitas is a nonce-word, seemingly invented
by Harington.

4. Philostilpnos] "lover of cleanness".



THE ANSWER TO THE LETTER.

MY good cousin, if you have heard so well of my poor house with the
appurtenances, it were to be wished for preservation of your better
conceit thereof, that you would not see them at all, they will seem
to you so far short of the report; for I do compare my buildings and
my writings together; in which, though the common sort think there
is some worth and wit, yet the graver censors do find many faults
and follies: and no marvel; for he that builds and hath gathered
little, and writes and hath read little, must needs be a bad builder
and a worse writer. But whereas you are disposed, either in the way
of praise or of play, to extol so much the basest room of my house,
as though you preferred it afore the best, your commendation is not
much unlike his courtesy, that being invited by a crabbed favoured
host to a neat house, did spit in his host's face, because it was
the foulest part of the house. But such as I have you shall be
welcome to; and if I may know when you will begin your progress, I
will pray my brother to be your guide; who will direct your jests in
such sort, as first, you shall come by a fine house that lacks a
mistress; then to a fair house that mourns for a master; from
whence, by a straight way called the Force-way, you shall come to a
town that is more than a town, where be the waters that be more than
waters. But from thence you shall pass down a stream that seems to
be no stream, by corn fields that seem no fields, down a street no
street, in at a gate no gate, over a bridge no bridge, into a court
no court, where if I be not at home, you shall find perhaps a fool
no fool.

But whereas you praise my husbandry, you make me remember an old
schoolfellow of mine in Cambridge, that having lost five shillings
abroad at cards, would boast he had saved two candles at home by
being out of his chamber; for such be most of my savings. Yet this
one point of husbandry, though it may well be called beggarly, yet
it is not for all that contemptible, and thus it was: Finding a fair
and flat field, though very stony, as all this country is, I made
some vagrant beggars (of which by neighbourhood of the baths here
comes great store) to gather all the stones that might break our
harrows; and finding an easy mean to water the ground with a fat
water, I have bettered my ground (as you say) and quite rid me of my
wandering guests; who will rather walk seven mile about, than come
where they shall be forced to work one half hour.

Now, sir, to come to the chief point of your desire, which requires
a more ample answer, but for a preamble you must be content with
this. You tell me, belike to encourage me, that my invention may be
beneficial, not only to my private friend, but to towns and cities,
yea, even to her majesty's service for some of her houses: trust me,
I do believe you write seriously as you term it herein; and for my
part I am so wholly addicted to her highness' service, as I would be
glad, yea, even proud, if the highest strain of my wit could but
reach to any note of true harmony in the full concert of her
majesty's service, though it were in the basest key that it could be
tuned to. And if I should fortune to effect so good a reformation in
the palace of Richmond or Greenwich (to which palace many of us owe
service for the tenure of our land), I doubt not but some pleasant
witted courtier of either sex, would grace me so much at least, as
to say that I were worthy for my rare invention to be made one of
the privy (and after a good long parenthesis, come out with)
chamber; or if they be learned and have read Castiglio's Courtier
they will say, I am a proper scholar, and well seen in Latrina
lingua.<1> But let him mock that list; qui moccat moccabitur:<2>

Who strike with sword, the scabbard them may strike;
And sure love craveth love, like asketh like.

If men of judgment think it may breed a public benefit, the conceit
thereof shall expel all private bashfulness; and I will herein
follow the example of that noble lady, that to save the liberties of
Coventry rode naked at noon through the streets thereof, and is now
thought to be greatly honoured and nothing shamed thereby.<3>

Further, whereas you embolden my pen not to be abashed at the
baseness of the subject, and as it were leading me on the way, you
tell me you have broken the ice for me, to enter me into such broad
phrases as you think must be frequent herein; I will follow your
steps and your counsel, neither will I disdain to use the poor help
of save-reverence, if need be, much like as a good friend of yours
and mine, that beginning to dispraise as honest a man as himself to
a great nobleman, said, he is the veriest knave, saving your
lordship: but the nobleman (ere the words were fully out of his
mouth) said, save thyself, knave, and be hanged; save not me. Even
so I must write in this discourse; sometime indeed as homely (saving
your worship) as you shall lightly see; and yet I will endeavour to
keep me within the bounds of modesty, and use no words but such as
grave precedents in divinity, law, physic, or good civility, will
sufficiently warrant me.

Sure I am that many other countrymen, both Dutch, French, and
Italians, with great praise of wit, though small of modesty, have
written of worse matters. One writes in praise of folly; another in
honour of the pox; a third defends usury; a fourth commends Nero; a
fifth extols and instructs bawdery; the sixth displays and describes
Puttana Errante,<4> which I hear will come forth shortly in English;
a seventh (whom I would guess by his writing to be groom of the
stole to some prince of the blood of France) writes a beastly
treatise only to examine what is the fittest thing to wipe withal;
alleging that white paper is too smooth, brown paper too rough,
woollen cloth too stiff, linen cloth too hollow, satin too slippery,
taffeta too thin, velvet too thick, or perhaps too costly; but he
concludes, that a gooseneck, to be drawn between the legs against
the feathers, is the most delicate and cleanly that may be.<5> Now
it is possible that I may be reckoned after these seven, as
sapientum octavus,<6> because I will write of a Jakes; yet I will
challenge of right (if the herald should appoint us our places) to
go before this filthy fellow; for as, according to Aristotle, a
rider is an architectonical science to a saddler, and saddler to a
stirrup-maker, &c. so my discourse must needs be architectonical to
his, since I treat of the house itself, and he but of part of that
is to be done in the house, and that no essential part of the
business:<7> for they say there be three things that if one neglect
to do them they will do themselves; one is for a man to make even
his reckonings; for whoso neglects it will be left even just
nothing: another is to marry his daughters; for if the parents
bestow them not, they will bestow themselves: the third is that
which the foresaid Frenchman writes of; which they that omit, their
laundresses shall find it done in their linen. Which mishap a fair
lady once having, a serving man of the disposition of Midas' Barber,
that could not keep counsel, had spied it, and wrote in the grossest
terms it could be expressed upon a wall what he had seen; but a
certain, pleasant, conceited gentleman corrected the barbarism,
adding rhyme to the reason in this sort;

My lady hath polluted her lineal vesture,
With the superfluity of her corporal disgesture."

But soft, I fear I give you too great a taste of my slovenly
eloquence in this sluttish argument. Wherefore to conclude, I dare
undertake, that though my discourse will not be so wise as the first
of those seven I spake of, that praises folly; yet it shall be
civiller than the second, truer than the third, honester than the
fourth, chaster than the fifth, modester than the sixth, and
cleanlier than the seventh. And that you and other my good friends
may take the less offence at it, I will clothe it (like an ape in
purple) that it may be admitted into the better company; and if all
the art I have cannot make it mannerly enough, the worst punishment
it can have, is but to employ it in the house it shall treat of; 
only craving but that favour, that a nobleman was wont to request of
your good father-in-law, to tear out my name before it be so
employed; and to him that would deny me that kindness, I would the
paper were nettles, and the letters needles for his better ease; or
that it were like to the friars book, dedicated as I take it to Pius
Quintus; of which one writes merrily, that his holiness finding it
was good for nothing else, employed it (instead of the goose neck)
to a homely occupation; and forsooth the phrase was so rude, the
style so rugged, and the Latin so barbarous, that therewith as he
writes scortigavit sedem apostolicam; He galled the seat apostolic:
and so I commend me to you, till I send you the whole discourse.
Your loving cousin and true friend,
???????? [Misacmos]<8>



NOTES TO THE ANSWER TO THE LETTER.

1. Latrina lingua] "The latrine language" – a pun on Latina lingua –
the Latin language.

2. qui moccat moccabitur] "He who mocks will be mocked."

3. Side note: Camden in his Britannia.

4. Puttana Errante] i.e "The Wandering Whore", by Lorenzo Veniero,
(1531).

5. Side note: This matter is discoursed by Rabelais in his 11th
chapter of his 5th book. "Un moyen de me torcher le cul le plus
signeurial, le plus excellent, le plus expedient que jamais fut vu"
A method of wiping my arse which is the most princely, the most
excellent, the most useful as could ever be seen."

6. sapientum octavus] "The eighth wise man."

7. Side note: This may be omitted in reading.

8. ???????? [Misacmos] "Hater of filth."



EPIGRAMS RELATING TO THE AJAX BY SIR JOHN HARINGTON.

Book I. Ep. 43.

To the Queen's Majesty, when she found fault with some particular
matters in Misacmos' Metamorphosis.

Dread Sov'reign, take this true, though poor excuse
Of all the errors of Misacmos' muse;
A hound that of a whelp myself hath bred,
And at my hand and table taught and fed,
When other curs did fawn and flatter coldly,
Did spring and leap, and play with me too boldly;
For which, although my pages check and rate him,
Yet still myself doth much more love than hate him.

Book I. Ep. 44.

To the Ladies of the Queen's Privy Chamber, at the making of their
perfumed Privy at Richmond.

The book hanged in chains saith thus:

Fair dames, if any took in scorn and spite,
Me, that Misacmos' muse in mirth did write,
To satisfy the sin, lo, here in chains
For aye to hang my master he ordains:
Yet deem the deed to him no derogation,
But doom to this device new commendation;
But here you see, feel, smell, that his conveyance
Hath freed this noisome place from all annoyance:
Now judge you, that the work mock, envy, taunt,
Whose service in this place may make most vaunt:
If us, or you to praise it were most meet,
You that made sour, or us that made it sweet?

Book I. Ep. 46.

Against Lynus, a Writer that found fault with the Metamorphosis.

Lynus, to give me a spiteful frump,
Said that my writings savour'd of the pump;
And that my muse, for want of matter, takes
An argument to write of from the Jakes.
Well, Lynus, speak each reader as he thinks,
Though thou of sceptres wrot'st, and I of sinks;
Yet some will say, comparing both together,
My wit brings matter thence, thine matter thither.

Book I. Ep. 51.

Of Cloacina and Stercutius.

The Romans, ever counted superstitious,
Adored with high titles of divinity,
Dame Cloacina and the lord Stercutius;
Two persons in their state of great affinity:
But we, that scorn opinions so pernicious,
Are taught by truth well try'd t'adore the Trinity;
And whoso care of true religion takes,
Will think such saints well shrined in A JAX.

Book I. Ep. 52.

To the Queen, when she was pacified and had sent Misacmos thanks for
the Invention.

A poet once of Trajan begg'd a lease
(Trajan, terror of war, mirror of peace),
And doubting how his writings were accepted,
'Gainst which he heard some courtiers had excepted;
He came to him, and with all due submission,
Deliver'd this short verse with his petition:
Dear Sovereign, if you like not of my writings,
Grant this sweet cordial to a spirit daunted;
But if you read and like my poor inditings,
Then for reward let this small suit be granted.
Of which short verse I find ensu'd such fruit,
The poet of the prince obtain'd his suit.

Book II. Ep. 13.

Against Caius, that scorned his Metamorphosis.

Last day thy mistress, Caius, being present,
One happ'd to name, to purpose not unpleasant,
The title of my misconceived book;
At which you spit, as though you could not brook
So gross a word: but shall I tell the matter
Why? If one names A Jax, your lips do water.
There was the place of your first love and meeting;
There first you gave your mistress such a greeting,
As bred her scorn, your shame, and others laughter,
And made her feel it twenty fortnights after:
Then thank their wit that make the place so sweet,
That for your Hymen you thought place so meet;
But meet not maids at madam Cloacina,
Lest they cry nine months alter, help Lucina.

Book III. EP. 29.

To his Friend of his Book Ajax.

You muse to find in me such alteration,
That I that maidenly to write was wont,
Would now set to a book so desperate front,
As I might scant defend by incitation;
My muse that time did need a strong purgation,
Late having ta'en some bruise by lewd reports;
And when the physic wrought, you know the fashion
Whereto a man in such a case resorts:
And so my muse with good decorum spent,
On that base titled book, her excrement.



EPIGRAPH

NIUNA CORROTTA MENTE INTESE MAI SANAMENTE PAROLE; ET COSI COME LE
HONESTE A QUELLA NON GIOVANO, COSI QUELLE, CHE TANTO HONESTE NON
SONO, LA BEN DISPOSTA NON POSSON CONTAMINARE, SE NON COME IL LOTO I
SOLARI RAGGI, O LE TERRENE BRUTTURE LE BELLEZZE DEL CIELO.
Boccaccio, Conclusione del Decamerone.
["Corrupt mind did never yet understand any word in a wholesome
sense; and as such a mind has no profit of seemly words, so such as
are scarce seemly may as little avail to contaminate a healthy mind
as mud the radiance of the sun, or the deformities of earth the
splendours of the heavens." (J.M.Rigg)]



THE PROLOGUE

TO THE READER OF THE METAMORPHOSIS OF AJAX.

GREAT Captain AJAX, as is well known to the learned, and shall here
be published for the unlearned, was a warrior of Greece, strong,
heady, rash, boisterous, and a terrible fighting fellow; but neither
wise, learned, staid, nor politic. Wherefore falling to debate with
Ulysses, and receiving so foul a disgrace of him, to be called fool
afore company, and being bound to the peace, that he might not fight
with so great a counsellor, he could endure it no longer, but became
a perfect malcontent; viz. his hat without a band, his hose without
garters, his waist without a girdle, his boots without spurs, his
purse without coin, his head without wit, and thus swearing he would
kill and slay. <1> First he killed all the horned beasts he met,
which made Agamemnon and Menelaus now more afraid than Ulysses;
whereupon he was banished the towns presently, and then he went to
the woods and pastures, and imagining all the fat sheep he met, to
be of kin to the coward Ulysses, because they ran away from him, he
massacred a whole flock of sheep, not ewes. Last of all, having
nobody else to kill, [the] poor man killed himself: what became of
his body is unknown; some say that wolves and bears did eat it, and
that makes them yet such enemies to sheep and cattle. But his blood,
as testifieth P. Ovidius the excellent historiographer, was turned
into a hyacinth, which is a very notable kind of grass or flower.

Now there are many miracles to be marked in this Metamorphosis, to
confirm the credit of the same: for in the grass itself remains such
pride of this noble blood, that as the graziers have assured me of
their credits (and some of them may be trusted for one hundred
thousand pounds), the rother-beasts that eat too greedily hereof
will swell till they burst. The poor sheep still, for an old grudge,
would eat him without salt (as they say); but if they do, they will
soon after rot with it. <2>

Further, I read that now of late years a French gentleman, son to
one Monsieur Gargasier, and a young gentleman of an excellent spirit
and towardness, as the reverent Rabelais (quem honoris causa nomino;
that is, whom should not name without save-reverence) writes in his
first book, xiii. Chap. <3> But the story you shall find more at
large in the xiv. book of his tenth decad.<4> This young gentleman
having taken some three or four score pills to purge melancholy,
every one as big as a pome-cittern, commanded his man to mow an half
acre of grass, to use at the privy: and notwithstanding that the
owners (to save their hay perhaps) swore to him it was of that
ancient house of AJAX, and therefore reserved of purpose only for
horses of the race of Bucephalus, or Rabycano, yet he would not be
persuaded: but in further contempt of his name, used a phrase that
he had learned at his being in the low countries, and bade Skite
upon Ajax. But suddenly (whether it were the curse of the people, or
the nature of the grass, I know not) he was stricken in his
posteriors with St. Anthony's fire; and despairing of other help, he
went on pilgrimage in hope of remedy hereof to Japan near China:
where he met a French surgeon, in the university of Macao, that
cured him both of that and the verol, that he had before in his
priorums, with the momio of a Grecian wench, that Ulysses buried in
his travel upon the coast of the further Ethiopia: and so he came
back again by Restinga des ladrones, through St. Lazaro;<5> and
crossing both the tropics, Cancer and Capricorn, he came by
Magellans, swearing he found no straits there, but came from thence
straight home. And so in twenty-four hour's sail, and two or three
odd years beside, he accomplished his voyage; not forgetting to take
fresh wine and water at Capon de Bona Speranza.<6> Yet ere he could
recover his health fully, he was fain to make divers vows (for now
he was grown very religious with his long travel); among which, one
was, that in remembrance of China, of all meats, he would honour the
chine of beef most; another was, that of all offices of the house,
he should do honour to that house of office, where, he had committed
that scorn to AJAX; and that there he should never use any more such
fine grass, but rather tear a leaf out of Holinshed's Chronicles, or
some of the books that lie in the hall, than to commit such a sin
against AJAX. Wherefore, immediately on his coming home, he built a
sumptuous privy, and in the most conspicuous place thereof, namely,
just over the door, he erected a statue of AJAX, with so grim a
countenance, that the aspect of it being full of terror, was half as
good as a suppository: and further, to honour him, he changed the
name of the house, and called it after the name of this noble
captain of the greasy ones (the Grecians I should say), AJAX: though
since, by ill pronunciation, and by a figure called Cacophonia, the
accent is changed, and it is called a Jakes.

Further, when the funeral oration was ended,<7> to do him all other
compliments that appertained to his honour, they searched for his
pedigree, and an excellent antiquary and a herald, by great fortune,
found it out in an old church book, in the Austin Friars at Genoa.
And it was proclaimed on this fashion:

AJAX, son of Telamon.
Son of Aeacus.
Son of Jupiter.<8>

Jupiter, alias dictus Picus.
Son of old Saturn,<9>
Alias dictus Stercutius.<10>

Which when it was made known unto the whole fraternity of the
brethren, there was nothing but rejoicing and singing, unto their
god Sarcotheos, a devout Shaame, in honour of this Stercutius, the
great great grandfather of AJAX. Which sonnet hath a marvellous
grace in their country, by means they do greatly affect these same
similiter desinentia,<11> every friar singing a verse, and a brother
answering him in the tune following; amounting just to four and
twenty, which is the mystical number of their order.

But, by the way, if any severe Catos take exceptions, and any chaste
Lucretias take offence at the matter or music here following, let
them pardon me, that sought but to keep decorum, in speaking of a
slovenly matter, and of slovenly men somewhat slovenly.

Vos vero viri eruditi si qua hic scurriliter nimis dicta videbuntur,
ignoscite, equissimum enim est, ut quam voluptatem scelerati male
faciendo capiant, eandem (quod fieri potest) male audiendo amittant.
Videtis autem cujusmodi farinae homines taxare instituimus: non
pius, doctos, sanctos, continentes, sed luxuriosos, hereticos,
barbaros, impios. Quibus ego me per omnem vitam acerrimum hostem, ut
et verum misacmos semper profitebor. Nostris proverbium, Cretisandum
cum Cretensibus, et certe hoc dignum est patella operculum. Nam
similes habere debent labra lactucas <12>


{Illustration 2 - Music}

1. O tu qui dans oracula.
2. Scindis cotem novacula.
3. Da nostra ut tabernacula.
4. Lingua canant vernacula.
5. Opima post jentacula.
6. Hujusmodi miracula.
7. Sit semper plenum poculum.
8. Habentes plenum loculum.
9. Tu serva nos ut specula.
10. Per longa et laeta saecula.
11. Ut clerus et plebecula.
12. Nec nocte nec diecula.
13. Curent de ulla recula.
14. Sed intuentes specula.
15. Dura vitemus spicula.
16. Jacentes cum amicula.
17. Quae garrit ut cornicula.
18. Seu tristis seu ridicula.
19. Tum porrigamus oscula.
20. Turn colligamus floscula.
21. Ornemus ut coenaculum.
22. Et totum habitaculum.
23. Tum culi post spiraculum.
24. Spectemus hoc spectaculum.<13>

Then, suitable to this hymn, they had a dirge for AJAX, with a
prayer to all their chief saints whose names begin with A.

Sauntus Ablabius.	)
Sauntus Acachius.	)
Sauntus Arrius.	)
Sauntus Aerius.	) Ora pro
Sauntus Aetius.	) AJAX
Sauntus Alnaricus.	)
Sauntus Adiaphoristae.	)
Saunti 11000 Anabaptistae.	)
Et tu Sauntiss. Atheos.	)

And so ended the black Sauntus.

Some of these denied the godhead of Christ with Arrius, some the
authority of bishops, as Aerius, which you may see in Prateolo de
vita haereticorum. <14> Almaricus denied the resurrection of the
body, which is an heresy that mars all, as St. Paul saith, 1 Cor.
xv. 14. That then our faith were vain.

By all which you may see, that it is but lack of learning, that
makes some fellows seek out stale English etymologies of this
renowned name of A JAX. One imagined it was called so of black-
jacks, because they look so slovenly, that a mad Frenchman wrote, we
did carry our drink in our boots: but that is but a bald etymology,
and I will never agree that Jack, though he were never so black,
should be thus slandered. But if you stand so much upon your
English, and will not admit our Greek and our Roman tongue, you
shall see I will cast about, to have one in English for you.

First then, you have heard the old proverb, "age breeds aches;" now
you must imagine, that an old man, almost fourscore years old, and
come to the psalm of David, Labour and dolour, being somewhat
costive, at the house groaned so pitifully, that they thought he had
been sick: whereupon one ran to him to hold his head, and asked him
what he ailed: He told them he ailed nothing, but only according to
the proverb, he complained, that age breeds aches; and minding to
speak it shorter, by the figure of abbreviation, or perhaps by the
rule, Quod potest fieri per pauciora, non debet fieri per plura <15>
(I pray you pardon me for being again in my Latin); oh, saith he,
masters make much of youth, for I tell you, age aches, age, aches. I
feel it, age aches. Upon which pathetical speech of his, delivered
in that place, the younger men that bare him special reverence,
termed the place age aches: which agrees fully in pronunciation,
though it may be since, some ill orthographers have miswritten it,
and so now it passeth current to be spoken and written A JAX. And
because, as the saying is, loquendum cum vulgo,<16> we must now take
him as we find him, with all his faults.

But yet for reformation of as many as we can, and specially of one
fault he is much subject unto, you must remember that this A JAX was
always so strong a man, that his strength being an inseparable
accident to him, doth now only remain in his, breath, and that in
diverse extremities, and contrary fashions. Sometime, with the heat
of his breath, he will be ready to overcome a strong man; another
time, he will take a weak man at the vantage, and strike him behind
with such a cold, that he shall be the worse for, it a month after.
Now many have wrestled with him, to seek to stop his breath, and
never maim him, but he makes them glad to stop their noses; and that
indeed is some remedy, for such whose throats have a better swallow,
than their heads have capacity. As some men that are forced at sea
to drink stinking puddle water, do wink and close their nostrils,
that they may not offend three senses at once.

Now again, some arm themselves against A JAX with perfumes, but that
methinks doubles the grief, to imagine what a good smell this were,
if the other were away: as he that should have had ten thousand
pounds with an ugly Mopsa, <17> said, not without a great sigh, Oh,
what a match were this were the woman away! But the device that
shall be hereafter discovered, will so confound this gentleman with
the strong breath, that save we carry about us some traitors, that
are ready to take his part, he should never be able so much as to
blow upon you. Yet I would have the favourable readers (of what sort
soever) thus far satisfied, that I took not this quarrel upon me
voluntarily, but rather in mine own defence: and standing upon the
punctilio of honour, having been challenged, as you may partly see
in the letter precedent, by one, as it seems, of the Captain's own
countrymen: for his name is Philostilpnos, which I thought at first
was a word to conjure a spirit, till at last, a fellow of mine of
Cambridge, told me the Philo was Greek, and that he would say in
English, that he loveth cleanliness. Now I being bound by the
duello, having accepted the challenge, to seek no advantage, but
even to deal with him at his own weapon, entered the lists with him,
and fighting after the old English manner without the stockados (for
to foin or strike below the girdle, we counted it base and too
cowardly), after half a score downright blows, we grew to be
friends, and I was content to subscribe, Yours, &c. And to the end I
may answer him in the same language, I am called Misacmos, which is
cousin and ally to his name, and it signifieth a hater of
filthiness; and to all such as are of kin to either of our names or
conditions, we commend this discourse ensuing.

Ad Zoilum et Momum.

Cease, masters, any more
To grudge, chafe, pine, and fret;
Lo stuff for you good store,
To gnaw, chew, bite, and eat.




NOTES TO THE PROLOGUE

1. Side note: Ovid Metam. Lib. 12.

2. Side Note: Salt recovers baned sheep

3. Side Note: Rabelais. Liv. i. chap. 13. Come Gargasier cognoit
l'esprit excellent de Gargantua a l'invention d'un torche cul. "How
Gargasier realised the excellent talents of Gargantua by his
invention of an arse-wiper."

4. Side note: Lib. Fictit. "fictitious book."

5. Restinga des ladrones, St. Lazaro] Islands in the Western
Pacific.

6. Capon de Bona Speranza] Cape of Good Hope.

7. Side note: Hic desunt non pauca de sermone ath. clerum. "Here was
wanting not a few sermons of atheist priests."

8. Side note: Thus far Ovid.

9. Side note: Thus much. Lib. 6. 8. Au[gustine] de civitate Dei.

10. Side note: Stercutius, the god of dung

11. similiter desinentia] "Similar endings" i.e. rhymes.

12. Vos Vero, &c.] "You truly learned men, if you do not want to see
these filthy words, ignore them, for it is most true, that when evil
men conceive of performing defiled pleasures, they (as far as they
can) avoid hearing about them. You will see also how we severely
punish this type of men, who are not pious, learned, saintly, and
restrained, but lustful, heretical, barbarous, and impious. To these
I have all my life been a bitter enemy, so that truly I will be
everywhere acknowledged as Misacmos ("hater of filth") Our proverb
is "One swindler swindles another" and certainly this is an
appropriate lid for the dish. And similarly, we should have lettuce
for lips." 
The last two sentences refer to proverbs meaning roughly "They will
get what they deserve"
Side note: Such lips, such lettuce.

13. O tu qui dans oracula, &c.]
"O thou who utt'ring mystic notes
The whetstone cuts't with razor
In mother-tongue permit our throats,
Henceforth to sing and say, Sir!
To rich, material breakfasts join,
These miracles more funny—
Fill all our cups with lasting wine,
Our bags with lasting money!
To us a guardian tow'r remain,
Through ages long and jolly;
Nor give our house a moment's pain,
From thought's intrusive folly!
Nor let our eyes for losses mourn,
Nor pore on aught but glasses;
And soothe the cares that still return,
By couching with our lasses;
Who loud as tattling magpies prate,
Alternate laugh and lour,
Then kiss we round each wanton mate,
And crop each vernal flow'r,
To deck our rooms, and chiefly that
Where supper's charms invite;
Then close in chimney-corner squat,
To see so blest a sight!"
(John Hawkins, from his History of Music, 1776)

14. Prateolo de vita haereticorum.] "The lives of the Heretics, by
Prateolus."

15. Quod potest fieri per pauciora, non debet fieri per plura] "What
can be said briefly, need not be said at length."

16. loquendum cum vulgo] "We must speak as the common people do."

17. Mopsa] An exceptionally repulsive woman, character in The
Countess of Pembroke's Arcadia by Philip Sidney.



A SHORT ADVERTISEMENT OF THE AUTHOR TO THE READER.

THE discourse ensuing is divided into three parts or sections (as it
were breathing places), lest it may seem confused, or too tedious to
be read all at once.

1. The first justifies the use of the homeliest words.
2. The second proves the matter not to be contemptible.
3. The third shows the form, and how it may be reformed.

1. The first begins gravely, and ends lightly.
2. The second begins pleasantly, and ends soberly.
3. The third is mixed, both seriously and merrily.

1. I would pray you to weigh the grave authorities reverently; for
they are true and authentical.
2. I would wish you to regard the pleasant histories respectively;
for they be honest and commendable.
3 I would advise you to use the merry matters modestly; for so they
may be faultless and harmless.

1. If you mean not to read it, then dispraise it not; for that would
be counted folly.
2. Till you have fully read it, censure it not; for that may be
deemed rashness.
3. When you have read it, say both of us have lost more time than
this in our days; and that perhaps would be judged the right.



THE FIRST SECTION

THERE was a very tall and serviceable gentleman, sometime lieutenant
of the ordnance, called M. Jaques Wingfield; who coming one day,
either of business or of kindness, to visit a great lady in the
court, the lady bade her gentlewoman ask, which of the Wingfields it
was; he told her Jaques Wingfield: the modest gentlewoman, that was
not so well seen in the French, to know that Jaques was but James in
English, was so bashful, that to mend the matter (as she thought),
she brought her lady word, not without blushing, that it was M.
Privy Wingfield; at which, I suppose the lady then, I am sure the
gentleman after, as long as he lived, was wont to make great sport.

I fear the homely title prefixed to this treatise (how warlike a
sound soever it hath) may breed a worse offence, in some of the
finer sort of readers, who may upon much more just occasion condemn
it, as a noisome and unsavoury discourse: because without any error
of equivocation, I mean indeed to write of the same that the word
signifies. But if it might please them a little better to consider,
how the place we treat of (how homely soever) is visited by
themselves once at least in four and twenty hours, if their
digestion be good, and their constitution sound; then I hope they
will do me their favour, and themselves that right, not to reject a
matter teaching their own ease and cleanliness, for the homeliness
of the name; and consequently, they will excuse all broad phrases of
speech, incident to such a matter, with the old English proverb that
ends thus, For lords and ladies do the same. I know that the wiser
sort of men will consider, and I wish that the ignorant sort would
learn, how it is not the baseness or homeliness, either of words or
matters, that make them foul and obscene; but their base minds,
filthy conceits, or lewd intents that handle them. He that would
scorn a physician, because for our infirmities' sake, he refuseth
not sometime the noisome view of our loathsomest excrements, were
worthy to have no help by physic, and should break his divine
precept that saith, honour the physician: for necessities' sake God
hath ordained him. And he that would honour the makers of
aposticchios, or rebatoes, because creatures much honoured use to
wear them, might be thought perhaps full of courtesy, but void of
wit.

Surely, if we would enter into a sober and sad consideration of our
estates, even of the happiest sort of us, as men of the world esteem
us, whether we be noble, or rich, or learned, or beautiful, or
healthy, or all these (which seldom happeneth) joined together, we
shall observe, that the joys we enjoy in this world consist rather
in indolentia (as they call it), which is an avoiding of grievances
and inconveniences, than in possessing any passing great pleasures;
so durable are the harms that our first parents fall hath laid on
us, and so poor the helps that we have in ourselves: finally, so
short and momentary the contentments that we fish for, in this ocean
of miseries, which either we miss (fishing before the net, as the
proverb is), or if we catch them, they prove but like eels, sleight
and slippery. The chiefest of all our sensual pleasures, I mean that
which some call the sweet sin of lechery, though God knows it hath
much sour sauce to it, for which notwithstanding many hazard both
their fame, their fortune, their friends, yea their souls, which
makes them so oft break the first commandment, that when they hear
it read at Church, they leave the words of the Communion book, and
say, Lord have mercy upon us, it grieves our hearts to keep this
law. And when the commination is read on Ash-Wednesday, wherein is
read, Cursed be he that lieth with his neighbour's wife, and let all
the people say, Amen:<1> these people either say nothing, or as a
neighbour of mine said he hem: I say this surpassing pleasure, that
is so much in request, and counted such a principal solace, I have
heard confessed before a most honourable person, by a man of middle
age, strong constitution, and well practised in this occupation, to
have bred no more delectation to him (after the first heat of his
youth was past) then to go to a good easy close-stool, when he hath
had a lust thereto (for that was his very phrase). Which being
confessed by him, and confirmed by many, makes me take this
advantage thereof in the beginning of this discourse, to prefer this
house I mind to speak of, before those which they so much
frequent:<2> neither let any disdain the comparison. For I remember,
how not long since, a grave and godly lady,<3> and grandmother to
all my wife's children, did in their hearings, and for their better
instruction, tell them a story, which though I will not swear it was
true, yet I did wish the auditory would believe it, namely, how an
Hermit being carried in an evening, by the conduct of an Angel,
through a great city, to contemplate the great wickedness daily and
hourly wrought therein, met in the street a gong-farmer with his
cart full laden, no man envying his full measure. The poor Hermit,
as other men did, stopped his nostrils, and betook him to the other
side of the street, hastening from the sour carriage all he could;
but the Angel kept on his way, seeming no whit offended with the
savour. At which, while the Hermit marvelled, there came not long
after by them, a woman gorgeously attired, well perfumed, well
attended with coaches and torches, to convey her perhaps to some
nobleman's chamber. The good Hermit somewhat revived with the fair
sight and sweet savour, began to stand at the gaze. On the other
side, the good Angel now stopped his nose, and both hastened himself
away, and beckoned his companion from the place: at which the Hermit
more marvelling than before, he was told by the Angel, that this
fine courtesan laden with sin, was a more stinking savour afore God
and his holy angels, than that beastly cart, laden with excrements.
I will not spend time to allegorize this story, only I will wish all
the readers may find as sure a way to cleanse and keep sweet the
noblest part of themselves, that is, their souls, as I shall show
them a plain and easy way to keep sweet the basest part of their
houses, that is, their sinks. But to the intent I may bind myself to
some certain method, I will first awhile continue as I have partly
begun, to defend by most authentical authorities and examples, the
use of these homely words in so necessary matters. Secondly,
concerning the matter itself, I will show how great an extraordinary
care hath been had in all ages, for the good ordering of the same.
Lastly, for the form, I will set down the cheapest, perfectest, and
most infallible, for avoiding all the inconveniences the matter, is
subject to, that hitherto (if I and many more be not much deceived)
was ever found out.

When I was a truantly scholar in the noble university of Cambridge,
though I hope I had as good a conscience as other of my pew-fellows,
to take but a little learning for my money, yet I can remember, how
a very learned and reverend divine held this question in the 
schools, Scripturae stiles non est barbarus; The style or phrase of
the Scripture is not barbarous. Against whom one replied with this
argument:

That which is obscene, may be called barbarous.
But the Scripture is in many places obscenous:
Therefore the Scripture may be called barbarous.

To which syllogism was truly answered (as I now remember, denying
the minor), that though such phrases to us seem obscene, and are so
when they are used to ribaldry, or lasciviousness; yet in the
Scripture they are not only void of incivility, but full of
sanctity: that the prophets do in no place more effectually, more
earnestly, nor more properly beat down our pride and vanity, and
open to our eyes the filthiness and horror of our sins, than by such
kind of phrases; of which they recited that, where it is said, that
the sins of the people were, quasi pannus menstruatae universae
justitiae nostrae <4> that a common or strange woman (for so the
Scripture covertly termeth a harlot), hath her quiver open for every
arrow; that an old lecherous man, is like a horse that neigheth
after every mare, &c.: to which I could add many more; if I affected
copiousness in this kind; some in broad speeches, some in covert
terms, expressing men's shame, men's sins, men's necessities.
Quinque aureos, anos facietis pro quinque satrapis: which our
English of Geneva translates very modestly. Ye shall make five
golden emeralds for five noblemen or princes. <5> Which word I am
sure, many of the simple hearers and readers, take for a precious
stone of the Indians, set in gold; and so they shall still take it
for me; for that ignorance may perhaps do them less hurt in this
matter, then further knowledge; but yet what a special Scripture
that is to God's glory and their shame, appears by David's prophecy
in the 77th Psalm; where he saith, Percussit inimicos suos in
posteriora, opprobrium sempiternum dedit illis; He smote his enemies
in the hinder parts, and put them to a perpetual shame. In
remembrance whereof, in some solemn liturgies until this day, the
same chapter of Aureos anos is read.

What should I speak of the great league between God and man, made in
circumcision? impressing a painful stigma or character in God's
peculiar people; though now most happily taken away in the holy
Sacrament of baptism. What the word signified, I have known reverent
and learned men have been ignorant: and we call it, very well,
circumcision and uncircumcision; though the Rhemists (of purpose
belike to vary from Geneva) will needs bring in prepuce: which word
was after admitted into the theatre with great applause, by the
mouth of master Tarlton the excellent comedian; when many of the
beholders, that were never circumcised, had as great cause as
Tarlton to complain of their prepuce. But to come soberly, and more
nearly to our present purpose; in the Old Testament, the phrase is
much used of covering the feet; and in the New. Testament, he that
healeth and helpeth all our infirmities, useth the word draught;
that that goeth into the man, is digested in the stomach, and cast
out into the draught.<6> Lastly, the. blessed apostle St. Paul,
being rapt in contemplation of divine blissfulness, compares all the
chief felicities of the earth, esteeming them (to use his own word)
as stercora, most filthy dung, in regard of the joys he hoped for.
In imitation of which zealous vehemency, some other writers have
affected to use such phrase of speech, but with as ill success as
the ass that leaped on his master at his coming home, because he saw
a little spaniel, that had so done, much made of: for indeed, these
be counted but foulmouthed beasts for their labours.

But to conclude these holy authorities, worthy to be alleged in most
reverent and serious manner, and yet here also I hope without
offence: let us come now to the ridiculous rather than religious
customs of the pagans; and see, if this contemptible matter I treat
of, were despised among them; nay, rather observe, if it were not
respected with a reverence, with an honour, with a religion, with a
duty, yea with a deity, and no marvel: for they that had gods and
goddesses, for all the necessaries of our life, from our cradles to
our graves; viz. 1. for sucking, 2. for swathing, 3. for eating, 4.
for drinking, 5. for sleeping, 6. for husbandry, 7. for venery, 8.
for fighting, 9. for physic, 10. for marriage, 11. for childbed, 12.
for fire, 13. for water, 14. for the thresholds, 15. for the
chimneys: the names of which I do set down by themselves, to satisfy
those that are curious; 1. Lacturtia, 2. Cunina, 3. Edulcia, 4.
Potina, 5. Morpheus, 6. Pan, 7. Priapus, 8. Bellona, 9. Aesculapius,
10. Hymen, 11. Lucina and Vagitanus, 12. Aether, 13. Salacia, 14.
Lares, 15. Penates. I say, you must not think they would commit such
an oversight, to omit such a necessary, as almost in all languages
hath the name of necessity, or ease: wherefore they had both a god
and a goddess, that had the charge of the whole business: the god
was called Stercutius, as they write, because he found so good an
employment for all manner of dung, as to lay it upon the land: or
perhaps it was he that first found the excellent mystery of the kind
setting of a parsnip (which I will not here discover, because I
heard of a truth, that a great lady that loved parsnips very well,
after she had heard how they grew, could never abide them); and I
would be loath to cause any to fall out of love with so good a dish.
Nevertheless (except they will have better bread than is made of
wheat), they must (how fine soever they be) give M. Stercutius leave
to make the land able to bear wheat. But the goddess was much more
especially, and properly assigned for this business, whose name was
Dea Cloacina; her statue was erected by Titus Tatius, he that
reigned with Romulus, in a goodly large house of office (a fit
shrine for such a saint), which Lodovicus Vives cites out of
Lactantius.

But he that will more particularly inform himself of the original of
all these petty gods and goddesses, as also of the greater, which
they distinguish by the name of Dii consentes, which are, according
to old Ennius' verse, divided into two ranks of lords and ladies.

Juno, Vesta, Minerva, Ceresque, Diana, Venus.
Mars, Mercurius, Neptunus, Jovis, Vulcanus, Apollo.<7>

Of all which, St. Augustine writes most divinely to overthrow their
divinity; and therefore I refer the learned and studious reader to
his fourth and sixth books de Civitate Dei; where the original and
vanity of all these gods and goddesses is more largely discoursed:
with a pretty quip to Seneca the great philosopher; who being in
heart half a Christian, as was thought,<8> yet, because he was a
senator of Rome, was fain (as St. Augustine saith) to follow that he
found fault with, to do that he disliked, to adore that he detested.
But come we to my stately dame Cloacina, and her lord Stercutius;
though these were not of the higher house called Consentes, yet I
hope for their antiquity, they may make great comparison; for he is
said to have been old Saturn, father to Picus that was called
Jupiter; and Cloacina was long before Priapus, and so long before
Felicity, that St. Augustine writes merrily, that he thinks verily,
Felicity forsook the Romans for disdain that Cloacina and Priapus
were deified so long before her; adding, Imperium Romanorum
propterea grandius, quam felicius fuit. The Roman empire therefore
was rather great than happy. But howsoever lady Felicity disdains
her, no question but madam Cloacina was always a very good fellow:
for it is a token of special kindness to this day, among the best
men in France, to reduce a syllogism in Bocardo together: insomuch,
as I have heard it seriously told, that a great magnifico of Venice,
being ambassador in France, and hearing a noble person was come to
speak with him, made him stay till he had untied his points; and
when he was new set on his stool, sent for the nobleman to come to
him at that time, as a very special favour. And for other good
fellowships, I doubt not but from the beginning it hath often
happened, that some of the nymphs of this gentle goddess have met so
luckily with some of her devout chaplains, in her chapels of ease,
and paid their privy tithes so duly, and done their service together
with such devotion, that for reward she hath preferred them within
forty weeks after to Juno Lucina, and so to Vagitana, Lacturtia, and
Cunina; for even to this day such places continue very fortunate.
And, whereas I named devotion, I would not have you think, how
homely soever the place is, that all devotion is excluded from it;
for I happening to demand of a dear friend of mine, concerning a
great companion of his, whether he were religious or no, and namely,
if he used to pray: he told me, that to his remembrance he never
heard him ask any thing of God, nor thank God for any thing, except
it were at a Jakes, he heard him say, he thanked God, he had had a
good stool. Thus you see a good stool might move as great devotion
in some men, as a bad sermon; and sure it suits very well, that
Quorum Deus est venter, eorum templum sit cloaca. He that makes his
belly his god, I would have him make a Jakes his chapel: but he that
would indeed call to mind how Arius, that notable and famous, or
rather infamous heretic, came to his miserable end upon a Jakes,
might take just occasion even at that homely business to have godly
thoughts, rather than as some have, wanton, or most have, idle. To
which purpose, I remember in my rhyming days, I wrote a short elegy
upon a homely emblem; which; both verse and emblem, they have set up
in Cloacina's chapel, at my house, very solemnly. And I am the
willinger to impart it to my friends, because I protest to you
truly, a sober gentleman protested to me seriously, that the,
conceit of the picture and the verse was an occasion to put honest
and good thoughts into his mind. And Plutarch defends with many
reasons, in his book called Symposeons, <9> that where the matters
themselves, often are unpleasant to behold, their counterfeits are
seen not without delectation.


{Illustration 3 – an elder tempted while at stool}

A godly father, sitting on a draught,
To do as need and nature hath us taught,
Mumbled (as was his manner) certain prayers,
And unto him the devil straight repairs!
And boldly to revile him he begins,
Alleging that such prayers are deadly sins;
And that he show'd he was devoid of grace,
To speak to God from so unmeet a place.
The reverent man, though at the first dismay'd,
Yet strong in faith, to Satan thus he said:
Thou damned spirit, wicked, false and lying,
Despairing thine own good, and ours envying;
Each take his due, and me thou canst not hurt,
To God my prayer I meant, to thee the dirt.
Pure prayer ascends to him that high doth sit,
Down falls the filth, for fiends of hell more fit.

Wherefore, though I grant many places and times are much fitter for
true devotion, yet I dare take it upon me, that if we would give the
devil no kinder entertainment in his other suggestions, than this
father gave him in his causeless reproof (for he gave it him in his
teeth, take it how he would); I say we should not be so easily
overthrown with his assaults, as daily we are, for lack of due
resistance. <10> But come we now to more particular, and not so
serious, matter. Have not many men of right good conceit, served
themselves with divers pretty emblems of this excremental matter; as
that in Alciat, to show that base fellows oft-times swim in the
stream of good fortune, as well as the worthiest?

Nos quoque poma notamus.<11>

Or as the old proverb, as well as emblem, that doth admonish men not
to contend with base and ignominious persons:

Hoc scio pro certo, quod si cum stercore certo
Vinco ceu vincor, semper ego maculor.
I know if I contend with dirty foes,
I must be soil'd, whether I win or lose.

Which emblem had almost hindered me the writing of this present
discourse, save that a good friend of mine told me, that this is a
fancy, and not a fight; and that if it should grow to a fight, he
assured me I had found so excellent a ward against his chief dart,
which is his strong breath, that I were like to quit my hands in the
fray as well as any man. But to proceed in these rare emblems: who
hath not read or heard of the picture made in Germany, at the first
rising of Luther? where to show, as it were by an emblem, with what
dross and draff the Pope and his partners fed the people, they
caused him to be portrayed in his pontificalibus riding on a great
sow, and holding before her taster a dirty pudding: which dirty
device, Sleidan the historian, very justly and gravely, both reports
and reproves; yet it served a turn for the time, and made great
sport to the people. But when this May-game was done, an hundred
thousand of them came home by weeping-cross; so as the poor sow was
not only sold by the ears, but sold by a drum, or slain by the
sword. Yet the Flanders cow had more wit than the German sow: for
she was made after another sort; viz. the mirror of princes feeding
her, the terror of princes spurring her; the Prince of Orange
milking her; or after some such fashion, for I may fail in the
particulars; but the conclusion was, that Monsieur d'Allanson <12>
(who indeed with most noble endeavour, though not with so happy
success, attempted them) would have pulled her back by the tail, and
she defiled his fingers. And thus much for emblems. Now for poesy
(though emblems also are a kind of poesy), I rather doubt that the
often usage of such words will make the poets be condemned, than
that the poets' authorities will make the words be allowed: but if
their example can give any countenance to them, they shall want
none.

It is certain, that of all poems the epigram is the wittiest; and of
all that write epigrams, Martial is counted the pleasantest. He, in
his 38th epigram of his first book, hath a distichon that is very
pliable to my purpose: of one that was so stately, that her close-
stool was of gold, but her drinking-cup of glass:

Ventris onus puro, nec te pudet excipis auro:
Sed bibis in vitro, carius ergo cacas. <13>

And in the same book, to a gentlewoman that had a pleasure to have
her dog lick her lips, as many do now a days:

Os et labra, tibi lingit Manneia, Catellus:
Non miror, merdas si libet esse cani.
The dog still licks thy lips, but no hurt;
I marvel not, to see a dog eat dirt. <14>

Further, in his third book, he mocks one of his fellow poets, that
drove away all good company with his verses; every man thought it
such a penance to hear them.

Nam tantos, rogo, quis ferat labores?
Et stanti legis, et legis sedenti:
Currenti legis, et legis cacanti,
In Thermas fugio: sonas ad aurem, &c.
Alas my head with thy long readings aches,
Standing or sitting, thou readest every where.
If I would walk, if I would go t'AJAX:
If to the bath, thou still art in mine ear.<15>

Where, by the way, you may note that the French courtesy I spake of
before, came from the Romans; since, in Martial's time, they shunned
not one the other's company at Monsieur AJAX. But now it may be,
some man will say, that these wanton and ribald phrases were
pleasing to those times of licentiousness and paganism that knew not
Christ; but now they are abhorred and detested, and quite out of
request. I would to God, with all my heart, he lied not that so
said; and that indeed religion could root out, as it should do, all
such wanton and vain toys (if they be all wanton and vain); yet I am
sure, that even in this age, and in this realm, men of worth and wit
have used the words and phrases, in as homely sort as Martial; some
in light, some in serious matter. Among Sir Thomas More's epigrams,
that fly over all Europe for their wit and conceit, the very last
(to make a sweet conclusion) is this:

Sectile ne tetros porrum tibi spiret odores,
Protinus a porro fac mihi cepe vores.
Denuo foetorem si vis depellere cepe:
Hoc facile efficient allia mansa tibi;
Spiritus at si post etiam gravis, allia restat,
Aut nihil, aut tantum, tollere merda potest.

Which, for their sakes that love garlic, I have taken some pains
with, though it went against my stomach once or twice.

If leeks you leek, but do their smell disleek,
Eat onions, and you shall not smell the leek:
If you of onions would the scent expel,
Eat garlic, that shall drown the onions' smell:
But against garlic's savour, at one word,
I know but one receipt, what's that? go look. <16>

Nay fie, will you name it, and read it to ladies: thus you make them
blame me that meant no less. But to come again to pleasant Sir
Thomas; he hath another epigram, that though this was but a sour
one, I durst as lief be his half at this, as at that, and it is
about a medicine for the colic.

Te crepitus perdit nimium, si ventre retentes,
Te propere emissus servat item crepitus:
Si crepitus servare potest, et perdere, nunquid
Terrificis crepitus regibus aqua potest?

Thus illfavouredly in English; for I will tell you true, my muse was
afraid to translate this epigram, and she brought me out three or
four sayings against it, both in Latin and English; <17> and two or
three shrewd examples, both of this last poet who died not of the
colic, and of one Collingborne that was hanged for a distichon of a
cat, a rat, and a dog. Yet I opposed Murus aheneus esto nil conscire
sibi,<18> and so with much ado she came out with it.

To break a little wind, sometime one's life doth save,
For want of vent behind, some folk their ruin have.
A power it hath therefore, of life and death express:
A king can cause no more, a crack doth do no less.

And when she had made it in this sorry fashion, she bade me wish my
friends, that no man should follow Sir Thomas More's humour, to
write such epigrams as he wrote, except he had the spirit to speak
two such apophthegms as he spake; of which the last seems to fall
fit into our text. <19> The first was, when the king sent to him to
know if he had changed his mind; he answered, yea: the king sent
straight a counsellor to him to take his subscription to the six
articles. Oh, said he, I have not changed my mind in that matter,
but only in this; I thought to have sent for a barber, to have been
shaved ere I had died; but now, if it please the king, he shall cut
off head, and beard, and all together. But the other was milder and
prettier; for after this, one coming to him as of good will, to tell
him he must prepare him to die, for he could not live: he called for
his urinal, and having made water in it, he cast it and viewed it
(as physicians do) a pretty while; at last he sware soberly, that he
saw nothing in that man's water, but that he might live, if it
pleased the king. A pretty saying, both to note his own innocency,
and move the prince to mercy. And it is like, if this tale had been
as friendly told the king, as the other perhaps was unfriendly
enforced against him, sure the king had pardoned him. But alas! what
cared he, or (to say the truth) what need he care, that cared not
for death? But to step back to my teshe (though every place I step
to yields me sweeter discourse); what think you by Haywood, that
escaped hanging with his mirth? The king being graciously and (as I
think) truly persuaded that a man that wrote so pleasant and
harmless verses, could not have any harmful conceit against his
proceedings; and so by the honest motion of a gentleman of his
chamber, saved him from the jerk of the six stringed whip. This
Haywood, for his proverbs and epigrams, is not yet put down by any
of our country, though one M. Davies doth indeed come near him, that
graces him the more in saying he puts him down. But both of them
have made sport with as homely words as ours be; one, of a
gentlewoman's glove, save that without his consent it is no good
manners to publish it; but old Haywood saith:

Except wind stand, as never wind stood,
It is an ill wind blows no man good.

And another not unpleasant, one that I cannot omit.

By word without writing one let out a farm,
The lessee most lewdly the rent did retain,
Whereby the lessor wanting writing had harm:
Wherefore he vowed, while life did remain,
Without writing never to let thing again.
Husband, quoth the wife, that oath again revart,
Else without writing you cannot let a crack.
God thank thee, sweet wife, quoth he, from my heart.
And so on the lips did her lovingly smack.

Such a thing it was; but not having the book here, and my memory
being no better than I would have it, I have stumbled on it as well
as I can. But now to strike this matter dead with a sound authority
indeed, and in so serious a matter, as under heaven is no weightier,
to such a person, as in the world is no worthier, from such a
scholar, as in Oxford was no learneder, mark what a verse here is in
an eucharistical and parenetical verse. He saith:

Italici Augiae stabulum foedamque cloacam,
A te purgari Romanaque ???????(skybala) tolli.<20>

If he had said stercora, I could guess well enough what it had
meant, but that the Greek hath in some ears a better emphasis. Thus
writes their great Campiano ?????? (mastix)<21> that confounds all
the Puritano Papistas; and yet to say truly, I make no great boast
of his authority to my text. If I had alleged him in divinity, I
would have stood lustily to it, and said ????? ??? (autos epha)<22>,
but for verses in praise of his mistress, there be twenty of us may
set him to school: for be it spoken, without disgrace or dispraise
to his poetry, such a metaphor had been fitter for a plain dame
abhorring all princely pomp, and not refusing to wear russet coats,
than for the magnificent majesty of a maiden monarch. Believe me, I
would fain have made him speak good rhyme in English; but (as I am a
true Misacmos) I beat my brains about it, the space that one may go
with the tide from London Bridge, down where the priest fell in upon
the maid, and from thence almost to Wapping, yet I could not couch
it into a cleanly distichon. But yet, because I know mistress
Philostilpnos will have a great mind to know what it means, I will
tell her by some handsome circumlocution. His meaning is, that a
lady of ladies, did for zeal to the Lord of lords, take the like
pains to purge some popish abuses, as the great giantly Hercules did
for Augeus. Now what manner of work that was, in the process of this
discourse, one way or other, you shall see me bring it in; though
yet I know not where will be the fittest place for it: here yet you
see by the way I have told, the man's meaning reasonable mannerly;
yet still methink I can say of his metaphor,

That still (methink) he us'd a phrase as pliant,
That said, his mistress was for wit a giant.


But I pray you let me go back again to merry Martial: for I should
have one more of his, if I have not lost it. Ad Phoebum. Oh, here I
have it.

Utere lactucis et mollibus utere malvis,
Nam faciem, duram, Phoebe, cacantis habes.<23>

He advises him to take somewhat to make him soluble; for his face
looked as if he were asking, who should be M. Mayor the next year.
But I think this jest was borrowed of Vespasian's fool, or else the
fool borrowed it of him; but the jest is worthy to be received into
this discourse. This fool had jested somewhat at all the board, and
Vespasian himself: and belike he thought it was ill playing with
edge tools and emperors; but Vespasian commanded him, and promised
him frank pardon, to break a good jest upon him. Well, sir (then
said the fool), I will but tarry till you have done your business;
whereby he quipped the Emperor's ill feature of face, that even when
he was merriest, looked as if he had been wringing hard on a close-
stool. But let us seek some better authorities than epigrams and
jesters: sure I am I shall find in history, which is called nuncia
vetustatis, vita memoriae, the reporter of antiquities, the life of
memory, many phrases expressing the same action, and not thinking
their style any whit abased thereby. He that writes the first book
of Samuel, tells that  David did cut off the lap of Saul's coat, and 
leaves not to tell what Saul was then doing.<24> The writer of
Bassianus' life, tells how he was not only privily murdered, but
murdered at the privy. Heliogabulus' body was thrown into a Jakes,
as writeth Suetonius. Lastly, the best, and the best written part of
all our chronicles, in all men's opinions, is that of Richard the
Third, written as I have heard by Moorton; but as most suppose, by
that worthy and uncorrupt magistrate, Sir Thomas More,<25> some time
Lord Chancellor of England; where it is written, how the king was
devising with Terril, how to have his nephews privily murdered; and
it is added he was then sitting on a draught (a fit carpet for such
a counsel). But to leave these tragical matters, and come to
comical; look into your sports of hawking and hunting: of which
noble recreations, the noble Sir Philip Sidney was wont to say, that
next hunting, he liked hawking worst: but the falconers and hunters
would be even with him, and say, that these bookish fellows, such as
he, could judge of no sports but within the verge of the fair fields
of Helicon, Pindus, and Parnassus. Now I would ask you, sir, lest
you should think I never read Sir Tristram: Do you not sometime
(beside the fine phrase, or rather metaphor, of inewing a woodcock)
talk both of putting a heron to the mount, and then of his slicing?
tell of springing a pheasant and a partridge, and find them out by
their dropping? Do you not further, to judge of your hawk's health,
look on her casting? If it be black at one end, and the rest yellow,
you fear she hath the philanders: if it be all black, you shall see
and smell she is not sound. Lastly, you have a special regard to
observe, if she make a clean mute. Moreover for hunting, when you
have harboured a stag, or lodged a buck, doth not the keeper before
he come to rouse him from his lodging (not without some ceremony),
show you his femishing, that thereby you may judge if he be a
seasonable deer? And soon after follows the melodious cry of the
hounds, which the good lady could not hear because the dogs kept
such a barking. And when all this is done, and you are rehearsing at
dinner what great sport you have had, in the midst of your sweet
meats, in comes Melampus or Ringwood, <26 > that sang the base that
morning, and in the return home lighted upon some powdered vermin,
and lays a chase under the table that makes all as sweet as any
sugar-carrion; and all this you willingly bear with, because it is
your pastime. Thus you must needs confess it is more than manifest,
that without reproof of ribaldry or scurrility, writings, both holy
and profane, emblems, epigrams, histories, and ordinary and familiar
communication, admit the use of the words with all their
appurtenances: in citing examples whereof I have been the more
copious, because of this captious time; so ready to backbite every
man's work, and I would forewarn men not to bite here, lest they
bite an unsavoury morsel. But here methink it were good to make a
pause, and (as it were at a long dinner) to take away the first
course, which commonly is of the coarsest meat, as powdered beef and
mustard; or rather (to compare it fitter) fresh beef and garlic, for
that hath three properties more suiting to this discourse: to make a
man wink, drink, and stink. Now for your second course, I could wish
I had some larks and quails, but you must have such as the market I
come from will afford; always remembered, that our retiring place,
or place of rendezvous (as is expedient when men have filled their
bellies), must be Monsieur AJAX, for I must still keep me to my
teshe: wherefore, as I say, here I will make the first stop; and if
you mislike not the fare thus far, I will make the second course
make you some amends.



NOTES TO THE FIRST SECTION

1. Side Note: Some say amend; and so done, were very well said.

2. Side note: Ajak's home preferred before a bawdy house.

3. Side note: The Lady Rogers; called, in her young days, the fair
nun of Cannington.

4. Side note: Isaac, lxiv 6. ("All our righteousnesses are as
menstrual rags").

5. The word given here as "emeralds" actually means an anal sore.
Side note: Regum. Lib i. cap. 6 v.4 (1 Samuel, not Kings, in most
modern editions).

6. Matthew xv. 17.

7. Side note: These gods were of the Privy Council to Jupiter. Chap
xxiii, book 4.

8. Side note: St. Augustine book vi. Chap 10.

9. Side note: Lib. v. Quest. i.

10. Side note: For want of the good take heed.

11. Nos quoque poma notamus.] "We also take account of apples (or
horse-dung)" Side note: Poma signifies horse-dung, as well as
apples.

12. Side note: M. D'Alençon.

13. Ventris onus puro, nec te pudet excipis auro:
Sed bibis in vitro, carius ergo cacas.] "You deposit your excretions,
without any sense of shame, into an unfortunate vessel of gold,
while you drink out of glass. The former operation, consequently, is
the more expensive" (Bohn). Side note: Lib. i. ep. 38 [37 in modern
editions].

14. Side Note: Lib. i. ep. 84.

15. Side note: Lib. iii. ep.44.

16. Tollere merde potest actually means "You can take a turd"

17. Side note: Non est bonum ludere cum sanctis. ("It is not good to
play with saints") It is good to play with your fellows. An nescis
longas regibus esse manus. ("If you do not know the long reach of
kings") He was beheaded.

18. Murus aheneus esto nil conscire sibi,] "Be this to you a wall of
brass, to know you have done no evil." Horace, Epistles i. 60.

19. Side note: Two apophthegms of Sir Thomas More

20. Italici Augiae stabulum foedamque cloacam,
A te purgari Romanaque ???????(skybala) tolli.] "I undertake to clean
from you the Italian Augean stables and filthy sewers of Roman [i.e.
Catholic] excrement" Side note: M. Rainolds much more seemly useth
the metaphor Lib. 1 chap. 8 p. 200. Jesuitae fimum in ipsius caput
retorquere. "To turn back the Jesuits' deeds on their heads."

21. ?????? (mastix)] "a whip."

22. ????? ??? (autos epha)] "he said it", a phrase used by disciples
of Pythagoras when quoting their master.

23. Ad Phoebum 
Utere lactucis et mollibus utere malvis,
Nam faciem, duram, Phoebe, cacantis habes.
"To Phoebus:
Take lettuces and take aperient mallows,
for you have the appearance, Phoebus, of one straining at stool."
(W. Ker) lib. iii ep. 66.

24. Side note: 1 Sam. xxiv. 3. Spelunca quam ingressus est Saul, ut
purgaret ventrem "A cave where Saul went in, to empty his bowels."

25. See http://www.exclassics.com/richard/lpm008.htm

26. Melampus or Ringwood] Common names for dogs.



THE SECOND SECTION
Proving the matter not to be contemptible.


IT hath been in the former part hereof sufficiently proved, that
there is no obscenity or barbarism in words concerning our
necessaries: but now for the place where these necessaries are to be
done; perhaps some will object, that it was never of that
importance, but that it was left to each man's own care to provide
for that which concerned his own peculiar necessity. It is not so,
for I can bring very authentical proofs out of ancient records and
histories, that the greatest magistrates that ever were, have
employed their wits, their care, and their cost, about these places;
as also have made divers good laws, proclamations, and decrees about
the same, and all thereto belonging, as by this that ensues shall
more plainly appear: in the handling whereof, I will use a contrary
method to the former; for I will begin now with profane stories, and
end with divine. First, therefore most certain it is, that mischiefs
make us seek remedies, diseases make us find medicines, and evil
manners make good laws. And as in all other things, so by all
likelihood in this we now treat of, when companies of men began
first to increase, and make of families towns, and of towns cities,
they quickly found not only offence, but infection, to grow out of
great concourse of people, if special care were not had to avoid it. 
And because they could not remove houses as they do tents, from
place to place, they were driven to find the best means that their
wits did then serve them, to cover rather than to avoid these
annoyances, either by digging pits in the earth, or placing the
common houses over rivers; but as Tully saith of metaphors, that
they were like our apparel, first devised to hide nakedness, then
applied for comeliness, and lastly abused for pride; so I may say of
these homely places, that first they were provided for bare
necessity; for indeed till Romulus' time I find little mention of
them, then they came to be matters of some more cost, as shall
appear in examples following: and I think I might also lay pride to
their charge; for I have seen them in cases of figured satin and
velvet (which is flat against the statute of apparel<1>); but for
sweetness or  cleanliness, I never knew yet any of them  guilty of
it; but that if they had but waited on a lady in her chamber a day
or a night, they would have made a man (at his next entrance into
the chamber) have said, so good speed ye. Now, as scholars do daily
seek out new phrases and metaphors, and tailors do oft invent new
fardingales and breeches; so I see no reason but magistrates may, as
well now as heretofore, devise new orders for cleanliness and
wholesomeness. But now to the stories I alleged before, as it were
at the second hand, out of Lactantius; how Titus Tacius, that was
king with Romulus, erected the statue of the goddess Cloacina in a
great privy made for that purpose. I find after this, in the story
of Livy, how Tarquinius Priscus, a man of excellent good spirit, but
husband to a wife of a more excellent spirit; a man that won a
kingdom with making a learned oration, and lost it with hearing a
rude one; a king, that was first crowned by an eagle, counselled by
an augur, and killed by a traitor: whose reign and his ruin were
both most strangely foretold. This worthy prince is reported by that
excellent historian, to have made two provisions for his city, one
for war, the other for peace; both very commendable: for war, a
stone wall about the town, to defend them from outward invasions;
and for peace, a goodly Jakes within the town, with a vault to
convey all the filth into Tiber, to preserve them from inward
infection.

Not long after him reigned Tarquinius, surnamed the proud; a tyrant,
I confess, and an usurper, and husband to a dragon rather than a
woman; but himself surely, a man valiant in war, provident in peace,
and in that young world, a notable politician: of whom Livy takes
this special note; that coming to the crown without law, and fearing
others might follow his example, to do that to him he had done to
another, he was the first that appointed a guard for his person, the
first that drew public matters to private hearing, the first that
made private wars, private peace, private confederacies; the first
that lessened the number of the senators, the first that when any of
them died kept their rooms void, with many excellent Machiavellian
lessons; which, whoso would be better instructed of, let him read
but his accusing of Turnus, his stratagem against the Gabians, &c.
But the matter I would praise him for, is none of all these; but
only because he built a stately temple, and a costly Jakes; the
words be, Cloacamque maximum receptaculum omnium purgamentorum
urbis; a mighty great vault to receive all the filth of the city. Of
which two works, joining them both together, Livy saith thus: Quibus
duobus operibus vix nova haec magnificentia quicquam aedeqavit:
which two great works, the new magnificence of this our age can
hardly match. Now though Brutus after, in a popular and seditious
oration to incite the multitude to rebellion, debased this worthy
work of his, saying he wasted the treasure of the realm, and tired
and toiled out the people, in exhaurendis cloacis, in emptying of
Jaxes (for that was his word); yet it appears by the history, that
if his son had not deflowered the chaste Lucrece (the mirror of her
sex), Brutus, with his feigned folly, true value, and great
eloquence, could never have disgraced him. For even with all the
faults, you, see that Brutus his own sons would have had him again;
who laying their heads together with many young gallants that
thought themselves much wiser than their fathers, concluded among
themselves, that a king was better than a consul, a court better
than a senate; that to live only by laws was too strict and rigorous
a life, and better for peasantly than princely dispositions; that
kings could favour, as well as frown; reward, as well as revenge;
pardon, as well as punish: whereas, the law was merciless, mute, and
immutable: finally, they concluded it was ill living for them where
nothing but innocency could protect a man. Lo, Brutus! how
eloquently thy sons can plead against their father: but thou hadst a
jury of sure freeholders, that gave a verdict against them; and
thyself wast both judge and sheriff, and hastenedst execution.

Oh, brave minded Brutus! I will not call thee primus Romanorum<2>
because one was shent for calling one of thy posterity, ultimus
Romanorum <3>; but this I must truly say, they were two brutish
parts, both of him and you: one to kill his sons for treason, the
other to kill his father in treason: <4 > and yet you would both
make us believe you had reason; and why so? forsooth because

Victrix causa placet superis sed victa Catoni.<5>

That is to say, in English, you had great fortune, and your cousin
had great friends; yet neither died in bed, but both in battle; only
his death was his enemies' advancement, and thy death was thy
enemies' destruction; but to omit these trifles and return to my
teshe: whereas thou railest against so great a prince for making of
so sumptuous a Jakes, this I cannot endure at thy hands; and if thou
hadst played me such a saucy part here in my country, first of mine
own authority, I would have granted the good behaviour against
you;<6> secondly, Tarquinius himself might have Scandalum magnatum
<7> against you; and, thirdly, a bill should have been framed
against you in the Star-chamber, upon the statute of unlawful
assemblies; and then you would have wished you had kept your
eloquence to yourself, and not when a man hath done but two good
works in all his life, you to stand railing at one of them. For
suppose that Tarquin had given me but a fee, thus would I plead for
him: M. Brutus, you have made us believe all this while you were but
a fool; but I see now, if one had begged you, he should have found
you a Bigamus. And whereas you seem to disgrace my honourable client
for making of A JAX, I dare undertake to prove it, that your own
laws, your religions, your customs, yea, your conscience is against
you, and shows it is but a mere calumniation. For to omit dame
Cloacina, so lately deified, did not the noble Hercules, whom you
Brutus honour as a god, far ancienter than Quirinus and Romulus,
among those many labours that eternized his memory, make clean
Augeus' dunghills.

Quis non Euristea durum,
Aut illaudati nescit Busiridis aras.<8>

If the work have a baseness, Tarquinius but with his purse, Hercules
with his person affected it; leaving a pattern to posterity, both of
labour and wit; for by turning a stream of water on the micksons, he
scoured away that in a week, that an hundred could scarce have done
in a year. Then would I end with some exclamation, and say, O
tempora, O mores! Oh times, oh manners! If a man be not popular, you
will straight say he is proud; if he keep good hospitality, you will
say he doth but fill many Jaxes; if he build goodly vaults for
sewers, you will say he spends his treasure in exhauriendis
cloacis.<9> Or rather I would say, O Hercules! come and bend thy bow
against Brutus, that shoots arrows through thy sides to slay
Tarquinius.<10> But now let me leave playing the lawyer, and lawyer-
like be friends immediately with him, whom even now I talked against
so earnestly, I mean with Brutus; because indeed, saving in this one
case, I never mean to be of counsel with Tarquin; for such proud
clients will speak us passing fair while we serve their turns, and
after pick a quarrel against us when we sue for a reward. Now
therefore to go forward with the story.

When this valiant Brutus had thus discarded the kings and queens out
of the pack, and showed himself indeed a sworn and avowed enemy to
all the court cards, there crept in many new forms of government,
and every one worse than other: namely, consuls, dictators,
decemviri, tribunes, triumviri; till at last, after often
interchanges, it came to the government of Emperors. In all which
times there were not only laws and special caveats given to the
great officers in time of war and danger, Ne quid respub. detrimenti
caperet, to look to the safety of the main chance (the
commonwealth), but also there were officers of good account; as
Aediles, praetores urbis, that made inquiries de stillicidiis, de
aqua ductibus,<11> of reparation of houses, of water courses, or
common sewers; of which I could recite out of the 43rd book of the
Digest. tit. 23. de cloacis; where you shall find it was lawful for
any man purgare et reficere cloacam.<12> What officers were to
license him that would privatam cloacam facere, qua habeat exitum in
publicum.<13> What special care was to be had of Tubus and
Fistula.<14> Lastly, that novam cloacam facere is concedit, cui
publicarum viarum cura sit; that is, that no man might make a new
Jakes, but he that had licence of the wardens of highways; with much
more, which I would cite if it were not to avoid prolixity. And from
them no doubt was derived our commission of sewers, of which the
best of us all I hope will take no scorn: which commission, though
in our country it is chiefly intended to keep open the channels of
rivers in the deep country, that the water may have free passage;
yet the very name imports, that therein is comprised the subject of
my present discourse; which in populous towns had as much need to be
looked to, as the other, infection being fit to be avoided, as well
as inundation. But now I hasten to imperial examples; for though I
have showed already some authorities for my text out of the practise
of the laws, the provident care of magistrates, the magnificent cost
of kings, the religion (though false) of pagans: yet until I have
added to all these the majesty of emperors, and the verity of
Scriptures, I suppose some carping mouths will not be stopped.

The first example I meet with among the emperors, was a matter
rather of courtesy than cost: and if any man will say, that I draw
this into my treatise as it were obtorto collo,<15 > I answer, that
in my understanding, the tale falleth so fit and proper unto this
discourse, as indeed to have brought it into any discourse saving of
A JAX, I would say it were improper and uncivil: the argument holds
a minore ad majus.<16>  Now hearken to my tale. Claudius, Emperor of
Rome, and husband to that filthy Messalina (vilissima qua fuerunt
vel sunt),<17> she that was worthy for the commonness of her body
(be it spoken with save the reverence of all women that are or were,
save herself) to have been metamorphosed into A JAX, rather than
poor Hecuba, for barking at him that killed her son, into a bitch.
This Claudius, I say, though not for cost (as Tarquin), yet for his
courtesy was greatly to be commended: for a gentleman one day being
talking with him, and falling suddenly into a grievous fit of the
colic, the poor gentleman would not for good manners sake break
wind, which might presently have eased him; and after the disease
increased so sore on him that he died. The Emperor informed of his
death, was much grieved thereat, especially hearing of the cause;
and immediately thereupon made it be solemnly proclaimed, that if
any man hereafter should be troubled with the colic, it should not
be taken for ill manners to break wind, though it were in the
Emperor's own company. Now it may be, some man in disgrace of this
proclamation will say, that this Claudius was but a cuckold and a
fool. I answer, that for the cuckold that was none of his fault; and
if it were a fault, God forbid all our faults should be seen on our
foreheads. And for the fool, the old proverb may serve us, Stultorum
plena sunt omnia; the world is full of fools, but take heed how you
beg him for a fool: <18>; for I have heard of one that was begged in
the court of wards for a fool, and when it came to trial, he proved
a wiser man by much than he that begged him; and though I have small
skill in the law, especially in these prerogative cases (for I must 
confess I studied Littleton but to the title of discontinuance), yet
methink I should find out a quirk, to make them that should beg him
have a cold suit in the court of wards. For I take it to be a ruled
case, that though a man hold wholly in Capite,<19> put the case by a
whole knight's service, or half a knight's service, yet if he be
covert baron<20>, as Claudius was (for I am sure his wife wore the
breeches), and being at his fool age of thirty-one, the Custodia
must of course be granted to the wife, although the man be plus
digne de sang.<21> And thus much we say, saving to ourselves all
advantage of exception to the insufficiency of the bill, &c.

And without that, the said Claudius did fondly to cause a man's hand
to be cut off upon the motion of a stranger; and without that, he
had  almost marred all the pastime he and his friends should have
had at a Naumachia, or sea-game, with re-saluting the slaves that
should have fought, in good Latin. <22> And lastly, without that,
the said Claudius, at his being in England<23> was (though he was
counted one of the best freeholders in Middlesex), could forfeit any
land that he held by the right of his sword, either in fee-simple or
fee-tail, either by the sock or the smock, to any other lady, but
the lady his wife. But alas, Claudius! thy friends may say, that I
am a bad lawyer; for all this while I have done little better than
confess the action; but I care not, seeing thou art dead, Mortui non
mordent,<24> and it were fitter now to preach for thee, than to
plead for thee: well then for thy gentle proclamation's sake, lo!
what in sadness (if I were to make thy funeral sermon) I would say
for thee, that howsoever some writers have wronged thee with the
name of a fool, <25> in one of thy judgments I may liken thy wisdom
to Solomon; and in one of thy jests I can compare thy wit with
Diogenes. As for example,<26> a woman on a time disclaiming her son,
and pretending that for conscience' sake she must needs confess a
truth, viz. how her own child died, and this was a supposititius, a
substitute in his place, for avoiding of her husband's displeasure;
no evidence appearing to the contrary, and the next heir following
the matter very hard, by complot with the mother who remained
obstinate in the tale.<27> Claudius, then sitting in judgment, seems
to believe it; and seeing the man a comely young man, and she no old
woman, and oft protesting she maliced him not, he commanded her
immediately in his presence to marry him. The malicious mother,
driven to that unlooked for pinch, openly confessed her unnatural
malice, to avoid so unnatural a marriage: and thus much for his
justice; now let us hear what his jest is. A certain gentleman that
had his fingers made of lime twigs, stole a piece of plate from
Claudius one day at a banquet; the conveyance was not so cleanly,
but one had spied it and told the Emperor, and offered to accuse him
of it, whereby his goods might have been all confiscate: but this
good prince would neither head him nor hang him, no nor so much as
once suffer him to be troubled; only the next time he came he caused
him to be served in an earthen dish; the gentleman being abashed at
it, for the dish gave him his dinner. Claudius was so far from
laying his crime in his dish, that he said, be of good cheer man,
and fall to thy meat, and when thou hast dined put up that dish too;
for I will spare thee that with a better will than the last, for
perhaps thou hast a mind to poke up thy dish when thou likest the
meat well. And so farewell, good Claudius, and when any of my
friends are troubled with the colic, I hope I shall make them
remember thee.

The next emperor that is fit to bring into this discourse, is
Vespasian; though his predecessor Vitellius, who is noted to have
been a passing great eater, would I think have taken it in good
part, to have been offered a cleanly and easy place for egestion
after his good digestion. But to the purpose: Vespasian, before he
was emperor, had borne some other offices, among the which one was
Aedilis; and it is written of him, that he incurred great
displeasure with Otho, then emperor, because he had not seen better
to the keeping sweet of the streets, and caused the filth of them
(according to his office) to be carried to the places appointed for
the same. But afterward, himself coming to be emperor (though the
city of Rome was before his time sufficiently furnished of Jaxes),
yet it seemed there wanted other places of near affinity to them
(which he found belike when he was Aedile by experience), I mean
certain pissing conduits; and therefore he caused divers to be
erected in the most populous and frequented places of the city, and
saved all the urine in cisterns, and sold it for a good sum of money
to the dyers. But though I tell you the tale thus plainly, you must
imagine the matter was much more formally and finely handled, and
namely, that there was an edict set out in this sort:

By the Emperor
C. FLAVIUS VESPASIANUS PATER PATRIAE, SEMPER AUGUSTUS, &c.

FORASMUCH as his Majesty hath been informed by sundry credible men,
that great abuse is committed by the irreverent demeanour of divers
persons, ill brought up, who without all due respect of civility and
reverence, in most unseemly manner shed their urine, not only
against the walls of his royal palace, but also against the temples
of the Gods and Goddesses: whereby not only ugly and loathsome
sights, but filthy and pestiferous savours are daily engendered: his
Majesty therefore, as well of a fatherly care of his citizens, as of
a filial reverence to the Gods, hath to his great charges, and of
his princely bounty and magnificence, erected divers and sundry
places of fair polished marble, for this special purpose; requiring,
and no less straightly charging all persons, as well citizens as
strangers, to refrain from all other places, saving these specially
appointed, as they tender his favour, &c.

Thus could I have penned the edict, if I had been secretary; for it
had not been worth a fig, if they had not artificially covered the
true intent (which was the profit), and gloriously set forth the
goodly and godly pretence (that was least thought on); viz. the
health of the people, and clean keeping of the temples. But I doubt,
notwithstanding this goodly edict, it will be objected, that it was
condemned for a base part, by a judge whose sentence is above all
appeal; I mean that noble Titus, deliciae humani generis;<28> he
that thought the day lost in which he had done no man good; to
answer which I would but say, as was said to him when the passing
money was put into the perfumed purse, suavis odor lucri, the smell
of gain is sweet. And I dare undertake, this answer will satisfy
divers men in London, and many of the worshipful of the city, that
make sweet gains of stinking wares;<29>  and will laugh, and be fat,
and say,

So we get the chinks,
We will bear with the stinks.

But I must find out a better answer for courtly wits; and therefore
I say to them, that according to the discipline and custom of the
Romans (in my opinion under reformation of their better judgments),
this was so honourable a part of Vespasian, that he was therefore
worthy to have been deified: for if Saturnus was allowed as a god,
by the name of Stercutius, as is before alleged, for finding a
profitable use of all manner of soil, I see a good reason (a
paribus)<30> that Vespasian should as well be deified for finding a
means to make money of urine; and accordingly to be named Urinatius,
of Urina; as the other is, of Stercus, Stercutius. Further,
Vespasian was famous for two true miracles done by him, greater than
all their gods beside ever did. Now if any take exception to his
face, because the fool told him he looked as if it went hard with
him, trust me it shall go hard with me too, but I will find somewhat
to say for him; and first, I will get some of the painting that
comes from the river of Oroonoque, which will wonderfully mend his
complexion. Secondly, I will say this; how bad soever his face was,
he had something so good, that a handsome woman gave him a thousand
crowns for putting his seal with his label to her patent; and yet
she exhibited the petition (as I take it) in forma paper, for she
was stark naked. Once this I am sure Suetonius writes; that when his
steward asked him how he should set down that thousand crowns on his
book, he bade him write it among his other perquisites in some such
sort:

Item. For respite of homage from a loving tenant to her lovely lord,
for a whole knight's fee, recepi<31> . . . . 1000 crowns.

Now for his wit, though I could tell you two excellent tales, how he
deceived a groom of the chamber, of his brother, and how he would
needs be half with his horsekeeper, for setting on a shoe on a horse
that lacked none; yet I omit them both, because many will be too apt
to follow the precedent, and I will keep me very strictly to my
teshe; and specially because I hasten to a most royal example, I
mean of Trajan. There is no man (I think) that hath either travelled
far countries, or read foreign stories, but hath either heard of the
famous exploits and victories that he had, or seen some of the
stately and sumptuous monuments that he made. This Trajan was
Emperor of Rome; and then emperor when Rome stood at her highest
pitch of greatness: a man whose conquests were most glorious, whose
buildings were most gorgeous, whose justice was most gracious: he
that stayed his whole army, to right the cause of one widow; he that
created a magistrate, and delivering him the sword for justice, said
to him, use this for me as long as I govern justly, but against me
when I govern otherwise; he in whose time no learned man was seen to
want, no poor man was seen to beg; he that would boast of Nerva his
predecessor, of Plotina his wife, of Plutarch his counsellor;
finally, this Trajan was so well accomplished a prince in all
princely virtues, as no story, no time, no memory, in all points,
can match him. This most renowned Emperor, hearing there was a town
in Bithynia, far off from Rome, and in a place where he was like
never to be troubled with the evil savour, that was much annoyed for
lack of a good conveyance of the common privies, thought himself
bound (as a father to all his subjects) to provide a remedy for such
an inconvenience; and of his own purse he took order for making a
vault, of great cost and charge, in the city. And for full
satisfaction of the reader herein, I will set down the two epistles
as I find them in the tenth book of the epistles of Plinius Secundus
to Trajan. Epist. 99.<32>

Plinius Secundus Trajano Imp. S.

Amastrianorum civitas, Domine, et elegans et ornata, habet, inter
pracipua opera pulcherrimam eandemque longissimam plateam, cujus a
latere per spatium omne porrigitur, nomine quidem flumen, revera
cloaca foedissima. Qua sicut turpis et immundissima aspectu ita
pestilens est odore teterrimo. Quibus ex causis non minus
salubritatis quam decoris interest, eam contegi. Quod fiet si
permiseris, curantibus nobis ne desit quoque pecunia operi tam
magno, quam necessario.—Which is thus in English:

Caius Plinius, to Trajan the Emperor, greeting. The city of the
Amestrians (my lord) being commodious and beautiful, hath among her
principal goodly buildings, a very fair and long street, on the side
whereof runneth through the whole length of it a brook, in name (for
it is called so), but indeed a most filthy Jakes; which as it is
foul and most uncleanly to behold, so is it infectious with the
horrible vile savour; wherefore it were expedient, no less for
wholesomeness than for handsomeness, to have it vaulted, which shall
be done if it please you to allow it; and I will take care that
there shall be no want of money for such a work, no less chargeable
than necessary. Thus writes Plinius Secundus, a Roman senator, and
as it were a deputy lieutenant in the province of Bithynia, to the
great Trajan; and I do half marvel he durst write so; for had it
been in the time of Domitian, Commodus, or Nero, either Martial
should have jested at him with an epigram; or some secretary that
had envied his honest reputation, should have been willed to have
answered the letter in some scornful sort; and would have written
thus:

Master Pliny, my Lord God the Emperor <33> not vouchsafing to answer
your letter himself, hath commanded me to write thus much to you;
that he marvels you will presume to trouble his divine Majesty with
matters of so base regard; that your father being held a wise man
and a learned, might have taught you better manners; that his
Majesty hath matters of great import, concerning the state of the
empire, both for war and peace, to employ his treasure in: thus much
I was commanded to write. Now for mine own part, let me say thus
much to you; that I heard my Lord God the Emperor say, that if the
ill savour annoy you, you may send to your mistress for a perfumed
handkerchief to stop your nose; and that some physicians say, the
smell of a Jakes is good against the plague.—Some such answer as
this, had been like to have come from some of those beastly
emperors, and their filthy followers. But how did Trajan answer it?
I will set you down his own letter, out of the same book; in the
same language.

Argumentum.
Permittit confornicari cloacam,
TR. PLINIO. S.

Rationis est, mi Secunde charissime, contegi aquam istam, qua per
civitatem Amastrianorum fluit, si detecta salubritati obest. Pecunia
ne huic operi desit curaturum te secundum diligentiam, tuam certum
habeo. Thus in English:

It is good reason, my dearest Secundus, that the water be covered
that runs by the city of the Amestrians, if the want of covering may
breed infection: and for money for the work, I make no question, but
you according to your accustomed diligence will make provision.

Short and sweet, yea most sweet indeed, because it was of an
unsavoury matter. But I had almost forgot to English the argument;
and then folks might laugh indeed at me, and think I were Magister
incipiens<34> with an s and say I could not English these three
words, permittit confornicari cloacam; what the good year, what is
this same confornicari? Trust me, this is a word I never read in
Homer nor Aristotle; marry indeed they wrote but ill Latin: no nor
in Tully, in Livy, in Tacitus, nor in all the poets: what a strange
word is this! Ho, sirrah, bring hither the dictionary. Which of
them, Cooper? No, no, Thomas Coperus omisit plurima verba.<35> Which
then, that with the French afore the Latin, or Thomas Thomas? Yea,
bring me them two. What, hast thou brought the two dictionaries? I
meant but the two Thomases.<36> Come old friend Tom, Tom, Qui fueras
quondam clarae praepositor aulae,<37> you have made rods to jerk me
withal ere now; I think I shall give you a jerk, if you do not help
me to some English for this word. Look it, sirrah, there in the
dictionary. Con, con. Tush, what dost thou look in the French? thou
wilt make a sweet piece of looking, to look for confornicar in the
French: look in the Latin for fornicor. F, fa, fe, fi, fo, for, for,
foramen, forfex, forica, forma, fornicator <38>(now I think I am
near it), fornix, fornicor, -aris, -are. There, what is that? a
vault, to vault or arch any thing with a compass. Well said, carry
away the books again now I have it. Then thus it is: He alloweth the 
vaulting or arching over of the Jakes. Marry, God's blessing on his
heart for his labour, and I love him the better for it. Wherefore
(most noble Trajan) thou mayest well be called the pattern of all
princely qualities; comely, beautiful, martial, merciful, a lover of
learning, moderate in private expenses, magnificent in public, most
goodly of stature, amiable, not only in thy virtues, but even in thy
vices: for, to say the worst was ever said of thee, these were all
thy faults; ambition or desire of glory in wars, love of women, and
persecuting of religion. For so they join thee, Nero, Domitianus,
Trajanus, Antonius, Pontifices Romanos laniarunt.<39> To which, thus
I answer without a fee, but with all my heart: that thy ambition was
so honourable, and thy warlike humour so well tempered, that thou
didst truly witness of thyself, that thou didst never envy any man's
honour, for the confidence thou hadst of thine own worth; and all
the world can witness, that thou never didst make unjust war, nor
refuse any just or indifferent peace. For that same sweet sin of
lechery, I would say as the friar said, a young man and a young
woman in a green arbour in a May morning; if God do not forgive it,
I would. For as Sir Thomas More saith of Edward the Fourth; he was
subject to a sin, from which, health of body in great prosperity of
fortune, without a special grace, hardly refraineth. And to speak
uprightly of him, his lusts were not furious, but friendly; able
with his goodly person, his sweet behaviour, and his bountiful
gifts, to have won Lucretia. Besides, no doubt, his sin was the
less, in that he ever loved his wife most dearly, and used her most
respectively: for I have ever maintained this paradox, it is better
to love two too many, than one too few. Lastly, for the persecution
of thy time, though I dare not defend it, yet there is a maxim,
invincibilis ignorantia recusat,<40> and sure thou didst not know
the truth, and thy persecution was very gentle, and half against thy
will, as appeareth by the 98th epistle of the tenth book of Pliny's
epistles; where thou dost utterly reject all secret promoters, and
dost pronounce against the strict inquisition, Conquirendi non
sunt,<41> etc. Wherefore I doubt not to pronounce, that I hope thy
soul is in heaven, both because those thou didst persecute prayed
for thee, wishing to thee, as Tertullian saith, Vitam prolixam,
imperium securum, domum tutam, exercitus fortes, senatum fidelem,
populum probum, orbem quietum; a long life, a happy reign, a safe
dwelling, strong armies, a faithful senate, honest people, and a
quiet world. Further, it is written by authors of some credit, that
thy soul was delivered out of hell at the prayer of great St.
Gregory;<42> which though I am not bound to believe, yet as in love
I had rather love too many than too few, so in charity I had rather
believe too much than too little. As for that titan scripture, ex
inferno nulla redemptio,<43> I have heard it oft alleged by great
clerks; but I think it is in the Epistle of St. Paul to the
Laodiceans, or in Nicodemus' Gospel: for I never yet could find it
in the Bible. Wherefore, this I will frankly say for Trajan; that
wheresoever I find a prince or a peer, with so great virtues and so
few vices, I will honour him, love him, extol him, admire him, and
pronounce this of him; that the army is happy that hath such a
general, the prince happy that hath such a counsellor, the mistress
happy that hath such a servant, and thus I end my profane
authorities. And now I come to the divine; wherein I think I shall
serve you, in the banquet I have promised you, as myself have been
served many times at our commencement feasts, and such like, in
Cambridge; that when we have been in the midst of some pleasant
argument, suddenly the Bibler hath come, and with a loud and audible
voice begun with Incipit libri Deuteronomium, caput vicesimum
tertium.<44> And then suddenly we have been all s't tacete,<45> and
hearkened to the Scripture; for even so must I now, after all our
pleasant stories bring in, as I promised, some divine authorities;
to the which I pray you let us with all due reverence be attentive.
<46>

In the aforesaid xxiii. chapter of Deuteronomy, in the 12th verse, I
find this text.

12. Habebis locum extra castra ad quem egrediaris ad requisita
nature.

13. Gerens paxillum in balteo, cumque sederis, fodies per circuitum,
et egeste humo operies quo relevatus es.

14. Dominus enim Deus tuus ambulat in medio castrorum, ut eruat te,
et tradat tibi inimicos tuos, et sint castra tua sancta, et nihil in
eis appareat faeditatis, ne derelinquat te. That is:

12 Thou shalt have a place without thy tents, to which thou shalt go
to do thy necessities of nature.

13 Carrying a spadestaff<46> in thy hand, and when thou wilt ease
thee, thou shalt cut a round turf; and thou shalt cover thy
excrements therewith, in the place where thou didst ease thyself.

14. For the Lord thy God walketh in the midst of thy tents to
deliver thee, and to give thy enemies into thy hands; that thy tents
may be holy, and that there appear no filthiness in them, lest he
forsake thee.

But methink some may say, upon hearing of this text, what is it
possible there should be such a scripture that handleth so homely
matters? I can hardly believe it; I have always had a Bible in my
parlour these many years, and ofttimes when the weather hath been
foul, and that I have had no other book to read on, and have wanted
company to play at cards or at tables with me, I have read in those
books of the Old Testament, at least half an hour by the clock; and
yet I remember not any such matter. Nay, further, I have heard a
preacher that hath kept an exercise a year together upon the books
of Moses, and hath told us of Genesis and genealogies, of the ark
and propitiatory, of pollutions, of washings, of leprosies;, but I
never heard him talk of such a homely matter as this. I answer it
may be so very well. And therefore now I pray you, sith the text is
so strange to you, give me leave to put you in mind of two virtuous
and honest observations out of this (how homely soever) yet holy
Scripture. One, to be thankful to our Saviour for his mercies; the
other, to be faithful to our sovereign for her merits. We may thank
God that all these servile ceremonies, which St. Paul calleth the
works of the law, as circumcision, new moons, sabbaths, washings,
cleanings, with touch not, handle not, eat not, &c. are now taken
away and quite abolished by the Gospel; which hath now made Omnia
munda mundis.<48> And as St. Augustine saith, instead of ceremonies,
cumbersome, infinite, intolerable, impossible, hath given
sacraments, easy, few, sweet, and gracious; and hath taught us,
instead of hearing Fac hoc et viva,<49> to say now to him, Da Domine
quod jubes.<50> Secondly, where as it seems you never heard this
text preached on, you may bless in your soul, and pray for her
Majesty's so peaceable and prosperous reign; this text being not fit
for peace and a pulpit, but only for war and a camp. And therefore,
though I hope we shall never have cause to hear such a scripture
preached in England, yet those that serve in other countries, both
have and shall hear it thus applied (and that oft not without need);
viz. that though now to the clean, all things are clean, yet still
we must have a special care of cleanliness and wholesomeness, even
for the things here spoken of; and if for such things, how much more
for rapes, thefts, murders, blasphemies; things (as God knows) too
common in all our camps. Ne Dominus Deus noster, qui ambulat in
media castrorum derelinquat nos; lest the Lord our God, that walketh
in the midst of our tents, should forsake us. And even in the time
of the sweetest peace, methinks I could also say, here at home, that
it is an irreverent thing for churches ordained for prayer, and
churchyards appointed for burial, to be polluted and defiled as if
they were kennels and dunghills.

And I have thought sometime with myself, that if I were but half so
great an officer under our most gracious Empress, who is indeed
worthy, and only worthy to be Trajan's mistress, as Plinius Secundus
was under that Trajan, I would write for the mending of such a
loathsome fault in my neighbour town of Bath (where many noble
persons are oft annoyed with it), as Pliny did for Amestris. Yet why
may I not by poetica licentia,<51> and by an honest and necessary
figure (in this age) called reprehensio,<52> imagine myself for half
an hour to be Secundus; and suppose some other, that perhaps at this
hour is not far from Trajan's country, to be that worthiest Trajan?
For though in the English grammar, the feminine gender is more
worthy than the masculine, the which rule I wish long may hold; yet
lest old Priscian should say I brake his head when I never came near
him,<53> I will keep me in this my pleasant imitation within such an
honest limitation, as shall be free from all just reprehension, and
write instead of C. Pl. Secundus Trajano. Imp. Salutem.

Haec tibi Traiano, terraque marique remoto,
Scribit Misacmos, nulli pietate Secundus.<54>


"The City of Bath (my lord) being both poor enough and proud enough,
hath since her Highness being there, wonderfully beautified itself
in fine houses for victualling and lodging, but decays as fast in
their ancient and honest trades of merchandise and clothing: the
fair church her Highness gave order should be re-edified, stands at
a stay; and their common sewer, which before stood in an ill place,
stands now in no place, for they have not any at all; which for a
town so plentifully served of water, in a country so well provided
of stone, in a place resorted unto so greatly (being at two times of
the year, as it were, the pilgrimage of health to all saints),
methink seemeth an unworthy and dishonourable thing; wherefore if
your lordship would authorize me, or some wiser than me, to take a
strict account of the money, by her Majesty's gracious grant
gathered and to be gathered, which in the opinion of many cannot be
less than ten thousand pounds (though not to wrong them, I think
they have bestowed upon the point of ten thousand pounds abating but
one cipher), I would not doubt; of a ruinate church to make a
reverent church, and of an unsavoury town a most sweet town.

"This I do the rather write, because your lordship, and the rest of
her Majesty's most honourable counsel, thought me once worthy to be
steward of that town, but that the wiser counsel of the town thought
it not meet, out of a deeper reach; lest, being already their poor
neighbour, this increase might have made my estate too great among
them. For indeed the fee belonging to it, and some other commodities
annexed, might have been worth to me, de claro viis et modis, per
annum CCCClxxx.d. <55>

"Moreover, I am to certify your lordship, that the spring taken out
of the hot bath into the private, doth not annoy or prejudice the
virtue of the hot bath, as her Majesty hath been lately informed:
and it is not unnecessary, for some honourable persons that come
thither, sometimes to have such a private bath." But now I pray you
let us hearken to the Scripture, for the bibler is not yet come to
Tu autem.<56>

I find also in the second and third chapter of Nehemias, which some
call the second book of Esdras, where he tells how nobody but he and
his ass went to survey the city, Et ingressus sum ad portam vallis
nocte, ante fontem draconis, et ad portam stercoris, et considerabam
murum Jerusalem dissipate, et portas ejus consumptas igni.<57> And
in the third chapter, showing who repaired all the ruins, Et portam
vallis aedificavit Hanum, et habitatores Zanoe,ipsi edificaverunt
eam, et statuerunt valvas ejus, et seras, et vectes, et mille
cubitos in muro usque ad portam sterquilinii. Et portam sterquilinii
edavit Melchias filius Rhecab princeps, etc. And the gate of the
valley built Hanum and the inhabitants of Zanoe; they built it, and
they made the leaves of the gate, and the locks, and the hinges, and
a thousand cubits in the wall, even to the dung gate: and Melchias,
son of Rhecab, being Prince of Bethacharan, built the dung gate.
<58>I would have said, save-reverence the dung gate, but that
Nehemias, who was a gentleman well brought up, and a courtier, and
had been a sewer and cupbearer to Artaxerxes, writes it as I have
recited it.

But now to the purpose; perhaps you will say, that this makes
nothing to the present argument, that the gate is called doungate;
for we have a gate in London called Dougate, that with a little dash
with a pen will seem to be the same gate, and yet hath no great
affinity with the matter: and on the other side, there is a place
with a glorious title of Queen Hithe, and yet it was ordained for my
lady Cloacina; I grant it might be so, for so there is a parish by
London called Hornsey, which is an ungracious crooked name, and yet
I verily persuade me, that the most glorious or gracious street in
London, hath more horns in it sometime, either visible or invisible,
than all the other parish. But concerning the gate in Jerusalem,
called Porta stercoris,<59> I find it was so called, because it lay
on the east side of the city, toward the brook Cedron, whither all
the rainwater of the city, and all other conveyances ran, as they do
out of the city of London into the Thames: and that being so, and
the city so populous, the gate might well be called Porta stercoris.
Now, without the city, I find mentioned another place ordained for
the like purpose, to carry out all such filth as the rain could not
wash away, and had no common passage; and that was the valley of
Hinnon, which seems by the map to lie southeast and by south to the
temple; and thither, I say, the scavengers carried their loading, as
they do at London beyond Golding Lane.<60> And therefore in the New
Testament it is called gehenna, and taken for hell; and if you have
a mind, to know how I come by this divinity, trust me if you will: I
come by it as true men come by their goods. For so it is, that not
long since there dwelt in Bath a schoolmaster, a man whom I favoured
much, for his sake that sent him thither. But he had not been there
long, but a controversy arose betwixt him and some preachers
thereabout, among whom we have too many that study nothing but the
controversies; and it came, after many disputes on both sides, at
last to writing and publishing of books. And the schoolmaster
(though being no preacher) wrote a book with this title, That Christ
descended not into hell; the very sight of which title being flat
contradictory to an article of the Creed, I remember I said of the
man, as Haywood saith in his proverbs, that hereafter,

He might be of my pater noster indeed,
But sure he should never come in my creed.

And therefore I might repute him as a good humanist, but I should
ever doubt him for a good divine. Now, as I say, hearing in these
disputes and sermons, divers names of hell throughly sifted; as
Ades, Tartaros, Infernum, Stagnum ardens, and last of all, Gehenna;
which last I was most used to, as having an old verse when I was at
Eton, of a peacock;

Angelus in penna, pede latro voce gehenna,
A bird that hath as angel's plume,
A thievish pace, a hellish tune.

Consequently, I observed, that our honest and learned preacher of
Bath, M. R. M. first proved hell to be a local place (if not
circumscriptive, yet at least definitive): then he showed the
etymology of the word gehenna to be derived in Greek of ?? ??? ?????
(ge kai innon), that is, the earth or valley of Hinnon; then he
told, that this place was as it were the common dunghill or mickson
of the whole town; that the Jews had used in this valley to make
their children pass through the fire, as a sacrifice to the devil,
according to the psalm of David; They offered their sons and
daughters unto devils. Finally, that our Saviour, to make a more
fearful impression in their hearts of the pains of hell indeed,
which they knew not, used the name of this hellish place, which they
knew that had in it these hateful hellish properties, smoke, stink,
horrible cries, and torment. But lest you should think I speak as a
parrot, nothing but what I have heard another say, let me add
somewhat of mine own poor reading, and that shall be this; that this
valley of Hinnon was once for the sweet air, fine groves, fair
walks, and green and pleasant fields, comparable with any place
about Jerusalem; but when the abominable idol of Moloch was erected
in it, whose portraiture was like a king, having the head of a calf,
all of brass, and hollow within; unto which (most inhumanly) they
sacrificed human flesh, yea their own children; and to the end that
the wicked parents might not feel remorse of the woeful cries of the
wretched children, they danced a strange medley about the fire,
having music suitable to such mirth, of drums and Jew's-harps (for I
think hornpipes and bagpipes were not then found out): I say, these
abominations being there committed, the good Josias driven to use an
extreme medicine to so extreme a malady, first burned and brake all
to pieces the horrible idol; and then, in detestation of the abuses
there committed, cut down the fine groves, tore up the sweet
pastures, defaced the pleasant walks; and to the end that all
passengers should fly from it, that were wont to frequent it, he
caused all filthy carrion, dead dogs and horses, all the filth of
the streets, and whatsoever hateful and ugly things could be
imagined, to be carried thither.<61> And this, O Josias, was thy
zealous reformation: but, alas! how little do some that pretend thy
name, participate thy nature. They pull down Moloch, but set up
Baal-peor and Beelzebub; their lean devotion thinks the hill of the
Lord is too fat; their envious eye serves them, like Aretino's
spectacles, to make all seem bigger than it should be: they learn
the Babylonian's song in the Psalms;

Down, down with it at any hand,
Make all things plain, let nothing stand.

They care neither for good letters nor good lives; but only out of
the spoils to get good livings, our good lord bishops must be made
poor superintendents, that they might superintend the goodly
lordships of rich bishoprics; and then we that be simple fellows,
must believe that they offer us Josias' reformation: whereas indeed
it savours not of that in any. thing but the ill savour; for as
Josias defaced a fair field, and made it spurcitiarum latrinam,<62>
so they would ruinate our cathedral churches, and make them spelunca
latronum,<63> as my good friend Hary-Osto, or mine Host Hary saith
of the pagan Rodomont, after his host had ended his knavish tale.

He makes the church (oh, horrible abuse)
Serve him for his profane ungodly use.

Wherefore let them call themselves what they list; but if they learn
no better lessons of Josias, but to turn sweet fields to stinking
dunghills, they shall make no new Jaxes in England by my consent;
and I hope my device shall serve to mend many that be now amiss with
an honester and easier reformation; and I doubt not but the
magistrate that hath charge to see ne quid respub. detrimenti
capiat,<64>.will provide, lest our receipts prove deceits, our
auditors frauditors, and our reformation deformation, and so all run
headlong to gehenna; where the sport will be torment, the music
clamours, the prospect smoke, and the perfume stink. <65> Which two
last, I mean smoke and stink, I have verily persuaded me, are two of
those pains of hell, which they call poena sensus:<66> which pain
St. Augustine affirms may also torment aerial or spiritual bodies;
as partly appears in the story of Tobias, where a wicked spirit was
driven away with the smoke of a broiled liver; and therefore I have
endeavoured in my poor buildings to avoid those two inconveniences
as much as I may. As for the two other annoyances, that the old
proverb joineth to one of these, saying, there are three things that
make a man weary of his house; a smoking chimney, a dropping eaves,
and a brawling woman, I would no less willingly avoid them. But when
storms come, I must, as my neighbours do, bear that with patience
which I cannot reform with choler, and learn of the good Socrates,
who when Xantippe had crowned him with a chamber-pot he bare it off
single with his head and shoulders, and said to such as laughed at
him for it,

It never yet was deem'd a wonder,
To see that rain should follow thunder.

And to the intent you may see, that I am not only groundedly studied
in the reformation of AJAX, which I have chosen for the project of
this discourse, but that I am also superficially seen in these three
other matters of shrewd importance to all good housekeepers; I will
not be dangerous of my cunning, but I will venture my pen and my
pains, if you will lend but your eyes or your ears, though I perhaps
shall have more fists about my ears than mine own for it. First,
therefore for the house, I will teach you a verse for it, that I
think M. Tusser taught me, or else now I may teach it his son.

To keep your house dry, you must always in summer,
Give money to the mason, the tiler, and plumber.

For the shrewd wife, read the book of Taming a Shrew, which hath
made a number of us so perfect, that now every one can rule a shrew
in our country, save he that hath her. But indeed there are but two
good rules. One is, let them never have their wills; the other
differs but a letter, let them ever have their wills; the first is
the wiser, but the second is more in request, and therefore I make
choice of it.

Lastly, for smoking chimneys, many remedies have been studied; but
one excellent and infallible way is found out among some of the
great architects of this age, namely to make no fire in them; and by
the same rule they may in have very sweet Jaxes too.<67> But the
best way. I have found, is out of Cardan partly, but as I think
mended by practice of some of my neighbours of Bath; who make things
like half a cloak about the tops of the chimneys, with a vane to
turn round with the wind; which, because they make of wood, is
dangerous for fire; but being made of thin copper plates, or of old
kettles, will be as light and without danger: but this is
supererogation, and more than I promised you.


{Illustration 4 – A house with a chimney cowl}


But now to come home again, though home be never so homely, the
fourth annoyance, though it be left out of the proverb, may compare
with two of the other three, which is a stinking privy; which makes
a man wish sometimes, save for an ornament of the face (as Heywood
saith), to have no nose:

Most of our savours be more sour than sweet:
A nose then or no nose, which is most meet?

And for the reformation of this, many I doubt not have ere this
beaten their brains, and strained very hard, to have found out some
remedy; but yet still I find all my good friends' houses greatly
annoyed with it.

But yet, ere I come to discover this exact and exquisite form that I
have promised, let me add a word or two out of the good and
wholesome rules of physic, both for authorising the homely words so
oft used, as for proving that the matter in their faculty is
specially regarded; for divers that are otherwise very dainty and
curious, yet for their health sake, will endure both to hear homely
language, to see sluttish sights, to taste dirty drugs, and to show
secret sores, according to the Italian proverb;

Al confessore, medico, et advocato,
Non deve tener cosa celato.
From your confessor, lawyer, and physician,
Hide not your case on no condition.

No man therefore is either so ignorant or so impudent, as either not
to know, or not to confess, that the honourable science of physic
embaseth itself oft-times about the care of this business: for
whereto serveth, I pray you, fiant clisteria, fiant pillulae, fiant 
potiones, fiant pessi.<68> But fie on it, it makes me almost sick to
talk of them; sure I am, the house I treat of, is as it were the
centre to which they must all fall, first or last; and many times, I
think, first were wholesomer of the two. But to enforce my proofs,
though shortly yet soundly, I will not bring any peculiar prescripts
out of Galen and Hippocrates, lest you should oppose against them
Asclepiades or Paracelsus; nor stand long to dilate of the empirical
physic, or the dogmatical and the methodical; of all which, if I
should say all I could, I fear me not so much that physicians would
take me for a fool, as that fools will take me for a physician. I
will therefore set down as it were certain authentical rules, out of
a general council of physicians, and that sent by common consent to
a great king of England; against which, if any doctor should except,
he must ipso facto be counted an heretic. This therefore I find of
my text in that book that begins,

Anglorum regi, scribit schola tota salerni.<69>


For when he hath been advised to make choice of three physicians,

Haec tria: mens laeta, requies, moderato dieta.

Doctor Diet, Doctor Quiet, and Doctor Merryman. Then they admonish
him of many particulars for his health, for his food, for his house,
&c. Which if they might with good manners write to a king, then I
may without incivility recite to a kinsman.

Si vis incolumen, si vis te vivere sanum,
Curas tolle graves irasci crede profanum,
Parce mero, coenato parum nec sit tibi vanum,
Surgere post epulas, somnum fuge meridianum.
Nec mictum retine, nec comprime fortiter anum, etc.
The Salern school doth by these lines impart
Health to the British king, and doth advise,
From cares thy head to free, from wrath thy heart;
Drink not much wine, sup light, and soon arise.
After thy meat, 'twixt meals keep wake thine eyes.
And when to nature's needs provok'd thou art,
Do not forbear the same in any wise:
So shalt thou live long time with little smart.

Lo! what a special lesson for health they teach, to take your
opportunity so oft as it is offered of going to those businesses.
Then soon after, to let you know how wholesome it is to break wind,
they tell four diseases that come by forbearing it;

Quatuor ex vento veniunt in ventre retento,
Spasmus, hydrops, colica, vertigo, quatuor ista.<70>

But most specially making for my purpose, both for word and matter,

Aer sit mundus, habitabilis ac luminosus,
Infectus neque sit, nec olens, foetore cloaca.

Which as a principal lesson, to be learned by builders, I will set
down in verse.

A builder that will follow wise direction,
Must first foresee before his house he makes,
That the air be clear, and free from all infection,
And not annoy'd with stench of any Jakes.

For indeed, let your house be never so well apparelled, never so
well plastered and painted, if she have a stinking breath I shall
never like of my lodging. Lastly, there be two other verses, with
which I will end these school authorities.

Multiplicant mictum, ventrum dant mespila strictum.
Post pyra da potum, post pomum vade cacatum.<71>

And thus I take it, I end this part of my discourse with a well
chosen verse to the purpose: yet ere you go, take this with you in
prose; that many physicians do hold; that the plague, the measles,
the hemorrhoids, the smallpox, and perhaps the great ones too, with
the fistula in ano, and many of those inward diseases, are no way
sooner gotten, than by the savour of other excrements upon
unwholesome privies. Wherefore I will now draw to the conclusion of
this same tedious discourse, for it is high time now to take away
the board; and I see you are almost full of our homely fare, and
perhaps you have been used to your dainties of potatoes, of caviare,
eringoes, plums of Genoa; all which may well increase your appetite
to several evacuations: we will therefore now (according to the
physic we learned even now) rise and stretch our legs a little, and
anon I will put on my boots and go a piece of the way with you, and
discourse of the rest: in the mean time myself will go perhaps to
the house we talk of, though manners would, I offered you the French
courtesy, to go with me to the place where a man might very kindly
finish this discourse.



NOTES TO THE SECOND SECTION

1. Side note: 33. Henry 8. For it is no reason M. AJAX should have a
better gown than his mistress.

2. primus Romanorum] "the first of the Romans."

3. ultimus Romanorum] "the last of the Romans."

4. Side note: Caesar called Brutus son and said to him when he
stabbed at him, ??? ?? ?????? (kai su technon) "And you, child?"

5. Victrix causa placet superis sed victa Catoni.] "The victorious cause
pleased those above [i.e. the gods] but the defeated cause pleased
Cato." Adapted from a phrase by Lucan, Pharsalia 1, 128.

6. Side note: It seems the writer hereof would fain be thought a
Justice of peace.

7. Scandalum magnatum] a defamatory speech or writing published to
the injury of a peer, judge, or other great officer of England
(Merriam-Webster).

8. Quis non Euristea durum, Aut illaudati nescit Busiridis aras.]
"Who knows not pitiless Eurystheus, or the altars of detested
Busiris?" (H.R. Fairclough) Virgil, Georgics 3.1.

9. in exhauriendis cloacis.] "In cleaning of sewers."

10. Side note: Martial. 505. [V. 33] Carpere causidicus fertur mea
carmina qui sit, nescio si sciero ve tibi causidice. "A lawyer is
said to carp at my poems; who he is I don't know: if I do know, woe
to you, lawyer!" (Walter Ker).

11. de stillicidiis, de aqua ductibus] "Of water running from roofs,
of aqueducts."

12. purgare et reficere cloacam] "to clean and repair a sewer."

13. privatam cloacam facere, qua habeat exitum in publicum] "To make
a private sewer, which would discharge into the public one."

14. Tubus, Fistula] "Pipes."

15. obtorto collo] "By the scruff of the neck." Side note: Some of
our rude countrymen English this (obtorto collis) hanging an arse.

16. a minore ad majus.] "From smaller to larger," a method of legal
argument which proposes a general rule from a particular case.

17. vilissima qua fuerunt vel sunt] "The vilest who ever is or will
be." Side note: Agrippa saith of her, that she lay with twenty-two
several men in twenty-four hours, at the common stews; et tandem
lassata viris non satiata reddit. "And at last though worn out from
all these men she was still not sated."

18. beg for a fool] to petition the Court of Wards for the custody
of a an idiot.

19. in Capite] A feudal tenure held directly from the King

20. covert baron] "under the legal protection of a husband."

21. plus digne de sang] "Of nobler blood."

22. Side note: Two parts why Claudius was esteemed a fool. Look
Sueton.

23. Side note: Claudius was in England.

24. Mortui non mordent] "Dead men don't bite."

25. Side Note: He is called fool to his face.

26. Side Note: But hereby hangs a tale.

27. Side Note: Claudius' judgment like that of Solomon.

28. deliciae humani generis] "The delight of the human race."

29. Side note: Oils, woad, tar &c.

30. a paribus] "equally."

31. recepi] "I have received."

32. Side note: Argumentum quaerit an contigenda sit aqua quae per
civitatem Amestrianorum fluit. The contents is, whether he shall
cover the water that runs by the town of Amestri.

33. Side note: Che scrisse taccia, et piu no'l faccia "He wrote
silently, and did nothing more."

34. Magister incipiens] "A novice teacher."

35. Thomas Coperus omisit plurima verba ] "Thomas Cooper has left
out very many words."

36. Side note: A great officer among the boys at Eton. Master of the
rods.

37. Qui fueras quondam clarae praepositor aulae] "You who would be
the brilliant prefect of the hall."

38. Side note: Eliot's Dictionary, and Cooper's, place these two
words too near together.

39. Nero, Domitianus, Trajanus, Antonius, Pontifices Romanos
laniarunt.] "Nero, Domitian, Trajan, Antoninus Pius, persecuted the
pontiffs of Rome."

40. invincibilis ignorantia recusat] "Invincible ignorance excuses."
This is a theological principle, that if a person does not know, and
cannot reasonably be expected to know, that what they are doing is
wrong, then it is not sinful for them.

41. Conquirendi non sunt] "They should not be hunted down"

42. Side note: S. Damascen. S. Brigid writes this of Trajan: believe
them who list; for though it seem popish, yet it ministers an
argument against some popish opinions.

43. ex inferno nulla redemptio] "there is no redemption out of
Hell."

44. Incipit libri Deuteronomium, caput vicesimum tertium.] "Here
begins the Book of Deuteronomy, chapter twenty-three."

45. s't tacete] Shh be quiet."

46. Side note: Authorities of Scripture.

47. Side note: Or a trowel.

48. Omnia munda mundis] "To the pure all things are pure." Titus. i.
15.

49. Fac hoc et viva] "Do this and you will live."

50. Da Domine quod jubes.] "Give me to do what you command, O Lord."

51. poetica licentia] "poetic licence."

52. reprehension] "Refutation", the sixth section of a classical
oration, where the speaker answered the opponent's arguments.

53. Side note: There is a comedy called Priscianus vapulans; ("The
Flogging of Priscian") where if one should say ignem hanc,("that
fire," but ungrammatical – should be ignem hunc) Priscian would cry,
his head were broken.

54. Haec tibi Traiano, &c.] "Micasmos, not Secundus, here writes
respectfully to you, Trajan, far across land and sea."

55. de claro viis et modis, per annum CCCClxxx.d. "Net of all
expenses, 480 pence [2 pounds] a year."

56. Tu autem] "You also", a phrase near the end of a grace or
prayer.

57. Et ingressus sum &c.] "And I went out by night by the gate of
the valley, even before the dragon well, and to the dung port, and
viewed the walls of Jerusalem, which were broken down, and the gates
thereof were consumed with fire." Neh ii. 13.

58. Side note: There is a noble and learned lady, Dowager to the
Lord John Russel, that will not name love without save-reverence.

59. Porta stercoris] "Dung gate."

60. Side note: The Brick-kilns.

61. Side note: A reverend bishop told me that the Brownists have
written a book called Josias's reformation, to this zealous purpose.

62. spurcitiarum latrinam] "A filthy privy."

63. spelunca latronum] "Dens (lit. caves) of thieves." Hary-Osto
i.e. Ariosto, whose Orlando Furioso Queen Elizabeth ordered
Harington to translate in full as a punishment for having shown a
translation of the naughty bits to her ladies-in-waiting.

64. ne quid respub. detrimenti capiat] "that nothing may be done to
harm of the state."

65. Side note: Isiae C. 3. 24. Et erit pro suavi odores foetor.
"Instead of sweet smell there shall be stink."

66. poena sensus] Punishment of the senses.

67. Side note: One taught an excellent rule to keep a chimney from
smoking and a privy from stinking; viz. to make your fire in the
privy, and to set the close-stool in the chimney.

68. fiant clisteria,fiant pillulae, fiant potiones, fiant pessi]
"They make enemas, pills, potions and pessaries."

69. Anglorum regi, scribit schola tota salerni.] "The whole school
of Salerno writes to the King of the English."

70. Quatuor ex vento veniunt, &c.] "Four things come from wind held
in, spasms, dropsy, colic, dizziness."

71. Multiplicant mictum, &c.] "Medlars increase the urine, and
tighten the bowels; after pears, drink; after apples, go to the
privy."



THE THIRD SECTION
Showing the form, and how it may be reformed


Now therefore to come where we left last, for I know you would fain
have your instructions ere you go home, as soon as I have given my
horse some breath up this hill, I will ride along with you, so you
will ride a sober pace; for I love not to ride with these goose-
chasing youths, that post still to their journey's end, and when
they come thither they cannot remember what business they have
there, but that they had even as much in the place they came from.

These inconveniences being so great, and the greater because so
general, if there be a way with little cost, with much cleanliness,
with great felicity, and some pleasure to avoid them, were it not
rather a sin to conceal it, than a shame to utter it? Wherefore
shame to them that shame think; for I will confess frankly to you,
both how much I was troubled with the annoyance, and what I have
found for the remedy. For when I have found not only in mine own
poor confused cottage, but even in the goodliest and stateliest
palaces of this realm, notwithstanding all our provisions of vaults,
of sluices, of grates, of pains of poor folks in sweeping and
scouring, yet still this same whoreson saucy stink, though he were
commanded on pain of death not to come within the gates, yet would
spite of our noses, even when we would gladliest have spared his
company, press to the fair ladies' chambers; I began to conceive
such a malice against all the race of him, that I vowed to be at
deadly feud with them, till I had brought some of the chiefest of
them to utter confusion; and conferring some principles of
philosophy I had read, and some conveyances of architecture I had
seen, with some devices of others I had heard, and some practises of
mine own I had paid for, I found out at last this way that is after
described, and a marvellous easy and cheap way it is;<1> and I dare
speak it upon my credit, not without good experience, that though it
be neither farfetched nor dear-bought, yet it is good for ladies;
and there be few houses that may not have the benefit of it: for
there be few great and well contrived houses, but have vaults and
secret passages made under ground to convey away both the ordure and
other noisome things, as also the rainwater that falls into the
courts; which being cleanly in respect of the eye, yet because they
must of force have many vents, they are oft noisome in regard of the
smell; especially in houses of office that stand high from the
ground; the tuns of them drawing up the air as a chimney doth smoke:
by which it comes to pass many times (especially if the wind stand
at the mouth of the vaults), that what with fish water coming from
the kitchens, blood and garbage of fowls, washing of dishes, and the
excrements of other houses joined together, and all these in moist
weather, stirred a little with some small stream of rain water; for
as the proverb is,

'Tis noted as the nature of a sink,
Ever the more it is stirred, the more to stink.

I say these, thus meeting together, make such a quintessence of a
stink, that if Paracelsus were alive, his art could not devise to
extract a stronger. Now because the most unavoidable of all these
things that keep such a stinking stir, or such a stink when they be
stirred, is urine and ordure, that which we all carry about us (a
good speculation to make us remember what we are, and whither we
must); therefore, as I said before, many have devised remedies for
this in times past, some not many years since, and I this last year;
of all which, I will make choice only of two beside mine own to
speak of; because men of good judgment have allowed them for good:
but yet (as the ape doth his young ones) I think mine the properest
of them all.

The first and the ancientest is, to make a close vault in the
ground, widest in the bottom, and narrower upward; and to floor the
same with hot lime and tarris, or some such dry paving as may keep
out all water, and air also; for if it be so close as no air can
come in, it doth as it were smother the savour, like to the snuffers
or extinguishers. wherewith we put out a candle; and this stands
with good reason, that seeing it is his nature to make the worse
savour the more he is stirred, and nothing makes him keep a more
stinking stir than a little wind and water: surely there can be
little or no annoyance of him in this kind of house, where he shall
lie so quietly. But against this is to be objected, that if there be
a little cranny in the wall as big as a straw, or if the ground
stand upon winter springs, or be subject as most places underground
are, to give with moist weather, then at such times it must needs
offend.

Besides, in a prince's house, where so many mouths be fed, a close
vault will fill quickly; and that objection did my Lord of Leicester
make to Sir John Young, at his last being at Bristow; who commended
to my Lord that fashion, and showed him his own of a worse fashion,
and told him that at a friend's house of his at Peterhill in London,
there was a very sweet privy of that making.

Another way is, either upon close or open vaults, so to place the
sieges or seats, as behind them may rise tuns of chimneys, to draw
all the ill airs upwards: of which kind I may be bold to say, that
our house of Lincoln's Inn putteth down all that have been made
afore it, and is indeed, both in reason and experience, a means to
avoid much of the annoyance that is wont to come off them, and
keepeth the place all about much the sweeter. But yet, to speak
truly, this is not safe from all infection or annoyance while one is
there, as my sense hath told me; for

Sensus non fallitur in proprio objecto <2>

Or perhaps, by the strict words of the statute, it ought to be so;
and that but two parts may be devised away, and a third must remain
to the heir; for. I dare undertake, go thither when you will, your
next heir at the common house, whatsoever charge he is at in the
suit, I am sure he may be made a savour, at least for the tertiam
partem <3> above all reprises, if the fault be not his own. And
further, when the weather is not calm, the wind is so unruly that it
will force the ill airs down the chimneys; and not draw them up, as
we see it doth in chimneys where fire is made, force down the smoke,
notwithstanding that the very nature of fire helpeth to enforce it
upward; whereas these moist vapours are apt (even of their own
nature) to spread abroad, and hang like a dew about everything.
Wherefore, though I am but a punie <4> of Lincoln's Inn, and the
builder hereof was a bencher, yet I will under reformation, prefer
my device afore his; either because it is better, or else, out of
the common fault of young men in this age, that we think our devices
wiser than our elders. Yet with this respective modesty, that
because my device is with water, where that cannot be had, or where
houses stand on an exceeding flat, there I will leave the work to
his oversight; but where any convenient current is, and no want of
water, there I would be surveyor: and so to divide the regiment,
that if for the dry land service he be general, for the water
service I will be admiral. Yet, by the way, I hope all the inns of
court will gratulate the present flourishing estate of Lincoln's
Inn:<5> not so much for furnishing the realm with most honourable,
upright, and well learned magistrates, great serjeants, grave
counsellors, towardly barristers, young gallants of worth and spirit
sans nombre;<6> but also (that I may now deal with my equals, and
not with my ancients) with two such rare engineers, me for this one
device, and Master Plat for very many.<7> Or if envy will not suffer
them to give us due honour, let us two, M. Plat, at least grace one
another: and I am the willinger to offer this kindness to you,
because I was advised by some to have recommended this device to
your illustrations, which I was very like to have done, save that we
are of no great acquaintance; and beside I have a little ambitious
humour of mine own to be counted a deviser; though to clear me of
pride, you see my first practice is upon so base a subject, as I
hope nobody will envy me, or seek to take it from me: as the sweet
Zerbino said to Marfysa, of the ugly Gabrina;

You have so sweet a piece to carry by you,
As you are sure that no man will envy you.<8>

And after he had played a word or two with them, he concluded,

Ben siate accopiati Io jurerei,
Se come essa e Bella tu gagliardo sei.
No doubt you are a fitly matched pair,
If you as lusty be, as she is fair.

But when they had done breaking of jests one on another, and that it
came to breaking of staves, the peerless Prince (for his oath's
sake) was fain to take that most hateful hag into his protection.
And so I suppose, that some may play in like sort upon me and my
writing, and say,

The writer and the matter well may meet,
Were he as eloquent as it is sweet.

But if they do, let them take heed that in one place or other of
this pamphlet they do not pull themselves by the nose, as the
proverb is. But that you may see, M. Plat, I have studied your book
with some observation, if you would teach me your secret of making
artificial coal, and multiplying barley (though I fear me both the
means will smell a little of kin to M. A JAX),<9> I assure you I
would take it very kindly: and we two might have a suit together for
a monopoly; you of your coal as you mention in your book, and I of
M. reformed A JAX: and if you will trust me to draw the petitions,
you shall see I will get some of the precedents of the starch and
the vinegar, and make it carry as good a show of reason and good to
the commonwealth as theirs doth. As, first, for yours I would frame
these reasons; I would show the excellent commodity of iron-mills
(for if you speak against them your suit will be dasht straight): I
would prove how they reduce wild and savage woods, to civil and
fruitful pastures: I would allege they are good for maintenance of
navigation, in respect that every ship, what with his cast pieces,
anchors, bolts, and nails, hath half as many tons of iron as timber
to it: I would say, it is a commodity to the subject; considering
they sell it for twelve or fourteen pound the ton, and when it came
out of Spain or Holland, it was sold but for eight pound. The like
also I would say for glass; and so concluding, that the woods must
needs be spent upon these two (as doubtless they will in a short
time), then your device for artificial coal, of how homely stuff
soever you make it, will be both regarded and rewarded. And thus
perhaps making some great man your half, you may have an imposition
of a tenth or a fifth of every chaldron of your fuel. And though it
should poison all the town with the ill savour (as the brewhouse by
Whitehall doth her Highness' own house and all Cannonrow), yet what
for necessity, and what for favour, it should be suffered. And never
fear that the price of your coal will fall by cherishing of woods;
for now Sir Walter Mildmay is dead, you shall have few men will busy
themselves about any of these public inconveniences; or if his
honest successor would attempt it, he should, I fear me, have small
hope to prevail in that which so honest a predecessor could not.
<10>

Now, for my monopoly, I would ask but this trifling suit, and I
would make these goodly pretences. First, because I have proved by
good authors, that M. A JAX is lineally descended of the ancient
house of Stercutius, and to have lived long under protection of Dea
Cloacina, and to have been prayed for by so many holy saints, I
would procure (if the traffic were as open with Rome as it hath
been), that as his progenitor Stercutius was allowed for a god, by
one of the first Roman Pontifices Maximi, so M. AJAX might be
allowed for a saint by Pope Sisesinke, Sixtus quintus (I would have
said), or one of his successors (which if it be so easy a matter, as
Boccaccio and other Italian authors write, will not be very
chargeable);<11> and then with some of the money that you gain with
the perfumed coal (if you will lend it me, and I will mortgage my
bull to you when I have it, for payment), I will erect in London and
elsewhere, divers shrines to this new saint; and all the fat
offerings shall be distributed to such poor hungry fellows as sue
for monopolies; which being joined to the ashes of your coal, will
be perhaps not uncommodious for land: and you and I will beg nothing
for our reward; but you, as I said afore, a fifth part of every
chaldron; and I, but the my sixth part of an assize a month, of all
that will not be recusants, to do their daily service at these holy
shrines.<12> Now, if any do object it is too great a suit (for I
think it would be the richest office in England), and say that it
would amount to more than Peter pence, and Poll pence too; I would
first, to stop their mouths quickly, promise them a good share in
it; then I would amplify the service, that in this device do in some
respects to the state of Christianity, in a matter that St. Peter
nor Paul neither never thought of. For it is a common obloquy, that 
the Turks (who still keep the order of Deuteronomy for their ordure)
do object to Christians, that they are poisoned with their own dung;
which objection cannot be answered (be it spoken with due reverence
to the two most excellent apostles) with any sentence in both their
epistles so fully to satisfy the miscreant wretches, as the plain
demonstration and practise of my device must needs answer them.

What think you, M. Plat? is not here a good plat laid, that you and
I may be made by for ever? only, I fear one let, and that is this: I
hear by report there is a worthy gentleman, sometime of our house,
that hath now the keeping of the great seal, and these suits cannot
pass but by his privity; and they say (see our ill hap) he hath ever 
been a great enemy to all these paltry concealments and monopolies;
and further, they say of him, that to beguile him with goodly shows
is very difficult, but to corrupt him with gifts is impossible:
well, if it be so, all our fat is in the fire, and let the lean go
after. <13> You may make a great fire of your gains, and be never
the warmer; and may throw all mine into AJAX, and be never the
poorer. Let us then make a virtue of necessity; and sith we cannot
get these monopolies, let us say we care not for them, and a
vengeance on them that beg them; and so we may have millions say
Amen to us, and we shall be thought the honester men; and seeing I
have had so ill luck in this, I would nobody might ever have any
more of them, till I make such another suit. And if M. Plat will
follow my advice, he shall impart his rare devices gratis, as I do
this; and so we may one day be put into the Chronicles, as good
members of our country; more worthily than the great bear that
carried eight dogs on him, when Monsieur was here. <14>

But to leave M. Plat's coal, which kindled this fantasy in me, and
to turn to my teshe; though I called myself by metaphor an admiral
for the waterworks, yet I assure you this device of mine requires
not a sea of water, but a cistern; not a whole Thames full, but half
a tun full, to keep all sweet and savoury: for I will undertake,
from the peasant's cottage to the prince's palace, twice so much
quantity of water as is spent in drink in the house will serve the
turn: which if it were at Shaftsbury, where water is dearest of any
town, I know that is no great portion. And the device is so little
cumbersome, as it is rather a pleasure than a pain; a matter so
slight, that it will seem at the first incredible; so sure, that you
shall find it at all times infallible: for it doth avoid at once all
the annoyances that can be imagined; the sight, the savour, the
cold: which last, to weak bodies, is oft more hurtful than both the
other, where the houses stand over brooks or vaults daily cleansed
with water. And not to hold you too long in suspense, the device is
this: You shall make a false bottom to that privy that you are
annoyed with, either of lead, or stone; the which bottom shall have
a sluice of brass to let out all the filth; which if it be close
plastered all about it, and rinsed with water as oft as occasion
serves, but especially at noon and at night, will keep your privy as
sweet as your parlour; and perhaps sweeter too, if Quail and Quando
be not kept out. But my servant Thomas (whose pencil can perform
more in this matter than my pen) will set down the form of this by
itself in the end hereof, that you may impart it to such friends of
yours as you shall think worthy of it, though you put them not to so
great penance, as to read this whole discourse.

And that I may now also end your penance, that have taken all this
pains to read this, that for your pleasure you would needs persuade
me to write, I will not end abruptly here, but as friends that are
upon parting in a journey, choose a cleanly place in the highway to
take their leaves one of another, and not in the dirt and mire: so
I, ere we part, will first for the enobling of this rare invention,
tell you somewhat of the place, of the company, of the means, and of
the circumstances, that first put so necessary a conceit in my head.
For I remember I have read that Archimedes, the excellent engineer
(a man in his time fully as famous at Syracusa, as our M. Plat is
here in England), was said to have disgraced himself by an
intemperate, or rather intempestive joy that he took of a very
worthy and memorable invention of his. The story is thus: Archimedes
having long beaten his brains to find some way by art how to
discover what quantity of counterfeit mixture was put into a crown
of massy gold, not dissolving the metals, and finding no means in
long study, at last washing himself naked in a bathingtub, he
observed still that the deeper he sunk, the higher the water rose;
and forthwith he conceived (which after he performed indeed), that
by such a means the true quantity of each metal might be found, and
the fraud discovered: with joy whereof he was so ravished, that
stark naked as he was, he ran out into the streets, crying, ??????,
?????? ("eureka, eureka"); I have found it, I have found it. At
which, for the time, all the people were amazed and thought him mad,
till his invention after proved him, not only sober, but also
subtle.

What, if some pleasant conceited fellow should give out, by way of
supposition, that possibly the deviser of this rare conveyance, was
at the time of devising thereof, sitting on some such place, as the
godly father sat on at his devout prayers, or the godless king sat
on at his devilish practices? as put the case on the stately
stinking privy in the Inner Temple (where many grave apprentices of
the law put their long debated cases to homely uses), and that with
joy of so excellent invention, he ran out with his hose about his
heels, and cried, ??????, ?????? ("eureka, eureka"): so might I be
likened to Archimedes, and there be some perhaps would be so very
fools to believe it. But lest that any idleheaded fellow should
devise, or any shallowbrained people believe such a tale, I do
beforehand give the word of disgrace to any that shall so say; and
will make it good on their persons with all weapons from the pin to
the pike, that whether it were by my good guiding, or my good
fortune, in the invention hereof, nor in the execution, I never
received such a disgrace as that of Archimedes. For I assure you,
the device was both first thought of, and discoursed of, with as
broad terms as any belongs to it, in presence of six persons, who
were (all save one) interlocutors in the dialogue; of which, I was
so much the meanest, that the other five, for beauty, for birth, for
value, for wit, and for wealth, are not in many places of the realm
to be matched. Neither was the place inferior to the persons; being
a castle, that I call the wonder of the west; so seated without, as
England in few places affords more pleasures; so furnished within,
as China nor the West Indies scarce allows more plenty. Briefly, at 
the very coming in you would think you were come to the Eldorado in
Guiana: and by this I hope both the invention and execution hereof
may be sufficiently freed from baseness.

Yet there remains one easy objection against the merit of my good
service herein; I mean easy to make, but it will not seem so easy to
answer; and that is, that some may say, this may fortune to do well
in many places, but yet there is no depth in the invention: for it
is nothing but to keep down the air with a stopple, and let out the
filth with a screw; which some will mislike, and will not endure to
have such a business every time they come to that house: to which I
answer, that for depth in the invention, I affect it not (for I
would not have it in all above two foot deep). And though the
proverb is, the deeper the sweeter, that is to be intended in some
sweeter matters; for the deeper you wade in this, you shall find it
the sourer. And if it seem too busy, he that hath so great haste of
his business, may take it as he finds it; which cannot be very ill
at any time. But the old saying was, Look ere you leap; and the old
custom was, that if a man had no light to look, yet he would feel,
to seek that he would not find, for fear lest they should find that
they did not seek. Further, the pains being so little as it is, I
should think him a sloven that would not by himself or his man leave
it as cleanly as he found it; especially considering, that in
Deuteronomy you are told, God misliketh sluttishness: and every cat
gives us an example (as housewives tell us) to cover all our
filthiness: and if you will not disdain to use that which cometh
from the musk cat, to make yourself, your gloves, and your clothes,
the more sweet, refuse not to follow the example of the cat of the
house, to make your entries, your stairs, your chambers, and your
whole house the less sour. Indeed, for the device, I grant it is as
plain as Dunstable highway, and perhaps it will be as common too;
but neither of them shall be any disgrace to it. For I heard an
Italian tell, that in Venice after they had had the great loss by
fire in Maximilian's time, when their arsenal was burnt with
gunpowder, they had long consultation how to keep their store powder 
from danger of fire, for fear of like mischances; at last a plain
fellow (like myself) came and told that he had devised a way, and
prayed to have audience.

Then he told them a long tale, but all to this short purpose; that
gunpowder was made of three simples, viz. saltpetre, brimstone, and
coal: but each of these several, would be easy kept from fire, and
be quenched if they were kindled; but being compound, it blew up all
in a moment, if the least spark did but meet with it: then he showed
that the causes could not be so sudden of using powder, but that the
simples being ready, it might soon be made: lastly, that saltpetre
did grow, rather than waste, with lying; whereas, being made into
powder, it doth consume, &c. All which, though every man there knew
before, yet because they had not offered to put it in practice, they
gave him a reward for his device, and followed therein his advice;
placing these simples in several houses, which are so dangerous when
they are compounded; and since that time they have been more annoyed
with water than with fire. Wherefore, I assure me, the magnificos of
Venice would allow of the device, and I had some idle money, I might
hap to be so idly disposed, to put out more than I will speak of
upon this return, when one of the sons and daughters of St. Mark had
put my device in execution;<15> especially if that Molto
Magnificentissimo were yet alive, that when his wife was sick, and
the physician was to see her water, he knew not how to bid her make
water, in words seemly for his high state and her fine ears, that
had never heard so foul a word as that in her life, till his man
took on him the matter, and found a phrase by circumlocution to
signify pissing, and never once to name it, in this sort; Cara
signora vi prego fare quello che fate dinanzi al cacare. <16> But
see, see, I would fain have bid you farewell; and now we are again
in our dirty common place, we will go with you yet a quoit's cast
further, and then upon the next green we will bid farewell, and turn
tail as they say: wherefore, now I will make you only a brief
repetition of that I have said. You see, first, how I have justified
the homely words and phrases with authorities above all exception; I
have proved the care ever had of the matter, with examples above all
comparison: lastly, I have expressed to you a cleanly form of it,
above all expectation. Neither do I praise it, as merchants do their
wares, to rid their hands of them; for I promise you, how high
soever I praise it, I mean not to part with it: for were I to praise
it upon mine oath as we do household stuff in an inventory, I would
praise it in my house, to be worth a hundred pounds; in yours, three
hundred pounds; in Wollerton, five hundred pounds; in Tibals,
Burley, and Holmbie,<17> a thousand pounds; in Greenwich, Richmond,
and Hampton-court, ten thousand pounds.

And by my good sooth, so I would think myself well paid for it: not
that I am so base-minded to think that wit and art can be rated at
any price, but that I would accept it as a gratuity fit for such
houses and their owners.

For I tell you, though I will not take it upon me that I am in
dialecticorum dumetis doctus,<18> or in rhetoricorum pompa
potens,<19> or caeteris scientiis saginatus,<20> as doth our
Pedantius of Cambridge; yet I take it, that in this invention I
shall show a great practice upon the grammar, and upon this point I
will challenge all the grammarians; viz. I say, and I will make it
good, that by my rare device I shall make Stercutius a noun
adjective. Now I know you will set your son William to answer me;
and he shall say, no, no, and come upon me with his grammar rule, ut
sunt divorum, Mars, Bacchus, Apollo, virorum, &c.<21> etc. and
hereby conclude, that he is both a substantive, and that a
substantial one too, and a masculine.

But all this will not serve, for I have learned the grammar too; and
therefore,

Come grammar rules, come now your power show,


as saith the noble Astrophell. First, therefore I say, his no, no,
is an affirmative;

For in one speech two negatives affirm.


Secondly, tell me pretty Will, what is a noun substantive? That that
may be seen, felt, heard, or understood. Very well; now I will join
issue with you on this point, where shall we try it? Not in
Cambridge, you will say; for I think they will be partial on my
side. Well then, in Oxford be it, and no better judge than M. Poeta,
who was chief captain of all the nouns in that excellent comedy of
Bellum gramaticale. <22> For, without all peradventure, when he
shall hear that one of his band and so near about him, is brought to
that state, that he is neither to be seen, smelt, heard, nor
understood, he will swear gog's nouns, <23>, he will thrust him out
of his selected band of the most substantial substantives, and sort
him with the rascal rabblement of the most abject adjectives. But
now, sir, that I have brought you to so fair a town as Oxford, and
so sweet a companion as your son William, I will leave you to him
that made you.

<24>Now (gentle reader) you have taken much pain, and perhaps some
pleasure, in reading our Metamorphosis of AJAX, and you supposed by
this time to have done with me: but now, with your favour, I have
not done with you. For I found by your countenance, in the reading
and hearing hereof, that your conceit oft-times had censured me
hardly, and that somewhat diversely; and namely, in these three
kinds:

<25> First, you thought me fantastical; secondly, you blamed my
scurrility; and, thirdly, you found me satirical: to which three
reproofs, being neither causeless nor unjust, do me but the justice
to hear my three answers.

<26> I must needs acknowledge it fantastical for me, whom I suppose
you deem (by many circumstances) not to be of the basest, either
birth or breeding, to have chosen, or of another man's choice to
have taken so strange a subject. But though I confess thus much, yet
I would not have you lay it to my charge; for if you so do, I shall
straight retort all the blame, or the greatest part of it, upon
yourself: and namely, I would but ask you this question, and even
truly between God and your conscience, do but answer it. If I had
entitled the book, A Sermon showing a sovereign salve for the sores
of the soul; or A wholesome Haven of Health to harbour the heart in;
or A marvellous medicine for the maladies of the mind, would you
ever have asked after such a book? would these grave and sober
titles have won you to the view of three or four tittles? much less
three or four score periods. But when you heard there was one that
had written of AJAX, straight you had a great mind to see what
strange discourse it would prove; you made inquiry who wrote it,
where it might be had, when it would come forth. You prayed your
friend to buy it, beg it, borrow it, that you might see what good
stuff was in it. And why had you such a mind to it? I can tell you.
You hoped for some merriments, some toys, some scurrility; or, to
speak plain English, some knavery: and if you did so, I hope now
your expectation is not altogether frustrate. Yet, give me leave
briefly to show you what petty pills you have swallowed in your
pleasant quadlings, and what wholesome wormwood was inclosed in
these raisins of the sun.

<27> Against malcontents, epicures, atheists, heretics, and careless
and dissolute Christians, and especially against pride and
sensuality, the prologue and the first part are chiefly intended.
The second gives a due praise, without flattery, to one that is
worthy of it; and a just check, without gall, to some that deserve
it. The third part, as it teacheth indeed a reformation of the
matter in question, so it toucheth in sport, a reprehension of some
practises too much in custom: all which the reader, that is
honourable, wise, virtuous, and a true lover of his country, must
needs take in good part. Now, gentle reader, if you will still say
this is fantastical, then I will say again, you would not have read
it except it had been fantastical; and if you will confess the one,
sure I will never deny the other.

<28>The second fault you object, is scurrility; to which I answer,
that I confess the objection, but I deny the fault; and if I might
know whether he were Papist or Protestant that maketh this
objection, I would soon answer them, namely, thus; I would cite a
principal writer on either side, and I would prove that either of
them hath used more obscene, foul,  and scurrilous phrases (not in
defence of their matter, but in defacing of their adversary) in one
leaf of their books, than is in all this.<29> Yet they profess to
write of the highest, the holiest, the weightiest matters that can
be imagined; that I write of the basest, the barrenest, and most
witless subject that may be described.

Quod decuit tantos cur mihi turpe putem?<30>

I forbear to show examples of it, lest I should be thought to
disgrace men of holy and worthy memory.

<31> For such as shall find fault that it is too satirical, surely,
I suppose their judgment shall sooner be condemned by the wiser
sort, than my writings. For when all the learned writers, godly
preachers, and honest livers over all England (yea, over all
Europe), renew that old complaint, Regnare nequitiam et in deterius
res humanas labi. <32>

When we hear them say daily, that there was never under so gracious
a head, so graceless members; after so sincere teaching, so sinful
living; in so shining light, such works of darkness: when they cry
out upon us, yea, cry indeed, for I have seen them speak it with
tears, that lust and hatred were never so hot, love and charity were
never so cold; that there was never less devotion, never more
division; that all impiety hath all impunity; finally, that the
places that were wont to be the samples of all virtue and honour,
are now become the sinks of all sin and shame. These phrases (I say)
being written and recorded, sounded and resounded in so many books
and sermons, in Cambridge, in Oxford, in the court, in the country,
at Paul's Cross, in Paul's Churchyard; may not I, as a sorry writer
among the rest, in a merry matter, and in a harmless manner,
professing purposely, Of vaults and privies, sinks and draughts, to
write, <33> prove according to my poor strength, to draw the readers
by some pretty draught, to sink into a deep and necessary
consideration, how to amend some of their privy faults? Believe it
(worthy readers, for I write not to the unworthy), AJAX, when he is
at his worst, yields not a more offensive savour to the finest
nostrils, than some of the faults I have noted do to God and the
world. Be not offended with me for saying it, more than I am with
some of you for seeing it. But this I say, if we would amend our
privy faults first, we should afterward much the better reform the
open offences, according to the old proverb, Every man mend one, and
all would be amended. Trust me, they do wrong me, that count me
satirical: alas! I do but (as the phrase is) pull a hair from their
beards whose heads perhaps by the old laws and canons should be
shorn. If you will say there is salt in it, I will acknowledge it;
but if you will suspect there is gall in it, I renounce it: I name
not many, and in those I do name, I swerve not far from the rule.

Play with me, and hurt me not:
Jest with me, and shame me not. <34>

For some that may seem secretly touched, and be not openly named, if
they will say nothing, I will say nothing. But, as my good friend M.
Davies said of his epigrams, that they were made like doublets in
Birchin-lane, for every one whom they will serve: so if any man find
in these my lines any raiment that suits him so fit, as if it were
made for him, let him wear it and spare not: and for my part, I
would he could wear it out. But if he will be angry at it, then (as
the old saying is) I beshrew his angry heart; and I would warn him
thus much (as his poor friend), that the workman that could with a
glance only, and a light view of his person, make a garment so fit
for him, if the same workman come and take a precise measure of him,
may make him another garment of the same stuff (for there need go 
but a pair of shears between them), that in what shire soever he
dwelleth, he may be known by such a coat as long as he liveth. Well,
to conclude, let both the writer and the readers endeavour to mend
ourselves, and so we shall the easier amend others; and then I shall
think my labour well bestowed in writing, and you shall think yours
not altogether lost in reading. And with this honest exhortation I
would make an end; imitating herein the wisest lawyers, who, when
they have before the simplest jurors, long disputed their cases to
little purpose, are ever most earnest and eager at the parting, to
beat into the jury's head some special point or other, for the
behoof of their client. For, so would I, howsoever you do with the
rest of the matter. I would, I say, fain beat still into your memory
this necessary admonition (which my new taken name admonisheth me of
<35>); to cleanse, amend, and wipe away all filthiness. To the which
purpose, I could methink allegorize this homely subject that I have
so dilated, and make almost as good a sermon as the friar did before
the Pope; saying nothing but Matto San Pietro<36> three times, and
so came down from the pulpit again; and being afterward examined,
what he meant to make a sermon of three words, but three times
repeated before the triple crowned prelate and so many cardinals, he
told them they might find a good sermon in Matto San Pietro; as
namely, if heaven might be gotten, notwithstanding all the pride,
pleasures, and pomp of the world, with ease, sensuality, and
epicurism, then what a fool was St. Peter to live so strict, so
poor, so painful a life? With which it is possible his auditory was
more edified, or at least more terrified, than they would have been
at a longer sermon: but I will neither end with sermon nor prayer,
lest some wags liken me to my L—'s players, who when they have ended
a bawdy comedy, as though that were a preparative to devotion, kneel
down solemnly, and pray all the company to pray with them for their
good Lord and master. Yet I will end with this good counsel, not
unsuiting to the text I have thus long talked of;

To keep your houses sweet, cleanse privy vaults:
To keep your souls as sweet, mend privy faults.

FINIS.



NOTES TO THE THIRD SECTION

1. Side note: The principles are these: Aer non penetrat aquam,
Natura non patitur vacuum. "Air does not penetrate water. Nature
abhors a vacuum".

2. Sensus non fallitur in proprio objecto] "The senses are not
deceived by nearby objects".

3. tertiam partem] "third part".

4. Side note: Puisne.

5. Side note: A true praise of Lincoln's Inn.

6. sans nombre] "Without number".

7. Side note: M. Plat set forth a book of engines.

8. Side note: Ariost. Cant. 20.

9. Side note: Some conjecture, that stale and cow dung must effect
both these multiplications.

10. Side note: The author could have said honourable of both; but he
takes honesty in this place for the higher title.

11. Side note: Boccacio writes, that S. Ciappelletto was canonised.

12. Side note: if I had such a grant, he that were my heres ex asse
("sole heir") would be the richest squire in England.

13. Side note: I protest Micasmos and all his friends love him the
better for it. If you call this flattery, I would you would all
deserve to be so flattered.

14. Side note: A worthy matter to be put into a Chronicle, and fit
for such worthy historiographers.

15. Side note: The Magnificos of Venice are called Figlivoli di S. 
Marco.

16. Cara signora, &c.] "Dear lady, please do that which you do in
front of shitting."

17. Side note: Theobalds, Burleigh, Holmby.

18. dialecticorum dumetis doctus,] "learned in thorny logic".

19. rhetoricorum pompa potens]"able to parade my rhetoric".

20. caeteris scientiis saginatus] "The rest of these puffed-up
sciences".

21. ut sunt divorum, Mars, Bacchus, Apollo, virorum, &c] "As of the
gods, Mars, Bacchus, Apollo, so are men, &c."

22. Bellum gramaticale] "The Grammatical War." Side note: This
comedy was played at her Majesty's last being at Oxford.

23. gogs nouns] A mangled oath = God's Wounds.

24. Side note: the epilogue, or conclusion.

25. Side note: Three reproofs of this pamphlet.

26. Side note: Answer to the first objection of fantasticalness.

27. Side note: A brief sum of the true intent of the book.

28. Side note: Answer to the second objection of scurrility.

29. Side note: This cannot be denied.

30. Quod decuit tantos cur mihi turpe putem?] "Why should I be
ashamed of that which was becoming to so many?" adapted from Ovid,
Amores, III 8.14, where regem "a King" instead of tantos "so many".

31. Side note: Answer to the third objection, that it it is too
satirical or sharp against the faults of the time

32. Regnare nequitiam et in deterius res humanas labi.] "Wickedness
rules, and everything human is getting worse" Side note: Seneca. (Of
Benefits, I.10.1.)

33. Side note: Allusion to the former words

34. Side note: A fit rule to be kept, and breeds all misrule when it
is broken; especially by honourable persons.

35. Side note: Misacmos.

36. Side note: That is to say, what a fool was St. Peter.



AN ANATOMY OF THE METAMORPHO-SED AJAX.

WHEREIN BY A
Tripartite Method, is plainly, openly, and demon-
stratively declared, explained, and eliquidated,
by Pen, Plot, and Precept, how unsavoury
Places may be made sweet, noisome
Places made wholesome, filthy
Places made cleanly.

PUBLISHED FOR
THE COMMON BENEFIT OF BUILDERS, HOUSEKEEPERS,
AND HOUSEOWNERS.

BY T. C.

TRAVELLER, APPRENTICE IN POETRY, PRACTISER IN MUSIC,
PROFESSOR OF PAINTING;
THE MOTHER, DAUGHTER, AND HANDMAID OF ALL MUSES,
ARTS, AND SCIENCES.

Invide quid mordes? Pictoribus atque Poetis,
Quidlibet audendi semper fuit aequa potestas.<1>

At London:
IMPRINTED BY RICHARD FIELD,
DWELLING IN THE BLACKFRIARS.

1596.

?
TO M. E. S. ESQUIRE.


SIR, My master having expressly commanded me to finish a strange
discourse that he had written to you, called the Metamorphosis of
AJAX, by setting certain pictures thereto; there came unto my mind a
tale I had heard, perhaps more merry than mannerly, how a plain or
rather pleasant servingman, waiting on his master at the Pope's
court, happened to be present one day when the gentleman, after long
attendance and great means, had obtained the favour to kiss his
Holiness' foot. The man seeing what his master did, first stole out
of the chamber, and then ran out of the house hiding himself for a
pretty space: the gentleman hearing of it, pitied his man's
simplicity (who perhaps was crafty knave enough for all that), and
asked why he went away? Alas! sir, said he, when I saw that a man of
your worth and worship, in so public a place, might kiss but his
toe, I doubted they would have made me have kissed him in some
homelier place; and so I might have been shamed for ever.

If that servingman had cause to run out of the house, methinks I may
seem to have more reason to run out of my wits, to have so strange a
task appointed me: for when the very face and head, or title of the
book, seemed so foul and unsavoury, what might I think the feet or
tail thereof were like to prove? Wherefore, I would gladly have
shunned so base an office; but having my master's example, joined to
his commandment, I took heart to me: and first, I read over the
discourse, to see what was promised therein on my behalf (viz.
certain pictures). But I assure you, in the reading of it, whether
it were the well-handling of the matter, or my partial opinion (a
fault that I am seldom charged withal), my mind was altered; and I
compared the homely title of it unto an illfavoured vizor, such as I
have or footpad, seen in stage plays, when they dance Machachinas,
which covers as sweet a face sometimes as any is in the company.<2>
And even presently therewithal, as if I had been inspired with the
spirit of AJAX, methought I durst have adventured with my pen and
pencil upon any thing. For as the saying is,

Painters and poets, claim by old enrolment,
A charter, to dare all, without controlment.

Wherefore, by the privilege of this charter (as also by a patent I
have of serving two apprenticeships), I will go somewhat beyond the
bare words of my commission, and yet not swerve much from the charge
that is laid upon me. For, sir, I would you knew it, though I never
troubled the schools at Oxford with any disputes or degrees, yet I
carried there a good scholar's books after him; and I trust I got
some quaint phrases among them; as namely, instead of praying the
cobbler to set two patches on my shoes, I could have said, Set me
two semicircles upon my suppeditals: with much other eloquence
beyond the common intelligence. And yet, notwithstanding all these
great vaunts, I will not take upon me, that I am able to say so much
of the Metamorphosis,the etymology, and the reformation of Don AJAX'
house, as my master hath said; or to defend the words, illustrate
the matter, and dilate of the form, as he hath done; for who can
stand against such an army of emperors, kings, magistrates,
prophets, poets, all-hallows, and all profanes, even from the Bible
to the Bable, as are by him brought for enobling of his arguments?
Yet for anatomizing as it were of the shape and body thereof,
because he hath handled that point (in M. Plat's opinion) <3>
somewhat too briefly for common understandings, I must here a little
better open it: for, as the old saying is, bonum quo communius eo
melius<4>, and the old verse is,

Scire tuum nihil est, nisi te scire hoc sciat alter
Goodness is best, when it is common shown:
Knowledge were vain, if knowledge were not known.

<5>  Wherefore now, seriously and in good sadness, to instruct you
and all gentlemen of worship, how to reform all unsavoury places of
your houses, whether they be caused by privies or sinks, or such
like (for the annoyance coming all of like causes, the remedies need
not be much unlike), this shall you do.

<6>"In the privy that annoys you, first cause a cistern, containing
a barrel or upward, to be placed either behind the seat, or in any
place in either in the room or above it, from whence the water may,
by a small pipe of lead of an inch, be conveyed under the seat in
the hinder part thereof (but quite out of sight); to which pipe you
must have a cock or a washer, to yield water with some pretty
strength when you would let it in.

<7> "Next make a vessel of an oval form, as broad at the bottom as
at the tap; two feet deep, one foot broad, sixteen inches long;
place this very close to your seat, like the pot of a close-stool;
let the oval incline to the right hand.

<8>"This vessel may be brick, stone, or lead; but whatsoever it is,
it should have a current of three inches to the back part of it
(where a sluice of brass must stand); the bottom and sides all
smooth, and drest with pitch, rosin, and wax; which will keep it
from tainting with the urine.<9>

<10>"In the lowest part of this vessel, which will be on the right
hand, you must fasten the sluice or washer of brass, with solder or
cement; the concavity or hollow thereof, must be two inches and a
half.

<11>"To the washer's stopple must be a stem of iron, as big as a
curtain rod; strong, and even, and perpendicular, with a strong
screw at the tap of it; to which you must have a hollow key with a
worm fit to that screw.

<12>"This screw must, when the sluice is down, appear through the 
plank not above a straw's breadth on the right hand; and being duly
placed, it will stand about three or four inches wide of the midst
of the back of your seat.

<13>"Item, That children and busy folk disorder it not, or open the
sluice with putting in their hands without a key, you should have a
little button or scallop shell, to bind it down with a vice pin, so
as without the key it will not be opened.

"These things thus placed, all about your vessel and elsewhere, must
be passing close plastered with good lime and hair, that no air come
up from the vault, <14> but only at your sluice, which stands close
stopped; and ever it must be left, after it is voided, half a foot
deep in clean water.

"If water be plenty, the oftener it is used and opened, the sweeter;
but if it be scant, once a day is enough, for a need, though twenty
persons should use it.

"If the water will not run to your cistern, you may with a force of
twenty shillings, and a pipe of eighteen pence the yard, force it
from the lowest part of your house to the the highest. <15>

But now behold the Anatomy. This is Don AJAX' house of the new
fashion, all in sunder; that a workman may see what he hath to do.


{Illustration 5 – The parts of AJAX}

Here are the parts set down, with a rate of the prices; that a
builder may guess what he hath to pay.


s.
d.
A. the cistern; stone or brick. Price
6
8
b, d, e the pipe that comes from the cistern, with a
stopple to the washer.
3
6
c a waste pipe
1
0
f, g the stem of the great stopple, with a key to it
1
6
h the form of the upper brim of the vessel or stoolpot


m the stoolpot, of stone
8
0
n the great brass sluice, to which is three inches
current to send it down a gallop into the Jax<16>
10
0
i the seat, with a peak devant for elbowroom.


	The whole charge thirty shillings and eight pence: yet a mason
of my master's was offered thirty pounds for the like. Memorandum.
The scale is about half an inch to a foot.
?

Here is the same, all put together; that the workman may see if it
be well.


{Illustration 6 – The whole of AJAX}

A the cistern.

b the little washer.

c the waste pipe.

D the seat board.

e the pipe that comes from the cistern.

f the screw.

g the scallop shell, to cover it when it is shut down.

H the stool pot.

i the stopple.

k the current.

1 the sluice.

m, N the vault into which it falls: always remember that the
chamberlain at noon and at night empty it, and leave it half a foot
deep in fair water.


And this being well done, and orderly kept, your worst privy may be
as sweet as your best chamber.

But to conclude all this in a few words, it is but a standing close-
stool easily emptied. And by the like reason (other forms and
proportions observed) all other places of your house may be kept
sweet.

Your worships' to command.
T. C.
Traveller.



NOTES TO THE ANATOMY

1. Invide quid mordes? Pictoribus atque Poetis,
Quidlibet audendi semper fuit aequa potestas.] "Who will attack me
from envy? But painters and poets have always shared the right to
dare anything." (A. S. Kline) Horace, Ars Poetica, 9-10.

2. Side note: Or to a toad, or a snake made in sugar, that looks
unsightly, but tastes sweetly.

3. Side note: M. Plat in his book against famine, fol. ultimo
penultimo.

4. bonum quo communius eo melius] "The more common a good is, the
better it is."

5. Side note: If that which follows offend the reader, he may turn
over a leaf or two, or but smell to his sweet gloves, and the savour
will necer offend him.

6. Side note: This cistern in the first plot is figured at the
letter A; and so likewise in the second plot. The small pipe in the
first plot at D, in the second at E; but it ought to lie out of
sight.

7. Side note: This vessel is expressed in the first plot H, M, N; in
the second H, K.

8. Side note: The current is expressed in the second plot K.

9. Side note: A special note.

10. Side note: In the second plot I, L.

11. Side note: In the first plot G, F; in the second F and I.

12. Side note: In the first plot between G, I.

13. Side note: This shows in the first plot K, L; in the second G;
such are in the backside of watches.

14. Side note: Else all is vain.

15. Side note: These forces, as also the great washer, you shall buy
at the queen's braziers in Lothbury, at the Boar's-Head.

16. And lest you should mislike with this phrase, I had it in a
verse of a grave author, that was wont to walk up and down the court
with a forest bill; I have forgot how it began (like a beast as he
was), but it ended in rhyme:

O that I were at Oxenford, to eat some Banbury cakes.



AN APOLOGY.

BUT pah! what have I talked of all this while? of A JAX? Pa-pe, what
an unsavoury argument is this! Nay, fie, I marvel you would read it.
I have lost all my credit with our wenches, if they hear that my pen
has thus polluted my paper.<1> But alas! it is but my fortune and
not my fault; I am forced thereto: when the master is in the
imperative mood, the man must obey in the present tense,<2> though,
he should be thought for his labour, As in praesenti, perfectum
format in avi, ut no, nas, knavi,<3>&c. Well, yet you see, I have
not forgot all my grammar. I wis it were better for us servingmen,
if you masters would do more in the dative case, and speak less in
the imperative mood.<4> If you will be lecherous, we must be bawds;
if you will be quarrellous, we must be ruffians: and now my master
plays the physician, I must be the apothecary. If he cast the water,
I must minister the clyster. What is the remedy?

Delirant domini, famuli plectuntur: iniquum est.
The men still bear their masters sin;
But little justice is therein.

But a great many of my master's betters, may say for themselves:

Mea (contendere noli) stultitiam patiuntur opes.
To strive with us it is but vain,
Our wealth our follies will sustain.<5>

Wherefore, now to say somewhat for myself, and as it were to play
one bout in mine own defence (for if Zoilus have already bitten at
my master's banquet, it may be some Momes will mock me for my short
pittance). First, therefore, to answer some Ciceronians, that
maintain that such a word as Stercutius should not be named in
civility (to omit, that where he condemns it, there he useth it, and
in one place besides)<6> But I would ask some rhetoric reader (for
sometimes eloquence hath thought it good to give the sword and
buckler place), whether it be not as civil a phrase to say,
Stercutius is made a noun adjective, as these few that I will here
recite; which, if I should English, they would make some perhaps
cast up their gorges. Against Piso, a great nobleman, his better in
birth, his equal in office;

<7>Cum hac me peste et labe confero? Meministi, caenum; nescio quo
egurgustio te prodire obvoluto capite soleatum? foetidam nobis
popinam exhalasti. Unde tu nos partim turpissime respondendo, partim
foedissime eructando ejecisti.<8>

<9 >And against the worthy Anthony (whom so noble pens have
celebrated), mark what he saith, and where; even in the senate. But
first, you must imagine that Anthony had had a little mischance
while he sat in judgment on the bench (perhaps some foolish orator,
that could not tell a slovenly tale cleanly, had been arguing of
purgare and reficere cloacam <10>; whereby, the nobleman being
queasy, laid open his stomach; and Tully, owing him a grudge, a year
after lays it in his dish, in these sweet words;

<11> O rem non modo visu foedam; sed etiam auditu, etc. In coetu
Populi Romani negotium publicum gerens, cui ructare turpe esset, is
frustis esculentis, vinum redolentibus gremium suum et totum
tribunal implevit.<12>

Thus, you see, your M. T. C. <13> when it pleased him to displease
others, would use words as bad as the best of us.

But to argue succinctly (as they call it), I say, that that some
call scurrility, in this book is indeed but a check to scurrility: I
will prove it will teach one to mend his fault, will show the fault
in themselves first.<14> Also the incomparable poet of our age, to
give a most artificial reproof of following the letter too much,
commits the same fault of purpose.

You that do dictionary method bring
Into your rhymes, running in rattling rows.
Sir P. Sydney.


Further, this book where it seems most loose, mark if it do not stop
rather than open all gaps of lasciviousness.<15>

But lest some bad disputers, confessing the premises to be true,
should deny the conclusion, let me deal sillogistice in mood and
figure.<16> And that the syllogism may be suitable to the
proposition, let it be in the third figure, the fifth mood, called
Bocardo.<17>

Major: Some homely words in necessary matters are not to be
condemned.
Minor: But all ages, all writers, all states, have used these words
in these matters.
Conclusion: Ergo, the title of the book should not be condemned.

Now if any be in so fierce a figure, and in so angry a mood, that he
will reduce all to Barbara, I think we should chop logic best with
such a one in ferio.

But if an argument be brought against us inthe second figure, in a
sober mood, and in the sacred name of Cesare; in this wise: <18>

1. No words obscene, scurrilous, and sordid, should come to modest,
chaste, and virtuous ears;
2. But all words concerning the subject of the book, are obscene,
scurrilous, and sordid:
3. Ergo, no part of the book is approvable.

Faith, then we are all non plus. I would our festino had been
coelarent;<19> for there is no denying nor replying to that mood;
but only say, God save the queen, and pray for the psalm of mercy.

Well, yet I trust, however my master speeds, I shall do well enough.
Aquila non capit muscas.<20> Wherefore, to conclude, and to grace
myself a little with you and your friends, let me tell you some of
my adventures. A servant's boast, you know, is to be like his
master. Lo! then how many ways I can liken me to him.

1. First, we are near of an age; past our fool age, neither young
nor old.<21>
	2. Both of a complexion; inclining to the oriental colour of a
Croydon sanguine.

3.Like in disposition; not idle, nor well occupied.

4. One of my kin did teach him at Eton, and one of his kin taught me
at Oxford.

5. We have been beyond sea, but never out of the queen's dominions.
In England, beyond Wales;<22> in Ireland, on this side England:<23>
where we saw young children mothers at eleven, young women old at
twenty-three: we saw some fair with little dressing, fat with scant
feeding, and warm with thin clothing.
	Excellent religion; mass in the morning, common prayer at noon,
common dancing at night;<24> we went as undertakers thither, we came
back overtaken; as for those that mocked us so, God and our Lady,
and one more go with them.

6. Since this travel we have been both poetical, and I musical and
pictorical; and though we may lie and steal by authority, yet we are
taken for true men, and have holp to hang thieves.

7. At this hour some of our friends think us worthy of better
fortunes than we have; but none is our friend so much to help us to
them.

8. We have played, and been played with, for our writings: Si quis
quod fecit, patiatur jus erit equum.<25> If you do take but such as
you give, it is one for another; but if they that play so, would
give us but a piece of gold for every good verse we think we have
made, we should leave some of them but poor fellows. <26> But soft,
if I shUuld tell all, he would say, I am of kin to Sauntus Ablabius.
It is no matter, since he made me write of Sauntus Accachius.

But now, that you may know I have been a dealer in emblems, I will
conclude with a device not sharp in conceit, but of venerable
antiquity; and yet by my masters own computation, it is not so
ancient as dame Cloacina, by eighteen hundred years and more. Now
riddle me what name is this. <27>


{Illustration 7 – device canting John Harington's name}

The (grace of God) guides well both age and youth;
Fly sin with fear, as harmless (hare) doth hound;
Like precious (ring) embrace more precious truth;
As (tun) full of good juice, not empty sound;
In these right scann'd, Misacmos' name is found.



NOTES TO AN APOLOGY

1. Side note: All this is sweetened with this one sentence; Humani
nihil a me alienum puto. ("I regard nothing human as foreign to me"
Terence, The self-tormentor, act i l.77) or, Dulcia non meruit qui
dedignatur amara. ("He who has despised the bitter does not deserve
the sweet")

2. Side note: Fidelis servus perpetuus asinus ("A faithful servant
is always a beast of burden.")

3. As in praesenti, perfectum format in avi, ut no, nas, knavi] A
pun on a school mnemonic for remembering Latin grammar—"-as in the
present, forms the perfect in 
-avi, as in no, nas, navi, &c.")

4. Side note: Quae mala sint Domini, quae servi commoda nescis.
Condile, qui servum, te genus esse diu.("Having been a servant for a
long time, Condylus, you do not realise how unhappy masters can be,
or how easy a servant's life") By your leaves, masters.

5. Side note: Horace (Epistles bk 1. Ep. 18 l. 28-29)

6. Side note: Nolo stercus curiae dici Glauciam. De orat. 157. ("I
would not call Glaucis "the shit of the senate." Cicero, On Oratory,
Bk. iii. par 41.) Supra stercus injectum. De divinat. 92 ("I was
cast into the dung" Cicero, On Divination, Bk. i. par 27)

7. Side Note : Oratio in Pisonem ("The oration against Piso")

8. Cum hac me peste, &c.] "Should I compare myself to this plague,
this disgrace? Do you remember, you filth, when you came out of a
hovel with your head wrapped up and in slippers? You breathed the
filthy stink of a cheap eating-house on us. Where you replied most
disgracefully to us with foul-smelling belching."

9. Side note: Pauci tua lutulenta vitia noveramus, Epicure ex hara
producte. "Few of us knew of your filthy life, O you Epicurus bred
in a pigsty."

10. purgare and reficere cloacam "Cleaning and repairing a sewer."

11. Side note: O matter, slovenly to be seen, to be heard, hateful,
&c. Orat. in M. Ant. II.

12. O rem non modo, &c.] "A filthy thing not to be seen or even
heard of, &c; but in an assembly of the Roman people, a man holding
a public office, in whom it would have been disgraceful even to
belch, he filled his own bosom and the whole tribunal with fragments
of what he had been eating reeking with wine." (C. M. Yonge.)

13. M. T. C.] i.e. Marcus Tullius Cicero.

14. Side note: Grammarians, Musicians, Dancers, Fencers.

15. Side note: A good trial of what spirit a book is written in.

16. sillogistice: by means of a syllogism. Side note: This is to you
that be scholars.

17. Side note: A syllogism in Bocardo.

18. Side note: A syllogism in the first mood of the second figure.

19. I would our festino had been coelarent;] Technical terms in
formal logic. A festino is "the mnemonic name of a mood of the
second figure of syllogism having the major premise negative and the
minor particular", coelarent is "a term designating the second mood
of the first figure of syllogisms, in which the major premiss and
the conclusion are universal negatives, and the minor premiss a
universal affirmative."

20. Side note: Eagles stoop not at flies.

21. Side Note: This I learn of my cousin M. Thomas Cicero, to,
praise myself.

22. Side note: Milford.

23. Side note: Waterford; because it is on ths side the English
pale.

24. Side note: The first, they call God's service: the second, they
call the Queen's service; the third, some think the devil's service.

25. Side note: Now if the man such praise will have,/Then what must
he that keeps the knave. Dametas in Arcadia

26. Side note: It is good to set a name to the book: For a book
without name may be called a libel.



THE TRIAL OF MISACMOS

An Apology
1. Or rather a Retractation;
2. Or rather a Recantation;
3. Or rather a Recapitulation;
4. Or rather a Replication; 
5. Or rather an Examination;
6. Or rather an Accusation;
7. Or rather an Explication;
8. Or rather an Exhortation;
9. Or rather a Consideration;
10. Or rather a Confirmation;
11. Or rather all of them;
12. Or rather none of them.

WHEN I had finished the precedent pamphlet, and in mine own fantasy
very sufficiently evacuated my head of such homely stuff, of which
it might seem it was very full charged, and showed how little
conceit or opinion I had of mine own ability to handle stately
matters, by choosing so mean a subject to discharge myself upon: I
thought now to rest me awhile, and to gather some strength, by
feeding on some finer meats, and making some cullisses and
restoratives, for myself out of some other men's kitchens, and not
open this vein any more. But I laboured all in vain to stop such a
vein: for certain people, of the nature of  those that first dwelt
in the Canaries, have, forced me to a further labour. <1> For,
whether it were overwatching myself at primero, or eating too much
venison, which they say is a very melancholy meat, I know not how:
but betimes one morning, when we use commonly to take our sweetest
sleep, namely, between eight and half hour past ten, I was either in
so strange a dream, or in so strange a melancholy, that methought
there came to me a nimble dapper fellow (I cannot hit on his name);
one that hath pretty pettifogging skill in the law, and hath been an
under sheriff (but not thrice), <2> , and is now in the nature of an
attorney; this honest friend told me this solemn tale: I was (saith
he) yesternight at supper at ordinary, and there met M. Zoilus, M.
Momus, and three or four good natured gentlemen more of the same
crew; and toward the end of supper they fell to talking (as their
manner is) of certain books lately come forth. And one of them told
how Lipsius the great politic (that learned to speak so good English
but awhile since) had written a book de Cruce<3>, protesting that
though he understood not the language, yet it offended his
conscience to see so many crosses in one book, and he have so few in
his purse: then they spake of M. Raynold's book against Bellarmine,
but they could find no fault with it; for they said it was of a
matter they used not to trouble themselves withal: thirdly, they
descanted of the new Faerie Queene, and the old both; and the
greatest fault they could find in it, was that the last verse
disordered their mouths, and was like a trick of seventeen in a 
sinkapace: Finally, they ran over many men's writing, saying, some
wanted rhyme, some wanted reason, and some both. One, they said, was
so young that he had not yet learned to write; another, so old he
had forgotten to write, and was fit now to be donatus rude,<4> as
Horace saith. But to make short, at last one of them pulled out of
his bosom a book that was not to be sold in Paul's Churchyard, but
only that he had borrowed it of his friend; and it was entitled, The
Metamorphosis of A JAX; at which they began to make marvellous
sport: and because it was a rainy night they agreed to read over the
whole discourse to pass the time with. First, they read the author's
name, and though they understood it not, yet that it might not pass
without a jest, they swore that it signified, Mise in a sack of
moss. They read the letters, and stumbling once or twice on a figure
called Prolepsis, or prevention, they were angry their scoffs were
so prevented. But when they found Rabelais named, then they were at
home; they looked for pure stuff where he was cited for an author.

The letters being ended, they perused the pictures; they swore they
were fit for a gong-farmer and a chimneysweeper. <5> Then they fell
to the Metamorphosis; it pleased them well: they said it was
scurrill, base, shallow, sordid; the ditty, the dirge, the
etymology, the pictures, gave matter of jest, of scorn, of derision,
of contempt. At last they came to the intent (as they thought) of
the whole discourse of reforming master AJAX' ill breath; why, they
were so pleased with it, they were ready to untruss, and thought to
have gone to it presently: but when they came to the exposition of
the name Misacmos, and found it was a hater of filth, it was such a
jerk, that they were half out of countenance with it. Zounds! saith
one of them, this fellow is an enemy to us; for we are counted but
filthy fellows among the grave greybeards. But at last, when they
were come to the double distichon directly entitled to them by name,
they had no sooner read it but there was such spitting and spelling,
as though they had been half choked; they thought they should never
get the taste out of their mouths, yet they took immediately, fifty
pipes of tobacco between five of them, and an ounce or two of
kissing comfits.<6> And soon after swearing over a paternoster or
two, and cursing two or three credos (I mean the pox and three or
four small curses), they vowed a solemn revenge; and taking pen and
ink, they fall to quoting of it, meeting with some matter almost in
every page, either to deride or to carp at; and when they had done
(for it would make a book to tell all that passed among them), at
last one of them who had some judgment, but not less malice than the
rest, said in great choler, doth this idleiheaded writer, because he
can tell a tale of old Stercutius out of St. Augustine, think that
his wit will serve him to find means to amend the ill savours in
Richmond and Greenwich? No, if Hercules that served Augeus, if Atlas
that sustained the world, if St. Christopher that is painted at
Richmond with his carriage, qui tollit peccata mundi;<7> if all
these should join with him, I doubt if it could be done. Yet, said
another of them (in scoff), we may thank him for his good meaning.
Nay rather, said a third man in earnest, let us plague him for his
malapertness. In conclusion, they all laid their heads together, as
near as they could for their brow antlers, and devised to indict you
at a privy sessions. Some said, you could not be indicted, except
you were put out of the peace first: but straight, one alleged a
precedent in Wiltshire, of a justice indicted for a barrator. <8>
Now therefore (said my little attorney), advise you how to answer
it; for the session will be a purchased session, sooner than you
look for it. He had but new ended his speech, and I had scarce
leisure to thank him, when methought there rushed into my chamber a
thick well-trussed fellow, with a badge just over his heart, and
commands me in the name that I love above all names, to go
immediately with him. I must say truly, that though I blessed the
name he used, and the badge he wore, yet I beshrewed his heart for
bringing me no better news next my heart: but with him I went (for
needs must he go whom the devil drives), and yet why should I belie
the devil? I think, for forty shillings more than his fee, he would
have been seeking me a month in every place, save where I was. But
to proceed, methought this gentle pursuivant brought me before an
austere and grave magistrate, whom I greatly loved and honoured, to
answer to divers objections and articles that I never expected to be
charged with. I comforted myself as well as I could with an old
adage or two, qui vadit plane vadit sane, the plain way hath the
surest footing; and magna est veritas et praevalet, great is the
truth and prevaileth; and then answered my accusers as I could.

The manner of the accusation was not much unlike the assault of a
town: For first, they skirmished as it were with small shot, which I
bare off with the armour and shield of plain dealing and honest
supplicity; but finding their forces increase, I was glad to retire
me into the castle of innocency; where they made a sore battery with
rabinets, minions, sakers, and demicanons; for, as God would have
it, they had no canons: <9> but thus they objected, and thus I
answered.

1. Some laid to my charge, I was an idle fellow, and showed by my
writings I had little to do. Alas! said I, it is too true; and
therefore, if you know any man that hath an office to spare, you may
do well to prefer me to it: for it were a bad office that I would
not change for this I have taken upon me; and if I had another, I
would be content this were divided among you.

2. Some said I was such a fool, to think seriously the device worthy
to be published, and put in practice as a common benefit; trust me
that is true too.

3. Some supposed that because my writings now lay dead, and had not
been thought of this good while, I thought (as Alcibades cut off his
dog's tail to make the people talk of his curtail), so I would send
my muse abroad masking naked in a net, that I might say,

Num iterum volito viva per ora virum.<10>


Of my honour that is not true. Will you deny it on your oath? Nay,
by our Lady, not for a thousand pounds.

4. Some said plainly, because my last work was another man's
invention, and that some fine phrase-making fellows had found a
distinction between a versifier and a poet, I wrote this to show I
could be both when I listed, though I mean to be neither: as Thales
Milesius, by making himself rich in one year, showed his contempt of
riches. The devil of the lie that is.

5. Some surmised against me, that because the time is so toying,
that wholesome meats cannot be digested without wanton sauce, and
that even at wise men's tables, fools have most of the talk,
therefore I came in with a babble to have my tale heard: I must
needs confess it.

6. Some said, that in emulation of outlandish wits, and to be one of
the first English that had given the venture to make the title of
his work the worst part of it, I was persuaded to write of such an
argument: I will never deny that while I live.

7. Some affirmed, that I had taken this laughing liberty to grace
some that have favoured me, and grate against some that had galled
me: guilty, my lord.

Alas! poor gentleman (say the standers by), he will be condemned
certainly for this that he hath confessed already, if he be not
saved by his book: let us hear what he will answer to the rest of
the indictment.

8. You did mean some disgrace in the letter afore the book, and in
many passages of the book itself, to ladies and gentlewomen. Who, I?
G— damn me if I love them not; I fear more to be damned for loving
them too well.

9. You did think to scoff at some gentlemen that have served in some
honourable services, though with no great good success. As I am a
gentleman, not guilty; neither do I mean any; but such as will needs
be called M. Captains, having neither carried out with them, nor
brought home with them, worth, wealth, or wit.

10. You did seek to discredit the honest meaning and laudable
endeavours of some zealous and honest men, that seek for
reformation, and labour faithfully and fruitfully in the world. To
this, in all and every not guilty; provided they rail not against
bishops, nor against the communion book.

11. You did intend some scorn to great magistrates and men in
authority, either alive or deceased, under covert names to cover
some knavery. Knavery? no, as God judge me, my lord, not guilty: the
good year of all the knavery and knaves for me. By whom will you be
tried? By the queen and the ladies, by the counsel and the lords.
What, saucy younker, will not meaner trial serve you? No, good
faith, my lord; I loved alway to be the worst of the company.

Well, sirrah, this is the judgment of the court: that because there
is hope that you may prove a wiser man hereafter, and that you have
some better friends than you are worthy of, you shall have this
favour; if the indictment happen to be found, you shall traverse it,
and you shall choose twelve freeholders bonos et legales
homines,<11> that shall inquire of the quality of your discourse,
and bring in their verdict quindena pascha;<12> and if they find you
guilty, you shall have a hole bored in your ear. What to do; to wear
my mistress' favour at? Now, God save your mistress' life, my lord.
Clerk of the peace, draw his indictment upon the four last articles
that he denied, and upon the statute of Scandala; <13> for I tell
you we must teach you to learn the laws of the realm, as well as
your rules of poetry. Laws? I trow I have the law at my fingers
ends:

Aurea perdentes super et sint pillory stantes
Scanda rumantes in regis consiliantes;
Aut in magnates nova sediciosa loquentes,
Non producentes autores verba serentes.
Their ears must on the pillory be nail'd
That have against her Highness' counsel rail'd;
Or such as of the peers foul brutes do scatter,
And cannot bring their author for the matter.

Wherefore, you shall find I will keep me safe enough from
scandalizing. And if you do, it is the better for you.

What is your name? Misacmos. What? it is a Welsh name, I think: Of
whence do you write yourself? Misacmos, of Caernarvon, gentleman.
Who made you of Caernarvon? She that made you of England. Well, you
shall fare never the worse for that; but look to the answering of
your indictment, I advise you. What must I have no counsel? Straight
a big fellow, with a biggin on his head, and his gown off of one
shoulder,<14> cries no, the Queen is a party. But I had rather your
gown were off the other shoulder, and your head after, then you
should make her a party against me; and yet, as ill as I love you, I
would my second son had changed possibilities with your eldest, for
a thing that I know. And thus after a few wrangling words, methought
the court rose for that time; and suddenly my man came bustling into
my chamber, and told me that all the gentlemen that had been riding
on the heath were come back again, and that it was near eleven of
the clock; and straight I called for my suit of Abrizetta, and made
all the haste I could to make me ready, not so much as tarrying to
say my prayers, lest I might not come time enough to the peace of
God at the closet, and so I might be in danger to lose my dinner.

But having somewhat better pondered with myself this foresaid fancy,
I was somewhat troubled with it, not so much for those hanging
metaphors, for as a good knight of our country said, gog's soul
sirs, the best gentleman of us all, need not forswear hanging, but
that I thought that my genius hereby presaged to me some peril to my
reputation, of the sundry censures I should incur, by letting such a
pamphlet fly abroad at such a time, when every thing is taken at the
volley; and therefore I held it not unnecessary, as much as in me
lay, to keep it from the view and censure of all such as were like
to deride it, despise it, or disgrace it; and to recommend it only
to all such as I thought would allow it and approve it. For to
confess the truth frankly to you, my good cousins, ? ??? ?
??????????? (O kai e philostilpnos)<15>, I desire not altogether to
have it concealed, lest some hungry promoting fellows should beg it
as a concealment, and beg the author also, for writing a thing that
he were ashamed to show; but if I might govern the matter as I
would, I would generally recommend it only to such as have houses
and families of their own. For I remember I have read of a certain
king of the Lacedemonians, that being one day private in his garden,
was teaching one of his sons of five years old to ride on a stick,
and unawares a great ambassador came to speak with him, and found
him in the manner: at which, both the king and the ambassador in the
king's behalf began to blush at first; but soon after, the king put
away the blush and the hobby-horse together, and with a pretty smile
asked the ambassador if he had any little children of his own; he
answered, no: then, said he, I pray you tell not what you found me
doing, till you have some little ones of your own, and then tell it,
and spare not: for even so, I would request men to forbear reading
of this discourse, or at least reproving of it till they had of
their own that, that would make them know the commodity and
cleanliness of it; and for those that will not, I would but wish
them (as Martial wishes to Charinus),

Quid imprecabor O Severe liventi,
Opto Mulos habeat et suburbanum.<16>


So I would they could ride on their footcloth, and had a house, and
A JAX of their own. Yet, surely it may be, it were the wisest way to
show it to none at all; and so I half wish sometimes: but because
every general rule must have his exception, you shall see whom I
would be content both the discourse and the device may be showed
unto.

<17>1. First, to a good and judicious scholar; for he will read it,
ere he will judge of it, and say, omnia probate;<18> and then
perhaps, after he hath read it, he will smile, and say it is some
young scholar's work, that would have showed more wit if he had had
it; but it is well, ridentem dicere verum quis vetat,<19> etc. And
then he will say, it were good some of his friends would advise him
to spend his talent and his time on some better subject. But some
supercilious fellow, or some stale scribe, that think men will not
judge them to be learned except they find faults, they will swear a
man would have written as well, that had read but Marcus Aurelius.

2. Secondly, I would have it showed to a housekeeper that hath much
resort to him; for it were not only a deed of charity to help such a
one, but a sin to hide it from him; for else he may pick a quarrel,
and say, that this same company hath so stenched up his house, that
he must be forced to lie at London till his house be made
sweeter.<20>

3. Thirdly, if one be a builder and no housekeeper, let him see it
too, for he loves to have all fine for his heir; and perhaps I would
be content for the love I have had to that humour, that my master
his son, were married to his mistress my daughter, as Heywood saith
of a lusty old widower, that wooed a young woman, and boasting how
well he would provide for his son:

In a short tale, when his long tale was done,
She pray'd his go home, and send her his son.

But if one be a builder and a housekeeper both, then I will come
home to his house to him; I will read him a lecture of it, I will
instruct his workman, I will give him plots and models, and do him
all the service I can; for that is a man of my own humour, and a
good commonwealths-man; but yet I will give him a caveat in his ear
that I learned of Sir Thomas More, if his purse be not well
furnished:

Aedificare demos multas, et pascere multos,
Est ad pauperiem, semita laxa nimis.
The way from wealth and store, to want and need,
Is much to build, and many mouths to feed.

4. Fourthly, if you would know whether you should show it to ladies.
Yea, in any wise to all manner of ladies; of the court, of the
country, of the city; great ladies, lesser ladies, learned,
ignorant, wise, simple, foul, well-favoured, painted, unpainted, so
they be ladies, you may boldly prefer it to them: for your milkmaids
and country housewives may walk to the woods to gather strawberries,
&c.

But greater states cannot do so; and therefore for them it is a
commodity more than I will speak of; yet upon a touch of this point,
make me but a good rhyme to this line afore dinner:

Within yon tower there is a flower that holds my heart.

Howbeit, you must not show it after one fashion to all; but to the
wise and sober, after a plain fashion; to the wanton and waggish,
after another fashion; as namely, if they cry (fie for shame) when
they hear the title read or such like, do but you say (for company)
that it is a mad fantastical book indeed; and when you have done,
hide it away, but where they may find it, and by the next day they
will be as cunning in it as you; for this is not the first time that
I have said of such a kind of book,

In Brutus' presence, Lucrece will refuse it;
Let him but turn his back, and she'll peruse it.

5. Fifthly, you may show it to all amorous young youths, that will
scratch their head but with one finger at once (as Cato noted of
Caesar), and had rather be noted of three disorders in their lives
than of one in their locks; and especially if they be so cleanly
that they will not eat pottage (no not alone), but that they will
wipe their spoon between every spoonful, for fear lest their upper
lip should infect the nether: for I would think certainly, that such
a one, if he be so cleanly as he would seem to be, would make great
account of A JAX so well reformed. But yet the world is so full of 
dissimulation and hypocrisy, that we of the plainer sort may be
easily deceived: for I heard of one the last day, in a town a
hundred mile from London, that had engrossed all the fine fashions
into his hands, of the curling, perfuming, wiping the spoon, &c.;
and yet after all this cleanliness went to as common and as deformed
A JAX of the feminine gender as any was in the town; and then, alas!
what will such a one care for my device.

<21>Lastly, I would have it showed to all good, fat, corpulent men,
that carry with them a writ of Corpus cum causa,<22> for they are
commonly the best natured men that be; without fraud, without
treachery, as Caesar said of Anthony and Dolobella, that he never
mistrusted them for any practise because he saw they were fat; but
rather Casca and Cassius, that were lean hollow fellows, and cared
not for a good dinner: and therefore I would be censured by those
good fellows that have less gall; and the rather, because I look
every day for press money from the captain, to be employed in the
conquest of that country,<23> and this engine of mine is like to be
in great request for those services.

But methinks you may say, that here is a marvellous restraint made
of showing this discourse of mine, not much unlike to our stage-
keepers in Cambridge, that for fear lest they should want company to
see their comedies, go up and down with vizors and lights, puffing
and thrusting, and keeping out all men so precisely, till all the
town is drawn by this revel to the place; and at last, tag and rag,
freshmen and subsizars, and all be packed in together so thick, as
now is scant left room for the prologue to come upon the stage: for
so you may suppose that I would bar all from this pamphlet of mine,
save those that can write, or read, or understand. But if you take
it thus, you do much mistake it; for there be divers from whom I
would keep it as I would from fire and water, as for example:

<24>1. First, from a passing proud fellow, such a one as Naaman the
Syrian, that would disdain to wash in Jordan though it would cure
him of the leprosy or the pox; and to such, for my part, I would
wish they might lay all in their gold breeches, rather than to abase
their high conceits so much, as to think upon poor master A JAX.

2. Secondly, from all manner of fools and jesters, whether they be
artificial or natural; for those be so dull, they cannot taste the
salt in a piece of well powdered writing; and those be so tart, they
will rather lose a friend than a jest: yet if their railing were
allayed a little, with the two excellent virtues of flattering and
begging, one might hope for some kindness at their hands.

3. Thirdly, if you spy a fellow with a bay leaf in his mouth, avoid
him; for he carrieth a thing about him worse than master A JAX, that
all the devices we have cannot reform.

4. Fourthly, if you see a stale, lean, hungry, poor, beggarly,
threadbare cavaliero, like to Lazarillo's master, that when he dined
at his own house, came forth with more crumbs of bread on his beard
than in his belly, and that being descended of divers nobilities,
will do a mean gentleman the honour to borrow ten shillings of him,
show it not him; for though he can say nothing against it, yet he
will leer under his hat as though he could speak more than he
thinks. For such a one that makes not a good meal at home once in a
month, hath not a good stool above once in a week, and then he will
never say us gramercy for it: and this I may say to you is a
consideration of no small importance; for though I must acknowledge
that is not one of the meritorious works I look to be saved by, yet
to have a prayer or two from some, that perhaps never say a prayer
anywhere else, would do me no hurt, nor them neither. And methink I
might much better deserve a kn-ave mary to be said for me where my
stately A JAX is admitted, and stands men instead, than he for whose
soul the young gentleman, the first time he consummated his marriage
with his wife, said a paternoster; and being asked for whom he
prayed, he told his wife it was for his soul that had taken the
pains to make his way so easy for him. Oh! sir, said she, it is a
sign you have travelled such ways more than an honest man should
have done, that you are so cunning; and so they became good friends.
But ware riot, ho! whither am I running? I said, I would keep me
from scandalizing; but if I stop not betime, some will think to have
their action in the case against me; yet it is good to cast the
worst. Suppose, that for my bad inditing, I should be indicted, as
it is twenty to one but if the grand jury were pricked by a bad
sheriff, out of those four last mentioned suits (and of three of
them you shall have a full appearance in most courts of
Christendom),<25> they will sure say, billa vera, though they should
say of right nothing but ignoramus <26>. But see, see, even with
thinking of it I fall again into my former melancholy; methink the
indictment is found, I am arraigned, I plead not guilty, I would
still be tried by the nobility, by such as build stately palaces and
keep great courts, but it will not be granted me; I must have none
but freeholders, I chafe at it and would appeal: they cry it is not
the course of the common law; I praise the civil law; for there a
man may hold play with appealing, if he have a little idle money to
spend, three or four years. At last comes the little dapper fellow,
my honest attorney, that knew better the course of these matters
than I did; and he rounds me in the ear, and tells me, that for
forty shillings to master high-sheriff's man that wears the russet
satin doublet and the yellow silk stockings, he will undertake I
shall have a jury of good freeholders, but for the nobility, it is
out of their commission: and, sir (saith he), what need you to stand
so much on the nobility, considering you desire to have none but
great housekeepers and builders? For suppose you could get three or
four to appear, one at Petworth, another hard by there at Coudrey
(where, in the old viscount's time, Jupiter hospitalis, is said to
have dwelt); and the young lord I hear doth patrisare, or rather I
should say avisare<27> (and that is a good word if he will mark it).
Say also another dwelt at Ragland in Monmouthshire, where I heard a
good knight of Gloucestershire affirm, the most honourable house of
that realm was kept; and a fourth at Nonesuch, where the housekeeper
for true English noblesse and honour, deserves the name better than
the house. But when you shall think to make up the tales, where will
you have them? some will be non est inventus in baliva,<28> some
that you love best will not be perhaps intro quatuor maria<29>:
wherefore the judge was your friend more than you were aware, that
gives you choice of freeholders.

Believe me (said I), I think it is so indeed; hold thee, my little
dapper knave, there is forty shillings for master sheriff's man to
buy him another pair of silk stockings, <30> and there is forty
pence for thy good counsel; and see you find me a jury of
substantial freeholders, that are good housekeepers, to try my
honesty by.

He goeth, and ere an ape can crack a nut (as they say) he brings the
names; and master crier he comes, twenty shillings in his shoes, and
calls them, though he be sure they cannot hear him, as followeth:

1. John Harington, of Exton in the county of Rutland, knight; alias
John Har: of Burleigh in the county aforesaid, alias of Combe in the
county of Warwick, alias of Ooston in the county of Leicester, come
into the court, or else, &c. Hath he freehold? Yea, he is a pretty
freeholder in all these shires: Moreover, saith a third man, though
he be a freeholder, yet he hath married his daughter to one, that
for a grandfather, for a father, for two uncles, and three or four
aunts, may compare with most men in England. Lastly, a fourth said,
and four hundred confirm it, that he relieves many poor and sets
them to work; he builds not only his own houses, but colleges and
hospitals. Marry, sir, then shall he be foreman of my jury with all
my very heart: a builder and an housekeeper both? you cannot devise
to please me better. I would there were a decem tales<31> in every
shire in England, and on that condition I would be glad to be one of
them. Well, what have you to say to Sir John Harington? Marry, this.
Here is one Misacmos, that is an accused servant of the state, to be
a writer of fantastical pamphlets to corrupt manners; the same
suspected of divers untruths and treasons, not sparing the majesty
of kings and great emperors (saying one was a cuckold and a fool,
another had an ill face, as in the pamphlet itself more plainly
appeareth): now because it seems he is a gentleman, and of
reasonable good breeding, he craves to be tried by a substantial
jury; of which, for many respects, he will have you to be the
foreman: he pleads to all the principal matters, not guilty; and
justifies, that those things they call untruth and treason, are
truth and reason. He is to be tried by God and country, which
country you are; wherefore, your charge is (if it please you) to
read the whole treatise at your leisure, and then to say how you
like it. He saith further, he cares not to have you sworn, because
your word will be taken for a greater matter than this by ten
thousand pounds without oath. Jury Harington.

2. Who is next? Sir John Peter, of Stonden in the county of Essex,
knight, a good housekeeper, and a builder both. Hath he freehold?
Yea, so, so, I think he may wear velvet and satin (by the statute of
4 and 5 Phil. Ma.), for he may dispend twenty marks a year, ultra
reprisas.<32>

Well, because he is a builder and a housekeeper, I hope he will not
deny me to be of my jury. The same charge, &c. that Sir John
Harington took, you &c.; and so long may you keep a good house. Jury
Peter.

3. Sir John Spenser, knight, a good substantial freeholder in
Northamptonshire, and a good housekeeper , and so was the father
afore him: Oh! I remember him; he had a poor neighbour once dwelt at
Holmeby, that made four verses, if I have not forgot them, were
forty shillings out of his way:

Erupuit sors dura mihi, sors altera reddit.
Haec loca quae veteri, rudere structa vides:
Aeternos vivat, magna Elizabetha per annos,
Quae me tam grato, laeto favore beat.<33>

By St. Mary he had good cause to say, well fare a good mistress, or
else Holmeby had been joined to your freehold. How say you, worthy
knight (and the best man of your name that is, but not that hath
been), <34> will you be of our jury? You will say, you know not this
same Misacmos. It may be so very well; for I think the fellow doth
scarce know himself at this instant, and yet he learned ?????
??????? (gnothi seauton) <35> twenty years ago. Well, I presume you
will not refuse it; for though you never heard of him, it seems he
hath heard of you: I will tell you two or three good tokens; you
have three or four sisters, good, wellfavoured, wellfeatured,
wellstatured, wellnatured women, for plain country wenches; and they
were married to men a step or two, or three or four, above the best
yeomen of Kent (well fare all good tokens); and one of them is a
widow; I beshrew their hearts, and I would their wives were widows
that made her so: I trow it was Sir James Harington and your father,
that went a begging to make a purse to marry their daughters: but
you will make a hundred of us go a begging, if we should follow you:
will you have any more tokens yet? you had a brother of Lincoln's
Inn, and another they say keeps a good house, for I ween the best
housekeeper in England was at his house: yet one token more: you
have a learned writer of your name, make much of him, for it is not
the least honour of your honourable family. Jury Spenser.

4. Thomas Stanop, knight, of Shelford in the county of Nottingham, a
housekeeper, a builder, a substantial freeholder, come into the
court. Alas! sir, he is lame, he cannot come. Is he so indeed? I am
sorry for it: I have heard that he hath borne some sway in his
country, yet bid him not forget the old proverb, a good friend in
the court is worth a penny in the purse at all times. Well, if he
cannot come, let us have another. Oh, sir (saith one), stay but a
paternoster while, and you may have his son in his place. What,
master John Stanop, my old schoolfellow, an honest and valiant
gentleman? I will tarry for him with all my heart. To the next.

5. Matthew Arundell, knight, of Wardour in the county of Wiltshire,
a good freeholder and a builder. Tush! he is no housekeeper, so said
one that dwells threescore miles to Trent northward. Is it so? I
will know within this month if it be so or no; in the mean season I
will venture to take him, if I can meet with him. For, first, I
doubt if he himself that said so, have spent so much in honourable
services as this freeholder's son hath done.

Secondly, I have seen both lords and ladies as well entertained in
his poor house, and served in as fine plate and porcelain as any is
in the north. And admit he were no housekeeper, yet I would have
him, because I hear he is a good horsekeeper, a red deer keeper, a
fallow deer keeper, and other such base things as may enable him for
my jury. Come on, old father Peleus; he looks like Prester John in
his furred nightcap; but he hath more wit under that cap than two or
three of his neighbours. Will it please you, sir, to be of our jury?
It shall cost the life of one of the baldfaced bucks else. What, are
you angry I call you Peleus? If I were but another Prometheus, I
would swear your fortune should be, to be like Peleus: for the time
was, that one wrote of your Thetis, when she waited on Diana at
Hatfield;

Who marketh well her grace, thereby may plainly see 
A Laura in her face, and not a Willoughby.

Whist! peace (saith my little attorney in mine ear)! you that are so
full of your poetry; we shall have a new indictment framed against
you, upon the statute of rogues, for telling of fortunes. Have you a
verse for that too? Yes, marry, have I, sir:

Fati narrator, Aegiptus prestigiator,
Aure perurantur, simul atque flagella sequantur.
All fortune-tellers, jugglers, and Egyptians,
Are burn'd in th' ear, or whipp'd by law's prescriptions.

Notwithstanding, I trust a man may by poetica licentia, and by
example of Virgil, tell fortunes that be past, yet little said is
soon amended; howbeit, I will not forget to be thankful to this good
knight for one special favour he did me; and that was, he made me go
when I was with him at Wardour to as stately A JAX house (for a
summer house), and as sweet as any can be, in a standing made in an
oak, that hangs over a pond; and marvel not I call it stately: for
this master A JAX, if you bring but an angle-rod and a cross-bow
with you, will afford choice of three royal sports, to kill deer,
fowl, and fish. Now this, I take it, was more than common kindness;
and so much for jury Arundell.

6. Francis Willoughby, knight, of Wollerton in the county of
Nottingham, a good freeholder, a housekeeper, and a great builder.
Oh! my neighbour that dwells a hundred miles from me, and yet but a
hedge parts our land: good morrow, neighbour, with the fair house,
the fair wife, and the fair living: Tout beau,<36> I pray you let us
have a fair verdict from you in our matter, or else I will promise
you I will rather lie in the worst inn in Nottingham, than in the
fairest bedchamber in your house: and if you will be of our side I
will pray that all your fairs may be the fairer one for another.
Jury Willoughby.

7. John Berin, knight, of the same county, a great good housekeeper;
marry, God's blessing on his heart for it. Indeed, I remember they
would say, that Sir John Berin for Nottinghamshire, was as great a
housekeeper as Sir Edward Baynton in Wiltshire; and then I will be
sworn he was a good one. Well, let us make much of him, for there is 
but a few of them left; I trust he will not refuse me for my jury.
Jury Berin.

8. George Sampoole, knight, a Lincolnshire man, and a Lincoln's Inn
man, a good freeholder, and keeps a good house in his country (as I
hear); but I know my neighbours of Bath will affirm that he kept
good hospitality there; and that he and his fair lady both, are a
worthy, virtuous, and a godly couple.

Well, let them be as godly as they may, and as perfect in the
Scripture as Priscilla and Aquila,<37> I hope they will not deny but
I have good authorities for my teshe, and give a friendly verdict.
Jury Sampoole.

9. Ralph Horsey, knight, the best housekeeper in Dorsetshire, a good
freeholder, a deputy lieutenant. Oh, sir, you keep hawks, and
hounds, and hunting horses; it may be some mad fellow will say, you
must stand in the bath up to the chin, for spending five hundred
pounds to catch hares and partridges, that might be taken for five
pounds.<38>

But if you do come to Bath (so you will be one of my jury), I will
stand as deep in the bath as you; and it is odds but at the spring
and fall we shall meet good company there. I pray you give a
friendly verdict, for old acquaintance between King's College and
Trinity College. Jury Horsey.

10. Sir Hugh Portman, of Orchard in the county of Somerset, knight,
a good housekeeper, a builder, and a substantial freeholder. Marry,
sir, I might ill have spared him. Come, my good knight, I have kept
you in store for a dead lift; I hope you will stick close to us for
the law; for you have as much if you list to show it as some that
wear coifs. Besides, you have that same sovereign medicine against
the consumption, called aurum potabile:<39> and I know your
neighbours of Taunton say you are liberal of it; and for your good
hospitality, your neighbours of the court will say, you are no
niggard of your meat. Yet I remember one day when I told a good
friend of yours that I was sure you never took usury, well (saith
he) though I grant he doth many men kind pleasures, yet he doth them
not all gratis. I promised him I would tell you so, and to pick a
further thank, I will tell you what I answered him (for I guessed at
his meaning by means I had once some smattering of the Latin
tongue<40>): if your gratis (quoth I) be an adjective, the fault is
theirs, and the praise is his.

Well, Sir Hugo, I will come shortly and see your new builded orchard
(I think there is not two better orchards in England, and put Kent
to it); and when we have conferred for reforming one fault there
(you can smell my meaning I am sure), then would I ask your opinion,
which makes a man happier, to be wise or rich: I asked a philosopher
once, and he said he could not tell, because he saw still the wise
men wait at the rich men's doors.

Well, happy are you if you can decide this question, and happier if
you cannot decide it. A rich man, a wise man, a builder, and
especially a bachelor. Franco, sciolto, slegato, O che felice,
stato?<41> Wherefore keep you so still, and believe me it is the
happiest state; yet tell not my wife that I say so, for (of my
honesty) she will make me unsay it again with all my heart. Jury
Portman. Crier count them.

Sir John Harington, one; Sir John Peter, two; Sir John Spenser,
three; Sir Thomas Stanop, four; Sir Matthew Arundell, five; Sir
Francis Willoughby, six; Sir John Berin, seven; Sir George Sampoole,
eight; Sir Ralph Horsey, nine; Sir Hugh Portman, ten. Whoop! why how
now, master K. sheriff's man? Here is but ten, give me a noble of my
forty shillings back again. Oh, speak soft, sir, you shall have a
tales<42> for two more, the best we can get, but we can find no more
knights. There is two names more for you. Who have we here? Ralph
Sheldon, of Beeley in the county of Worcester, esquire; Thomas
Markham, gentleman.

First, let us see what this Sheldon is. Hath he freeholds? Yea, sir,
he is a good freeholder, a great housekeeper, a builder, an
excellent commonwealths man as any is in all his country; I will
warrant you he will be for you.

Not too much of your warrants.<43> What said Henry Tuttle to his
grandfather? Give me leave I pray you a little, I have heard he is
an unthrift; I have forgotten at what game it was, but I am sure it
was said, if he had not fair play played him, he was in danger
within these two years to have lost his land by one play or other.
By the mass, it is true there was such a matter. Well, let him thank
a guiltless conscience and a gracious princess that he sped no
worse.<44> Oh, these same oves et boves, et pecora campi,<45> a
flock of white sheep in a green field, and a new house on a high
hill; I tell you they be perilous tempting marks to shoot at.

It is strange to see the world; not half a year before, I heard one
that was a great courtier say, that he thought him one of the
sufficientest wise men of England, and fittest to have been made of
the council but for one matter; and indeed, by Cornelius Agrippa's
rule, that is a right courtier's commendation: For after they had
roved three or four idle words to praise a man, straight they mar
all at the buts: I would to God, for their own sakes and mine too,
they could leave it. Well, master Sheldon, I pray you be of our
jury, for you have made a fine house at Weston (but I know one fault
in it). Now, though I praise your house like a courtier with a but,
you must bring in your verdict like a plain countryman without the
but.

Thomas Markham, gentleman, come to the court: which Markham is this?
black Markham, keeper of Bescowd: why he is an esquire, I trow I
have a verse for it made by a most honourable poet;

Thomas Markham, the gentle squire,
Whom Sir Fulke Greville call'd a grimsire.

Yea, it is true; but the case is altered since:  for that same good
knight is lame, or else I dare answer he would have appeared on this
jury himself (and his son is an honourable gentleman, and a great
statesman may do a man displeasure about the queen, it is not good
troubling of him). If he be that Markham I will none of him, for I
heard a noble philosopher of the same coat that the poet was, say
that he is a stoic, and I will no stoics of my jury; of the two
extremes, I would rather have epicures. Besides that, I would have
no such black fellows; for we shall have some of these poetry men
say, as one said of Sir Harry Goodyeare, when he wrote Candida sint
comitum Goodyeere nil nisi nigrum,<46> he wrote underneath it, Hic
niger est, hunc tu regina caveto;<47> a good year on him for his
good caveat, for he hath had since some young scholars that have
learned to put in the like caveats. Cave credas, take heed you trust
him not: but Tully saith in his oration pro Ligario, nonne omnem
humanitatem exuerunt? Have they not cast away all sense of humanity?
And a little after saith the same Tully of Cave ignoscas; haec nec
hominis, nec ad hominem vox: qua qui apud te C. Cesar utetur, suam
ipsi citius abiicient humanitatem, quam extorquebunt tuam. Thus in
English: take heed you pardon not; Oh, lewd speech, not fit to be
spoken of a man nor to a man; which speech, whosoever shall use to
thee (O more than Caesar), shall sooner discover their own cruel
inclination, than extort from thee thy natural clemency. O divine
Tully, is not this Christianly spoken of a heathen? were not that
heathenishly spoken of a Christian? Well, he that should put in such
a caveat for me, I would follow presently a quare impedit,<48> why I
might not present him for a cnave at little Brainford and less
honesty.

Thomas Markham, gentleman, come to the court. Yet again? I tell thee
I will none of him, one said he looked black on him: yea, but he
that found such fault with his complexion, I heard one tell him was
dead, and he answered very charitably, young he was, and poor he
was, and knave he was; and so God have mercy on his knave's soul.
<49> Accused and said, Lopus had bid him say he was a dangerous man
with Cave credas Tanquam stercus memoria impiorum <50> Faith, that
is like enough to be his answer. Then it may be he is clear
otherwise, though he look black.

Clear, yea on my word. Candido piu nel cuor che di fuor cigno:<51>
What is that? Rara avis in terris nigroque similimo cigno;<52> Just
as Jermin's lips; now you have compared him well, as white as a
black swan. Well, I have no mind to have him of my jury, he is but a
poor freeholder, he hath no credit. No credit? why his bond hath
been taken for twenty thousand pounds. Hath it? more fool he, I will
never trust him for half so much; I pray thee look me some better
freeholder. Why, sir? I advise you do not scorn him; though he be no
knight, he had a knight to his father, and hath a knight to his son,
you may well admit him of your jury. I tell thee, my little knave,
thou dost press me beyond good manners; I will not have him. Hark in
your ear, they say he is malcontent. Who saith so? Nay, who saith
so? Unton is undone; Markham is malcontent. <53> Who hath not heard
that? wherefore make no more ado, but send me for his nephew Robert,
that came of the elder house and of the blood of Lancaster; he that
master secretary Walsingham gave the Arabian horse; I would have
him, he is a fairer complexioned man by half, and in sadness I wish
him well. Heigh ho: what, dost thou sigh? Alas! sir, he would come
with all his heart, but he is busy sitting on a commission (I have
forgotten in what bench it is), <54> and when he hath done there, he
must go they say, to another bench at Oxford.<55> What, Robert
Markham of Cottam? so honest a gentleman, so good a housekeeper, so
well descended, so well affected in religion, and become such a
bencher, that when he is called is forthcoming, but not coming
forth? I am sorry I can do him no pleasure; I would his best cousin
did know it. The time hath been, that if he could have walked with a
little stick like a ragged staff on his sleeve, or if he had had but
a walking hind, or a ramping stag, or the white bird that is such a
beauty to the Thames, he should not have lain so long after his
resting: well, then I perceive the world goeth hard on all the
Markham's sides; I think they be all malcontents, they shall none of
them be of my jury: I pray God they do not say that I am of kin to
them, for indeed my name Misacmos begins with an M. What, if one
should write Misacmos is malcontent; I would leap upon the letter
and reply, By your leave you lie like a lout, lewd master libeller.
But Markham is malcontent; how prove you it? Scriptum est enim, for
it is written, but is in libro fictitio.<56> I would you could name
me your author; yet let us examine this ignoto, <57>if he say true.
Let us do him the favour that men do to astronomers, if they tell
but one true tale, believe him in a hundred lies; sure you lied in
all the rest, good M. Libeller; <58> for first, he that you said was
undone, lived to do more service for his country than ever you will
do; and many things are left undone by his death, that might perhaps
have been much better done; and he that you said fadeth,<59> doth
now flourish with a gilt axe in his hand in a much more honourable
service; and he that you said wailed,<60> is well and merry (he
thanks you not); and he you said was bankrupt, <61> pays the queen
more subsidy than you and I both, I dare lay a wager; and the other
two, the one need not go barehead for want either of hat or
hair,<62> and the other will neither dodge nor doubt to show his
face as you do. Wherefore, M. Libeller, though in this matter you
are cited and believed better than Saint Austin, yet I believe you
not in saying Markhams be malcontents: and yet, at a venture, I
would you had the causes of discontent that they have, so they had
none of them: but this I will distinguish upon the authority
alleged, that taking malcontent as an honest man might take it,
namely, a man sorrowful for the grievous loss of his greatest
friend, the ungrateful requitals of most kind and friendly offices,
the unadvised revolt of his dear son, the unaccustomed frown of his
dread sovereign; if a man felt no discontent in these, I would say
he were a stock and not a stoic; but understanding it, as I know you
would be understood, that they be malcontent as ill affected to
their prince; I dare say you lie in plain English; but there is one
will come home shortly, I trow, that will tell you, if you be so
full of the French as I take you to be, Tu ments par la gorge.<63>
But, good M. Libeller, and your fellows, I know your meanings; you
would fain make malcontents, and it grieves you you cannot; the
water is so clear for your fishing, you catch nothing but gudgeons;
the great fishes be too wary, and now, you are fain to lessen your
meshes contrary to statute, being willing to play any game rather
than sit out: or I think you have read the policy of Richard the.
Third, who to give his wife a preparative to her death, gave
out.first she was dead, hoping that this corsive (cordial I would
have said) might break her heart, as it did indeed.

So you worthy members of your country (God amend you, for I was
saying the plague take you all), when you would make malcontents,
then your policy gives out first that they be so. Oh, take heed of
such a one, he is a dangerous man. A puritan, why so? He will not
swear nor ride on a Sunday; then he wishes too well to the Scottish
church; note him in your tables. Another is a Papist. How know you?
He said he hoped his grandfather's soul was saved. Tush! but he goes
to church. Marry, they be the most perilous men of all. And why so,
I pray you? If they will venture their souls to pleasure their
prince, what do you suspect them of? Oh, if they be Catholic they
are Spanish in their hearts, for he is their Catholic king. By my
fay, that is somewhat you say; but I pray you, you that are not
Spanish but all for the French, what religion is the French king of?
Oh, no more of that; you will answer that when Calais is French
again. Fare you well, sir.

Thomas Markham, gentleman, come into the court, and pluck up thy old
spirits. Is not this he that should have been comptroller, and now
he is afraid rather to be controlled? What evil hath he done? His
second son grew so great he could not find room enough in England.
Alas! poor boy, God punisheth oft the sin of the father on the
children, but never but once that I have read of the son's offence
on the father. Is there nobody hath a son so far off? I trow there
is; and yet he a true and worthy gentleman.

Thomas Markham, gentleman, her majesty's servant extraordinary, come
to the court. Why, was he once ordinary? Yea, that he was: ask old
Hatfield men, and ask them quickly too, for they be almost all gone.
Why, man, he was standard-bearer to the worthy band of Gentlemen
Pensioners. What! did he leave such a place gratis? yea, gratis the
adverb. Why would he leave it? Because it asked such perpetual
attendance. Oh, now you have answered me; he shall be none of my
jury for that: had he so little wit? Well, sir, saith my attorney, I
pray you dally no more but take him, for you may have a worse else:
I say unto you he is a right Englishman; a faithful, plain, true,
stout gentleman, and a man of honesty and virtue. Out, ass! What
dost thou tell me of these stale fashions of the sword and buckler
time? I tell thee they are out of request now; honest and virtuous,
I durst as leave you had told me a tale of an old Jakes. Of A JAX?
Marry, that I can do too: I assure you he loves an easy cleanly
Jaxe, marvellous well; and he is a very good fellow at the Jaxe; for
if one be his dear friend, he will let him tarry with him, while he
is at his business: I think he saith his prayers there, for I will
be sworn I heard him say oft-times, I thank God I have had a good
stool, &c. May I believe this of your word? Yea, be bold of it, I
can prove both this and all the rest by very good witness. Why didst
thou not say thus much at the first? I would have had him, though I
had gone to Berwick on foot for him: What! a good freeholder, a
builder, and a housekeeper, and loves a sweet Jaxe too? though he
cannot be Alpha of my jury, yet he shall be Omega. Come on, M.
Markham, I must crave less acquaintance of you as grim as you look;
did not a lady say once that I should fare the better for that good
face of yours, and God thank her for it, so. I did indeed; yet now
some will make me believe I fare the worse for it. Be of good cheer,
man: What makes you so sad? I have commendations for you from your
old friend; Thomas of Ormond<64> hath sent you a hawk will make you
live one year the longer. I cannot make him look merrily on me for
all this; he sees he cannot live long, he must think of his grave.
Tush, man! though you cannot live long, you may linger (an please
God) as others have done, some three or four-and-twenty years yet.
What say you? no life? M. Richard Drake hath you commended, and
would have you get the queen another gelding, for grey Markham will
have his old M. fault and fortune both; he will be old, and then
they will not care for him. Not a word yet? I will make him speak
anon. You shall have your son joined patent with you for Bescood, if
he will come home and be a true knight to the crown: what say you to
that? Marry, gospel in your mouth, and if he can be proved other I
renounce him for my son. Oh, have you found your tongue now? Well,
sir, I have a suit to you; I pray you appear on my jury, and give a 
good verdict of our book called M. AJAX: you know the book well
enough; I read you asleep in it once or twice as we went from
Greenwich to Westminster. Out upon it, have you put it in print? did
not I tell you then, Charles Chester and two or three such scoffing
fellows would laugh at you for it? Yes: and did not I tell you again
that I would laugh too, and so we might all be merry? Well, grim
sire, let me have a friendly verdict, if it be but for teaching you
to amend a fault at Bescood, that I felt there twenty-four winters
ago; and if you do not say well of it, I will cause one or other
that hath been at M. AJAX with you, report it in court to your
disgrace; and your Joan shall be disgraced too for tying your points
and sitting by you so homely (yet I would I had given a hundred
pounds she never had had worse nor untruer tale told of her); and so
fare you well, good master Markham, and God send you many a good
stool. And thus with much ado the jury was empanneled.

Now began I to have a good hope, nay, rather a firm assurance of my
acquittal, having got a jury of so good sufficiency, so great
integrity, so sound ability: but it is commonly seen, that in
matters depending in controversy, the greatest danger is bred by too
much security; for the accusation was so hard followed, that some of
the jury began to be doubtful of their verdict, the witnesses were
so many, their allegations so shrewd, and the evidence so pregnant.
And not only the faults of this present pamphlet, but my former
offences, which were before the pardon (contrary to the due course
of all courts), were enforced against me. As first, to prove I had
wronged not only ladies of the court, but all women's sex, they had
quoted a stanza in Hary Osto,<65> beginning thus;

Ye courtly dames that are both kind and true,
Unto your lords, if kind and true be any;
As sure I am in all your lovely crew,
Of so chaste minds there are not over many.

And after, in the host's tale, worse, if worse may be:

Now he began to hold his wife excused;
His anger now a little is relented;
And though that she her body had abused,
And to a servant had so soon consented;
Not her for this, but he the sex accused,
That never can with one man be content;
If all (quoth he) with one like stain are spotted,
Yet on a monster mine was not besotted.

And after, in the person of Rodomont,

Ungrateful,false, crafty you are, and cruel;
Born of our burning hell to be the fuel.

And lastly, in this pamphlet to compare, or rather to confound bawdy
houses and Jakes houses, courtesans and carters, with angels and
hermits, there were three or four of the jury that said, the time
had been, they would have thought it no good manners. But Alpha and
Omega, that have ever thought chastity a virtue, acquitted me at
last; saying, to scorn vice showed a love of virtue. And for the
rest, I pleaded not only a general but a special pardon. Yet, lest
the standers by should think I had been guilty, or that I had been
burnt in the hand for the like fact before, I answered, that in the
verse I did but follow my author, the whole work being enjoined me
as a penance by that saint, nay, rather goddess, whose service I am
only devoted unto. And as for the verses before alleged, they were
so flat against my conscience, that I inserted somewhat more than
once, to qualify the rigour of those hard speeches. For example,
against railing Rodomont, I said thus:

I tremble to set down in my poor verse,
The blasphemies that he to speak presumes:
And writing this, I do know this, that I
Oft in my heart do give my pen the lie.

And in another place, to free me from all suspicion of pretended
malice, and to show a manifest evidence of intended love, where my
author very sparingly had praised some wives, I added of mine own
(<66>) so much as more

I think was never said for them; which I will here set down ad
perpetuam rei memoriam,<67> and that all posterity may know how good
a husband I would be thought:

Lo, here a verse in laud of loving wives,
Extolling still our happy married state;
I say they are the comfort of our lives,
Drawing a happy yoke, without debate.
A playfellow, that far off all grief drives;
A steward, early that provides and late;
Faithful and kind, sober and. sweet, and trusty;
Nurse to weak age, and pleasure to the lusty.

Further, for the faults escaped in this fore-alleged pamphlet, I
protested I was ready to make a retractation for their better
satisfaction; as namely, first, for that homely comparison that I
made between my lady Cloacina's house and my lady Flora's nymphs, I
take it not to hold in general, but within this exception; except it
be a very foul and deformed harlot, or a very clean and reformed
AJAX.

Secondly, for the rules of taming a shrew, that I commended for the
wiser, I here protest against that rule: for if it have not been
followed within the first year or a day, it is too late to prove a
new rule afterwards:<68> and therefore I hold it as a rule or maxim,
proved by natural philosophy, confirmed by ancient history, and
therefore may here be concluded in our poor poetry in this sort:<69>

Concerning wives, take this a certain	rule,
That if at first you let them have the	rule,
Yourself at last with them shall have no	rule,
Except you let them evermore to	rule.

At this the whole jury were merry, and agreed all to acquit me. And
as for those that articuled against me, some of them are so tickled
with this answer, as I am sure they will never accuse me for an
enemy to ladies any more.

The next article was for abusing the name of a great soldier, both
in that being a Grecian I make him speak in Latrina lingua,<70> and
that having been so renowned for his valour in wars, I would say his
picture was set in so homely a place, that it might also thereby
seem to have been called after his name in English. Now this matter
was followed very hotly by half a dozen gallant soldiers, that never
saw naked sword out of Fleet-street; and these came in swearing that
I had touched them in honour, and they would therefore fight with me
about it. The jury seemed to make but light of the matter; but yet
to satisfy the gentlemen, especially two of them that had been
likened to Brutus and Cassius, and called ultimi Ruffianorum,<71>
they wished me to answer them, which I did in this sort: I said I
was loath to fight for the justification of my wit: and further, I
could name them two honest gentlemen that had offered M. AJAX as
great abuse as this, and he had put it up at their hands. They asked
who they were? I told them they were two of his countrymen; one they
called M. Plato, the other M. Plutarch; of whom the one in his tenth
book de Repub. saith, that the soul of AJAX went into a lion, and
the other saith, it had been as good for it to have gone into an
ass; and both agree that it went into hell. And if reading of this
will satisfy you, I will turn you to the place, and lend you the
book in Latin or in French; for that I think is your better
language; and I protest to you it is an excellent chapter, wherein
the same Plutarch very divinely showeth how predestination, and
freewill, and chance, may all stand together. The pox on Plutarch
and you too (saith one of these fighting fellows), read him who
list, for I will never read him: but why should he or you either
abuse a soldier's name? Oh, sir, said I, good words I pray you,
though I dare say you wish me no worse than you have yourself, for I
know you are a gentleman of three descents; but if that be beyond
your reading, let me come within compass of your study: I know you
have read old Scoggin's jests. Did not he when the French king said
he had set our king's picture in the place where his close-stool
stands. Sir, saith he, you do the better, for every time you look on
him you are so afraid, that you have need of a close-stool. Now, I
hope I offer AJAX no greater scorn than that was, yet thanks be to
God their successors remain good friends. This did somewhat better
answer them, but not fully. Nay, masters (quoth I), if you stand on
the punctilios with me, whomsoever this answer will not serve, let
him send me the breadth of his buckler (I should say the length of
his rapier), and draw himself as lineally, from Captain Medon's
grandfather, as I have derived AJAX from Stercutius, and I will
presently make a recantation of all have said.<72> At last, to take
up the quarrel, Sir M.A. and M.R.S. set down their order, that he
should not be called any more Captain AJAX, nor Monsieur AJAX, but
Don AJAX; and then to this second article they all agreed, not
guilty.

These swearing fellows being thus discharged, there comes a couple
of formal fellows, in black cloaks faced with velvet, and hats
suitable to the same; and under their hats little nightcaps, that
covered their Epimetheus, but not their Prometheus, having special
care to keep their brain warm; yet one of them was said to be a hot-
brained fellow; the other had no great fault that I know, save that
he would say too long a grace afore dinner; insomuch that one of his
own coat told him one day, that if he had thought to have heard a
collation, he would have sung a psalm before it. These whispered two
or three of the jury in the ear, and after having made a ducking
courtesy or two, bade the Lord to guide their worships, and so went
back to their chambers at the sign of the Bible; leaving a mad
fellow their attorney, to urge the accusation they had brought;
which was in show very sharp and heinous, to this effect: That they
supposed me to be in heart a Papist.<73> Straight I searched every
corner of my heart, and finding no such thought in it, I asked why
any man should say so? I know (say I) some of you would see my heart
out, by your wills; but for that you shall pardon me: But this ye
know, ex abundantia cordis, os loquitur; out of the abundance of the
heart the mouth speaketh. And here I protest to you all, I never
defended any opinion of religion, either by way of argument or
writing, that in any point gainsayeth the Communion book: let my
accusers say so if they can. Yes, sir, saith their zealous attorney,
I heard one testified viva voce in a pulpit, that you had defended a
popish opinion, of a second coming of Elias. And if I mistake him
not much, I trow, his good living grows not so fast with his new
benefice, as his good name withers with his ill behaviour. But if he
use no better behaviour, than to tell me my faults at Bath when I am
at London, I may, fortune, play the bad horseman, and spur him at
London for stumbling so ill favouredly at Bath: or if I would ride
like a hotspur, he might happen like a dull jade (as he is) be wrung
on the withers, as one of his coat was for such a matter in the same
place. It may be he thinks he hath advantage of me, because he can
prate in a pulpit cum licentia;<74> but he shall see by this little,
that I have liberty if I list to reply in print cum privilegio;<75>
and my replication may, fortune, be as forcible as his answer.

More I would have said (for I was in choler), but some of the jury
wished me (for satisfying the company) to tell what religion I was
of. It was a strange question to be asked me afore such a jury
(considering I came not thither to be catechised)<76>, and therefore
I determined to make them as strange an answer, such as should
please them all, or displease them all ere I had done. First, I
said, neither Papist, Protestant, nor Puritan. Then all said they
would condemn me as a neuter, or nulli fidian, except I gave a
better answer.

Then I said, I am a Protesting Catholic Puritan. Tush, say they, how
can that be? Forsooth, even thus; to believe well, to do well, and
say well; to have good faith, good works, and good words; is not
that a good religion? Yes, indeed, so done, were very well said. But
said they, directly we expect your answer, what you count to be true
religion? Why then directly thus I answer, out of St. Justus'
epistle, the two last verses, you shall see who be of a wrong
religion, and who be of the right. Justus? Oh, saith one, byandby, I
think he means James; and straight he pulls a little book out of his
sleeve that looked like Janus' picture, with two faces standing east
and west (but it was a testament bound to the backside of David's
psalms), and turning to the place, he read as followeth:

If a man think himself religious, not refraining his tongue, but 
seducing his heart, this man's religion is vain. <77>

Pure religion and undefiled before God, even the Father, is
this;<78> to visit orphans and widows in their afflictions, and to
keep yourself undefiled from the world.

Why then, saith one, if you profess so pure a religion, it seems you
are a Puritan. Even so.

More time would have been spent in this matter, but that Sir H. P.
told them these things belonged to the high commissioners, and
therefore wished them to proceed to the next.

Now for the last article, because it was concerning only the pamplet
itself, the whole jury referred the censuring thereof to Sir H. P.
to say if any thing therein were against the law, because he was
well seen in the law.

He told them, that indeed he had read it more than once, and that
for ought he could observe in it, it did not in any point offend
either common or statute law. But (said he) there is a law (as I
take it) more common than civil, that saith, things must be as they
be taken.<79> Yet, for my part, in my verdict I would not say any
man's ears are horns; what the rest said, I could not tell, for that
I was sent away; yet I overheard one of them say, he would talk with
a counsellor to inform him better of the law.

But I finding that to grow so doubtful, that I thought to have been
so clear, began now to think it my safest course to sue for a
pardon. <80> And with that I awaked, vowing I would never write any
more such idle toys if this were well taken; praying the readers to
regard it but as the first line of Aesop's Fables:

Gallus gallinaceus dum vertit stercorarium, invenit gemmam.<81>

FINIS.



NOTES TO THE TRIAL OF MISACMOS

1. Side note: Canaries were so called, of the dogs that were found
in them.

2. Side note: The saying is, Thrice an an under sheriff, and ever a
knave.

3. de Cruce] "Concerning the Cross."

4. donatus rude] "Given his discharge on retiement"

5. Side note: And they both be honester occupations than Zoilus and
Momus

6. Side note: Martial saith, quincuncies puto post decem peractos
("After finishing ten measures of wine")

7. qui tollit peccata mundi] "He who takes away the sins of the
world" i.e. Jesus.

8. Side note: That they found in the 56th Page.

9. Side note: Canons signify nine rules of law. Now they are not
right canons, but bastard canons, that batter innocency.

10. Num iterum volito viva per ora virum] "Now once again may I
flutter from the mouths of men."

11. bonos et legales homines] "Good and law-abiding men."

12. quindena pascha] A report from the sheriff to a court saying how
he had carried out the judgements

13. Side note: Ano. 1. 2. Phil. and Mar. cap. 3. Ano. 23. Eliz. cap.
2

14. Side note: I mean no lawyer of our time, but one that Martial
speaks of.

15. ? ??? ? ???????????] O kai e philostilpnos = "And you hater of
filth."

16. Quid imprecabor O Severe liventi,
Opto Mulos habeat et suburbanum.] "How shall I curse his purple face,
Severus? May he have mules and a suburban property."

17. Side note: Directions for showing the book.

18. omnia probate] "Try everything."

19. ridentem dicere verum quis vetat] "What prevents one from
telling the truth while laughing?."

20. Side note: A common excuse of such as as break up house.

21. Side note: Praise of fat men.

22. Corpus cum causa] Literally, "The body with the writ," a court
order for the imprisonment of a debtor.

23. Side note: Lubberland.

24. Side note: Four sorts of men that will mislike of this book.

25. Side note: Proud. Fools. Beggars.

26. billa vera . . . ignoramus] Verdicts brought by a grand jury,
indicating respectively that there is, or is not, enough evidence to
bring the accused person to trial.

27. patrisare . . . . avisare] To inherit from, or take after, one's
father or grandfather respectively.

28. non est inventus in baliva] "Not found within the bailiff's area
of jurisdiction."

29. intro quatuor maria] "between the four seas" i.e. in England

30. Side note: Wooden stocks were fitter for them than silk
stockings

31. decem tales] "Ten such persons."

32. ultra reprisas.] "Net of expenses."

33. Erupuit sors &c.] "You can see this building restored as it was of
old in this place. She took many hardships from me, and gave me many
benefits. May the great Elizabeth live forever, whose graciousness
made me so rejoice."

34. Side note: There were earls of the Spensers

35. ????? ???????] gnothi seauton "Know thyself," the inscription on
the temple at Delphi.

36. Tout beau] "All good."

37. Priscilla and Aquila] See Acts xviii.

38. Side note: According to the tale in the Hundred Merry Tales.
(The Decameron, by Boccaccio)

39. aurum potabile] "Drinkable gold", a colloidal suspension of gold
nanoparticles, much promoted as a cure-all.

40. Side note: Gratis signifieth to thankful persons. But gratis,
the adverb, signifies freely.

41. Franco, sciolto, slegato, O che felice, stato?] "Footloose,
free, not tied down, oh how happy a state."

42. tales] Something just as good.

43. Side note: What is a knave's warrant worth? A by-word in
Somersetshire.

44. Side note: And let him pray for Trajan's soul with St. Gregory.

45. oves et boves, et pecora campi] "Sheep and cattle, and beasts of
the field."

46. Candida sint comitum Goodyeere nil nisi nigrum] "Let our
companions be white; Goodyear is nothing but black."

47. Hic niger est, hunc tu regina caveto] "This is black, I warn you
of this, O queen.

48. quare impedit] Literally, "Why does he hinder", a writ which
begins a legal action for deciding a disputed right of presentation
to a benefice. It is typically brought by a patron against a bishop
who refuses to appoint the patron's nominee as a priest.
(Wikipedia).

49. Side note: In memoria aeterna erit iustus. ("May the just man be
remembered for ever.")

50. Cave credas Tanquam stercus memoria impiorum] "You must believe
that the memory of the impious is so much dung."

51. Candido piu nel cuor che di fuor cigno] "Purer in his heart than
the whiteness of a swan."

52. Rara avis in terris nigroque similimo cigno] "A rare bird on
earth, black, and looking a swan."

53. Side note: A lewd libel made at the death of the Lord Chancellor
Hatton

54. Side note: King's Bench.

55. Side note: Penniless Bench.

56. libro fictitio.] "A fictitious book."

57. Side note: Agrippa.

58. Side note: The libel is thus: Unton is undone; Markham is
malcontent.

59. Side note: Flower fadeth

60. Side note: Swaile waileth.

61. Side note: Bancroft is bankrupt.

62. Side note: Hatton is hat off

63. Tu ments par la gorge] French. Literally "You lie through your
throat", corresponding to English "through your teeth" i.e. you lie
outrageously.

64. Side note: A most honourable Earl, and true friend.

65. Hary Osto] i.e. Ariosto, author of Orlando Furioso, which Queen
Elizabeth ordered Harington to translate in full as a punishment for
having shown a translation of the naughty bits to her ladies-in-
waiting.

66. Side note: mine own subauditor, verse, or wife, which you will.

67. ad perpetuam rei memoriam] "That its memory may last for
evermore."

68. Side note: Aristotle ruled by his wife.


69. Side note: Semiramis asked leave to rule but a week, but you
know what followed.

70. Latrina lingua,] "The language of the privy"—a pun on Latina
lingua–"The Latin language."

71. ultimi Ruffianorum] "The greatest of all ruffians."

72. Side note: Recantare, is to sing the same song again

73. Side note: All that defend the queen's proceedings are counted
no better than Papists with these hot fellows; and they call my Lord
of Canterbury our Pope.

74. cum licentia] "With a licence to preach."

75. cum privilegio] Authorised to print by Royal permission.

76. Side note: For some of them I hope are but Protestants of anno
Primo Eliz.

77. Side note: To have a bad tongue is bad religion

78. Side note: James, C. i. v. 26,27.

79. Side note: Judge Markham would have been of that opinion in the
time of Edward the Third; and the Judge Portman, your grandfather,
in Edward the Sixth.

80. Side note: Sapientis est nihil praestare praeter culpam ("It is
wise not to pledge oneself against anything except doing wrong."

81. Gallus gallinaceus dum vertit stercorarium, invenit gemmam.]
"The cock while searching in the dung, found a jewel."



Glossary to The Metamorphosis of Ajax.

Allege: To use as evidence in argument
An: If
Aposticchio: Something made by art, or counterfeit.
Articuled: Made accusations
Baned: Poisoned
Barrator: A judge who takes bribes
Bigamus: A bigamist
Biggin: A white skullcap or coif, worn by serjeants-at-law, a senior class of lawyer. 
Black jack: A leather drinking vessel
Buckler: A small shield
Casting: Vomit, or excrement
Chaldron: A measure of coal (36 bushels, about 1½ tons)
Clyster: A syringe for administering an enema
Collation: A sermon
Commination: A denunciation of sinners, part of the Anglican service for Ash Wednesday
Complot: A conspiracy
Corsive: A corrosive poison
Culliss: A nourishing broth given to invalids
Devant: In front
Distichon: A poetical couplet
Draff: Literally, spent brewing grains, metaphorically, any worthless rubbish
Draught: A privy
Egestion: Defecation
Eryngoes: Candied roots of sea-holly (Eryngium maritimum); eaten as a delicacy, a cure for colds, and supposedly an aphrodisiac.
Fardingale: A framework of hoops used to support a wide dress or crinoline
Femishing: Deer's excrement
Foin: To thrust with a sword or knife
Frump: A sneer
Gog: A euphemism for God in mangled oaths e.g. gog's nouns = God's wounds
Gong-farmer: A scavenger of dung
Grimsire: An austere, stern, morose or overbearing person. (OED)
Holp: Helped
Housekeeper: A householder, one entitled by law to vote, serve on juries, etc.
Inew: To drive into water
Intempestive: Unseasonable
Let: An obstacle or hindrance
Lineal: Made of linen
List: To want to do something
Lour: To scowl
Machachinas: A sword-dance performed by fantastically masked and costumed dancers
Mickson: A heap of dung
Minion: A kind of cannon, of about 3 inches calibre, firing a 4-pound ball
Mise: Expenses or payments
Momio: Mummy, i.e. the powdered bodies of mummified Egyptians, used as a medicine
Mute: Mucus
Naumachia: A mock naval battle, performed for entertainment.
Parenetical : Exhortatory
Philanders: A disease of hawks caused by intestinal worms
Plat: A patch of ground
Plot: Illustration, drawing.
Points: Laces used for tying clothes
Pome-cittern: A citron
Pontificalibus: The formal vestments of the Pope
Powdered: Seasoned with spices
Primero: A card game, often involving heavy gambling
Priorums: Front parts i.e. genitals
Punie: A new student or freshman
Pursuivant: A messenger or bailiff.
Quadling: A variety of apple
Rabinet: A kind of cannon, of about 1½ inches calibre, firing a ¾ pound ball
Rebato: A kind of stiff collar
Respectively: Respectfully
Rother-beasts: Oxen or cattle
Sad: Serious
Sadness: Seriousness
Saker: A kind of cannon, of about3 ¼ inches calibre, firing a 4½ -pound ball
Save-reverence: With apologies
Scurrile: Scurrilous
Serjeant: i.e a serjeant-at-law, a senior class of lawyer. Only a serjeant could become a judge. 
Sewer: At a large formal meal, a steward who supervised the laying of the table, directed the guests to their places, and commanded the serving of food and drink.
Shent: Disgraced
Sinkapace: Or Cinquepace:  a kind of dance.
Sith: Since
Sleight: Crafty, cunning
Slicing: Excrement
Subsizar: A student who received free tuition in return for performing menial tasks
Suppedital: A shoe
Supplicity: Pleading
Tarris: A kind of cement made from powdered pumice
Taster: Snout
Teshe: A task
Traverse: To plead not guilty to an accusation
Trow: To declare something to be true
Untruss: To open one's clothing
Venu: A wound
Verol: Syphilis
Visor: A mask
Volley: In taken at the volley = taken impetuously, without consideration
Younker: A young man


