




THE NEWGATE CALENDAR


Edited by Donal Ó Danachair

Volume 4








Published by the Ex-classics Project, 2009
http://www.exclassics.com
Public Domain





 

A View of the Interior of Newgate



CONTENTS


THOMAS WATKINS Executed in the Market-Place of Windsor, 7th of March, 1764, 
for Murder	10
WILLIAM CORBETT An American, executed at Tyburn, 4th of April, 1764, for the 
Murder of his Landlord and his Family	11
MAJOR COLIN CAMPBELL Cashiered for the murder of Captain M'Kaarg, 1764	12
JOHN WESKET AND JOHN COOPER The Former was executed at Tyburn, 9th of 
January, 1765, for robbing his Master, the Earl of Harrington; and the Latter 
transported for Fourteen Years for receiving Stolen Goods	15
BARNEY CARROL AND WILLIAM KING Convicted under the Coventry Act for 
cutting and maiming, and executed at Tyburn, 31st of July, 1765	17
PATRICK OGILVIE AND CATHARINE NAIRN Convicted of Murder. Ogilvie 
hanged 13th November, 1765, but Nairn escaped from custody.	19
PETER M'KINLIE, GEORGE GIDLEY, ANDREW ZEKERMAN, AND RICHARD 
ST. QUINTIN Executed for Piracy and Murder, December 19th, 1765	23
WILLIAM WHITTLE Excited by religious zeal he murdered his wife and children 
and was executed April 5th, 1766	28
JOHN CROUCH AND WIFE Convicted for offering to sell, on the Royal Exchange, 
a Young Girl, 12th of May, 1766	29
THE COUNTESS OF BRISTOL, OTHERWISE THE DUCHESS OF KINGSTON 
Whose Trial for Bigamy, at Westminster Hall, was attended by the Queen and other 
Members of the Royal Family	30
SAMUEL ORTON Clerk to the Court of Requests, executed 14th of January,1767, 
for forging Two Letters of Attorney, in the Name of Captain Bishop, by means of 
which he received One Thousand Pounds from the Bank of England	49
JOHN WILLIAMSON A deliberate and cruel Murderer, who tortured and starved 
his Wife to Death. Executed in Moorfields, 19th of January, 1767	51
ELIZABETH BROWNRIGG Executed at Tyburn, 14th of September, 1767, for 
torturing her Female Apprentices to Death	53
WILLIAM GUEST Executed at Tyburn, 14th of October, 1767, for High Treason, in 
diminishing the Current Coin of the Realm	59
JOHN POWER, Alias WINN Pirate, hanged at Execution Dock, 10th March, 1768	60
JAMES SAMPSON A treacherous and base Villain, executed at Tyburn, 11th of 
March, 1768, for robbing and setting fire to his Benefactor's House	62
FREDERIC LORD BALTIMORE, ELIZABETH GRIFFENBURG, AND ANNE 
HARVEY The former tried for committing a rape on Sarah Woodcock, and the two 
latter as accessories before the fact, 26th March, 1768	64
JAMES GIBSON A Gentleman, executed at Tyburn, 23rd of March, 1768, for 
Forgery on the Bank of England	77
JOHN WILKES, ESQ., M.P. Whose arrest and conviction for writing seditious and 
blasphemous pamphlets led to riots in London in 1768.	78
WILLIAM HAWKINS AND JOSEPH WILD Indicted for rioting, July, 1768	83
SARAH METYARD AND SARAH MORGAN METYARD, HER DAUGHTER 
Executed at Tyburn, 19th of July, 1768, for the Cruel Murders of Parish Apprentices
	85
ELIZABETH RICHARDSON Executed at Tyburn, 21st of December, 1768, for 
murdering an Attorney-at-Law, in Symond's Inn, Chancery Lane	88
WILLIAM TAUNTON Executed for the murder of Mrs. Phipps, 11th September, 
1769	90
MUNGO CAMPBELL A Gentleman, who was convicted of killing the Earl of 
Eglinton, and to avoid an Ignominious Death hanged himself, 28th of February, 1770
	93
Mr BARETTI An Italian, who was indicted for the wilful Murder of Evan Morgan, 
and acquitted	96
JAMES ATTAWAY AND RICHARD BAILEY Executed at Tyburn, 4th of July, 
1770, for committing a Burglary after tying up the Butler	101
PETER CONWAY AND MICHAEL RICHARDSON Executed at Tyburn, 19th of 
July, 1770, for a Murder which was their first Essay in Crime	102
CAPTAIN DAVID FERGUSON Hanged in chains at Execution Dock, 5th January 
1771, for the murder of his cabin-boy.	104
PETER M'CLOUD Hanged for Housebreaking, on 27th of May, 1771, before he had 
attained the Age of Sixteen	106
JOHN EYRE, ESQ. Transported, in 1771, for stealing Paper out of the Guildhall of 
the City of London	108
DR LEVI WEIL, ASHER WEIL, JACOB LAZARUS AND SOLOMON PORTER A 
Gang of Robbers who committed Murder, and were executed at Tyburn, 9th of 
December, 1771	109
HENRY JONES, FRANCIS PHOENIX AND CHARLES BURTON Executed at 
Tyburn, 3rd of February, 1772, for Burglary at the House of Sir Robert Ladbroke, a 
City Banker	111
JAMES BOLLAND A Sheriff Officer, and a most unconscionable Villain, executed at 
Tyburn, 18th of March, 1772, for Forgery	114
JONATHAN BRITAIN A plausible Rascal, who was executed at Bristol, 15th of 
May, 1772, for Forgery	120
JOHN ADSHEAD AND BENJAMIN ALSWORTH Hanged for housebreaking, 8th 
July, 1772	122
SAMUEL ROBERTS and THOMAS BACCHUS Hanged for High Treason, in 
counterfeiting the current Coin of this Realm.	126
WILLIAM GRIFFITHS Executed at Tyburn, 20th of January, 1773, for a Highway 
Robbery	129
GEORGE BARRINGTON A Well-Dressed Pickpocket who "worked" in Churches 
and the Houses of Parliament, and was convicted on 15th of March, 1773	131
JOHN LENNARD Executed for Rape, 11th August, 1773	133
WILLIAM FIELD ALIAS GREEN Executed on Kennington Common, 1st of 
September, 1773, for Highway Robbery	135
WILLIAM COX Who played Marbles and kept a Pet Sparrow to aid him in the 
Commission of Robberies. Executed at Tyburn, 27th of October, 1773	137
ELIZABETH HARRIET GREEVE A clever Swindler, transported for Felony, in the 
Year 1773	139
JOHN RANN Commonly called "Sixteen-String Jack." Executed at Tyburn, 30th of 
November, 1774, for Highway Robbery	140
AMOS MERRITT Having saved an Innocent Man from the Gallows, he himself was 
executed at Tyburn, 10th of January, 1775, for Burglary	145
JOHN BOLTON Convicted of murdering a girl he had seduced and made pregnant, 
but cheated justice by committing suicide, 29th March, 1775	146
LAMBERT READING Hackney-Coachman and Leader of a Gang of Robbers, 
executed at Chelmsford, 10th of August, 1775, for Burglary	149
WILLIAM CORBETT An American, executed at Tyburn, 4th of April, 1764, for the 
Murder of his Landlord and his Family	150
MAJOR COLIN CAMPBELL Cashiered for the murder of Captain M'Kaarg, 1764
	151
JOHN WESKET AND JOHN COOPER The Former was executed at Tyburn, 9th of 
January, 1765, for robbing his Master, the Earl of Harrington; and the Latter 
transported for Fourteen Years for receiving Stolen Goods	154
BARNEY CARROL AND WILLIAM KING Convicted under the Coventry Act for 
cutting and maiming, and executed at Tyburn, 31st of July, 1765	156
PATRICK OGILVIE AND CATHARINE NAIRN Convicted of Murder. Ogilvie 
hanged 13th November, 1765, but Nairn escaped from custody.	158
PETER M'KINLIE, GEORGE GIDLEY, ANDREW ZEKERMAN, AND RICHARD 
ST. QUINTIN Executed for Piracy and Murder, December 19th, 1765	162
WILLIAM WHITTLE Excited by religious zeal he murdered his wife and children 
and was executed April 5th, 1766	167
JOHN CROUCH AND WIFE Convicted for offering to sell, on the Royal Exchange, 
a Young Girl, 12th of May, 1766	168
THE COUNTESS OF BRISTOL, OTHERWISE THE DUCHESS OF KINGSTON 
Whose Trial for Bigamy, at Westminster Hall, was attended by the Queen and other 
Members of the Royal Family	169
SAMUEL ORTON Clerk to the Court of Requests, executed 14th of January,1767, 
for forging Two Letters of Attorney, in the Name of Captain Bishop, by means of 
which he received One Thousand Pounds from the Bank of England	188
JOHN WILLIAMSON A deliberate and cruel Murderer, who tortured and starved 
his Wife to Death. Executed in Moorfields, 19th of January, 1767	190
ELIZABETH BROWNRIGG Executed at Tyburn, 14th of September, 1767, for 
torturing her Female Apprentices to Death	192
WILLIAM GUEST Executed at Tyburn, 14th of October, 1767, for High Treason, in 
diminishing the Current Coin of the Realm	198
JOHN POWER, Alias WINN Pirate, hanged at Execution Dock, 10th March, 1768
	199
JAMES SAMPSON A treacherous and base Villain, executed at Tyburn, 11th of 
March, 1768, for robbing and setting fire to his Benefactor's House	201
FREDERIC LORD BALTIMORE, ELIZABETH GRIFFENBURG, AND ANNE 
HARVEY The former tried for committing a rape on Sarah Woodcock, and the two 
latter as accessories before the fact, 26th March, 1768	203
JAMES GIBSON A Gentleman, executed at Tyburn, 23rd of March, 1768, for 
Forgery on the Bank of England	216
JOHN WILKES, ESQ., M.P. Whose arrest and conviction for writing seditious and 
blasphemous pamphlets led to riots in London in 1768.	217
WILLIAM HAWKINS AND JOSEPH WILD Indicted for rioting, July, 1768	222
SARAH METYARD AND SARAH MORGAN METYARD, HER DAUGHTER 
Executed at Tyburn, 19th of July, 1768, for the Cruel Murders of Parish Apprentices
	224
ELIZABETH RICHARDSON Executed at Tyburn, 21st of December, 1768, for 
murdering an Attorney-at-Law, in Symond's Inn, Chancery Lane	227
WILLIAM TAUNTON Executed for the murder of Mrs. Phipps, 11th September, 
1769	229
MUNGO CAMPBELL A Gentleman, who was convicted of killing the Earl of 
Eglinton, and to avoid an Ignominious Death hanged himself, 28th of February, 1770
	232
Mr BARETTI An Italian, who was indicted for the wilful Murder of Evan Morgan, 
and acquitted	235
JAMES ATTAWAY AND RICHARD BAILEY Executed at Tyburn, 4th of July, 
1770, for committing a Burglary after tying up the Butler	240
PETER CONWAY AND MICHAEL RICHARDSON Executed at Tyburn, 19th of 
July, 1770, for a Murder which was their first Essay in Crime	241
CAPTAIN DAVID FERGUSON Hanged in chains at Execution Dock, 5th January 
1771, for the murder of his cabin-boy.	243
PETER M'CLOUD Hanged for Housebreaking, on 27th of May, 1771, before he had 
attained the Age of Sixteen	245
JOHN EYRE, ESQ. Transported, in 1771, for stealing Paper out of the Guildhall of 
the City of London	247
DR LEVI WEIL, ASHER WEIL, JACOB LAZARUS AND SOLOMON PORTER A 
Gang of Robbers who committed Murder, and were executed at Tyburn, 9th of 
December, 1771	248
HENRY JONES, FRANCIS PHOENIX AND CHARLES BURTON Executed at 
Tyburn, 3rd of February, 1772, for Burglary at the House of Sir Robert Ladbroke, a 
City Banker	250
JAMES BOLLAND A Sheriff Officer, and a most unconscionable Villain, executed at 
Tyburn, 18th of March, 1772, for Forgery	253
JONATHAN BRITAIN A plausible Rascal, who was executed at Bristol, 15th of 
May, 1772, for Forgery	259
JOHN ADSHEAD AND BENJAMIN ALSWORTH Hanged for housebreaking, 8th 
July, 1772	261
SAMUEL ROBERTS and THOMAS BACCHUS Hanged for High Treason, in 
counterfeiting the current Coin of this Realm.	265
WILLIAM GRIFFITHS Executed at Tyburn, 20th of January, 1773, for a Highway 
Robbery	268
GEORGE BARRINGTON A Well-Dressed Pickpocket who "worked" in Churches 
and the Houses of Parliament, and was convicted on 15th of March, 1773	270
JOHN LENNARD Executed for Rape, 11th August, 1773	272
WILLIAM FIELD ALIAS GREEN Executed on Kennington Common, 1st of 
September, 1773, for Highway Robbery	274
WILLIAM COX Who played Marbles and kept a Pet Sparrow to aid him in the 
Commission of Robberies. Executed at Tyburn, 27th of October, 1773	276
ELIZABETH HARRIET GREEVE A clever Swindler, transported for Felony, in the 
Year 1773	278
JOHN RANN Commonly called "Sixteen-String Jack." Executed at Tyburn, 30th of 
November, 1774, for Highway Robbery	279
AMOS MERRITT Having saved an Innocent Man from the Gallows, he himself was 
executed at Tyburn, 10th of January, 1775, for Burglary	284
JOHN BOLTON Convicted of murdering a girl he had seduced and made pregnant, 
but cheated justice by committing suicide, 29th March, 1775	285
LAMBERT READING Hackney-Coachman and Leader of a Gang of Robbers, 
executed at Chelmsford, 10th of August, 1775, for Burglary	288
JANE BUTTERFIELD,  Tried for murder but acquitted, 19th August, 1775	289
THOMAS AIKNEY AND ELIZABETH BROADINGHAM Executed for the murder 
of Broadingham's husband, 20th March, 1776	291
DANIEL AND ROBERT PERREAU  Twin Brothers, who, though popularly believed 
to be innocent, were executed at Tyburn, 17th of January, 1776, for Forgery	293
MARGARET CAROLINE RUDD  Tried for Forgery and acquitted	302
PETER LE MAITRE  Convicted, 7th of March, 1777, of robbing the Ashmolean 
Museum at Oxford	305
JAMES HILL  Commonly called "John the Painter," an Incendiary, who aimed at the 
Destruction of the Nation. Executed at Portsmouth, 10th of March, 1777	306
JOSEPH ARMSTRONG  Convicted of Murder, but cheated the Gallows by hanging 
himself, 17th of March, 1777	310
DAVID BROWN DIGNUM  Convicted, 5th of April, 1777, of fraudulently 
pretending to sell Places under Government, and sentenced to Hard Labour on the 
Thames	311
ANN MARROW  Pilloried at Charing Cross, 22nd of July, 1777, for marrying three 
Women	312
DR WILLIAM DODD Doctor of Divinity, Prebendary of Brecon, Chaplain-in-
Ordinary to his Majesty, and Minister to the Magdalen Hospital. Executed at Tyburn, 
27th of June, 1777, for Forgery	313
JOHN HARRISON  An Assurance Corporation Accountant, who was convicted of 
Forgery in 1777, but afterwards received his Majesty's Pardon	328
FRANCIS MERCIER OTHERWISE LOUIS DE BUTTE  Executed in Prince's 
Street, opposite Swallow Street, in the City of Westminster, 8th of December, 1777, 
for Murder	331
JOHN HOLMES AND PETER WILLIAMS  Publicly whipped, by the Sentence of the 
Middlesex Court of Quarter Sessions, for December, 1777, for stealing Dead Bodies
	333
THE REVEREND BENJAMIN RUSSEN,  Executed for rape, 12th December, 1777
	335
JAMES ELLIOT  Executed at Maidstone, in March, 1778, for a Forgery on the Bank 
of England, attended with Circumstances which were left to the Twelve Judges for 
determination	337
JOHN PIERCE, VINCENT PIERCE AND ELIZABETH LUKER  Sentenced to 
Imprisonment for a Riot at Sadler's Wells Theatre which occasioned the Death of 
Eighteen of the Audience	338
GEORGE ROACH, ROBERT ELLIOT AND JONAS PARKER  Who were 
convicted, the first two of stealing, and the other of receiving Part of a Lead Coffin 
from Aldermanbury Church, in 1778	340
ALEXANDER SCOTT  City of London hoaxed by a False Proclamation of War, 
April, 1778	342
THOMAS HORNER AND JAMES FRYER  Executed for Burglary and Robbery 
under Threats of Violence, 24th of June, 1778	344
FRANCIS LEWIS OTHERWISE GRIMISON  Cobweb as a Clue to a Bogus 
Burglary committed by a Butler, who was executed at Tyburn, 24th of June, 1778	345
MARY KNIGHT  Executed for the murder of her child, 24th August, 1778	347
JOSEPH RELPH  Who was indicted for Murder, and found guilty of Manslaughter.
	348
JAMES DONALLY  A Blackmailer, who was convicted of Highway Robbery, 22nd of 
February, 1779	352
MORGAN PHILLIPS  Executed for murder, robbery and arson, 5th April 1778	354
THE REV. JAMES HACKMAN  Executed at Tyburn, 19th of April, 1779, for 
murdering Miss Reay outside Covent Garden Theatre	355
JAMES MATHISON  Who forged Bank-Notes so cleverly that they could not be 
distinguished from Genuine Ones. Executed at Tyburn, 28th of July, 1779	361
ELIZABETH BUTCHILL  Executed for infanticide, March 17th, 1780	362
A. DURNFORD AND W. NEWTON  Executed at Tyburn, 22nd of November, 1780, 
for a Robbery under Singular Circumstances	364
LORD GEORGE GORDON  An Account of the Riots in London in 1780	365
JOHN DONELLAN, ESQ Executed for the Murder of Sir Theodosius Boughton, 
Bart., his Brother-in-Law, 2nd of April, 1781	371
FRANCIS HENRY DE LA MOTTE  A French Spy, who was executed at Tyburn, 
27th of July, 1781, for High Treason	375
WILLIAM WYNNE RYLAND  Engraver to his Majesty. Executed at Tyburn, in 
August, 1783, for forging a Bill of Exchange	377
RICHARD CARPENTER Convicted at the Lent Assizes, 1785, Hampshire, of forging 
Seamen's Wills and executed at Winchester	380
CHARLES PRICE A Notorious Swindler and Bank-Note Forger, who committed 
Suicide in 1786	381
MICHAEL WALKER, RICHARD PAYNE AND ROBERT COX  Executed opposite 
Smart's Buildings, Holborn, London, 18th of December, 1786, for Murder	384
JOHN ELLIOT, M.D.  Acquitted of a Serious Crime, he killed himself, by Hunger- 
Striking because of a Vindictive Sentence for a Minor Offence	385
HENRY STERNE  Commonly called "Gentleman Harry." Convicted of stealing the 
Duke of Beaufort's Pendant, 1787	387
THOMAS DENTON  His Misapplied Talents led to his Downfall, and he was 
executed before Newgate, 1st of July, 1789 for making Base Coin	389
THOMAS GORDON  Executed at Northampton, 17th of August, 1789, for a Murder 
ordered by his Mother	391
THOMAS PHIPPS, ESQ., AND THOMAS PHIPPS, HIS SON  Executed for a 
Forgery committed by the Younger Man, who exonerated his Father, 5th of 
September, 1789	392
WILLIAM WARD  A boxer, convicted of manslaughter for killing his opponent.	394
SAMUEL HINCHCLIFFE  Convicted at the Westminster Sessions in January, 1790, 
Imprisoned and publicly whipped for a Fraudulent Trick	397
JOHN DYER  A Westminster Schoolboy, executed at Newgate, 5th of August, 1790, 
for Forgery	398
EDWARD LOWE AND WILLIAM JOBBINS  Young Incendiaries, who set fire to a 
House in order to plunder it, and were executed in the City, 20th of November, 1790
	399



THOMAS WATKINS 
Executed in the Market-Place of Windsor, 7th of March, 1764, for Murder

	THIS hardened villain was nearly sixty years of age when he committed, with 
aggravated cruelty, the foul crime for which he most justly underwent the sentence of 
the law.
	Two maiden ladies of fortune, of the name of Hammersley, resided near 
Windsor. On the night of the 4th of February some ruffians broke into their house 
with such caution that they took the ladies' pockets from under their pillows while the 
owners were asleep. A maid-servant, who it was supposed had been alarmed, was 
murdered by them before they quitted the house.
	The struggles of the poor woman awoke the ladies. They called, but getting no 
answer they got up, and procured a light, and, to their horror, found the dead body of 
their faithful servant, with a handkerchief crammed into her mouth, a cord tightly 
twisted round her neck, and her head forced between her legs, and tied to the foot of 
the bedstead.
	A reward of fifty pounds being offered for the apprehension and conviction of 
the murderer, Thomas Watkins, by trade a gardener, was taken up on suspicion, and 
committed to Reading Jail.
	His trial occupied eight hours, during which the hardened wretch behaved with 
great resolution, asked the witness many questions, and asserted his innocence in the 
strongest terms. Though no absolute proof could be adduced of his having committed 
the murder, a great number of concurring circumstances rendered his guilt clear to the 
jury, who, with little deliberation, found him guilty, and he received sentence of 
death.
	He was carried in a post-chaise from Reading to Windsor, where the murder 
was committed, accompanied by the executioner, the under-sheriff and his javelin-
men. His body was afterwards hung in chains.


WILLIAM CORBETT 
An American, executed at Tyburn, 4th of April, 1764, for the Murder of his 
Landlord and his Family

	THIS man of blood was born in Portsmouth, in New Hampshire, and bred a 
shipwright. His mother dying when he was very young, he ran away to Connecticut, 
in New England, where he entered on board a sloop, and made two or three voyages; 
but not living so well as he expected on board the ship, he deserted. When he came to 
Boston he contracted himself with a gentleman who dealt in lumber, which he sent in 
vessels to the West Indies; and Corbett made several voyages in his service, but was 
so addicted to drinking and theft that he received frequent correction for those vices.
	At length he sailed to Newfoundland with one Captain Warton, and as he was 
a good ship-carpenter he might have been happy in his situation, but his irregularities 
obliged the Captain to dismiss him. Then he procured employment in repairing 
fishing-boats and other craft; but, spending his earnings in great extravagance, he 
involved himself in debt, which obliged him to embark on board a ship for Barbados, 
to avoid prison.
	Then he sailed to several parts of North America, and at length settled at 
Halifax, in Nova Scotia; after which he sailed to England, and associated with the 
worst of company in Wapping and Rotherhithe, which tended still further to debauch 
a mind already much depraved.
	A few weeks before Corbett committed the crime for which he suffered he 
took lodgings at the house of Mr Knight, a publican at Rotherhithe. He had not been 
long in the family, which consisted only of the man, his wife and the maid-servant, 
before he resolved on the murder of them all; but the maid-servant escaped his fury.
	At the Surrey Assizes in 1764 William Corbett was indicted for the murder of 
Henry Knight and Anne, his wife, by cutting their throats; and was again indicted, on 
the coroner's inquest, for the said murder; and a third time, for robbing the house. He 
was found guilty on his own confession and a variety of collateral evidence.
	After having committed the murder he rifled the house of money, and even put 
on some of Mr Knight's linen and other clothes. He then went to Billingsgate, where 
he was apprehended. After conviction he acknowledged that he endeavoured to set 
fire to Mr Knight's house.
	On the day of execution he was conveyed to Kennington Common, where he 
again acknowledged his guilt, and, having spent about a quarter of an hour in 
devotion, underwent the sentence of the law, and was hung in chains on the road 
between Rotherhithe and Deptford.


MAJOR COLIN CAMPBELL 
Cashiered for the murder of Captain M'Kaarg, 1764

  
Captain M'Kaarg killed by Major Campbell

	COLIN CAMPBELL was major-commandant of the hundredth regiment of 
foot when that corps was quartered in the island of Jersey, from whence it embarked 
for Marttinique. Among the officers in this regiment was Captain M'Kaarg, who had 
so far embezzled the money he received to pay his company, that the men were 
starving in the streets of St. Hillary, in Jersey, and was himself so greatly involved in 
debt, that he took methods to elude the payment of what he owed so unbecoming an 
officer and a gentleman, that the secretary at war acquainted Major Campbell, by 
letter, that, if he did not find means to satisfy his creditors, he should be obliged to lay 
his case before his majesty.
	Upon receipt of this letter the major, with the advice of the commander-in-
chief at Jersey, who had before sent to inform him that M'Kaarg's men were begging 
in the streets, took the payment of his company out of his hands.
	This necessary step of his commander M'Kaarg, in his mind, resented, but he 
apparently lived with him upon amicable terms; and, when the troops were embarking 
at Jersey, his necessities became so pressing, that he could not proceed on his voyage 
without pecuniary assistance, which in vain he endeavoured to obtain from the 
paymaster and several other officers. He then applied to Major Campbell; and through 
him alone he was enabled to head his company on board the transports, without which 
he must have staid behind.
	Generous actions we every day see ill requited in civil society. Do a good turn, 
and, unless you follow it up by acceding to extravagant demands, you will too often 
he treated with ingratitude. Resentment follows, and the donor is often impelled to 
violence upon the ingrate.
	M'Kaarg aspersed the character of his benefactor; and the major resorted to 
unjustifiable resentment. He, however, first sent the following letter to the man whom 
he was assured had treated him with dishonour and ingratitude:--
	'Sir, 
	'I am this moment informed that on some occasions you have taken liberties 
with my character unbecoming an officer and a gentleman. I desire an immediate and 
explicit answer, per bearer; and am, till then, 
	'Your humble servant, 
'	C. CAMPBELL.'
	To this letter he received the following answer--
	'Sir, 
	'I have just now received yours, and have taken no liberties with your 
character but what I am able to answer for. 
	'Yours, &c.  
	'J. M'KAARG'
	The moment the major received this answer he went, with a bayonet by his 
side, and a drawn sword in his hand, to Captain M'Kaarg's tent; and his rashness was 
the cause of his disgrace. Hence let officers learn to moderate their passions, and to 
seek lawful reparation for injuries.
	At the court-martial held on Major Campbell it was proved that, thus armed, 
he assailed the tent of Captain M'Kaarg, which he entered, and said to him, 'You have 
aspersed my character -- turn out.' The captain replied that 'he had no small sword.' 
Then the major ordered him to turn out as he was: a struggling then ensued, and they 
came out of the tent. Again they struggled, and both fell to the ground; in which 
M'Kaarg was run through the body. When both were down Major Campbell said, 'Beg 
your life, or you are a dead man;' to which the captain replied I do beg my life:' and 
then he exclaimed 'I am a dead man!' -- The major then got up, and ordered a surgeon 
to be sent for; but the wound proved mortal, and the captain soon expired.
	This was the substance of the charge against Major Campbell. In his defence 
he attempted to prove that Captain M'Kaarg was armed, which the Court gave no 
credit to, pronouncing the following curious sentence:--
	'The Court, on due consideration of the whole matter before them, are of 
opinion that Major Colin Campbell is guilty of the crime laid to his charge; but there 
not being a majority of voices sufficient to punish with death as required by the 
articles of war, the Court doth adjudge the said major-commandant Colin Campbell to 
be cashiered for the same; and it is the further opinion of the Court he is incapable of 
serving his majesty in any military employment whatever.'
	We have called this a curious sentence, because, if there was not a majority of 
the Court sufficient to punish with death, how could there be a majority sufficient to 
find him guilty of a crime by which he became liable to suffer death? The law 
requires, in capital cases, that three-fourths of the members of a court-martial must 
agree in opinion to find the party guilty. This Court declares that it did find him 
guilty, but could not punish him equal to his offence. If three-fourths had found him 
guilty, they would surely have been sufficient to punish adequately to the guilt found; 
but, as three-fourths did not find him capitally guilty, the Court could not be 
competent to inflict any kind of punishment. On the contrary, upon the very face of 
their opinion and sentence, however guilty, in fact, ha might have been, he was 
entitled to an acquittal in point of law.
	Major Campbell taking offence at the conduct, during this trial, of General 
Monkton, under whom the island of Martinique had been captured, brought the 
following charge against that gallant general, before a court-martial at the horse 
Guards, on the 14th of April, 1764:--
	'For many wrongs and deliberate acts of oppression towards the said Cohn 
Campbell, when under his command, in the island of Martinique, in the year 1762, 
particularly by several acts of affront and indignity, both in the person of the said 
Colin Campbell, and the corps then under his command; and also, whilst a trial was 
pending on a charge exhibited against the said Colin Campbell before a general court 
martial, by discouraging his friends, intimidating his witnesses, and depriving him of 
the lawful means of defence, as well as by suppressing the proceedings of the said 
general court-martial from the Earl of Albemarle, lieutenant-general of his majesty's 
forces, under a pretence of the said proceedings having been transmitted to Great 
Britain, when, in truth, they were still in his own custody; and, furthermore, by a cruel 
confinement of the said Colin Campbell, who was then ill, in a noisome unhealthy 
prison, even though it was at that time known to the said Major-general Monkton that 
the sentence against the said Colin Campbell was not capital.'
	The opinion of the Court on the trial of this victorious general was pronounced 
by the president in these words: 'The Court is of opinion that the charge and complaint 
of Colin Campbell, Esq. against Major-general Robert Monkton is altogether 
unsupported by evidence, and, in some points, extremely contradicted by the 
complainant's own witnesses, and doth hereby most honourably acquit the said Major-
general Robert Monkton of the same, and every part thereof; and the Court is further 
of opinion that the said charge and complaint is groundless, malicious, and 
scandalous, in the highest degree; and tending not only to injure the said major-
general's character, but to hurt the service in general, as it must greatly affect every 
officer, who may have the honour of commanding a body of his majesty's troops, 
when he reflects that his character and reputation are liable to he thus publicly 
attacked by a person who has been dismissed his majesty's service with ignominy.'


JOHN WESKET AND JOHN COOPER 
The Former was executed at Tyburn, 9th of January, 1765, for robbing his 
Master, the Earl of Harrington; and the Latter transported for Fourteen 
Years for receiving Stolen Goods

	JOHN WESKET had been for many years a gentleman's servant, and had 
pilfered from several of his employers. In company with one Bradley he robbed the 
house of a gentleman in Hatton Garden, and also the chambers of Mr Montague, a 
Master in Chancery.
	Wesket was engaged as a porter to Lord Harrington in the year 1762, but 
continued his acquaintance with Bradley, and was likewise intimate with Cooper, who 
kept a chandler's shop in Little Turnstile, at whose house Bradley lodged; and both 
these men visited Wesket at his new place.
	Wesket having formed a plan for robbing his noble master imparted his design 
to the other two. He and Bradley agreed to commit the robbery on the following 
Saturday night, when Lord and Lady Harrington were going to the opera, which 
would give Wesket an opportunity of concealing his accomplice in the house. Wesket 
secreted Bradley in his chamber, and told him to remain there till about midnight, 
when he would come to him.
	Lord Harrington and his lady came from the opera about twelve at night, and 
less than two hours afterwards, when all the family were quiet, Wesket went to his 
accomplice and took him into the kitchen, where an impression from Bradley's dirty 
shoes was made on the dresser, and they then made a similar impression in the area, 
first leaving the kitchen window open, as an intimation that the robber had gone off 
that way.
	They now went into the study, where they lighted a candle; and Wesket having 
forced open the bureau, by means of a gimlet and chisel, they took out notes, jewels 
and money, to the amount of two thousand pounds, all which Wesket assigned to the 
care of Bradley, bidding him carry the booty to Cooper, and then let him out at the 
street door and went to bed.
	When Lord Harrington went into his study he discovered the depredation that 
had been made on his property, whereupon a strict search was made through the 
house, to find which way the thief had escaped; and then it was that the impression of 
Bradley's shoes was noticed on the dresser and in the area. But, as it was observed that 
no footsteps appeared except in the kitchen and area, it was presumed that some 
person within the house had committed the robbery.
	The chisel, gimlet and tinder-box were found by the steward, who interrogated 
Wesket respecting the robbery. Some suspicion arising that he had a concern in it, 
Lord Harrington sent for a magistrate, who questioned all the servants in the strictest 
manner; and Wesket, in whose pocket ten guineas were found, was turned away, on 
the presumption of his guilt, as nothing arose that could justify the magistrate in 
committing him to prison.
	He was no sooner dismissed than he went into one of the boxes at Covent 
Garden Theatre, when Bradley, happening to see him from the gallery, waited for him 
at the playhouse door, after the entertainment was over. Wesket having informed his 
companion of what had passed since the robbery, Bradley told him what booty had 
been obtained, and desired him to come to Cooper's and inspect it. They accordingly 
met on the following day, when Bradley, representing the danger of trying to put off 
the notes in London, proposed to attempt doing it at Chester Fair. This being agreed 
to, Bradley went to the fair, where he purchased a quantity of linen, for which he paid 
the notes to the Irish dealers, and received the balance in cash. The Earl of Harrington 
having kept the number of one of the notes of which he had been robbed, it was 
carried to the bank, where the payment of it was stopped, and it was traced through 
the hands of many persons to those of Mr Smith, a Liverpool merchant, who said he 
took it of Mr Breath, a linen factor, at Newry, in Ireland. Mr Breath being written to, 
his answer was that he received it of a person at Chester Fair, who said his name was 
Walker, and was dressed like a gentleman, but had nothing in his behaviour that could 
warrant his assuming that title.
	On this Lord Harrington's steward went to Chester to endeavour to learn where 
the supposed Walker had lodged during the fair; which he found to have been at the 
house of a shoemaker named Rippington. He learned further that Walker had set out 
for London in a post-chaise, and on his arrival in the metropolis had written a letter 
desiring that a pocket-book, which he had left behind him, might be sent to the St 
Clement's Coffee-House, in the Strand.
	The steward received this letter, and brought it to London and delivered it to 
Sir John Fielding, when it was discovered to be Bradley's writing. Thereupon the 
active magistrate above mentioned caused several persons to attend at the coffee-
house; but no discovery arose from this diligence.
	Bradley's person was immediately described in handbills, which were 
circulated through the kingdom, and a reward was offered for taking him. At this 
juncture a hackney-coachman declared in a public-house that in his hayloft was a 
large chest belonging to one Bradley, and that Cooper had delivered the chest to his 
care; but he knew not its contents. On this Cooper was sent for to Sir John Fielding's; 
and, strong suspicions of the guilt both of him and Wesket arising, they were 
committed to Newgate for trial.
	In a few days Bradley was found, dressed in seaman's apparel, at a public-
house in Wapping, and, being conducted to Bow Street, he made such a declaration 
respecting the robbery that Sir John Fielding thought proper to admit him an evidence 
against the other parties.
	At the next sessions at the Old Bailey, Wesket and Cooper were brought to 
trial, when the former was capitally convicted for the burglary, and sentenced to die; 
and Cooper was sentenced to be transported for fourteen years, as the receiver of 
stolen effects.


BARNEY CARROL AND WILLIAM KING 
Convicted under the Coventry Act for cutting and maiming, and executed at 
Tyburn, 31st of July, 1765

	BY an Act of Parliament passed in the 22nd and 23rd of King Charles II. it 
was enacted that: "If any person, on purpose, and by malice aforethought, and by 
lying in wait, shall unlawfully cut or disable the tongue, put out an eye, slit the nose, 
cut off a nose or lip, or cut off or disable any limb or member of any subject, with 
intention in so doing to maim or disfigure him; the person so offending, his 
counsellors, aiders, abettors (knowing of, and privy to, the offence), shall be guilty of 
felony, without benefit of clergy."
	This Act was called the Coventry Act, because it was made on Sir John 
Coventry's being assaulted in the street and having his nose slit.
	Carrol and King had both been soldiers, and as such behaved unexceptionably, 
particularly at the siege of Havana, where Carrol was distinguished by his bravery; 
but on their return to England they determined to commence as robbers, and this on a 
plan attended with the most infernal cruelty.
	They procured two boys, named Byfield and Matthews, who were to pick 
pockets, and if they were seized the men were to procure their release by cutting the 
parties who held them across their faces with a knife.
	Carrol having sharpened his weapon of destruction, they all went out together 
on the night of the 17th of June, 1765, and, continuing their route from Covent 
Garden to the Strand, saw a gentleman, named Kirby, near Somerset House, who was 
walking very slow, on account of the heat of the weather, which made them think him 
a proper object of attack.
	On this Carrol directed Byfield to pick the gentleman's pocket. Byfield had got 
his hand in the pocket, when Mr Kirby seized him and threatened to carry him before 
a magistrate, but only to terrify him from such practices for the future.
	On this the other three villains followed Mr Kirby so closely that he suspected 
their connection; but he still held the boy, to frighten him the more, though he 
observed Carrol sometimes before and sometimes behind him. At length the villain 
came so near that the boy cried out, "Keep off; the gentleman will let me go!" when 
Carrol replied, "Damn him, but I will cut him!"
	Mr Kirby now felt great pain, but had no idea that he had been wounded by 
any sharp instrument, apprehending that his pain proceeded only from a common 
blow. At length he found a defect in his sight, and presumed that dust had been 
thrown in his eyes; but on putting his hand to his face he found that it streamed with 
blood.
	Going to the Crown and Anchor tavern, in the Strand, Mr Ingram, a surgeon of 
eminence, almost immediately attended him; but, though the utmost expedition was 
used in calling in the assistance of that gentleman, Mr Kirby had lost nearly two 
quarts of blood in the short interval. On examination it appeared that the wound had 
been given in a transverse direction, from the right eye to the left temple; that two 
large vessels were divided by it; that there was a cut across the nose, which left the 
bone visible; and that the eyeballs must have been divided by the slightest deviation 
from the stroke.
	The abominable assassins were very soon apprehended, found guilty, and 
hanged, amid the execrations of an offended multitude.


PATRICK OGILVIE AND CATHARINE NAIRN 
Convicted of Murder. Ogilvie hanged 13th November, 1765, but Nairn 
escaped from custody.

	As the case of these malefactors made a great noise in the world at and after 
the commission of the crime, we shall be the more careful to give all the particulars of 
it.
	At East Miln, in the county of Forfar, in Scotland, lived Mr. Thomas Ogilvie, 
a man of moderate fortune, whose life was of the domestic kind, with his mother, till 
he was about forty years of age, when he married Catharine, the beautiful daughter of 
Sir Thomas Nairn, of Dunsinan, on the 31st of January, 1765, the young lady being 
then about twenty-one years of age.
	(It may be proper to observe that in Scotland women are sometimes called by 
their maiden names after marriage. Hence this unhappy woman is called Nairn instead 
of Ogilvie.)
	Patrick Ogilvie, the brother of Thomas, having served as a lieutenant in the 
East Indies, returned to Scotland soon after the celebration of the nuptials, and went to 
congratulate his brother on the occasion.
	From this visit arose all that scene of distress which gives rise to the following 
narrative; for Patrick having beheld his sister with eyes of unwarrantable love, they 
were seen within three weeks after the wedding, by the servants, walking in the fields 
with too great familiarity, and kissing each other with all the fondness of enraptured 
lovers.
	Soon afterwards Anne Clarke, a kinswoman of Mr. Ogilvie, paying a visit in 
the family, remarked a great intimacy between the lovers, who frequently went to bed 
together without the precaution of shutting the chamber-door. Mrs. Clarke remarked 
on the scandalous impropriety of the lady's conduct; but, so far from blushing at it, 
she boasted of her love for her brother-in-law, with whom she said she would 
abscond, or otherwise give a dose to her husband, whom she detested.
	Mr. Ogilvie the elder was of so pacific a disposition, that, though the criminal 
conversation became every day more conspicuous, he contented himself with 
representing to his brother how much he dishonoured the family by so sinful a 
practice; but he did not even forbid him the house.
	At length he paid the lieutenant a sum of money bequeathed him by his father; 
and then Patrick departed, to take the diversions of the country: but he still 
corresponded with his sister—in-law; and they left letters for each other under a stone, 
and even occasionally met together in the fields.
	When this was known, the injured husband, so far from resenting the conduct 
of his brother, wrote to him, expressing his inclination to bequeath him both his wife 
and the principal part of his estate, saying he would consult his own peace of mind in 
retirement: he even entreated him to return, adding 'My wife cannot be happy without 
you.'
	Mrs. Nairn had, in the mean time, written to Patrick Ogilvie to send her some 
poison; and accordingly he sent her some white arsenic, under the name of salts,for 
her use.
	Mrs. Clarke, above mentioned, no sooner heard that the packet was arrived, 
than she cautioned Mr. Ogilvie not to drink any thing given him by his wife, unless 
she first partook of it: but this precaution proved fruitless; for the unhappy man being 
ill one morning, his wife conveyed a quantity of the arsenic into a basin of tea which 
the maid-servant was carrying to him; and then the base woman waited at his bed-side 
while he drank it.
	The most excruciating pains in his bowels, accompanied with a violent 
retching, was the consequence of this draught, and at nine at night Mr. Ogilvie expired 
in the greatest agony, after a marriage of little more than four months, during which 
he scarcely enjoyed one happy day.
	His brother now gave directions respecting the funeral; but, in the mean time, 
Mrs. Clarke wrote to a younger brother of thedeceased, who was then a student at 
Edinburgh, intimating her suspicions that Mr. Ogilvie had been poisoned. Hereupon 
the young gentleman set out for East Miln, being determined to inquire into the real 
state of the case. He took with him the under-sheriff of the county, and two surgeons. 
The under-sheriff recommended opening the body of the deceased; but, as he had 
been dead six days, and as it was now the middle of June, and the weather intensely 
hot, this was opposed by the surgeons, lest some noisome effluvia should arise from 
the body.
	The presumed murderers were now taken into custody, and committed to the 
prison of Forfar, whence they were removed to Edinburgh, to take their trials in the 
High Court of Justiciary. Mrs. Clarke had concealed herself from the time that the 
murder was committed; but on the 3d of August, 1765, she went to Edinburgh, and 
surrendered her self to the lord-advocate, as the trials of the offenders were to 
commence on the Monday following. Here upon his lordship committed her, and two 
women-servants of the deceased, to the Castle, that there might be no obstruction to 
the course of public justice.
	The prisoners being brought into court on the appointed day, a copy of their 
indictments, with a list of the jury and witnesses, was respectively delivered to them; 
and then the Court was adjourned to the 12th of the same month, at eight in the 
morning.
	In the interim the counsel for the prisoners petitioned the Court that Anne 
Clarke might be removed from her usual place of confinement with the servant-maids, 
lest she should prevail on them to perjure themselves, to the prejudice of the 
prisoners.
	The Court granted the prayer of this petition; and Mrs. Clarke was removed 
into another room: but Lord George Beauclerk, the then commander-in-chief of the 
forces in North Britain, caused her to be conveyed to her former place of confinement, 
on an information that the room in which the governor of the castle had placed her 
was not secure enough to prevent her escape.
	Complaint of this procedure being made by the counsel for the prisoner, Lord 
George insisted that it was his duty to prevent the escape of the evidence, 
notwithstanding any order of Court.
	The trial was at length proceeded upon on Monday, the 12th of August, and 
continued without inter mission till three o'clock on the Wednesday morning, when 
the jury retired, and at four in the afternoon of that day gave their verdict that the 
prisoners were both guilty.
	The lord-advocate now demanded that judgment should be passed on them; 
but this was opposed by their counsel, who urged that there were several informalities 
in the trial, which would destroy the force of the verdict, as they were incompatible 
with the principles of the laws of Scotland.
	On this a debate ensued, which continued near five hours, when the Lord 
Justice Clerk declared that, unless a special plea was stated in arrest of judgment, he 
would pronounce sentence against the prisoners.
	Hereupon it was agreed that, on the following day, at eleven o'clock, the 
arguments in writing should be delivered into court; and, when that was done, a 
farther argument of six hours ensued thereon.
	The counsel for the prisoners, having at length no other plea left to urge, 
hinted that Mrs. Nairn was with child, but did not pretend to say how far she might be 
advanced in her pregnancy.
	On this sentence of death was passed against Patrick Ogilvie, to be executed 
on the 25th of September, in the Grass Market, Edinburgh; and Mrs. Nairn being 
remanded to prison, orders were given for a jury of matrons to be summoned on the 
following day, to inquire into her real situation.
	The Court being once more assembled, the matrons were sworn, and retired; 
and, on their return, declared that they could not determine whether she was pregnant 
or not. On this the judgment against her was suspended till November; and the 
matrons were directed to visit her frequently in the interval.
	The utmost interest of the relations of the convicts was now exerted to prevent 
the disgrace of a public execution, by procuring a reprieve for Mr. Ogilvie, who 
constantly asserted his innocence respecting the death of his brother.
	Such diligence was used in this matter, that Counsellor M'Carty was heard in h 
is behalf before the king in council, where he contended for a right of appealing from 
the decision of the Court of Justiciary to the House of Lords.
	The lord-advocate of Scotland, in reply hereto, insisted that the determination 
of the Court of Justiciary must be final, as it was a criminal court, in which the 
prisoner had been tried and convicted by a jury of his countrymen. He referred to the 
19th article of the Act of Union, by which the Court of Justiciary was established.
	The matter having been maturely considered, Mr. Ogilvie was left to suffer the 
sentence of the law.
	The day before his death he was attended by two clergymen, and several of his 
friends, to whom he made a solemn avowal of his innocence of the facts alleged 
against him, and thought that his brother, who had undertaken the prosecution, had 
behaved in a manner undeservedly rigorous; yet he declared that he should die in 
perfect charity with all mankind.
	At the place of execution he made an address to the populace, still asserting 
his innocence; and, as soon as he had concluded his devotions, he was turned off, 
amidst an immense concourse of people. No sooner was he turned off, than, the rope 
slipping, he dropped to the ground; but, being immediately tied up again, he said 
aloud, ' I adhere to my former confession, and die an innocent man.' This being said, 
he was executed, and his body delivered to a surgeon for dissection.
	This unhappy man suffered in the Grass Market at Edinburgh on the 13th of 
November, 1765.
	Mrs. Nairn having remained in custody till November, it then appeared that 
she was pregnant, on which she was respited till the time when she should be brought 
to bed, which was in the month of January, 1766.
	After she had been delivered a month an order was issued for her execution; 
but, a short time before this event would have taken place, she escaped from the 
prison at nine at night, in the uniform of an officer; and an old footman, who had lived 
in her father's family, being waiting for her with a post-chaise, they set oft together.
	Mrs. Nairn was not missed till near noon on the following day; and persons 
were sent express to reapprehend her; but she had arrived in London before them.
	She now engaged the master of a Dutch fishing-smack to convey her to 
Holland for fifty guineas; but the wind blew with such violence that he was obliged to 
land her on the Kentish shore, whence she travelled to Dover, attended by her faithful 
servant. They immediately got on board the packet-boat bound for Calais; and no 
authentic accounts respecting her have transpired since that period.
	Such were the different fates of two people, who, as far as we can judge of the 
affair, appear to have been involved in the same crime. The one dies, avowing his 
perfect innocence; the other escapes the immediate stroke of justice, which was 
suspended over her by the most slender thread.
	Mysterious are the ways of Providence, and, in the language of Scripture, 'past 
finding out;' but it is for mortals humbly to submit to all its dispensations.
	One pertinent remark will naturally arise on this occasion, viz, the absurdity of 
disproportionate marriages. Mr. Thomas Ogilvie was nearly twice the age of his wife, 
and had therefore much the less chance of happiness with her.
	The bond of marriage will be frequently found to be a rope of sand where 
fortune is made the sole consideration on either side, and where unity of mind, and a 
tolerable equality in aged are not consulted.
	We make this remark for the sake of those parents who may be tempted to 
compel their children to unequal marriages on the idea that riches alone can bestow 
that happiness which must generally, if not always, depend on consent of mind.


PETER M'KINLIE, GEORGE GIDLEY, ANDREW 
ZEKERMAN, AND RICHARD ST. QUINTIN 
Executed for Piracy and Murder, December 19th, 1765

  
Mrs Glass and her daughter imploring the pirates to spare their lives

	BEFORE we enter upon the bloody deeds of these inhuman monsters, we shall 
present our readers with an account of the cruel fortune of Captain Glass, who had 
fought against the enemies of his country; and, after undergoing from them a long 
series of cruel treatment, at length fell a victim to the abominable cruelty of the pirates 
above named.
	This unfortunate man was the son of the Reverend Mr. John Glass, a minister 
of the Church of Scotland, who in several publications zealously opposed the practice 
of religion according to particular forms. The adherents to his religious opinions 
obtained the appellation of Glassites; and his doctrines being first propagated in 
England by Mr. Sandeman, his son-in-law, those who adopted them were called 
Sandemanians. At a very early period young Mr. Glass afforded strong proof of an 
acute and penetrating understanding, greatly beyond what could be reasonably 
expected at his tender years. After the fine genius of this promising youth had 
received some cultivation at a respectable grammar-school, he was removed to the 
University, where he attained to a great proficiency in the sciences. Having taken up 
the degree of Master of Arts, he applied himself to the study of physic and surgery, in 
which he made a rapid progress. He afterwards engaged as a surgeon on board a 
trading vessel bound to the coast of Guinea; and in that capacity made several 
voyages to America. His superior qualifications gained him a distinguished place in 
the esteem of several capital merchants, who intrusted to him the command of a vessel 
in the Guinea trade; and his conduct proved highly to the advantage of his owners, 
and equally honourable to himself.
	When the war against France was declared, Captain Glass, upon the minute 
review of his affairs, found himself in possession of a very considerable sum; a great 
part of which he determined to venture on board a privateer. He caused a vessel to be 
fitted out with all possible expedition, and took the command on himself. A mutiny 
happened among the sailors when they had been on board about three days; and news 
of this disagreeable circumstance being communicated to the captain, he hastened to 
the vessel, and, going upon deck, dared to single combat any man who should 
presume to dispute his authority; but his challenge was declined! and, by coolly 
representing the dangerous consequences that might result from such unjustiflable 
proceedings, exhorting them to an exact observance of necesssary discipline, and 
assuring them that his utmost endeav ours should be exerted to procure them 
satisfaction in every particular, the harmony and good understanding of his crew were 
restored; and in a short time after the vessel proceeded on her voyage.
	In about ten days they made a prize of a ship, richly laden, belonging to 
France, which they carried into a port in the West Indies. They soon after engaged two 
ships of war, but, after an obstinate contest, were compel led to submit to the superior 
power of the enemy. The captain, however, did not strike his flag till he had received 
a dangerous wound on the shoulder, and the greatest part of his men were slain. He 
was put into one of the French prisons, where he experienced very severe treatment. 
An exchange of prisoners taking place, Captain Glass was no sooner restored to 
freedom than he resolved to make a reserve of two thousand pounds, and to venture 
the remainder of his fortune on board a privateer. He had sailed in his second vessel 
but a short time when he was again conquered by the enemy, and conveyed to a 
French prison. Captain Glass, on his return to England, was esteemed one of the most 
expert, judicious, and intrepid seamen in the British navy. The war being concluded, 
he conceived a design of sailing in search of discoveries; and, in pursuance of this 
plan, he purchased a vessel adapted to his purpose; and, having carefully made every 
necessary preparation for the prosecution of his design, directed his course towards 
the coast of Africa.
	Between the river Senegal and Cape de Verde he discovered a commodious 
harbour, from which circumstance he entertained the reasonable expectation that very 
great commercial advantages would be derived. The captain now returned to England, 
and communicated his discovery to government, who granted him an exclusive trade 
to the harbour for the space of twenty years. That he might be enabled to pursue his 
project with the greater advantage, he engaged in partnership with two or three 
gentlemen of fortune; and a vessel, furnished with all necessary articles, being 
prepared, he sailed for the harbour, where he arrived without meeting with any 
occurrences worthy of recording. He sent one of his men on shore, with orders for 
offering proposals for a commercial intercourse with the natives; but the messenger 
had no sooner landed than he was cruelly murdered by the barbarians. The captain 
now suggested a plan for informing the king of the country that, by opening a trade, 
his subjects would derive great advantages. The king affected the utmost willingness 
to comply with his proposals; but, under the appearance of friendship, endeavored to 
effect his destruction. Having failed in other treacherous schemes, he sent poisoned 
provisions to Captain Glass, who prudently made experiments upon them, and by that 
means preserved his life. Being in great distress for the necessaries of life, Captain 
Glass and three of his men ventured to sea in an open boat, intending to direct their 
course towards the Canaries, for the purpose of purchasing provisions. The natives, 
being apprized of their departure, attempted to plunder the ship; but they were 
effectually repulsed by the remaining part of the crew.
	The men who continued in the vessel being extremely distressed, judging that 
it would be dangerous to remain longer in the harbour, and despairing of their 
captain's re turn so early as was expected, they sailed for England, where they arrived, 
after encountering a variety of dangers, difficulties, and distresses. Captain Glass 
arrived at one of the Canary Islands, and presented a petition to the governor, 
supplicating permission to purchase provisions; but the inhuman Spaniard caused him 
to be apprehended as a spy, and ordered him to be confined in a noisome dungeon, 
where he was allowed no other sustenance than bread and water; and, to aggravate his 
distress, the barbarous tyrant denied him the use of pen, ink, and paper. In this 
unhappy situation the captain remained upwards of six months. At length he climbed 
up to the iron bars that were across the space for admitting light to the dungeon, and 
perceived an English vessel in the harbour. The sight of a vessel belonging to his 
native country inspired him with hopes of regaining his liberty; but his despair was re 
newed upon considering the apparent impossibility of making his miserable fate 
known to those who would be inclined to afford him relief. At length he adopted the 
following experiment:-- by means of a piece of charcoal he wrote his name, and some 
words intimating his distress, upon a biscuit, which he fortunately dropped from the 
grate of the dungeon at the moment when an English sailor was passing beneath. The 
man, observing the captain's name upon the biscuit, carried it to his commander, who 
immediately made application to the governor for the relief of his countryman. In 
consequence of this humane intercession, the cruel and tyrannical Spaniard subjected 
the petitioner to severity of treatment equal to that sustained by Captain Glass. A ship 
that soon afterwards sailed for England conveyed news to our ministry of the arbitrary 
and barbarous conduct of the governor; and, speedy application being made to the 
King of Spain, he issued an order for the release of the two captains. About the time 
that Captain Glass recovered his freedom, his wife and daughter, a young lady about 
twelve years old, remarkable for her beauty and fine accomplishments, arrived at the 
Canaries, on board a ship from London; and their first interview with him afforded a 
scene truly affecting. Captain Glass now embarked, with his wife and daughter, on 
board a ship bound to London, under the command of Captain Cockeran.
	While the ship lay at the Canaries, a plot was concerted between Peter 
M'Kinlie, the boatswain, a native of Ireland; George Gidley, the cook, born in the 
west of Yorkshire; Richard St. Quintin, a native of the same country; and Andrew 
Zekerman, a Dutchman -- for murdering all the other persons on hoard, and seizing 
the treasure, which, including what Captain Glass had shipped in behalf of him self 
and his partners, amounted to a hundred thousand pounds in dollars. The villains 
made three attempts on different nights to carry their horrid plan into execution, but 
were prevented through the circumspection of their commander. The conspirators 
were appointed to the night-watch on the 13th of November, when the ship had 
reached the British Channel; and, about midnight, the captain going upon the quarter 
deck to see that all things were disposed in proper order, he, upon his return, was 
seized by the boatswain, who held him while Gidley struck him with an iron bar, and 
fractured his skull, after which they threw him into the sea. Two of the seamen, who 
were not concerned in the conspiracy, hearing the captain's groans, came upon deck, 
and were immediately murdered and thrown overboard.
	Captain Glass, being alarmed, went up the gangway, and judging that a mutiny 
had happened, returned to fetch his sword. M'Kinlie, guessing his design, followed 
him down the steps leading to the cabin, and waited in the dark till the captain 
returned with a drawn sword in his hand, when, getting unperceived behind him, he 
seized both his arms, and then called to his accomplices to murder him. Captain Glass, 
being a very powerful man, had nearly disengaged himself from the ruffian, when 
Zekerman came up, whom the captain wounded in the arm; but before he could 
recover his sword he was overpowered, the other villains soon joining their associates. 
The unhappy man was no sooner disarmed than he was many times run through the 
body; after which he was thrown overboard.
	Mrs. Glass and her daughter now came on deck, and, falling on their knees, 
supplicated for mercy; but they found the villains utterly destitute of the tender 
feelings of humanity; and Zekerman telling them to prepare for death, they embraced 
each other in a most affectionate manner, and were then forced from each other's arms 
and thrown into the sea. Having put all the crew to death, excepting a boy who had 
attended Captain Glass, and another boy who was an apprentice on board the ship, the 
murderers steered towards the Irish coast, and on the 3rd of December found them 
selves within ten leagues of the harbour of Ross. They hoisted out the long-boat, and 
put into it dollars to the amount of two tons; and, after knocking out the windows of 
the ballast ports, rowed towards shore, leaving the two boys to sink with the vessel. 
Captain Glass's boy could not swim, and he therefore soon drowned; but the other lad 
swam to the boat, when Zekerman struck him a violent blow on the breast, which 
occasioned him immediately to sink.
	Having thus massacred eight innocent persons, the villains proceeded to the 
mouth of the river Ross; but, thinking it would be dangerous to go up the river with so 
much riches, they buried two hundred and fifty bags of dollars in the sand, and 
conveyed as much treasure as they could possibly bear about their persons to a village 
called Fishertown, where they stopped for refreshment; and, during their regale, an 
Irishman privately robbed them of a bag containing twelve hundred dollars. On the 
following day they went to Ross, and there sold twelve hundred dollars. Having 
purchased each a pair of pistols, and hired horses for themselves and two guides, they 
rode to Dublin, and took up their residence at the Black Bull, in Thomas Street.
	The wreck of the ship was driven on shore on the day of their leaving Ross; 
and the manner in which the villains had lived at Fishertown and Ross, their general 
behaviour, and other circumstances, being understood as grounds for suspicion of 
their being pirates, an express was dispatched by two gentlemen to the lords of the 
regency at Dublin, exhibiting the several causes of suspicion, and giving a particular 
description of the supposed delinquents. On board the wreck was found a sampler 
worked by Miss Glass, from which it appeared that a part of the work was done on her 
birthday, which afterwards proved to be the day preceding on which the murders were 
perpetrated; and this sampler proved a principal means of leading to a discovery of the 
guilt of these abominable villains.
	The gentlemen who were commissioned to attend the lords of the regency had 
no sooner communicated their business than the lord-mayor and sheriffs were sent 
for; and proper instructions being given them, they on the same night caused M'Kinlie 
and Zekerman to be taken into custody. The prisoners were separately examined, and 
they both confessed the particulars of their guilt, and that their accomeplices had that 
morning hired a post-chaise for Cork, where they meant to embark on a vessel bound 
for England. Gidley and St. Quintin were the next day taken into custody at an inn on 
the road to Cork; and they followed the example of their accomplices, in 
acknowledging themselves guilty. The sheriff of Ross took possession of the effects 
found in the wreck, and the bags of dollars that the villains had buried in the sand, and 
deposited the whole in the treasury of Dublin, for the benefit of the proprietors.
	The prisoners being brought to trial, they confessed them selves guilty of the 
charges alleged in the indictment, and they were condemned, and suffered death, 
December the 19th, 1765, after which their bodies were hung in chains in the 
neighbourhood of Dublin.


WILLIAM WHITTLE 
Excited by religious zeal he murdered his wife and children and was 
executed April 5th, 1766

	THE shocking crimes of this monster in human shape show the danger to be 
apprehended from religious enthusiasm.
	The blood that has been shed, under the pretext of religion, in and since the 
Crusades, or, as they were de nominated, the holy wars, is greater than the torrents 
shed by tyrants fighting for each other's empire.
	William Whittle was a poor ignorant wretch, worked up to a state of frenzy by 
the abominable doctrine of some ignorant popish priest; for this wretched man was a 
Roman Catholic, and murdered his wife and his two children!
	On being interrogated, after conviction, and while under sentence of death, as 
to his motive for committing such horrid deeds, he replied that his priest often told 
him he should be damned for marrying a heretic. But why murder your innocent 
children? To this he answered, 'The mother had carried them to the church of the 
heretics: so they would have been damned if he had not killed them; but now they 
were in purgatory, and would go to heaven in time.'
	This wicked sinner, exulting in his fell deed, was executed on Lancaster Moor, 
April the 5th, 1768, and his body hung in chains.
	Soon after execution, the Rev. Mr. Oliver, who held it a duty to attend the last 
moments of the wretched man, under the hope of working in him contrition, and a 
renunciation of tenets too dangerous to be implanted in weak minds, received the 
following threatening letter, evidently the composition of one of the same persuasion 
as the malefactor:--
	Sir, 
	I make bold to acquaint you, that your house, and every clergyman's that's in 
this town (Lancaster), or any black son of a b--h like you -- for you are nothing but 
heretics and damned souls -- if William Whittle, that worthy man, hangs up ten days, 
you may fully expect to be blown to damnation.'


JOHN CROUCH AND WIFE 
Convicted for offering to sell, on the Royal Exchange, a Young Girl, 12th of 
May, 1766

	ON the 15th of January, 1766, an elderly man and woman were observed on 
the Royal Exchange, London, with a fine young girl, apparently fourteen years of age, 
but thinly and shabbily clothed, and consequently shivering with cold in that 
inclement season of the year. It was first conceived that they were asking charity, as 
the man had addressed two or three gentlemen, from whom he received a 
contemptuous denial. At length he accosted an honest captain of a ship, who instantly 
made known the base proposal which had been made to him, which was to purchase 
the unfortunate and innocent girl.
	The parties were immediately taken into custody by the beadles of the 
Exchange, and carried before the sitting magistrate at Guildhall, who committed the 
man and woman to prison, as vagrants, and ordered the girl to be taken care of in the 
London Workhouse. On their examination they persisted that the girl was their own 
child; but it appeared so unnatural that parents in Britain should offer for sale their 
offspring that an inquiry into the transaction was set on foot.
	At the general sessions of the peace, held at Guildhall aforesaid, on the 12th of 
May following, this unnatural man and woman were brought to the bar. It appeared 
that the man was named John Crouch, and that his residence was at Bodmin, in 
Cornwall. The woman was his wife, and the unfortunate girl his niece; and having 
heard "that young maidens were very scarce in London, and that they sold for a good 
price," he took her out of the poorhouse there and, accompanied by his wife, had set 
off, and travelled on foot from Bodmin to London, two hundred and thirty-two miles, 
in order to mend their fortune by her sale.
	The jury found the man guilty on an indictment presented against him for an 
offence far short of his crime; but considering the woman under his influence 
acquitted her. The husband was sentenced to six months' imprisonment in Newgate, 
and to pay a fine of one shilling.


THE COUNTESS OF BRISTOL, OTHERWISE THE 
DUCHESS OF KINGSTON 
Whose Trial for Bigamy, at Westminster Hall, was attended by the Queen 
and other Members of the Royal Family

  
Portrait of the Duchess of Kingston

	FEW women have attracted so large a portion of public attention as the 
Countess of Bristol, otherwise the Duchess of Kingston. She was the daughter of 
Colonel Chudleigh, the descendant of an ancient family in the county of Devon; but 
her father dying while she was yet young, her mother was left possessed only of a 
small estate with which to bring her up, and to fit her for that grade of society in 
which from her birth she was entitled to move. Being possessed, however, of 
excellent qualities, she improved the connection which she had among persons of 
fashion, with a view to the future success in life of her daughter. The latter 
meanwhile, as she advanced in years, improved in beauty; and upon her attaining the 
age of eighteen was distinguished as well for the loveliness of her person as for the 
wit and brilliancy of her conversation. Her education had not been neglected; and, 
despite the small fortune possessed by her mother, no opportunity was lost by which 
her mind might be improved, and a means was about this time afforded for the display 
of her accomplishments. The father of George III. held his Court at Leicester House; 
and Mr Pulteney, who then blazed as a meteor on the Opposition benches in the 
House of Commons, was honoured with the particular regard of his Royal Highness. 
Miss Chudleigh had been introduced to Mr Pulteney; and he had admired her for the 
beauties of her mind and of her person, and, his sympathies being excited on her 
behalf, he obtained for her, at the age of eighteen, the appointment of maid-of-honour 
to the Princess of Wales. His efforts, however, did not stop at thus elevating her to a 
situation of the highest honour, but he also endeavoured to improve the cultivation of 
her understanding by instruction; and to him Miss Chudleigh read, and with him, 
when separated by distance, she corresponded.
	The station to which Miss Chudleigh had been advanced, combined with her 
numerous personal attractions, produced her many admirers -- some with titles, and 
others in the expectation of them. Among the former was the Duke of Hamilton, 
whom Miss Gunning had afterwards the good fortune to obtain for a consort. The 
Duke was passionately attached to Miss Chudleigh, and pressed his suit with such 
ardour as to obtain a solemn engagement on her part that, on his return from a tour, 
for which he was preparing, she would become his wife. There were reasons why this 
event should not immediately take place; but that the engagement would be fulfilled at 
the specified time was considered by both parties as a moral certainty. A mutual 
pledge was given and accepted; the Duke commenced his proposed tour, and the 
parting condition was, that he should write by every opportunity, and that Miss 
Chudleigh of course should answer his epistles. Thus the arrangement of Fortune 
seemed to have united a pair who possibly might have experienced much happiness, 
for between the Duke and Miss Chudleigh there was a strong similarity of disposition, 
but Fate had not destined them for each other.
	Miss Chudleigh had an aunt, whose name was Hanmer: at her house the Hon. 
Mr Hervey, son of the Earl of Bristol, and a captain in the Royal Navy, was a visitor. 
To this gentleman Mrs Hanmer became so exceedingly partial that she favoured views 
which he entertained towards her niece, and engaged her efforts to effect, if possible, 
a matrimonial connection. There were two difficulties, which would have been 
insurmountable had they not been opposed by the fertile genius of a female -- Miss 
Chudleigh disliked Captain Hervey, and she was betrothed to the Duke of Hamilton.
	No exertions which could possibly be made were spared to render this latter 
alliance nugatory; and the wits of this woman were exerted to the utmost to favour the 
object which she had in view. The letters of his Grace were intercepted by Mrs 
Hanmer; and his supposed silence giving offence to her niece, she worked so 
successfully on her pride as to induce her to abandon all thoughts of her lover, whose 
passion she had cherished with delight. A conduct the reverse of that imputed to the 
Duke was observed by Captain Hervey: he was all that assiduity could dictate or 
attention perform. He had daily access to Miss Chudleigh, and each interview was 
artfully improved by the aunt to the promotion of her own views. The letters of his 
Grace of Hamilton, which regularly arrived, were as regularly suppressed; until, 
piqued beyond endurance, Miss Chudleigh was prevailed on to accept the hand of 
Captain Hervey, and by a private marriage to ensure the participation of his future 
honours and fortune. The ceremony was performed in a private chapel adjoining the 
country mansion of Mr Merrill, at Lainston, near Winchester, in Hampshire.
	The hour at which she became united with Captain Hervey proved to her the 
origin of every subsequent unhappiness. The connubial rites were attended with 
unhappy consequences; and from the night following the day on which the marriage 
was solemnised Miss Chudleigh resolved never to have any further connection with 
her husband. To prevail on him not to claim her as his wife required all the art of 
which she was mistress; and the best dissuasive was the loss of her situation as maid-
of-honour should the marriage become publicly known. The circumstances of Captain 
Hervey were not in a flourishing condition, and were ill calculated to enable him to 
ride with a high hand over his wife; and the fear of the loss of the emoluments of her 
office operated most powerfully with him to induce him to obey the injunctions which 
she imposed upon him in this respect. Her marriage being unknown to mere outward 
observers, Miss Chudleigh, or Mrs Hervey -- a maid in appearance, a wife in disguise 
-- was placed in a most enviable condition. Her Royal mistress smiled upon her; the 
friendship of many was at her call; the admiration of none could be withheld from her: 
but amidst all her conquests and all her fancied happiness she wanted that peace of 
mind which was so necessary to support her against the conflicts which arose in her 
own breast. Her husband, quieted for a time, grew obstreperous as he saw the jewel 
admired by all, which was, he felt, entitled only to his love; and feeling that he 
possessed the right to her entire consideration resolved to assert his power. In the 
meantime every art which she possessed had been put into operation to soothe him to 
continued silence; but her further endeavours being unsuccessful she was compelled 
to grant his request, and to attend an interview which he appointed at his own house, 
and to which he enforced obedience by threatening an instant and full disclosure in 
case of her non-compliance. The meeting was strictly private, all persons being sent 
from the house with the exception of a black servant; and on Mrs Hervey's entrance to 
the apartment in which her husband was seated his first care was to prevent all 
intrusion by locking the door. This meeting, like all others between her and her 
husband, was unfortunate in its effects: the fruit of it was the birth of a boy, whose 
existence it will be readily supposed she had much difficulty in concealing. Her 
removal to Brompton for a change of air became requisite during the term of her 
confinernent, and she returned to Leicester House perfectly recovered from her 
indisposition; but the infant soon sinking in the arms of death, left only the tale of its 
existence to be related.
	In the meantime the sum of her unhappiness had been completed by the return 
of the Duke of Hamilton. His Grace had no sooner arrived in England than he 
hastened to pay his adoration at the feet of his idol, and to learn the cause of her 
silence when his letters had been regularly dispatched to her. An interview which took 
place soon set the character of Mrs Hanmer in its true light; but while Miss Chudleigh 
was convinced of the imposition which had been practised upon her, she was unable 
to accept the proffered hand of her illustrious suitor, or to explain the reason for her 
apparently ungracious rejection of his addresses. The Duke, flighty as he was in other 
respects, in his love for Miss Chudleigh had at least been sincere; and this strange 
conduct on the part of his betrothed, followed as it was by a request on her part that he 
would not again intrude his visits upon her, raised emotions in his mind which can 
hardly be described. The rejection of his Grace was followed by that of several other 
persons of distinction; and the mother of Miss Chudleigh, who was quite unaware of 
her private marriage with Captain Hervey, could not conceal her regret and anger at 
the supposed folly of her daughter.
	It was impossible that these circumstances could long remain concealed from 
the society in which Miss Chudleigh moved; and, in order to relieve herself from the 
embarrassments by which she was surrounded, she determined to travel on the 
Continent. Germany was the place selected by her for her travels; and she, in turn, 
visited the chief cities of its principalities. Possessed as she was of introductions of the 
highest class, she was gratified by obtaining the acquaintance of many crowned heads. 
Frederick of Prussia conversed and corresponded with her. In the Electress of Saxony 
she found a friend whose affection for her continued to the latest period of life.
	On her return from the Continent Miss Chudleigh ran over the career of 
pleasure, enlivened the Court circles, and each year became more ingratiated with the 
mistress whom she served. She was the leader of fashion, played whist with Lord 
Chesterfield, and revelled with Lady Harrington and Miss Ashe. She was a constant 
visitant at all public places, and in 1742 appeared at a masked ball in the character of 
Iphigenia.
	Captain Hervey, like a perturbed spirit, was, however, eternally crossing the 
path trodden by his wife. If in the rooms at Bath, he was sure to be there. At a rout, 
ridotto or ball, this destroyer of her peace embittered every pleasure, and even 
menaced her with an intimation that he would disclose the marriage to the Princess.
	Miss Chudleigh, now persuaded of the folly and danger of any longer 
concealment from her Royal mistress, determined that the design which her husband 
had formed from a malicious feeling should be carried out by herself from a principle 
of rectitude; and she, in consequence, communicated to the Princess the whole of the 
circumstances attending her unhappy union. Her Royal mistress pitied her, and 
continued her patronage up to the hour of her death.
	At length a stratagem was either suggested or it occurred to Miss Chudleigh at 
once to deprive Captain Hervey of the power to claim her as his wife. The clergyman 
who had married them was dead. The register-book was in careless hands. A 
handsome compliment was paid for the inspection; and, while the person in whose 
custody it was listened to an amusing story, Miss Chudleigh tore out the register. Thus 
imagining the business accomplished she for a time bade defiance to her husband, 
whose taste for the softer sex having subsided from some unaccountable cause, 
afforded Miss Chudleigh a cessation of inquietude.
	A change in the circumstances of the Captain, however, effected an alteration 
in the feelings of his wife. His father having died, he succeeded to the title of the Earl 
of Bristol, and his accession to nobility was not unaccompanied by an increase of 
fortune. Miss Chudleigh saw that by assuming the title of Countess of Bristol she 
would probably command increased respect, and would obtain greater power; and 
with a degree of unparalleled blindness she went to the house of Mr Merrill, the 
clergyman in whose chapel she had been married, to restore those proofs of her union 
which she had previously taken such pains to destroy. Her ostensible reason was a 
jaunt out of town; her real design was to procure, if possible, the insertion of her 
marriage with Captain Hervey in the book which she had formerly mutilated. With 
this view she dealt out promises with a liberal hand. The officiating clerk, who was a 
person of various avocations, was to be promoted to the extent of his wishes. The 
book was managed by the lady to her content, and she returned to London, secretly 
exulting in the excellence and success of her machination.
	While this was going on, however, her better fate influenced in her favour the 
heart of a man who was the exemplar of amiability -- this was the Duke of Kingston; 
but, remarried as it were by her own stratagem, the participation of ducal honours 
became legally impossible. The chains of wedlock now became galling in the 
extreme. Every advice was taken, every means tried, by which her liberation might be 
obtained; but all the efforts which were made proved useless, and it was found to be 
necessary to acquiesce in that which could not be opposed successfully or pass 
unnoticed. The Duke's passion, meanwhile, became more ardent and sincere; and, 
finding the apparent impossibility of a marriage taking place, he for a series of years 
cohabited with Miss Chudleigh, although with such external observances of decorum 
that their intimacy was neither generally remarked nor known.
	The disagreeable nature of these proceedings on their part was, however, felt 
by both parties, and efforts were again made by means of which a marriage might be 
solemnised. The Earl of Bristol was sounded; but upon his learning the design with 
which a divorce was sought he declared that he would never consent to it, for that his 
Countess's vanity should not be flattered by her being raised to the rank of a duchess. 
The negotiations were thus for a time stopped; but afterwards, there being a lady with 
whom he conceived that he could make an advantageous match, he listened to the 
suggestions which were made to him with more complacency, and at length declared 
that he was ready to adopt any proceedings which should have for their effect the 
annihilation of the ties by which he was bound to Miss Chudleigh. The civilians were 
consulted, a jactitation suit was instituted; but the evidence by which the marriage 
could have been proved was kept back, and the Earl of Bristol failing, as it was 
intended he should fail, in substantiating the marriage, a decree was made, declaring 
the claim to be null and unsupported. Legal opinion now only remained to be taken as 
to the effect of this decree, and the lawyers of the Ecclesiastical Courts, highly 
tenacious of the rights and jurisdiction of their own judges, declared their opinion to 
be that the sentence could not be disturbed by the interference of any extrinsic power. 
In the conviction, therefore, of the most perfect safety, the marriage of the Duke of 
Kingston with Miss Chudleigh was publicly solemnised. The wedding favours were 
worn by persons of the highest distinction in the kingdom; and during the lifetime of 
his Grace no attempt was made to dispute the legality of the proceedings. For a few 
years the Duchess figured in the world of gaiety without apprehension or control. She 
was raised to the pinnacle of her fortune, and she enjoyed that which her later life had 
been directed to accomplish -- the parade of title -- but without that honour which 
integrity of character can alone secure. She was checked in her career of pleasure, 
however, by the death of the Duke. The fortune which his Grace possessed, it appears, 
was not entailed, and it was at his option, therefore, to bequeath it to the Duchess or to 
the heirs of his family, as seemed best to his inclination. His will, excluding from 
every benefit an elder, and preferring a younger, nephew as the heir in tail, gave rise 
to the prosecution of the Duchess, which ended in the beggary of her prosecutor and 
her own exile. The demise of the Duke of Kingston was neither sudden nor 
unexpected. Being attacked with a paralytic affection, he lingered but a short time, 
which was employed by the Duchess in journeying his Grace from town to town, 
under the false idea of prolonging his life by change of air and situation. At last, when 
real danger seemed to threaten, even in the opinion of the Duchess, she dispatched 
one of her swiftest-footed messengers to her solicitor, Mr Field, of the Temple, 
requiring his immediate attendance. He obeyed the summons, and, arriving at the 
house, the Duchess asked him to procure the Duke to execute, and be himself a 
subscribing witness to, a will made without his knowledge, and more to the taste of 
the Duchess than that which had been executed. The difference between these two 
wills was this: the Duke had bequeathed the income of his estates to his relict during 
her life expressly under the condition of her continuing in a state of widowhood. 
Perfectly satisfied, however, as the Duchess seemed with whatever was the inclination 
of her dearest lord, she could not resist the opportunity of carrying her secret wishes 
into effect. She did not relish the temple of Hymen being shut against her. Mr Field, 
however, positively refused either to tender the will or to be in any manner concerned 
in endeavouring to procure its execution; and with this refusal he quitted the house. 
Soon after the frustration of this attempt the Duke of Kingston expired.
	No sooner were the funeral rites performed than the Duchess adjusted her 
affairs and embarked for the Continent, proposing Rome for her temporary residence. 
Ganganelli at that time filled the papal chair. He treated her with the utmost civility -- 
gave her, as a sovereign prince, many privileges -- and she was lodged in the palace of 
one of the cardinals. Her vanity being thus gratified, her Grace, in return, treated the 
Romans with a public spectacle. She had built an elegant pleasure yacht; a gentleman 
who had served in the navy was the commander. Under her orders he sailed for Italy; 
and the vessel, at considerable trouble and expense, was conveyed up the Tiber. The 
sight of an English yacht in this river was one of so unusual a character that it 
attracted crowds of admirers; but, while all seemed happiness and pleasure where the 
barque rested quietly on the waters of the river, proceedings were being concocted in 
London which would effectually put a stop to any momentary sensations of bliss 
which the Duchess might entertain.
	Mrs Craddock, who, in the capacity of a domestic, had witnessed the marriage 
which had been solemnised between her Grace and the Earl of Bristol, found herself 
so reduced in circumstances that she was compelled to apply to Mr Field for 
assistance. The request was rejected; and, not withstanding her assurance that she was 
perfectly well aware of all the circumstances attending the Duchess's marriage, and 
that she should not hesitate to disclose all she knew in a quarter where she would be 
liberally paid -- namely, to the disappointed relations of the Duke of Kingston -- she 
was set at defiance. Thus refused, starvation stared her in the face; and, stung by the 
ingratitude of the Duchess's solicitor, she immediately set about the work of ruin 
which she contemplated. The Duke of Kingston had borne a marked dislike to one of 
his nephews, Mr Evelyn Meadows, one of the sons of his sister, Lady Frances 
Pierpoint. This gentleman, being excluded from the presumptive heirship, joyfully 
received the intelligence that a method of revenging himself against the Duchess was 
presented to him. He saw Mrs Craddock; learned from her the particulars of the 
statement which she would be able to make upon oath; and, being perfectly satisfied 
of its truth, he preferred a bill of indictment against the Duchess of Kingston for 
bigamy, which was duly returned a true bill. Notice was immediately given to Mr 
Field of the proceedings, and advices were forthwith sent to the Duchess to appear 
and plead to the indictment, to prevent a judgment of outlawry.
	The Duchess's immediate return to England being thus required, she set about 
making the necessary preparations for her journey; and, as money was one of the 
commodities requisite to enable her to commence her homeward march, she 
proceeded to the house of Mr Jenkins, the banker in Rome, in whose hands she had 
placed security for the advance of all such sums as she might require. The opposition 
of her enemies, however, had already commenced; they had adopted a line of policy 
exactly suited to the lady with whom they had to deal. Mr Jenkins was out, and could 
not be found. She apprised him, by letter, of her intended journey, and her consequent 
want of money; but still he avoided seeing her. Suspecting the trick, her Grace was 
not to be trifled with, and, finding all her efforts fail, she took a pair of pistols in her 
pocket and, driving to Mr Jenkins's house, once again demanded to be admitted. The 
customary answer, that Mr Jenkins was out, was given; but the Duchess declared that 
she was determined to wait until she saw him, even if it should not be until a day, 
month or year had elapsed; and she took her seat on the steps of the door, which she 
kept open with the muzzle of one of her pistols, apparently determined to remain 
there. She knew that business would compel his return, if he were not already indoors; 
and at length Mr Jenkins, finding further opposition useless, appeared. The nature of 
her business was soon explained. The conversation was not of the mildest kind. 
Money was demanded, not asked. A little prevarication ensued, but the production of 
a pistol served as the most powerful mode of reasoning, and, the necessary sum being 
instantly obtained, the Duchess quitted Rome. Her journey was retarded before she 
reached the Alps; a violent fever seemed to seize on her vitals: but she recovered, to 
the astonishment of her attendants. An abscess then formed in her side, which 
rendering it impossible for her to endure the motion of the carriage, a kind of litter 
was provided, in which she slowly travelled. In this situation nature was relieved by 
the breaking of the abscess; and, after a painfully tedious journey, the duchess reached 
Calais. At that place she made a pause; and there it was that her apprehension got the 
better of her reason. In idea she was fettered and incarcerated in the worst cell of the 
worst prison in London. She was totally ignorant of the bailable nature of her offence, 
and therefore expected the utmost that can be imagined. Colonel West, a brother of 
the late Lord Delaware, whom the duchess had known in England, became her 
principal associate; but he was not lawyer enough to satisfy her doubts. By the means 
of former connections, and through a benevolence in his own nature, the Earl of 
Mansfield had a private meeting with the duchess and the venerable peer conducted 
himself in a manner which did honour to his heart and character.
	Her spirits being soothed by the interview, the duchess embarked for Dover, 
landed, drove post to Kingston-house, and found friends displaying both zeal and 
alacrity in her cause. The first measure taken was to have the duchess bailed. This was 
done before Lord Mansfield; the Duke of Newcastle, Lord Mountstuart, Mr Glover, 
and other characters of rank attending. The prosecution and consequent trial of the 
duchess becoming objects of magnitude, the public curiosity and expectation were 
proportion ably excited. The duchess had through life distinguished herself as a most 
eccentric character. Her turn of mind was original, and many of her actions were 
without a parallel. Even when she moved in the sphere of amusement, it was in a style 
peculiarly her own. If others invited admiration by a partial display of their charms at 
a masquerade, she at once threw off the veil, and set censure at defiance. Thus, at 
midnight assemblies, where Bacchus revelled, and the altars of Venus were encircled 
by the votaries of love, the duchess, then Miss Chudleigh, appeared almost in the 
unadorned simplicity of primitive nature. The dilemma, therefore, into which she was 
thrown by the pending prosecution, was, to such a character, of the most perplexing 
kind.
	She had already in a manner invited the disgrace, and she now neglected the 
means of preventing it. Mrs Cradock, the only existing evidence against her, again 
personally solicited a maintenance for the remaining years of her life: and voluntarily 
offered, in case a stipend should be settled on her, to retire to her native village, and 
never more intrude. The offer was rejected by the duchess, who would only consent to 
allow her twenty pounds a year, on condition of her sequestering herself in some place 
near the Peak of Derbyshire. This the duchess considered as a most liberal offer; and 
she expressed her astonishment that it should be rejected.

  
The Duchess of Kingston's interview with Foote, the comedian

	Under the assurances of her lawyers, the duchess was as quiet as that 
troublesome monitor, her own heart, would permit her to be; and reconciled in some 
measure to the encounter with which she was about to meet, her repose was most 
painfully disturbed by an adversary, who appeared in a new and most unexpected 
quarter. This was the celebrated Foote, the actor, who, having mixed in the first 
circles of fashion, was perfectly acquainted with the leading transactions of the 
duchess's life, and had resolved to turn his knowledge to his own advantage. As, in the 
opinion of Mandeville, private vices are public benefits, so Foote deemed the crimes 
and vices of individuals lawful game for his wit. On this principle he proceeded with 
the Duchess of Kingston; and he wrote a piece, founded on her life, called "The Trip 
to Calais." The scenes were humorous: the character of the duchess admirably drawn; 
and the effect of the performance of the farce on the stage would have been that which 
was most congenial to the tastes of the scandal-mongers of the day -- namely, to make 
the duchess ashamed of herself. The real object of Mr. Foote, however, was one of a 
nature more likely to prove advantageous to himself -- it was to obtain money to 
secure the suppression of the piece; and with this view he contrived to have it 
communicated to her grace that the Haymarket Theatre would open with an 
entertainment in which she was taken off to the life. Alarmed at this, she sent for 
Foote, who attended with the piece in his pocket; but having been desired to read it, 
he had not gone far before the character of Lady Kitty Crocodile being introduced, the 
duchess could no longer control her anger, and rising in a violent rage, she exclaimed, 
"Why, this is scandalous; what a wretch you have made me." Mr. Foote assured her 
that the character was not intended to"caricature her;" -- even in his serious moments 
being unable to control his desire to pun -- for he left her to infer that it was a true 
picture; and the duchess, having taken a few turns about the room, became more 
composed, and requested that the piece might be left for her perusal, engaging that it 
should be returned by the ensuing evening. The actor readily complied, and retired; 
but the lady being left to consider her own portrait, was so displeased with the 
likeness, that she determined, if possible, to prevent its exposure on the stage. The 
artist had no objection to sell his work, and she was inclined to become the purchaser; 
but on the former being questioned as to the sum which he should expect for 
suppressing the piece, he proportioned his expectations to what he deemed the 
duchess's power of gratifying them, and demanded two thousand guineas, besides a 
sum to be paid as compensation for the loss of the scenes, which had been painted for 
the farce, and which were not applicable to any other purpose. The magnitude of the 
demand, as well it might, staggered the duchess; and having intimated her extreme 
astonishment at so exorbitant a proposition, she expressed a wish that the sum might 
be fixed at one within the bounds of moderation and reason. The actor was positive; 
concluding, that as his was the only article in the market, he might name his own 
price: but the result was, that by demanding too much, he lost all. A cheque for 
fourteen hundred pounds was offered; the amount was increased to sixteen hundred 
pounds, and a draft on Messrs. Drummond's was actually signed; but the obstinacy of 
the actor was so great, that he refused to abate one guinea from his original demand. 
The circumstance might at any other time have passed among the indifferent events of 
the day, and as wholly undeserving of the public notice; but those long connected with 
the duchess, and in habits of intimacy, felt the attack made on her as directed by a 
ruffian hand, at a moment when she was least able to make resistance. His grace the 
Duke of Newcastle was consulted. The chamberlain of the household (the Earl of 
Hertford) was apprised of the circumstance; and his prohibitory interference was 
earnestly solicited. He sent for the manuscript copy of "The Trip to Calais," perused, 
and censured it.
	But besides these and other powerful aids, the duchess called in professional 
advice. The sages of the robe were consulted, and their opinions were that the piece 
was a malicious libel; and that, should it be represented, a shorthand writer ought to 
be employed to attend on the night of representation, to minute each offensive 
passage, as the groundwork of a prosecution. This advice was followed, and Foote 
was intimidated. He denied having made a demand of two thousand guineas; but the 
Rev Mr Foster contradicted him in an affidavit. Thus defeated in point of fact, Foote 
found himself baffled also in point of design. The chamberlain would not permit the 
piece to be represented.
	Foote now had recourse to another expedient. He caused it to be intimated 
"that it was in his power to publish if not to perform; but were his expenses 
reimbursed (and the sum which her grace had formerly offered would do the 
business), he would desist." This being communicated to the duchess, she in this, as in 
too many cases, asked the opinion of her friends, with a secret determination to follow 
her own. Foote, finding that she began to yield, pressed his desire incessantly; and she 
had actually provided bills to the amount of one thousand six hundred pounds, which 
she would have given him but for the Rev Mr Jackson, who, being asked his opinion 
of the demand, returned this answer: "Instead of complying with it, your grace should 
obtain complete evidence of the menace and demand, and then consult your counsel 
whether a prosecution will not lie for endeavouring to extort money by threats. Your 
grace must remember the attack on the first Duke of Marlborough by a stranger, who 
had formed a design either on his purse or his interest, and endeavoured to menace 
him into a compliance." This answer struck the Earl of Peterborough and Mr Foster 
very forcibly, as in perfect coincidence with their own opinions; and Mr Jackson was 
then solicited to wait on Mr Foote; Mr Foster, the chaplain of the duchess, professing 
himself to be too far advanced in years to enter into the field of literary combat. Mr 
Jackson consented to be the champion on the following condition: that the duchess 
would give her honour never to retract her determination, nor to let Foote extort from 
her a single guinea. Her grace subscribing to this condition, Mr Jackson waited on Mr 
Foote at his house in Suffolk-street, and intimated to him the resolution to which the 
duchess had come. The actor, however, still wished to have matters compromised; and 
to this end he addressed a letter to the duchess, which began with stating "that a 
member of the privy council and a friend of her grace (by whom he meant the Duke of 
Newcastle) had conversed with him on the subject of the dispute between them; and 
that, for himself, he was ready to have every thing adjusted." This letter afforded the 
duchess a triumph. Every line contained a concession; and, contrary to the advice of 
her friends, she insisted upon the publication of the whole correspondence.
	This circumstance for a time served to turn the current of attention into a new 
channel. But while the public notice was withdrawn from her grace, she felt too 
heavily the necessity which existed to adopt some course to enable her either to evade 
or meet the impending danger. Her line of procedure was soon determined upon -- she 
affected an earnest desire to have the trial, if possible, accelerated, while in secret she 
took every means in her power to evade the measures which her opponents had taken 
against her, Her conduct in other respects appears to have been strangely inconsistent. 
An opportunity presented itself which remained only to be embraced to secure her 
object. It became the subject of a discussion in the House of Lords whether the trial of 
her grace should not be conducted in Westminster Hall; and the expense which would 
necessarily be incurred by the country was by many urged as being a burden which 
ought not to rest upon the public purse. Lord Mansfield, privately desiring to save the 
duchess from the disgrace and ignominy of a public trial, strove to avail himself of 
this objection in her favour; and so great had become the differences of opinion 
entertained upon the subject, that the withdrawal of the prosecution altogether would 
have been a matter which would have been considered desirable rather than improper. 
Here then was the critical moment at which the duchess might have determined her 
future fate. A hint was privately conveyed to her that the sum of ten thousand pounds 
would satisfy every expectation, and put an end to the prosecution; and doubts being 
expressed of the sincerity of the proposal; the offer was made in distinct terms. The 
duchess was entreated by her friends to accept the proposition which was made, and 
so at once to relieve herself and them from all fear of the consequences which might 
result to her; but through a fatal mistaken confidence either in the legal construction 
of her case, or in her own machinations, she refused to accede to the offers which 
were held out. Resting assured of her acquittal, she resisted every attempt at 
dissuasion from her purpose of going to trial; and she assumed an air of indifference 
about the business which but ill accorded with the doubtful nature of her position. She 
talked of the absolute necessity of setting out for Rome; affected to have some 
material business to settle with the Pope; and, in consequence, took every means and 
urged every argument in her power to procure the speedy termination of the 
proceedings -- as if the regular course of justice had not been swift enough to overtake 
her. In the midst of her confidence, however, she did not abandon her manoeuvring; 
but at the very moment when she was petitioning for a speedy trial, she was engaged 
in a scheme to get rid of the principal witness against her. Mrs Cradock, to whom 
before she had refused a trifling remuneration, might now have demanded thousands 
as the price of her evidence. A negotiation was carried on through the medium of a 
relation of hers, who was a letter-carrier, which had for its object her removal from 
England; and an interview was arranged to take place between her and the duchess, at 
which the latter was to appear disguised, and was to reveal herself only after some 
conversation, the object of which was that terms might be proposed; but her grace was 
duped: for having changed her clothes to those of a man, she waited at the am pointed 
hour and place without seeing either Mrs Cradock or the person who had promised to 
effect the meeting; and she afterwards learned that every particular of this business 
had been communicated to the prosecutors, who instructed the letter-carrier to pretend 
an acquiescence in the scheme.
	Thus baffled in a project which had a plausible appearance of success, the only 
method left was the best possible arrangement of matters preparatory to the trial.

  
The trial of the Duchess of Kingston

	About nine o'clock in the morning of Monday the 15th of April, 1776, the 
peeresses, foreign ambassadors, &c. concluded the ceremony of assuming their 
respective places in Westminster hall: and at half past ten her majesty, accompanied 
by the prince of Wales, the bishop of Osnaburgh, two other young princes, and the 
princess royal, and attended by lord and lady Holdernesse, lord Hinchinbroke, and 
others of the nobility, entered the hall from the duke of Newcastle's house in New 
Palace Yard, and took her seat in the centre of his grace's gallery.
	The procession came into the hall in the following order at a quarter past 
eleven: the eldest sons of peers, preceded by the domestics of the lord high steward, 
masters in chancery, king's serjeants and judges, barons, bishops, viscounts, earls, 
marquesses and dukes; the serjeant at arms, the lord high steward with black rod on 
his right, and garter on his left; the lord president, and the lord privy seal. The barons 
proceeded to their seats next the bar, the junior barons taking the left hand seat next 
the bar, and the other barons following in that order till the seats were filled in the 
front of the court. The archbishops and bishops occupied the side benches on the 
right, and the dukes the benches extending from the throne to the table.
	The persons who composed the court having taken their seats with the usual 
formalities, the lord high steward directed the clerk of the crown to read the 
certiorari, the return thereof, the caption of the indictment, the indictment itself, and 
other official papers; which being done, the serjeant at arms made proclamation for 
the usher of the black rod to place the prisoner at the bar.
	The duchess then came forward, attended by Mrs Egerton, Mrs Barrington, 
and Miss Chudleigh, three of the ladies of her bedchamber, and her chaplain, 
physician, and apothecary; and as she approached the bar she made three reverences, 
and then dropped on her knees, when the lord high steward said, 'Madam, you may 
rise.' Having risen, she curtsied to the lord high steward and the house of peers; and 
her compliments were returned.
	Proclamation being made for silence, the lord high steward mentioned to the 
prisoner the fatal consequences attending the crime of which she stood indicted, 
signifying that, however alarming and awful her present circumstances, she might 
derive great consolation from considering that she was to be tried by the most liberal, 
candid, and august assembly in the universe.
	The duchess then read a paper, setting forth that she was guiltless of the 
offence alledged against her, and that the agitation of her mind arose, not from the 
consciousness of guilt, but from the painful circumstance of being called before so 
awful a tribunal on a criminal accusation; begging, therefore, that if she was deficient 
in the observance of any ceremonial points, her failure might not he understood as 
proceeding from wilful disrespect, but be attributed to the unfortunate peculiarity of 
her situation. It was added in the paper that she had travelled from Rome in so 
dangerous a state of health, that it was necessary for her to be conveyed in a litter; and 
that she was perfectly satisfied that she should have a fair trial, since the 
determination respecting her cause, on which materially depended her honor and 
fortune, would proceed from the most unprejudiced and august assembly in the world.
	The lord high steward desired the lady to give attention while she was 
arraigned on an indictment for bigamy. Proclamation for silence being made, the 
duchess (who had been permitted to sit) arose, and read a paper, representing to the 
court that she was advised by her counsel to plead the sentence of the ecclesiastical 
court in the year 1769, as a bar to her being tried on the present indictment. The lord 
high steward informed her that she must plead to the indictment; in consequence of 
which she was arraigned; and, being asked by the clerk of the crown whether she was 
guilty of the felony with which she stood charged, she answered with great firmness, 
'Not guilty, my lords.' The clerk of the crown then asking her how she would be tried, 
she said, 'by God and her peers;' on which the clerk said, 'God send your ladyship a 
good deliverance.'
	The serjeant at arms made proclamation for all persons who had evidence to 
produce against the prisoner to appear. The lord high steward requested, that, as his 
seat was so distant from the bar, he might be allowed, for the convenience of hearing, 
to go to the table; to which the court readily acquiesced.
	Mr Dunning, in a concise speech, opened the pleadings in support of the 
prosecution. He was followed by Mr Thurloe, the attorney general, who learnedly 
animadverted on the plea advanced by the prisoner, and said that, being counsel for 
the prosecution, it became his duty to declare his opinion on the case in question, 
which was, that he could not discover any reasonable foundation for the plea urged by 
the prisoner; and he desired that, if there were reasons sufficient to support it, they 
might be produced by the counsel on the opposite side.
	Lord Mansfield moved, that a proper officer from Doctors Commons might 
read the sentence of the ecclesiastical court. Hereupon the attorney general said that it 
would be necessary for all the allegations, replications, &c. on which the sentence was 
founded, to he read; and the clerk of the crown read the allegations, and was 
proceeding with the replications, when Lord Mansfield observed, that it would not be 
necessary to read the latter papers, since the counsel, in the course of their pleadings, 
would introduce the material arguments therein contained.
	Mr Wallace rose to reply to the attorney general, and in an eloquent strain of 
forcible argument endeavoured to prove the determination of the ecclesiastical court 
to be conclusive. Mr Wallace was followed by Mr Mansfield, who displayed great 
ingenuity and learning in support of the same doctrine.
	Doctor Calvert, a civilian, spoke nearly for the space of two hours, and 
produced many precedents to prove the sentence of the consistory court to be 
definitive and irrevocable. The same ground of argument was pursued by Doctor 
Wynne, another civilian, who also quoted several cases in point in behalf of the 
Duchess; and on the conclusion of this gentleman's speech the court was adjourned on 
the motion of Lord Gower.
	The business of the second day was opened by the lord high steward, who 
desired the counsel for her Grace to reply to the arguments advanced on the preceding 
day against evidence being admitted in support of the prosecution.
	The attorney general entered upon a minute examination of the pleadings on 
the other side, and endeavoured to confute the arguments of the counsel and civilians, 
and to prove that the cases they had quoted were ill-applied, and undeserving 
authority. This gentleman spoke about an hour and twenty minutes.
	The solicitor general then arose, and delivered a learned and elaborate speech, 
wherein he was extremely severe on the consistory court, saying he could not allow 
authority to that doctrine which puts the decisions of that court above the cognizance 
of the temporal ones. He said, that if the sentences of the ecclesiastical court were to 
be deemed conclusive, persons addicted to indulge a disposition to variety might each, 
by the exercise of industry and ingenious collusion, gratify his passions with seventy-
five wives before attaining his thirtieth year. His witty and humorous allusions 
frequently provoked a general laugh at the expence of Doctors Commons; and he 
concluded with giving it as his opinion that the supreme court of legislature was 
invested with an indisputable power of reversing the decisions of the consistory 
courts. Mr Dunning spoke next, strongly supporting the arguments of the solicitor 
general, and producing several authorities from the law-books in justification of his 
opinion, that the plea could not be admitted as a bar against calling evidence to prove 
the criminality of the prisoner.
	Doctor Harris, a civilian, rose in behalf of the prosecution; and, taking an 
extensive view of the pleadings of the Doctors Calvert and Wynne, exerted his utmost 
power to prove them nugatory.
	Lord Talbot then addressed the court, observing, that as the matter in agitation 
was of the utmost importance both to the noble prisoner, and the right honourable 
court in general, the pleadings on both sides could not be weighed with too minute an 
attention; and lest the memory should be encumbered (candidly acknowledging that 
he had already heard more than he believed his mind would retain) he moved for the 
court to adjourn to the chamber of parliament. Hereupon the lord high steward came 
from the table to the throne, and requested to be informed whether it was the pleasure 
of the house to adjourn; and the question being put, it passed in the affirmative.
	On Friday, the 19th of April, Mr Wallace was called upon by the lord high 
steward to reply in behalf of the prisoner. Lord Ravensworth then begged he might 
propose question to the counsel at the bar. His lordship's question was, 'Is the sentence 
of the ecclesiastical court in this case final and conclusive, or is it not?' Upon this 
Lord Mansfield said, 'If the noble lord means -- Is there any precedent for reversing 
the sentence of the ecclesiastical court? the answer must certainly be in the negative. 
As to any other meaning, the question is in debate among the counsel at the bar, and 
has been so these three days.'
	Mr Wallace then largely expatiated in support of his former cases, and pleaded 
powerfully in refutation of the arguments advanced by the counsel on the opposite 
side, producing many other cases in point, and urging that they were incontrvertble. 
the next speaker was Doctor Calvert, who pleaded very ably in support of the power 
of the ecclesiastical court he concluded with insisting that the sentence of the 
consistory court was indisputably a legal plea in bar of evidence being produced 
against the prisoner.
	It being intimated that the counsel for the Duchess had concluded their replies, 
a motion was made by Lord Gower for adjourning to the parliament chamber, and for 
allowing her Grace permission to retire to her apartment till the peers should return 
into court; upon which the lord high steward adjourned the court about half past three 
o'clock.
	The peers having taken their seats in the parliament chamber, Lord Camden 
proposed the following questions to the judges:-- 'Whether it was their opinion that 
the court had power to call evidence in support of the prosecution? or whether they 
deemed the sentence of the ecclesiastical court conclusive and irrevocable? and 
whether the prosecutor could or could not proceed in this court against the prisoner 
for obtaining the decision of the consistory court by collusion and fraud?' The opinion 
of the judges was, 'That in either case the prosecutor was authorised to enter into 
evidence in support of the indictment on which the prisoner stood arraigned.'
	In conscquence of the above determination, the house, after having withdrawn 
for about half an hour, returned into court; and the lord high steward informed the 
attorney general, that he was directed by their lordships to order him to proceed with 
the trial.
	Mr Attorney then explained the nature of the evidence he meant to produce, 
and recapitulated a great number of facts and circumstances from the year 1742, 
previous to the supposed marriage of her Grace with Mr Hervey, to the time of her 
marriage with the late Duke of Kingston.
	The solicitor general rose to examine the witnesses, and Anne Craddock being 
called to the bar, the Duke of Richmond observed that it would he proper for her to 
stand a a greater distance from the prisoner, and, after some debate on this head, Mr 
Quarme, deputy usher of the black rod, was placed between them. One of the clerks of 
the house put the questions from the counsel, and delivered the answers of the witness 
with an audible voice.
	The evidence of Anne Craddock was to the following purpose: -- I have 
known her Grace the Duchess of King ston ever since the year 1742; at which time 
she came on a visit to Mr Merrill's, at Launceston in Hampshire, during the 
Winchester races. At that time I lived in the family of Mrs Hanmer, Miss Chudleigh's 
aunt, who was then on a visit at Mr Merrill's, where Mr Hervey and Miss Chudleigh 
first met, and soon conceived a mutual attachment towards each other. They were 
privately married one evening about eleven o'clock in Launceston church, in the 
presence of Mr Mountney, Mrs Hanmer, the Reverend Mr Ames, the rector, who 
performed the ceremony, and myself. I was ordered out of the church, to entice Mr 
Merrill's servants out of the way. I saw the bride and bridegroom put to bed together; 
and Mrs Hanmer obliged them to rise again: they went to bed together the night 
following. In a few days Mr Hervey was under the necessity of going to Portsmouth, 
in order to embark on board Sir John Danvers's fleet, in which he was a lieutenant; 
and being ordered to call him at five o'clock in the morning, I went into the bed 
chamber at the appointed hour, and found him and his lady sleeping in bed together, 
and was unwilling to disturb them, thinking the delay of an hour or two would not be 
of any consequence. My husband, to whom I was not married till after the time I have 
mentioned, accompanied Mr Hervey in the capacity of his servant. When Mr Hervey 
returned from the Mediterranean, his lady and he lived together. I then thought her in 
a state of pregnancy. Some months after, Mr Hervey went again to sea, and during his 
absence, I was informed that the lady was brought to bed. She herself told me she had 
a little boy at nurse, and that his features greatly resembled those of Mr Hervey.
	The Duke of Grafton asked the witness, whether she had seen the child? and 
she answered in the negative. His Grace also asked, whether, as the ceremony was 
performed at night, there were any lights in the church? In reply to which she said, Mr 
Mountney had a wax light fixed to the crown of his hat. In reply to questions proposed 
by Lord Hillsborough, the witness acknowledged that she had received a letter from 
Mr Fossard, of Piccadilly, containing a promise of a sinecure place, on condition of 
her appearing to give evidence against the lady at the bar, and expressing that if she 
thought proper she might shew the letter to Mr Hervey.
	On Saturday the 20th of April Anne Craddock was further examined. The 
Lords Derby, Hillsborough, Buckinghamshire, and others, questioning her whether 
she had not been promised a reward by the prosecutor on condition of her giving 
evidence to convict the prisoner; her answers were evasive, but she was at length 
brought to acknowledge that pecuniary offers had been made to induce her to give 
evidence in support of the prosecution.
	Mrs Sophia Pettiplace, sister to Lord Howe, was next examined; but her 
evidence was of no consequence. She lived with her Grace at the time when her 
supposed marriage took place with Mr Hervey, but was not present at the ceremony; 
and she only believed that the Duchess had mentioned the circumstance to her.
	Caesar Hawkins, Esquire, deposed, that he had been acquainted with the 
Duchess several years, he believed not less than thirty. He had heard of a marriage 
between Mr Hervey and the lady at the bar, which circumstance was afterwards 
mentioned to him by both parties, previous to Mr Hervey's last going to sea. By the 
desire of her Grace he was in the room when the issue of the marriage was born, and 
once saw the child. He was sent for by Mr Hervey soon after his return from sea, and 
desired by him to wait upon the lady, with proposals for procuring a divorce, which he 
accordingly did; when her Grace declared herself absolutely determined against 
listening to such terms; and he knew that many messages passed on the subject. Her 
Grace some time after informed him, at his own house, that she had instituted a 
jactitation suit against Mr Hervey in Doctors Commons. On another visit she appeared 
very grave, and desiring him to retire into another apartment, said she was 
exceedingly unhappy in consequence of an oath, which she had long dreaded, having 
been tendered to her at Doctors Commons to disavow her marriage, which she would 
not do for ten thousand worlds. Upon another visit, a short time after, she informed 
him, that a sentence had passed in her favour at Doctors Commons, which would be 
irrevocable, unless Mr Hervey pursued certain measures within a limited time, which 
she did not apprehend he would do. Hereupon he enquired how she got over the oath; 
and her reply was, that the circumstance of her marriage was so blended with falsities 
that she could easily reconcile the matter to her conscience; since the ceremony was a 
business of so scrambling and shabby a nature, that she could as safely swear she was 
not, as that she was married.
	Judith Philips being called, swore, that she was the widow of the Reverend Mr 
Ames; that she remembered when her late husband performed the marriage ceremony 
between Mr Hervey and the prisoner; that she was not present, but derived her 
information from her husband; that some time after the marriage the lady desired her 
to prevail upon her husband to grant a certificate, which she said she believed her 
husband would not refuse; that Mr Merrill, who accompanied the lady, advised her to 
consult his attorney from Worcester; that in compliance with the attorney's advice a 
register-book was purchased, and the marriage inserted therein, with some late burials 
in the parish. The book was here produced, and the witness swore to the writing of her 
late husband.
	The writing of the reverend Mr Ames was proved by the reverend Mr Inchin, 
and the reverend Mr Dennis; and the entry of a caveat to the duke's will was proved 
by a clerk from Doctor's Commons. The book in which the marriage of the duke of 
Kingston with the lady at the bar was registered on the 8th of March, 1769, was 
produced by the reverend Mr Trebeck of St Margaret's, Westminster; and the reverend 
Mr Samuel Harpur, of the Museum, swore, that he performed the marriage ceremony 
between the parties on the day mentioned in the book produced by Mr Trebeck.
	Monday the 22d of April, after the attorney-general had declared the evidence 
in behalf of the prosecution to be concluded, the lord high steward called upon the 
prisoner for her defence, which she read; and the following are the most material 
arguments it contained to invalidate the evidence adduced by the proseeutor: -- she 
appealed to the Searcher of all hearts, that she never considered herself as legally 
married to Mr Hervey; she said that she con sidered herself as a single woman, and as 
such was addressed by the late duke of Kingston; that, influenced by a legitimate 
attachment to his grace, she instituted a suit in the ecclesiastical court, where her 
supposed marriage with Mr Hervey was declared null and void; but, anxious for every 
conscientious as well as legal sanction, she submitted an authentic state of her case to 
the archbishop of Canterbury, who, in the most decisive and unreserved manner, 
declared that she was at liberty to marry, and afterwards granted, and delivered to 
doctor Collier, a special licence for her marriage with the late duke of Kingston. She 
said that, on her marriage, she experienced every mark of gracious esteem from their 
majesties, and her late royal mistress, the princess dowager of Wales, and was 
publicly recognized as duchess of Kingston. Under such respectable sanctions and 
virtuous motives for the conduct she pursued, strengthened by a decision that had 
been esteemed conclusive and irrevocable for the space of seven centuries, if their 
lordships should deem her guilty, on any rigid principle of law, she hoped, nay, she 
was conscious, they would attribute her failure as proceeding from a mistaken 
judgment and erroneous advice, and not censure her for intentional guilt.
	She bestowed the highest encomiums on the deceased duke, and solemnly 
assured the court, that she had in no one instance abused her ascendency over him; 
and that, so far from endeavouring to engross his possessions, she had declared herself 
amply provided for by that fortune for life which he was extremely anxious to 
bequeath in perpetuity. As to the neglect of the duke's eldest nephew, she said it was 
entirely the consequence of his disrespectful behaviour to her; and she was not 
dissatisfied at a preference to another nephew, whose respect and attention to her had 
been such as the duke judged to be her due, in consequence of her advancement to the 
honour of being the wife of his uncle.
	The lord high steward desired Mr Wallace to proceed with the evidence. The 
advocate stated the nature of the evidence he meant to produce to prove that Anne 
Craddock had asserted to different people that she had no recollection of the marriage 
between Mr Hervey and the lady at the bar; and that she placed a reliance on a 
promise of having a provision made for her in consequence of the evidence she was to 
give on the present trial; and, to invalidate the depositions of Judith Phillips, he 
ordered the clerk to read a letter, wherein she supplicated her grace to exert her 
influence to prevent her husband's discharge from the duke's service, and observed, 
that Mrs Phillips had, on the preceding day, swore, that her husband was not 
dismissed, but voluntarily quitted his station in the household of his grace.
	Mr Wallace called Mr Berkley, Lord Bristol's attorney, who said his lordship 
told him he was desirous of obtaining a divorce, and directed him to Anne Craddock, 
sayng she was the only person then living who was present at his marriage; and that, a 
short time previous to the commencement of the jactitation suit, he waited upon Anne 
Craddock, who informed him that her memory was bad and that she could remember 
nothing perfectly in relation to the marriage, which must have been a long time 
before.
	Anne Pritchard deposed that about three months had elapsed since being 
informed by Mrs Craddock that she expected to be provided for soon after the trial, 
and of being enabled to procure a place in the custom-house for one of her relations.
	The lord high steward addressed himself to the court; saying, that their 
lordships had heard the evidence on both sides, and that the importance and solemnity 
of the occasion required that they should severally pronounce their opinions in the 
absence of the prisoner, observing that the junior baron was to speak first -- their 
lordships declared the prisoner to be guilty.
	Proclamation was then made that the Usher of the Black Rod should replace 
the prisoner at the bar; and, immediately on her appearing, the Lord High Steward 
informed her that the Lords had maturely considered the evidence adduced against 
her, as well as the testimony of the witnesses who had been called on her behalf, and 
that they had pronounced her guilty of the felony for which she was indicted. He then 
inquired whether she had anything to say why judgment should not be pronounced 
against her.
	The Duchess immediately handed in a paper containing the words, "I plead the 
privilege of the peerage," which were read by the clerk at the table. The Lord High 
Steward then informed her Grace that the Lords had considered the plea, and agreed 
to allow it, adding: "Madam, you will be discharged on paying the usual fees."
	The Duchess during the trial appeared to be perfectly collected, but on 
sentence being pronounced she fainted, and was carried out of court.
	This solemnity was concluded on the 22nd of April, 1776. But the prosecutors 
still had a plan in embryo to confine the person of the Countess of Bristol -- for to this 
rank she was now again reduced -- to the kingdom, and to deprive her of her personal 
property; and a writ of ne exeat regno was actually in the course of preparation, but 
private notice being conveyed to her of this circumstance she was advised 
immediately to quit the country. In order to conceal her flight she caused her carriage 
to be driven publicly through the streets, and invited a large party to dine at her house; 
but, without waiting to apologise to her guests, she drove to Dover in a post-chaise, 
and there entering a boat with Mr Harvey, the captain of her yacht, she accompanied 
him to Calais. Circumstances of which she had been advised, and which had occurred 
during the period of her absence from Rome, rendered her immediate presence in that 
city necessary, and proceeding thither, without loss of time, she found that a Spanish 
friar, whom she had left in charge of her palace and furniture, had found means to 
convert her property into money, and after having seduced a young English girl, who 
had also been left in the palace, had absconded. Having now obtained the whole of her 
plate from the public bank where she had deposited it, she returned to Calais, which 
she adopted as the best place at which she could fix her residence, in consequence of 
the expeditious communication which existed between that town and London, by 
means of which she might be afforded the earliest intelligence of the proceedings of 
her opponents.
	Their business was now to set aside, if possible, the will of the Duke of 
Kingston. There was no probability of the success of the attempt, but there was 
sufficient doubt upon the subject in the mind of the Countess to keep all her 
apprehensions alive. The will of his Grace of Kingston, however, received every 
confirmation which the Courts of Justice could give, and the object of the Countess 
now was to dissipate rather than expend the income of his estates.
	A house which she had purchased at Calais was not sufficient for her purpose; 
a mansion at Montmartre, near Paris, was fixed on, and the purchase of it was 
negotiated in as short a time as the Countess could desire. This house being in a 
ruinous condition a lawsuit was brought by her. Going to St Petersburg, she turned 
brandy-distiller, but returned to Paris before the lawsuit was settled. The possession of 
such a place, however, was not sufficient for the Countess, and she proceeded to make 
a second purchase of a house, built upon a scale of infinite grandeur. The brother of 
the existing French king was the owner of a domain suited in every respect for the 
residence of a person of such nobility, and the Countess determined to become its 
mistress. It was called the territory of St Assise, and was situated at a pleasant 
distance from Paris, abounding in game of all descriptions, and rich in all the 
luxuriant embellishments of nature. The mansion was of a size which rendered it fit 
for the occupation of a king: it contained three hundred beds. The value of such an 
estate was too considerable to be expected in one payment; she therefore agreed to 
discharge the whole of the sum demanded, which was fifty-five thousand pounds, by 
instalments. The purchase on the part of the Countess was a good one. It afforded not 
only game, but rabbits in plenty; and, finding them of superior quality and flavour, her 
ladyship, during the first week of her possession, had as many killed and sold as 
brought her three hundred guineas. At St Petersburg she had been a distiller of brandy; 
and now at Paris she turned rabbit-merchant.
	Such was her situation when one day, while she was at dinner, her servants 
received the intelligence that judgment respecting the house near Paris had been 
awarded against her, the sudden communication of the news produced an agitation of 
her whole frame. She flew into a violent passion, and burst an internal blood vessel. 
She walked a little about her room, and afterwards said: "I will lie down on the couch; 
I can sleep, and after that I shall be entirely recovered." She seated herself on the 
couch, a female having hold of each hand. In this situation she soon appeared to have 
fallen into a sound sleep, until the women felt her hands colder than ordinary, and she 
was found to have expired. She died on the 26th of August, 1796.


SAMUEL ORTON 
Clerk to the Court of Requests, executed 14th of January,1767, for forging 
Two Letters of Attorney, in the Name of Captain Bishop, by means of which 
he received One Thousand Pounds from the Bank of England

	SAMUEL ORTON was a native of London. While he was in a state of infancy 
his father died, leaving Mrs Orton in possession of a handsome fortune. She was a 
Protestant dissenter, and placed her son under the care of a dissenting minister, at 
whose academy he made some progress in several branches of learning.
	The young man discovered a very strong inclination for trade, and he was 
therefore apprenticed to a reputable dealer in London, to whom he proved a faithful 
and industrious servant. Upon the expiration of his apprenticeship he purchased the 
place of Clerk to the Court of Requests, in the borough of Southwark, which produced 
an income of about three hundred pounds a year.
	He soon afterwards embarked in the wine trade, which he successfully pursued 
some years; and, being generally considered as a man of large property, many 
persons, who supported their credit by the circulation of notes of hand and bills of 
exchange, applied for his endorsements, knowing that his name would give their 
paper currency, and he was so imprudent as to make himself liable to the payment of 
fourteen hundred pounds.
	The persons with whom Mr Orton had engaged in such imprudent connections 
being declared bankrupts, he became answerable to the holders of the notes. Having 
debts of his own to the amount of nine hundred pounds, and the notes for fourteen 
hundred to discharge within a fortnight, he formed the resolution of committing 
forgery.
	A friendship had long subsisted between Mr Orton and Captain Bishop, who, 
upon leaving England, had entrusted him with a letter of attorney, authorising him to 
receive his pay and dividend of bank stock.
	He forged two letters of attorney, by means of which he received a thousand 
pounds at the bank. It must be observed that his intention was not ultimately to 
defraud the Captain, but merely to support his credit till remittances from his 
correspondents should enable him to replace the money; and he flattered himself in 
the opinion that if, through disappointments, he should be unable to restore the 
property before the Captain's return, he would readily excuse his conduct.
	Captain Bishop, being at Portsmouth in August, 1766, wrote to Mr Orton, 
mentioning that his ship was coming round to Woolwich, and that he was desirous of 
an interview as soon as possible after his arrival. Orton wrote the Captain word that he 
would certainly meet him at Woolwich, and, having some business to negotiate at 
Yarmouth, he set out on horseback for that place.
	On his return to London he left his horse at an inn near Charing Cross and 
went into St James's Park, where he accidentally met Captain Bishop, whose ship had 
arrived at Woolwich on the preceding day. They supped together at the Belle 
Sauvage, on Ludgate Hill; and the next day Mr Orton dined with the Captain on board 
his ship, at Woolwich.
	Before leaving Woolwich, Mr Orton intended to inform the Captain of his 
conduct with regard to the money he had received at the bank, but he declined 
introducing the subject upon learning that the Captain meant to remain at Woolwich 
till his ship was cleared, which he expected would be in not less than a week.
	Mr Orton now went a second time to Yarmouth, and, on his return in four 
days, found a letter at his house from Captain Bishop, signifying that, having received 
his pay, he had more money by him than he had occasion for, and therefore desired 
Mr Orton to meet him at the Belle Sauvage and receive a sum in order to dispose of it 
in such a manner as he should judge would prove most advantageous. They met 
according to appointment, and Mr Orton was about to mention the forged letters of 
attorney when the Captain said he was under the necessity of immediately attending 
Admiral Knowles; and they parted with every appearance of friendship, mutually 
promising to meet the following evening.
	The next night he had not been in the house where he had appointed to meet 
Captain Bishop more than half-an-hour when he was arrested for two hundred pounds 
at the suit of the Captain, and immediately conducted to a spunging-house. He was the 
next day examined in the presence of some of the directors of the bank, and 
committed to Newgate in order for trial.
	The violent agitation of spirits which this unfortunate man experienced when 
he was charged with the commission of forgery will not admit of description. Being 
brought to trial, his guilt was proved by indisputable evidence; and he was sentenced 
to be executed.
	While he remained in Newgate his behaviour was perfectly consistent with his 
unhappy circumstances. He was conveyed to the place of execution in a mourning-
coach; and, after he had employed some time in devout prayer, the sentence of the law 
was put in force, and his body was delivered to his friends. Samuel Orton was 
executed at Tyburn, on the 14th of January, 1767.


JOHN WILLIAMSON 
A deliberate and cruel Murderer, who tortured and starved his Wife to 
Death. Executed in Moorfields, 19th of January, 1767

	WILLIAMSON was the son of people in but indifferent circumstances, who 
put him apprentice to a shoemaker. When he came to be a journeyman he pursued his 
business with industry, and in a short time he married an honest and sober woman, by 
whom he had three children. His wife dying, he continued some time a widower, 
maintaining himself and his children in a decent manner.
	At length he contracted an acquaintance with a young woman so deficient in 
point of intellect that it may be said she bordered upon idiocy. Her relations had 
bequeathed her money sufficient for her maintenance, and this circumstance induced 
Williamson to make proposals of marriage, which she accepted. Being asked in 
church, the banns were forbidden by the gentleman appointed guardian to the unhappy 
woman.
	Williamson having procured a licence, the marriage was solemnised; and in 
consequence thereof he received the money that was in the hands of the guardian. 
About three weeks after the marriage he cruelly beat his wife, threw water over her, 
and otherwise treated her with great severity; and this kind of brutality he frequently 
repeated. At length he fastened the miserable creature's hands behind her with 
handcuffs, and, by means of a rope passed through a staple, drew them so tight above 
her head that only the tips of her toes touched the ground.
	On one side of the closet wherein she was confined was now and then put a 
small piece of bread-and-butter, so that she could just touch it with her mouth; and she 
was allowed daily a small portion of water.
	She once remained a whole month without being released from this miserable 
condition; but during that time she occasionally received assistance from a female 
lodger in the house and a little girl, Williamson's daughter by his former wife.
	The girl having once released the poor sufferer, the inhuman villain beat her 
with great severity. When the father was abroad the child frequently gave the unhappy 
woman a stool to stand upon, by which means her pain was in some degree abated. 
This circumstance being discovered by Williamson, he beat the girl in a most 
barbarous manner, and threatened that if she again offended in the same way he would 
punish her with still greater severity.
	Williamson released his wife on the Sunday preceding the day on which she 
died, and at dinner-time cut her some meat, of which, however, she ate only a very 
small quantity. This partial indulgence he supposed would prove a favourable 
circumstance for him, in case of being accused of murder.
	Her hands being greatly swelled, through the coldness of the weather and the 
pain occasioned by the handcuffs, she begged to be permitted to go near the fire, and, 
the daughter joining in her request, Williamson complied. When she had sat a few 
minutes, Williamson, observing her throwing the vermin that swarmed upon her 
clothes into the fire, ordered her to "return to her kennel." Thereupon she returned to 
the closet, the door of which was then locked till next day, when she was found to be 
in a delirious state, in which she continued till the time of her death, which happened 
about two o'clock on the Tuesday morning.
	The coroner's jury being summoned to sit on the body, and evidence being 
adduced to incriminate Williamson, he was committed to Newgate. At the ensuing 
sessions at the Old Bailey he was brought to trial before Lord Chief Baron Parker, and 
sentenced to death. From the time of his commitment to prison till the time of his 
execution he behaved in a very decent and penitent manner. The gallows was placed 
on the rising ground opposite Chiswell Street, in Moorfields. After he had sung a 
psalm and prayed some time, with an appearance of great devotion, he was turned off, 
amidst an amazing concourse of people. His body was conveyed to Surgeons' Hall for 
dissection, and his children were placed in Cripplegate Workhouse.


ELIZABETH BROWNRIGG 
Executed at Tyburn, 14th of September, 1767, for torturing her Female 
Apprentices to Death

  
Portrait of Elizabeth Brownrigg

	THE long and excruciating torture in which this inhuman woman kept the 
innocent object of her remorseless cruelty, before she finished the long-premeditated 
murder, more engaged the attention and roused the indignation of all ranks, than any 
criminal in the whole course of our melancholy narratives.
	Elizabeth Brownrigg was married to James Brownrigg, a plumber, who, after 
being seven years in Greenwich, came to London and took a house in Flower-de-Luce 
Court, Fleet Street, where he carried on a considerable share of business, and had a 
little house at Islington for an occasional retreat.
	She had been the mother of sixteen children, and, having practised midwifery, 
was appointed by the overseers of the poor of St Dunstan's parish to take care of the 
poor women in the workhouse; which duty she performed to the entire satisfaction of 
her employers.
	Mary Mitchell, a poor girl, of the precinct of Whitefriars, was put apprentice 
to Mrs Brownrigg in the year 1765; and at about the same time Mary Jones, one of the 
children of the Foundling Hospital, was likewise placed with her in the same capacity; 
and she had other apprentices. As Mrs Brownrigg received pregnant women to lie-in 
privately, these girls were taken with a view of saving the expense of women-
servants. At first the poor orphans were treated with some degree of civility; but this 
was soon changed for the most savage barbarity. Having laid Mary Jones across two 
chairs in the kitchen, she whipped her with such wanton cruelty that she was 
occasionally obliged to desist through mere weariness. This treatment was frequently 
repeated; and Mrs Brownrigg used to throw water on her when she had done 
whipping her, and sometimes she would dip her head into a pail of water. The room 
appointed for the girl to sleep in adjoined the passage leading to the street door, and, 
as she had received many wounds on her head, shoulders and various parts of her 
body, she determined not to bear such treatment any longer if she could effect her 
escape.
	Observing that the key was left in the street door when the family went to bed, 
she opened the door cautiously one morning and escaped into the street. Thus freed 
from her horrid confinement, she repeatedly inquired her way to the Foundling 
Hospital till she found it, and was admitted, after describing in what manner she had 
been treated, and showing the bruises she had received. The child having been 
examined by a surgeon, who found her wounds to be of a most alarming nature, the 
governors of the hospital ordered Mr Plumbtree, their solicitor, to write to James 
Brownrigg, threatening a prosecution if he did not give a proper reason for the 
severities exercised towards the child.
	No notice of this having been taken, and the governors of the hospital thinking 
it imprudent to indict at common law, the girl was discharged, in consequence of an 
application to the Chamberlain of London. The other girl, Mary Mitchell, continued 
with her mistress for the space of a year, during which she was treated with equal 
cruelty, and she also resolved to quit her service. Having escaped out of the house, she 
was met in the street by the younger son of Brownrigg, who forced her to return 
home, where her sufferings were greatly aggravated on account of her elopement. In 
the interim the overseers of the precinct of Whitefriars bound Mary Clifford to 
Brownrigg; it was not long before she experienced similar cruelties to those inflicted 
on the other poor girls, and possibly still more severe. She was frequently tied up 
naked and beaten with a hearth broom, a horsewhip or a cane till she was absolutely 
speechless. This poor girl having a natural infirmity, the mistress would not permit her 
to lie in a bed, but placed her on a mat in a coal-hole that was remarkably cold; 
however, after some time, a sack and a quantity of straw formed her bed, instead of 
the mat. During her confinement in this wretched situation she had nothing to subsist 
on but bread and water; and her covering, during the night, consisted only of her own 
clothes, so that she sometimes lay almost perished with cold.
	On a particular occasion, when she was almost starving with hunger, she broke 
open a cupboard in search of food, but found it empty; and on another occasion she 
broke down some boards, in order to procure a draught of water. Though she was thus 
pressed for the humblest necessaries of life, Mrs Brownrigg determined to punish her 
with rigour for the means she had taken to supply herself with them. On this she 
caused the girl to strip to the skin, and during the course of a whole day, while she 
remained naked, she repeatedly beat her with the butt-end of a whip.
	In the course of this most inhuman treatment a jack-chain was fixed round her 
neck, the end of which was fastened to the yard door, and then it was pulled as tight as 
possible without strangling her. A day being passed in the practice of these savage 
barbarities, the girl was remanded to the coal-hole at night, her hands being tied 
behind her, and the chain still remaining about her neck.
	The husband being obliged to find his wife's apprentices in wearing apparel, 
they were repeatedly stripped naked, and kept so for whole days, if their garments 
happened to be torn. Sometimes Mrs Brownrigg, when resolved on uncommon 
severity, used to tie their hands with a cord and draw them up to a water-pipe which 
ran across the ceiling in the kitchen; but that giving way, she desired her husband to 
fix a hook in the beam, through which a cord was drawn, and, their arms being 
extended, she used to horsewhip them till she was weary, and till the blood flowed at 
every stroke.
	The elder son one day directed Mary Clifford to put up a half-tester bedstead, 
but the poor girl was unable to do it; on which he beat her till she could no longer 
support his severity; and at another time, when the mother had been whipping her in 
the kitchen till she was absolutely tired, the son renewed the savage treatment. Mrs 
Brownrigg would sometimes seize the poor girl by the cheeks and, forcing the skin 
down violently with her fingers, cause the blood to gush from her eyes.
	Mary Clifford, unable to bear these repeated severities, complained of her hard 
treatment to a French lady who lodged in the house; and she having represented the 
impropriety of such behaviour to Mrs Brownrigg, the inhuman monster flew at the 
girl and cut her tongue in two places with a pair of scissors.

  
Elizabeth Brownrigg flogging her apprentice

	On the morning of the 13th of July this barbarous woman went into the 
kitchen and, after obliging Mary Clifford to strip to the skin, drew her up to the staple; 
and though her body was an entire sore, from former bruises, yet this wretch renewed 
her cruelties with her accustomed severity.
	After whipping her till the blood streamed down her body she let her down, 
and made her wash herself in a tub of cold water, Mary Mitchell, the other poor girl, 
being present during this transaction. While Clifford was washing herself Mrs 
Brownrigg struck her on the shoulders, already sore with former bruises, with the 
butt-end of a whip; and she treated the child in this manner five times in the same day.
	The poor girl's wounds now began to shew evident signs of mortification; and 
it is probable that she might have been privately buried, and the murderess escaped 
detection, but for the following circumstance. Mary Clifford's mother-in-law, who had 
resided some time in the country, came to town, and enquired after the child; and 
being informed that she was placed at Brownrigg's, she went thither, but was refused 
admittance by Mr Brownrigg, who even threatened to carry her before the lord-mayor 
if she came there to make farther disturbances.
	Hereupon the mother-in-law was going away, when Mrs Deacon, wife of Mr 
Deacon, baker at the adjoining house, called her in, and informed her that she and her 
family had often heard moanings and groans issue from Brownrigg's house, and that 
she suspected the apprentices were treated with unwarrantable severity. Mrs Deacon 
likewise promised to exert herself to come at the truth of the affair.
	At this juncture Mr Brownrigg, going to Hampstead on business, bought a 
hog, which he sent home. This hog was put into a covered yard, to which there was a 
sky-light, which it was thought necessary to remove, in order to give air to the animal.
	As soon as it was known that the sky-light was removed, Mr Deacon ordered 
his servants to watch, in order, if possible, to discover the girls. Deacon's servant-
maid, looking from a window, saw one of the girls stooping down; on which she 
called her mistress, and she desired the attendance of some of the neighbours, who, 
having been witnesses of the shocking scene, some men got upon the leads, and 
dropped bits of dirt, to induce the girl to speak to them; but she seemed wholly 
incapable.
	Hereupon Mrs Deacon sent to the girl's mother-in-law, who going to the 
overseers who had placed out the child, they called on Mr Grundy, one of the 
overseers of St Dunstan's, and all of them going together, they demanded a sight of 
Mary Clifford: but Brownrigg, who had nicknamed her Nan, told them that he knew 
no such person, but if they wanted to see Mary (meaning Mary Mitchell), they might; 
and accordingly produced her.
	Mr Deacon's servant now declared that Mary Mitchell was not the girl who 
had been seen in the shocking situation abovementioned; on which Mr Grundy sent 
for a constable, to search the house, which was done; but no discovery was then made.
	Mr Brownrigg threatened highly; but Mr Grundy, with the spirit that became 
the officer of a parish, took Mary Mitchell with him to the workhouse, where, on the 
taking off her leathern-boddice, it stuck so fast to her wounds, that she shrieked with 
the pain: but, on being treated with great humanity, and told that she should not be 
sent back to Brownrigg's, she gave an account of the horrid treatment that she and 
Mary Clifford had sustained; and confessed that she had met the latter on the stairs 
just before they came to the house.
	On this Mr Grundy and some others returned to the house, to make a stricter 
search; on which Brownrigg sent for a lawyer, in order to intimidate them, and even 
threatened a prosecution, unless they immediately quitted the house.
	Unterrified by these threats, Mr Grundy sent for a coach to carry Brownrigg to 
the compter; on which the latter promised to produce the girl in half an hour, if the 
coach was discharged. This being consented to, the girl was produced from a 
cupboard, under a beauset in the dining-room, after a pair of shoes, which young 
Brownrigg had in his hand during the proposal, had been put upon her.
	It is not in language to describe the miserable appearance this poor girl made: 
almost her whole body was ulcerated. Being taken to the workhouse, an apothecary 
was sent for, who pronounced her to be in danger.
	Brownrigg was conveyed to Wood Street Compter; but his wife and son made 
their escape, taking with them a gold watch and some money. Mr Brownrigg was 
carried before Alderman Crossby, who committed him, and ordered the girls to be 
taken to St Bartholomew's Hospital, where Mary Clifford died within a few days. The 
coroner's inquest was summoned, and found a verdict of wilful murder against James 
and Elizabeth Brownrigg, and John, their son.
	In the meantime Mrs Brownrigg and her son shifted from place to place in 
London, bought clothes in Rag Fair to disguise themselves, and then went to 
Wandsworth, where they took lodgings in the house of Mr Dunbar, who kept a 
chandler's shop.
	This chandler, happening to read a newspaper on the 15th of August, saw an 
advertisement which so clearly described his lodgers that he had no doubt but they 
were the murderers. A constable went to the house, and the mother and son were 
conveyed to London. At the ensuing sessions at the Old Bailey the father, mother and 
son were indicted, when Elizabeth Brownrigg, after a trial of eleven hours, was found 
guilty of murder, and ordered for execution; but the man and his son, being acquitted 
of the higher charge, were detained, to take their trials for a misdemeanour, of which 
they were convicted, and imprisoned for the space of six months.
	After sentence of death was passed on Mrs Brownrigg, she was attended by a 
clergyman, to whom she confessed the enormity of her crime) and acknowledged the 
justice of the sentence by which she had been condemned.
	The parting between her and her husband and son, on the morning of her, 
execution, was affecting beyond description. The son falling on his knees, she bent 
herself to him, and embraced him. The husband was kneeling on the other side; she 
also kneeled down, and, having besought the Almighty to have mercy on her soul, 
said 'Dear James, I beg that God, for Christ's sake, will be reconciled, and that he will 
not leave me, nor forsake me, in the hour of death, and in the day of judgment.'
	On her way to the place of execution the people expressed their abhorrence of 
her crime in terms which, though not proper for the occasion, testified their 
astonishment that such a wretch could have existed: they even prayed for her 
damnation instead of her salvation: they doubted not but that 'the devil would fetch 
her,' and hoped that 'she would go to hell.' Such were the sentiments of the mob.
	At the place of execution this miserable woman joined in prayers with the 
ordinary of Newgate, whom she desired to declare to the multitude, that she confessed 
her guilt, and acknowledged the justice of her sentence.
	After execution her body was put into a hackney-coach, conveyed to Surgeons' 
Hall, dissected and anatomised; and her skeleton was hung up in Surgeons' Hall.
	What is it possible to say on this subject that will not have occurred to every 
reader of feeling and humanity? This more than common murder -- this murder by 
inches, has something so shocking in its nature, something so infernal in its progress, 
that there is no language in which to express our abhorrence of it.
	That Mrs Brownrigg, a midwife by profession, and herself the mother of many 
children, should wantonly murder the children of other women, is truly astonishing, 
and can only be accounted for by that depravity of human nature, which philosophers 
have always disputed, but which true christians will be ready to allow.
	Let her crimes be buried, though her skeleton be exposed; and may no one 
hereafter be found hardy enough to copy those crimes!
	Women who have the care of children from parish workhouses, or hospitals, 
should consider themselves at once as mistresses and as mothers; nor ever permit the 
strictness of the former character to preponderate over the humanity of the latter.


WILLIAM GUEST 
Executed at Tyburn, 14th of October, 1767, for High Treason, in 
diminishing the Current Coin of the Realm

	THIS man's crime was aggravated by a breach of public trust. He was the son 
of a clergyman of unblemished character, of the city of Worcester, who placed him 
apprentice to a genteel business.
	He then came to London and took a shop in Holborn, where he carried on 
business for some years, with the usual success of trade. His father's good name 
assisted him in procuring a clerkship in the Bank of England, and there the constant 
handling of gold shook his integrity. He took a house in Broad Street Buildings, in a 
room in the upper part of which he used to work. Having procured a curious machine 
for milling guineas, not unlike a machine made use of by mathematical-instrument 
makers, he used to take guineas from his drawer at the bank, file them, and then return 
them to the bank and take out guineas of full weight in their stead. Of their filings he 
made ingots, which he sold to an assayer, who, on his trial, deposed that the filings 
were of the same standard as our guineas.
	The cashier of the bank, having his suspicions aroused, sent Mr Sewallis and 
Mr Humberton, servants of the bank, with proper officers to search Mr Guest's house 
in Broad Street Buildings. In a room up two pair of stairs there stood a mahogany nest 
of drawers, in which, on being broken open, were found a vice, files, and an 
instrument proper for milling the edges of guineas.
	Mr Throughton, a jeweller, deposed he had sold two bars of gold for the 
prisoner, one of which weighed forty-six and the other forty-eight ounces.
	The circumstances above mentioned were deemed to adduce such evidence of 
guilt that the jury did not hesitate to convict Mr Guest; the consequence of which was, 
that sentence of death was passed on him.
	After conviction this malefactor made the most serious preparations for the 
awful change that awaited him. Consistent with the plan respecting persons convicted 
of high treason, he was conveyed to the place of execution on a sledge. His dress 
consisted of a suit of mourning and a club-wig. At Tyburn, the place of execution, he 
appeared to exhibit every mark of penitence and resignation. He prayed devoutly, and 
when he was turned off, and his body had hung the accustomed time, it was delivered 
to his friends to be buried.


JOHN POWER, Alias WINN 
Pirate, hanged at Execution Dock, 10th March, 1768

	THIS malefactor was a native of the West of England, and very early engaged 
in a seafaring life, serving on board a ship which sailed to the coast of Guinea on the 
slave-trade. This trade, of all others, is the most obnoxious to the feelings of 
humanity, the most contrary to the doctrines of Christianity; and it is astonishing that 
any man can call himself a Christian, yet professedly barter away the lives and 
liberties of his fellow-creatures!
	Captain Fox had the command of the vessel, and, while he was on shore on the 
African coast, Power and several other seamen determined to seize the ship, and to 
take her to sea on their own account.
	This resolution being formed, they swore fidelity to each other; and, giving the 
name of 'Bravo' to the ship (which had been called the Polly), they sailed for the West 
Indies, the command being given to Power, who now assumed the title of captain.
	The mate of the ship exerted his utmost influence to prevail on Power to let the 
real captain come on hoard before he sailed, and to return to his own duty; but all the 
return that the mate experienced for this good advice was the ball of a pistol lodged in 
his shoulder: Power likewise discharged a ball through the cheek of a sailor, and 
wounded a second who refused to submit to his imperious commands.
	Thus by violence becoming master of the vessel, he proceeded on his voyage 
with a lading of negro slaves; but among the other parties on board was a free negro, 
who had remained as a hostage for two of his country men; and this man was 
employed in splitting wood for firing.
	This free negro frequently conversing with the slaves, the pirates conceived 
that they were concerting plans to regain their liberty; for guilt is ever suspicious.
	One Robert Fitzgerald, aft Irishman, was the first who observed the free negro 
talking to the slaves; and hinting his suspicions to Power, and telling him to be on his 
guard, the latter, who was a fellow of the most unfeeling disposition, caused the poor 
man to be tied to the side of the ship, where he whipped him some minutes with a cat-
o'-nine-tails with such severity, that his body streamed with blood, and his bones in 
some places were visible.
	After this severe chastisement for no real offence Power took a cutlass from 
the hands of one of the sailors; but, not thinking it sharp enough to answer his horrid 
purpose, be directed that another should be brought him, with which he cut the poor 
negro in several places. Not contented with exercising this unprovoked severity, he 
directed Fitzgerald to cut him again, and the barbarous villain even exceeded his 
commission. Another of the sailors, named Potts, likewise cut him in two or three 
places; and at length Fitzgerald completed the murder by cutting off his bead, and 
throwing that, with the body, into the sea; though he had no order from Power for 
carrying the affair to such extremity.
	The horrid murder being thus committed, they continued their voyage for the 
West Indies, where they offered the negro slaves for sale; but, a suspicion arising of 
some illicit practices, they thought it prudent to depart; and, steering their course for 
North America, they came to anchor in the harbour of New York, where most of them 
thought it prudent to consult their safety in flight; but the surgeon of the ship (who 
had been obliged to dissemble his inclinations, to save his life) gave information 
against the murderers, some of whom were taken into custody.
	Fitzgerald had made his escape; but Power, and a seaman named Tomlin, were 
sent to England, where they were brought to trial; when the latter was acquitted from 
a variety of circumstances that arose in exculpation of his crime; but Power, being 
convicted on the fullest evidence, was sentenced to death for the murder of the negro.
	After conviction his behaviour was such as might have been expected from so 
hardened a wretch, -- one who seemed to defy the laws of God and man, to be a 
wilful, a deliberate, murderer.
	This malefactor was hanged at Execution Dock on the 10th of March, 1768.
	After the various and repeated remarks we have made on the crimes of murder 
and piracy, nothing remains to be said on the present occasion but to reprobate in the 
severest manner the practice of engaging in the slave-trade. If a man possessed those 
generous feelings by which our nature is said to be distinguished, he could not be 
induced to engage in this infernal traffic; or, if he did engage in it, it is impossible but 
that his feelings must be called forth, and he would see that his life was little less than 
continued murder.
	We are convinced that it may be, because it has been, argued, that the petty 
princes of Africa make a practice of selling as slaves such of their countrymen as they 
have obtained possession of by right of conquest; but shall this be an argument of any 
weight in a humane, in a Christian breast? Forbid it honour! forbid it that genuine 
philanthropy which claims the first possession of our hearts and gives us a distinction 
from the beasts that perish!
	It is not reasonable to suppose that God has made any distinction between his 
creatures: why then should that distinction be made by man -- vain, presumptuous, 
man -- too fond of arrogating to himself something more than the attribute of the 
Deity!


JAMES SAMPSON 
A treacherous and base Villain, executed at Tyburn, 11th of March, 1768, 
for robbing and setting fire to his Benefactor's House

	EARLY in life Sampson gave proofs of an extraordinary genius for drawing, 
to which his friends afforded proper encouragement, and his progress in the art was 
exceedingly rapid. The youth's uncommon talents being mentioned to the Duke of 
Richmond, his Grace engaged him in his service on very liberal terms, and employed 
masters properly qualified to afford every possible improvement to his fine genius. 
Afterwards the Duke warmly recommended Sampson to the patronage of the Right 
Honourable General Conway, who appointed him one of the draughtsmen to the 
Tower.
	The greatest part of his time that was not engaged in a necessary attention to 
the duties of his office Sampson employed in making copies of the natural curiosities 
in the British Museum and in the conversation of learned and ingenious men, by 
whom that celebrated library was frequented; and he was so highly esteemed, both by 
the Duke of Richmond and General Conway, that he had free access to them on all 
occasions. Having married an upper servant in the General's family, he appeared to 
live in a state of great felicity; but unfortunately he maintained an illicit intercourse 
with some women of debauched principles, whose extravagances involved him in 
many embarrassments.
	Being allowed the liberty of amusing himself in the General's library, he 
learned that money and papers of consequence were kept there; and this tempted him 
to the fatal resolution of robbing his benefactor and setting fire to the house, as a 
means of covering up his guilt. Having concealed himself in the house, he waited till 
he supposed the family had retired to rest, and then entered the library, where he stole 
property to a considerable amount and set fire to some of the furniture.
	About six in the morning the General was alarmed by the cry of "Fire!" and 
perceived smoke issuing from the library; but he would not permit the door to be 
opened till the engines arrived, lest the flames should burst out and communicate to 
the other parts of the building. The engines being ready to play, he directed the 
firemen to use their endeavours to secure a writing-table that stood in a corner of the 
room, several bank-notes being deposited in a drawer thereof. This table was brought 
out, part of it being burned, and the drawer open in which the bank-notes had been 
deposited. The General put all the papers he found in the drawer into his pocket.
	When the confusion occasioned by the supposed accident had subsided, the 
General examined the papers taken out of the drawer, and missing a bank-note of five 
hundred pounds, and four of one hundred pounds each, concluded that the room had 
been fired for the purpose of concealing the robbery.
	All the domestics in the house had lived many years in the General's service, 
and he had the firmest confidence in their fidelity; but in order to secure his property, 
and discover the author of the horrid fact, which he strongly suspected to have been 
committed by some person well acquainted with his house, he made application to the 
bank, where he learned that the note for five hundred pounds had been already 
changed for others of smaller value; and, from the description of the person who had 
changed it, his suspicions were fixed on Sampson.
	It was now determined that Mr Camp, who had received the note, and Mr 
Lambert, who had delivered the smaller ones on Camp's ticket, should attend at the 
Duke of Richmond's house at an appointed hour.
	The Duke sent a servant to Sampson's lodgings, desiring to see him on 
business; and he presently attended, and entered into conversation on different 
subjects with his Grace and General Conway. The above-mentioned clerks of the bank 
were introduced, and, immediately recognising the person of Sampson, a signal was 
made that had been before agreed on; in consequence of which the General accused 
Sampson of the robbery and setting fire to the library. For some time he steadily 
denied the charge, but, finding no possibility of confuting the evidence of Camp and 
Lambert, he at length confessed all the particulars of his guilt.
	Sampson's lodgings at Pimlico were searched, and the two notes received at 
the bank and the four stolen from the drawer of the writing-table were found. The 
delinquent, being taken before Sir John Fielding, was committed to Newgate in order 
for trial, which came on at the following sessions at the Old Bailey, when he was 
convicted, and sentenced to be hanged.
	While he remained in Newgate he regularly attended prayers in the chapel, and 
on the morning of his execution he received the Sacrament. The passage of carriages 
being obstructed by the pavement being broken up in Holborn, Sampson was 
conveyed through Smithfield, Cow Cross, Turnmill Street and the King's Road to 
Tyburn, where he acknowledged the justice of his sentence, and, after some time 
employed in prayer, suffered the punishment due to his offences, on 11th March, 
1768.


FREDERIC LORD BALTIMORE, ELIZABETH 
GRIFFENBURG, AND ANNE HARVEY 
The former tried for committing a rape on Sarah Woodcock, and the two 
latter as accessories before the fact, 26th March, 1768

  
Sarah Woodcock forcibly introduced to Lord Baltimore

	THOUGH conviction did not follow the trials of these presumed offenders, it 
is our duty to state the affair as it was transmitted to the public at the time.
	Frederic Lord Baltimore was the lineal descendant of Mr. Calvert, who was 
promoted to the degree of a peer of Ireland by King James I. from whom he received 
the grant of an immense tract of land in America, which has since borne the name of 
Maryland.
	Lord Baltimore's father had a country seat at Epsom, where the object of our 
present notice was born, and sent for education to Eton School, where he became a 
great proficient in classical knowledge, and was said to have a singular taste and 
capacity for the learning and manners of the ancients; and his father dying before he 
was of age, left him in possession of a most ample fortune.
	His lordship married the daughter of the Duke of Bridgewater, and was 
exceedingly unhappy in the nuptial connexion, owing to his unbounded attachment to 
women. In fact, his passion for the sex was so illiberal and so gross, that his house had 
the appearance of a Turkish seraglio rather than that of an Englishman of fortune; nor 
was it reputable for any woman of character to have entered within his walls.
	Lord Baltimore, during his residence abroad, sailed from Naples to 
Constantinople, where he saw and admired the customs of the Turks and on his return 
to England, in 1766, he caused a part of his house to be taken down, and rebuilt in the 
form of a Turkish harem. He kept a number of women, who had rules given them by 
which to regulate their conduct; and he had agents, to procure him fresh faces, in 
different parts of the town.
	Elizabeth Griffenburg, wife of Dr. Griffenburg, a native of Germany, and 
Anne Harvey, a woman of low education, were two of the parties employed by Lord 
Baltimore in his irregular designs on the sex.
	In November, 1767, Mrs. Harvey told his lordship that young lady named 
Woodcock, who was very handsome, kept a milliner's shop on Tower Hill. Prompted 
by curiosity, and a still more ignoble motive, Lord Baltimore went once or twice to 
the shop, and purchased some trifling articles, by way of making an acquaintance. He 
then asked her if she would attend him to the play; but this she declined, having never 
been at a play in her life; and, as she had been bred up among that rigid sect of 
dissenters called Independents, she had been taught to consider theatrical diversions 
as incompatible with the duties of Christianity.
	Some time afterwards Lord Baltimore went hastily into Miss Woodcock's 
shop, saying that be had been splashed by mud from a hackney-coach. This was 
noticed by the young lady, who expressed her surprise that he could be so near the 
coach as to see, but not avoid it. He answered, 'I was thinking of you, Miss;' but she 
paid no regard to this compliment, as she considered him as a neighbour, and a 
married man.
	At length Lord Baltimore and his agents had completed the outlines of the 
ungenerous plan which they had determined, if possible, to carry into execution. Mrs. 
Harvey, going to Miss Woodcock's shop on the 14th of December, bespoke a pair of 
laced ruffles, which she desired might be made up against the next day, for the use of 
a lady, who might be a good customer if she was not disappointed, as she was fond of 
encouraging persons who were young in trade.
	On the following day Mrs. Harvey called and paid for the ruffles, and, having 
given orders for some other articles, desired that they might ho brought to her house 
in the Curtain Road, near Holywell Mount, Shoreditch, on the succeeding day.
	At the time appointed Miss Woodcock went to the house, where Mrs. Harvey 
received her politely, and desired her to drink tea; but as the days were short, and as 
she had no friend to attend her, she expressed her wish to decline the invitation. 
During their conversation one Isaac Isaacs, a Jew, came into the house, and, having 
paid his respects to Mrs. Harvey, said he was going to the play. Hereupon Mrs. 
Harvey said 'I was going to attend a lady with some millinery goods;' and then to 
Isaacs, 'This is the lady I was speaking to you of;' then again to Miss Woodcock, 'I 
would be glad you would go with me; the lady wants a great many things, and will be 
a very good customer to you.'
	Isaacs now observed, that, as it was necessary for him to have a coach, he 
could set them both down at the lady's house. This was objected to by Miss 
Woodcock, on account of her dress; but this objection was overruled by Mrs. Harvey, 
who said that circumstance could not have any weight with the lady they were about 
to attend.
	At this time Lord Baltimore's coach was waiting in the neighbourhood; and 
Isaacs, going out under the pretence of calling a coach, gave directions for drawing it 
to the door. This being done, the parties got into it; but Miss Woodcock did not 
observe whether it was a hackney-coach or not.
	The coachman drove at a great rate; the glasses were drawn up, and at length 
they arrived in the court-yard of a house, apparently that of a person of fashion. Mrs. 
Harvey took Miss Woodcock upstairs through a suite of rooms elegantly furnished, in 
one of which she saw an elderly man sitting, whom she afterwards knew to be Dr. 
Griffenburg, who politely desired her to repose herself, while he informed the lady of 
the house of her arrival.
	Dr. Griffenburg had not been long absent when Lord Baltimore entered; and 
Miss Woodcock was much alarmed when she discovered that he was the very person 
who had repeatedly been at her shop; but he desired her to be appeased, saying that he 
was steward to the lady on whom she was come to attend. Miss Woodcock desired 
that she might immediately see the lady; on which Lord Baltimore said he would fetch 
her; and, soon afterwards bringing in Mrs. Griffenburg, said that she was the lady who 
had ordered the millinery goods.
	Orders were now given for tea; and, when the equipage was taken from the 
table, Lord Baltimore brought from another room some purses, a ring, some smelling-
bottles, and other articles, which he said he had purchased for Miss Woodcock. She 
seemed to despise the trifles, which she intimated might have pleased her well enough 
when a child.
	As the evening advanced, she seemed importunate to depart, saying that her 
friends would become uneasy at her long absence; but at this time she had no idea of 
being forcibly detained.
	To divert her from the thought of departing, Lord Baltimore took her to view 
several apartments in the house. On their coming into one of which, where there was a 
harpsichord, he proposed to play a tune on that instrument to the young lady; and, 
when he had so done, and she became still more anxious to depart, he insisted that she 
should stay to supper, and gave a private intimation to Mrs. Griffenburg to make the 
necessary preparations.
	Mrs. Griffenburg being retired, Lord Baltimore took Miss Woodcock behind 
the window-curtain, and behaved to her in a manner very inconsistent with the rules 
of decency. On her making violent opposition to this insult, Dr. Griffenburg and Mrs. 
Harvey advanced, as if to assist his lordship; but she contested the matter with them 
all, and, forcing her way towards the door, declared that she would go home 
immediately: yet still it does not appear that she had any suspicion of sustaining the 
violence that was afterwards offered her.
	After this, Lord Baltimore insisted on her sitting with him at supper; but her 
mind was too much discomposed to admit of her thinking of taking any refreshment. 
He offered her a glass of syllabub; but she beat it out of his hand, and ran towards the 
door, with an intention to have departed: but he told her it was late; that no coach was 
then to be procured; and at length said positively that she should not go home.
	Dr. Griffenburg, with his wife and Mrs. Harvey, now endeavoured to prevail 
on the young lady to go to bed; but she declared that she would never sleep in that 
house. On this they conducted her to a room, in which they went to bed: but she 
continued walking about till the morning, and lamenting her unhappy situation.
	Looking out of the window about eight o'clock, she observed a young woman 
passing, to whom she threw out her handkerchief, which was then heavy with tears. 
As the party did not see her, she called out 'Young woman!' on which the other made 
a motion as if she would fling the handkerchief within the rails.
	As Miss Woodcock called to the woman, with an intention of sending her to 
her father, the two women now jumped out of bed, and forced her from the window, 
upbraiding her with what they called a rejection of her good fortune, and wishing 
themselves in so happy a situation.
	Her reply was, that all the fortune the man possessed should not prevail on her 
to think of living with him on dishonourable terms; and she again demanded that 
liberty to which she had so just a claim.
	The women now quitting the room, Lord Baltimore and Dr. Griffenburg came 
in soon afterwards; when the former said that he was astonished at her outrageous 
behaviour, as he had promised that she should go home at twelve o'clock. She replied 
that she would go home directly, as her sister, and particularly her father, would be 
inexpressibly anxious on occasion of her absence.
	Lord Baltimore now conducted her downstairs, and ordered breakfast; but she 
refused to eat, and wept incessantly till twelve o'clock, when she once more 
demanded her liberty. His lordship now said that he loved her to excess; that be could 
not part with her; that he did not intend any injury to her, and that he would write to 
her father: and on this be wrote a letter, of which the following is a copy; and in it sent 
a bank-note of two hundred pounds:-- 'Your daughter Sally sends you the enclosed, 
and desires you will not be uneasy on her account, because every thing will turn out 
well with a little patience and prudence. She is at a friend's house safe and well, in all 
honesty and honour; nothing else is meant, you may depend on it; and, sir, as your 
presence and consent are necessary, we beg of you to come, in a private manner, to 
Mr. Richard Smith's, in Broad Street Buildings.'
	Lord Baltimore showed this letter to Miss Woodcock; but so greatly was her 
mind disturbed, that she knew little of its contents; and so exceedingly was she 
terrified, that she wrote the following words at the bottom, by his direction: 'Dear 
father, this is true, and I should be glad you would come this afternoon: From your 
dutiful daughter.'
	After writing the above postscript, she appears to have been convinced of the 
impropriety of it, and, turning to his lordship, she said 'Can you look me in the face, 
and say that your name is Richard Smith, or that these are Broad Street Buildings?' 
Struck with guilt, be acknowledged his name was not Richard Smith, but said that 
gentleman lived within a few doors; and that the place was not the Broad Street 
Buildings in the city, but another of the same name at the west end of the town.
	She now wept incessantly at the thought of her unhappy situation, and 
repeatedly begged for her liberty; but, no sooner did she presume to go towards the 
window to make her distress evident to any casual passenger, than one or other of the 
women forced her away.
	At length Mrs. Griffenburg gave orders that the window should be nailed up; 
but Lord Baltimore came in at the juncture, and pretended to be very angry at this 
proceeding, lest it should be suspected that murder was intended to be committed in 
the house. His lordship then told Miss Woodcock that if she presumed to pull up the 
windows, or make any disturbance, he would throw her into, the street; a 
circumstance by which she was greatly terrified.
	This happened at the approach of night, and she continued weeping and 
lamenting her situation, and refused to take any refreshment at supper. When desired 
to go to bed, she refused to do so, unless Lord Baltimore would solemnly promise not 
to molest her. On this she spent the night walking about the room, while the two 
women who were appointed to guard her went to bed.
	In the morning she went into a parlour, where Lord Baltimore waiting on her, 
she endeavoured to represent his ill conduct in the most striking light, and begged that 
if he had the tenderness of a father for a child he would permit her to depart. He said 
that she might write to her father, which she did; and, fearful of giving offence, said 
that she had been treated 'with as much honour as she could expect, and begged her 
friends would come immediately.' Lord Baltimore was now out of the room; but the 
women told Miss Woodcock that his lordship had sent two hundred pounds to her 
father on the preceding day. She seemed amazed at this circumstance, which appears 
to be a proof of the anxiety of her mind at the time the letter was written.
	Soon after this a servant came in with a letter as from the presumed Richard 
Smith. It was written in a language she did not understand; but Lord Baltimore 
pretended to explain it to her, saying it intimated that her father had been at Mr. 
Smith's, but would not wait while she was sent for.
	In order to carry on the imposition, his lordship sent for a man who personated 
the supposed Mr. Smith; but Miss Woodcock was soon convinced that be had never 
seen her father, from the unsatisfactory answers that he gave to her inquiries.
	After this Lord Baltimore played a tune, while the pretended Mr. Smith and 
Mrs. Harvey danced to the music; but in the mean time Miss Woodcock was 
tormented by a thousand conflicting passions. She was then shown some fine 
paintings in the room, one of which being that of a ship in distress, she said it bore a 
great resemblance to her own unhappy situation.
	Then the man, called Smith was desired by Lord Baltimore to draw Miss 
Woodcock's picture; and he instantly pulled out a pencil, and made the drawing, while 
the young lady sat in a posture of extreme grief and dejection.
	At midnight Mr. Broughton, his lordship's steward, brought intelligence that 
Isaacs, the Jew, having offered a letter to Miss Woodcock's father, was stopped till he 
should give an account where the young lady was secreted. Lord Baltimore was, or 
affected to be, in a violent passion, and vowed vengeance against the father; but in the 
interim the Jew entered, and delivered a letter which he pretended to have received 
from Miss Woodcock's sister. She took it to read; but she had wept so much that her 
eyes were sore; and of all she read she could recollect but this passage:-- 'Only please 
to appoint a place where and when we may meet with you.'
	The hour of retirement being arrived, Miss Woodcock refused to go upstairs, 
unless she might be assured of not receiving any insult from his lordship. She had not 
taken any sustenance since she entered the house. For this night she laid down in her 
clothes, on a bed in which Mrs. Harvey reposed herself. She asked this bad woman if 
she had ever been in love; and acknowledged that she herself was addressed by a 
young fellow, who appeared to be very fond of her, and that they were to settle in 
business as soon as the marriage should take place; wherefore she desired Mrs. 
Harvey to show her the way out of a house that had been so obnoxious to her: but the 
answer of the latter was, that though she had lived in the house several years, she did 
not herself know the way out of it.
	On the following morning, when Miss Woodcock went downstairs, she 
pleaded earnestly with Lord Baltimore for her liberty; on which he became most 
violently enraged, called her by the vilest names, arid said that, if she spoke to him on 
the subject any more, he would either throw her out of the window, or send her home 
in a wheelbarrow, with her petticoats tied over her head; and, turning to Isaacs the 
Jew, he said, 'Take the slut to a mean house like herself;' which greatly terrified her, 
as she presumed he meant a house of ill fame.
	The sufferings she had undergone having by this time made her extremely ill, 
Lord Baltimore mixed a physical draught for her, which he insisted on her drinking.
	On the Sunday afternoon he begged her to sit and hear him talk. His discourse 
consisted of a ridicule on religion, and every thing that was sacred, even to the 
denying the existence of a soul.
	After supper he made six several attempts to ravish her within two hours; but 
she repulsed him in such a determined manner, that it was impossible for him to 
accomplish his dishonourable purpose. On that night she lay with Mrs. Harvey; but 
could get no rest, as she was in perpetual fear of renewed insults from his. lordship.
	On the Monday morning she was told that she should see her father, if she 
would dry her eyes, wash herself, and put on clean linen. Mrs. Griffenburg now 
supplied her with a change of linen; and then she was hurried into the coach with Lord 
Baltimore, Doctor Griftenburg, and two women. They were carried to Lord 
Baltimore's country seat at Epsom, where she experienced several fresh acts of 
indecency from her ignoble tormentor; and, on her again resisting him, he said she 
must submit that night, with or without her consent; and in this declaration he was 
supported by the two infamous women.
	At supper she ate a few mouthfuls; but declined drinking any thing, lest some 
intoxicating matter should be mixed with the liquor. Lord Baltimore and his people 
now diverted themselves with the game of blind-man's buff; but Miss Woodcock 
refused to take any share in their ridiculous folly.
	The two women now conducted her to the bed chamber, and began to undress 
her; nor was she capable of making much resistance, being weak, through want of 
food and continued grief. Still, however, she begged to be deprived of life, rather than 
submit to dishonourable treatment.
	On the drawing of the curtains she observed that Lord Baltimore was in bed, 
which added to her former terrors; but she was not suffered to remain long in doubt: 
the women left her; but, alas! not to her repose; for that night gave rise to the crime 
which furnished matter for the prosecution of which we are now reciting the 
particulars.
	Twice (according to Miss Woodcock's deposition) was this horrid purpose 
effected; and, though she called out repeatedly for help, yet she found none; and in the 
morning, when she went to Mrs. Harvey's room, and told her what had passed, the 
latter advised her to be quiet, for that she had made noise enough already.
	The infamous Harvey now hinting that worse consequences might still be 
expected, Miss Woodcock determined to seem content with her situation, disagreeable 
as it was, in the hope of obtaining the protection of her friends.
	In this hope she frequently went to the window, flattering herself that she 
might see some person whom she knew. With the same view she went out once with 
his lordship, and once with Mrs. Griffenburg; and, having accidentally heard the name 
of Lord Baltimore mentioned, she presumed this to be the person who had treated her 
so ill; nor had she a guess who it was till this period.
	On the afternoon of the day that she made this discovery they went to London, 
to the great joy of Miss Woodcock, who hoped now to find an easier communication 
with her friends. At her request she was permitted to sleep alone; and the next day he 
introduced her to Madam Saunier, the governess to his lordship's natural daughters, 
telling her that Miss Woodcock had been recommended as a companion to the young 
ladies.
	On this day he gave her some money, and desired her to dispose of it as she 
thought proper; and, when night advanced, he sent Mrs. Griffenburg to order her to 
come to bed. She at first refused to comply, and at length yielded only on conditional 
terms. What passed this night is too horrid for relation.
	On the following day Mrs. Griffenburg told her that she had been preparing 
another apartment for her, and begged that she would come and see it; and conducted 
her to a stone garret, which was remarkably cold and damp; and, being among the 
servants' apartments, she began to apprehend that Lord Baltimore, having gratified his 
own passion, was disposed to transfer her to his dependents.
	Miss Woodcock's friends now began to form some conjectures where she 
might be secreted; and Mr. Davis, a young fellow who had paid his addresses to her, 
determined to exert himself to ascertain the fact.
	On the Sunday he placed himself under a window of Lord Baltimore's house, 
and had not been there long before she saw him, and intimated that she did so. On this 
Davis took out a book, motioning with his hand for her to write. She then waved her 
hand for him to approach; but, as he did not seem to comprehend her meaning, she ran 
into another room, and said 'I cannot come to you; is my father well?' He answered 
that all parties were well, and asked what was become of Mrs. Harvey. The young 
lady now put down the window, and retired, unable any longer to continue the 
conversation.
	Mr. Davis now went and informed Miss Woodcock's father of the discovery 
he had made; on which the old gentleman went to Mr. Cay, a baker, in Whitecross 
Street, to ask his opinion. Mr. Cay went with him to Mr. Watts, an attorney, who 
advised them to make application to Lord Mansfield for a writ of habeas corpus. But 
it may be now necessary to take notice of what passed between Lord Baltimore and 
Miss Woodcock in the meantime.
	On the day following that on which she had been seen by Davis, his lordship 
told her that she should see her father that day, at Dr. Griffenburg's, in Dean Street, 
Soho; and he said he would make a settlement on her for life if she would 
acknowledge that she had been well treated. This she agreed to, in the hope of 
obtaining her freedom. She was then told that her father had caused Mrs. Harvey to be 
taken into custody.
	Lord Baltimore now went to Griffenburg's with Miss Woodcock, taking 
likewise a young lady, of whom she was to declare herself the companion: but they 
had been only a few minutes at Griffenburg's when a servant came to apprise his 
lordship that Sir John Fielding's people had surrounded his house.
	Lord Baltimore, having previously sent one of his servants with a letter to 
Miss Woodcock's father, now ordered a coach; and he, and Dr. Griffenburg and the 
young lady, now went to a tavern in Whitechapel, in quest of the servant, who told 
them that Mr. Woodcock having been out all day in search of his daughter, and not 
being returned, he (the servant) would not leave the letter, from a point of prudence.
	Hereupon they drove to a house in Covent Garden, where the servant soon 
arrived with a note from Sir John Fielding's clerk, desiring Miss Woodcock to come 
to Bow Street, where her friends were, in expectation of her arrival. Fearful of taking 
any step that might involve her in still farther difficulties, she showed Lord Baltimore 
the note, when he declared she should not comply with the contents; and they 
immediately drove to Dr. Griffenburg's.
	At this place they were met by his lordship's steward, who said his house was 
still surrounded by peace-officers; but, as they went away soon afterwards, this 
unworthy peer then took Miss Woodcock home in his own carriage.
	On their arrival the valet-de-chambre told his master that on the Sunday 
morning the young lady had spoken to a person from the window, His lordship now 
demanded if this was fact. She acknowledged that it was; but said she had not 
acquainted her friends with her distressed situation.
	He now tried to calm her mind, but said that she must sleep with him that 
night, which she positively refused, unless he would engage not to offer her any 
insult; and this promise was made, and complied with.
	In the morning Mr. Watts, the attorney, called at Lord Baltimore's house with 
a writ of habeas corpus; but the porter would not admit him till he produced the writ; 
but then he was asked into the house, and Lord Baltimore made acquainted with his 
business. On this his lordship told his prisoner Mr. Watts's business, and begged she 
would prepare to see him with all possible composure.
	In the interim his lordship waited on the attorney, who demanded whether one 
Sarah Woodcock was in his house: but, on his declining to give an immediate answer, 
Watts said that he would serve the writ unless she was instantly produced; and that the 
consequence would be that all his doors must be broke open till she was found: but he 
hoped that so violent a procedure would not be necessary.
	His lordship now begged his patience for a short time, and his requisition 
should be complied with. Mr. Watts agreed to wait, and the other, going to Miss 
Woodcock, requesting her to write to her father, and declare that she had been used 
with tenderness, and had consented to her then situation; and he desired her to add 
that she wished to see her father and sisters, but hoped their visit would be of the 
peaceful kind; and with all this she complied, in hope, as she afterwards declared, of 
obtaining her liberty.
	This letter being sealed, and dispatched by one of his lordship's servants, be 
introduced the attorney to Miss Woodcock, who asked her if her residence in that 
house was a matter of choice, or whether she was forcibly detained. She replied that 
she remained there by her own consent, but that she was anxious to see her father.
	With this declaration Mr. Watts appeared satisfied, saying that no person had 
any right to interfere, if she voluntarily consented to her situation.
	His lordship then intimated that it would be proper for her to go to Lord 
Mansfield, and make a similar declaration. She made no hesitation to comply with this 
proposal; but still appeared exceedingly anxious to have a conference with her father.
	On this the parties went to Lord Mansfield's house in Bloomsbury Square, 
where they were shown into different apartments; and Miss Woodcock's friends 
waited in an antechamber, to hear the issue of this extraordinary affair.
	The young lady being examined by Lord Mansfield, he inquired minutely into 
the circumstances respecting her being conveyed to Lord Baltimore's house. She 
answered every question in the most explicit manner; and, when the judge asked her if 
she was willing to live with his lordship, she answered in the affirmative; but 
expressed great earnestness to see her friends first.
	On this she was shown into the room where her friends waited; and the first 
question she asked was 'Who Lord Mansfield was, and whether he had a right to set 
her at liberty?' She was told that his right was indisputable; and his lordship being 
again consulted, he inquired if she still adhered to her former opinion; to which she 
replied that she did not, but desired to go home with her father.
	His lordship then asked her how happened the sudden change in her mind. Her 
answer was 'Because, till I saw them, I did not know you had power to release me.' 
His lordship then said 'Child, it is in my power to let you go;' and told her she was at 
full liberty to go where she pleased'; on which she went into the other room to her 
friends, but was unable to express her joy on the occasion.
	In the interim Lord Mansfield addressed the Reverend Mr. Watson, a 
dissenting minister, and some other persons present, to the following effect:-- 
'Gentlemen, I would have you take notice of Miss Woodcock's answers, because 
possibly this matter may be variously talked of in public, and justice ought to be done 
to both parties; for, when this lady came before me on her private examination, she 
expressed a desire to see her father and sister, or sisters: and now she has answered as 
you have heard.'
	On Miss Woodcock's discharge, Mr. Cay, the baker, in Whitecross Street (to 
whom her father bad delivered the two hundred pound bank-note, which had been 
enclosed in the letter by Lord Baltimore), conveyed the young lady to Sir John 
Fielding, before whom she swore to the actual commission of the rape by Lord 
Baltimore.
	At this time Mrs. Griffenburg and Mrs. Harvey were in custody; and a warrant 
was issued to apprehend Lord Baltimore; but he secreted himself for the present, and 
surrendered to the Court of King's Bench on the last day of Hilary term, 1768; and the 
two women being brought thither by habeas corpus, they were all admitted to bail, in 
order for trial at Kingston, in Surrey, because the crime was alleged to have been 
committed at his lordship's seat at Epsom.
	In the interim Miss Woodcock went to the house of Mr. Cay, in Whitecross 
Street; but, not being properly accommodated there, she went to the house of a friend, 
where she lived in great privacy and retirement till the time arrived for the trial of the 
offending parties.
	Bills of indictment being found against Lord Baltimore and the two women, 
they were all brought to trial before the Lord Chief Baron Smythe; and, after the 
evidence against them had been given, in substance as may be collected from the 
preceding narrative, Lord Baltimore made the following defence, which was read in 
Court by Mr. Hamersley, solicitor to his lordship:--
	'My Lord and Gentlemen, 
'I have put myself upon my country, in hopes that prejudice and clamour will avail 
nothing in this place, where it is the privilege of the meanest of time king's subjects to 
be presumed innocent until his guilt has been made appear by legal evidence. I wish I 
could say that I had been treated abroad with the same candour. I have been loaded 
with obloquy, the most malignant libels have been circulated, and every other method 
which malice could devise has been taken to create general prejudice against me. I 
thank God that, under such circumstances, I have had firmness and resolution enough 
to meet my accusers face to face, and provoke an inquiry into my conduct. Hic murus 
aheneus esto, -- nil conscire sibi. The charge against me, and against these poor 
people who are involved with me, because they might otherwise have been just 
witnesses of my innocence, is in its nature very easy to be made, and hard to be 
disproved. The accuser has the advantage of supporting it by a direct and positive 
oath; the defence can only be collected from circumstances.
	'My defence is composed, then, of a variety of circumstances, all tending to 
show the falsity of this charge, the absurdity of it, the improbability that it could be 
true. It will be laid before the jury under the direction of my counsel; and I have the 
confidence of an innocent man, that it will be manifest to your lordship, the jury, and 
the whole world, that the story told by this woman is a perversion of truth in every 
particular. What could induce her to make such a charge I can only suspect: very soon 
after she came to my house, upon a representation to me that her father was distressed, 
I sent him a considerable sum of money: whether the ease with which the money was 
obtained from me might suggest the idea as a means of obtaining a larger sum of 
money, or whether it was thought necessary to destroy me, in order to establish the 
character of the girl to the world, I know not; but I do aver, upon the word of a man of 
honour, that there is no truth in any thing which has been said or sworn of my having 
offered violence to this girl. I ever held such brutality in abhorrence. I am totally 
against all force; and for me to have forced this woman, considering my weak state of 
health, and my strength, is not only a moral, but a physical, impossibility. She is, as to 
bodily strength, stronger than I am. Strange opinions, upon subjects foreign to this 
charge, have been falsely imputed to me, to inflame this accusation. Libertine as I am 
represented, I hold no such opinions. Much has been said against me, that I seduced 
this girl from her parents: seduction is not the point of this charge; but I do assure 
your lordship and the jury this part of the case has been aggravated exceedingly 
beyond the truth. If I have been in any degree to blame, I am sure I have sufficiently 
atoned for every indiscretion, which a weak attachment to this unworthy woman may 
have led me into, by having suffered the disgrace of being exposed as a criminal at the 
bar in the county which my father had the honour to represent in parliament, and 
where I had some pretensions to have attained the same honour, had that sort of an 
active life been my object.
	I will take up no more of your lordship's time than to add that, if I had been 
conscious of the guilt now imputed to me, I could have kept myself and my fortune 
out of the reach of the laws of this country, I am a citizen of the world; I could have 
lived any where: but I love my own country, and. submit to its laws, resolving that my 
innocence should be justified by the laws. I now, by my own voluntary act, by 
surrendering myself to the Court of King's Bench, stake, upon the verdict of twelve 
men, my life, my fortune, and, what is dearer to me, my honour. 
'BALTIMORE. 
'March 25, 1768.'
	The substance of the defences of Mrs. Griffenburg and Mrs. Harvey consisted 
principally in alleging that Miss Woodcock had consented to all that had passed, and 
that no force had been used towards her either by Lord Baltimore or themselves.
	The evidence of Dr. Griffenburg was not admitted, as his name was upon 
record, on a charge of having been concerned in a crime of a similar nature.
	After every thing alleged against the prisoners had been heard in the most 
dispassionate manner, the judge addressed himself to the jury in the following terms:--
	'Gentlemen of the Jury, 
The prisoner at the bar, Lord Baltimore, stands indicted for feloniously ravishing, and 
carnally knowing, Sarah Woodcock, spinster, against her will, on the 22d of 
December last, at Epsom, against the statute which makes this offence felony: and the 
other two prisoners are indicted as accessories before the fact, by feloniously and 
maliciously procuring, aiding, and abetting Lord Baltimore to commit the said rape, at 
the same time and place. To this they have pleaded not guilty, and you are to try if 
they are guilty. Before I state to you the evidence I will mention to you two or three 
things: in the first place, my lord complains of libels and printed accounts of this 
transaction, which have been circulated. It is a most unjustifiable practice, and tends 
to the perversion of public justice; and, therefore, if you have seen any thing printed 
on the side of the prosecutrix, or the prisoners, I must desire you to divest yourselves 
of any prejudice that such publications must have occasioned, and give your verdict 
only on the evidence now laid before you. Another thing I desire is, that, whichever 
way the verdict is given, none of the friends of any of the parties will make use of any 
expressions of approbation or applause, which are extremely improper and indecent in 
a court of justice, and I shall certainly commit any person whom I know to be guilty 
of it. The last thing that I shall mention to you is, to desire that no resentment you may 
feel at the manner in which she was carried to Lord Baltimore's house may have any 
influence on your verdict; for, however unwarrantable the manner was in which she 
came into his power, if, at the time he lay with her, it was by her consent, he is not 
guilty of the offence of which he is indicted; though it was proper to be given in 
evidence on this trial, to account for her being with him, and his having an 
opportunity of committing the crime: and to show, from the indirect manner of getting 
her to his house, the greater probability that her account is true. Having said this, I 
will now state to you the whole evidence as particularly as I can.'
	Mr. Baron Smythe then stated the whole of the evidence to the jury, as before 
given, which took up three hours, and then concluded thus:--
	'In point of law, the fact is fully proved on my lord and the two other 
prisoners, if you believe the evidence of Sarah Woodcock. It is a crime which in its 
nature can only be proved by the woman on whom it is committed; for she only can 
tell whether she consented or no: it is, as my lord observes, very easy to be made, and 
hard to be disproved; and the defence can only be collected from circumstances; from 
these you must judge whether her evidence is or is not to be believed. Lord Hale, in 
his 'History of the Pleas of the Crown,' lays down the rules:-- 1. If complaint is not 
made soon after the injury is supposed to be received; 2. If it is not followed by a 
recent prosecution; a strong presumption arises that the complaint is malicious. She 
has owned the injury was received December 22; the complaint was not made till 
December 29; but she has accounted for it in the manner you have beard. The strong 
part of the case on behalf of the prisoners is her not complaining when she was at 
Lord Mansfield's, the supreme magistrate in the kingdom in criminal matters. You 
have heard how she has explained and accounted for her conduct in that particular, 
which you will judge of. Upon the whole, if you believe that she made the discovery 
as soon as she knew she had an opportunity of doing it, and that her account is true, 
you will find all the prisoners guilty; if you believe that she did not make the 
discovery as soon as she had an opportunity, and from thence, or other circumstances, 
are not satisfied her account is true, you will find them all not guilty; for, if he is not 
guilty, they cannot be so; for they cannot be accessory to a crime which was never 
committed.'
	After an absence of an hour and twenty minutes, the jury returned with a 
verdict that the prisoners were Not Guilty.
	This singular affair was tried at Kingston, in Surrey, on the 20th of March, 
1768.
	Our readers will not be displeased with a few remarks on this very 
extraordinary transaction -- The meanness of Lord Baltimore, and the unreasonable 
terror and ignorance of Miss Woodcock, will appear to be equal objects of 
astonishment. His lordship's devices to obtain possession of this woman were beneath 
the dignity of a nobleman, or, indeed, of any man; and her tame submission to the 
insult is a proof that she had little idea of the sacred protection which the laws of her 
country would have afforded her; for Lord Baltimore's house (at the bottom of 
Southampton Row, Bloomsbury) was not so obscurely situated but that she might 
have made application to many a passenger.
	Something, indeed, must be allowed to feminine fear on such an occasion, 
after she once found herself in the actual possession of a man from whom she thought 
it would be dangerous even to attempt an escape.
	Miss Woodcock's ignorance of Lord Mansfield's power will appear very 
extraordinary; but surely not more so than that of a man, who, being an evidence 
before Sir John Fielding, addressed him successively by the titles of sir! your honour! 
your worship! your lordship! your grace! and your majesty! These appellations were 
repeatedly heard to be given within half an hour by the writer of this narrative; and be 
presumes the circumstance may be considered as an apology for the superlative 
ignorance of Miss Woodcock.
	On the whole, however, this case is of the melancholy kind. What shall we 
think of a man, of Lord Baltimore's rank and fortune, who could debase himself 
beneath all rank and distinction, and, by the wish to gratify his irregular passions, 
submit to degrade him self in the opinion of his own servants and other domestics?
	Addison has a fine sentiment, by which our nobility ought to be influenced:--
'Honour 's a sacred tie; the law of kings; 
The noble mind's distinguishing perfection: 
It aids and strengthens Virtue where it meets her, 
And imitates her actions where she is not: 
It is not to be sported with.'--


JAMES GIBSON 
A Gentleman, executed at Tyburn, 23rd of March, 1768, for Forgery on the 
Bank of England

	THIS gentleman had received a liberal education, and was bound clerk to Mr 
Francis, an attorney of eminence, residing in Lincoln's Inn. His good behaviour and 
the rapid improvement he made in the profession of the law induced his master, on the 
expiration of his articles, to take him into partnership. In the early part of life he had 
married a young lady, with whom he received a genteel fortune, and by whom he had 
five children. Notwithstanding these tender pledges of his love, he deserted his wife 
and family for the embraces of a mistress who had been kept by a Scottish nobleman, 
leaving them to suffer the extremes of want while he was enjoying the luxuries of life.
	Mr Francis's business was of an extensive nature, and was principally 
transacted by Gibson, who gave proof of the most consummate abilities in his 
profession. Among other engagements, Mr Francis was employed in a cause 
respecting an estate in Chancery, on which an injunction was issued; and a person was 
appointed to receive the rents of the estate till the Lord Chancellor should make his 
final decree. In the interim, Gibson, having reduced himself by a profuse mode of 
living, forged the handwriting of the Accountant-General of the Court of Chancery in 
a suit which he was soliciting for Robert Lee, Esq., and others, executors to the late 
Sir G. Brown, Bart., Robert Pringle and others, in consequence of which he received 
above nine hundred pounds.
	Discovery of this transaction being made in a short time, Gibson was taken 
into custody, and lodged in Newgate, in September, 1766. When brought to trial for 
the forgery at the ensuing sessions at the Old Bailey the jury brought in a special 
verdict, subject to the determination of the twelve judges. From this time Gibson 
continued in Newgate till January, 1768 (upwards of fifteen months), and it was the 
prevailing opinion that no further notice would be taken of the affair. However, 
Gibson, by repeated applications, urged that this case might be determined by the 
judges; and at length, in Hilary Term, 1768, the learned Bench made a final decision 
on his case, importing that it came within the meaning of the law. Consequently he 
received sentence of death, and was removed into the cells of Newgate. After sentence 
his behaviour was in every way becoming to his melancholy situation, and he 
reflected with much sorrow on his unkindness to his wife and family. He was carried 
to execution in a mourning-coach, and requested that his fellow-sufferer, Benjamin 
Payne, a footpad, whom he saw placed in a cart, might accompany him, which the 
sheriff refused.


JOHN WILKES, ESQ., M.P. 
Whose arrest and conviction for writing seditious and blasphemous 
pamphlets led to riots in London in 1768.

	The year 1768 will ever be remembered in the annals of the English history, 
on account of the murders and mischief committed by a deluded mob, stimulated by 
the writings of John Wilkes, Esq. an alderman of London, and member of parliament 
for Aylesbury.
	The most scandalous and offensive of his writings, were in a periodical 
publication called "The North Briton," No. 45, and a pamphlet entitled "An Essay on 
Woman." The North Briton was of a political nature; the other a piece of obscenity; 
the one, calculated to set the people against the government, the other to corrupt their 
morals.
	Among the ministers who found themselves more personally attacked in the 
North Briton, was Samuel Martin, Esq. member for Camelford. This gentleman found 
his character, as secretary of the treasury, so vilified, that he challenged the writer to 
fight him. Wilkes had already been engaged in a duel with Lord Talbot, and escaped 
unhurt; but Mr. Martin shot him in the body, of which wound he laid in imminent 
danger, during several days, and was confined to his house for some weeks.
	The attorney-general filed informations against Wilkes, as author of the North 
Briton, No. 45, and a pamphlet emitted "An Essay on Woman." On these charges he 
was appre hended and committed prisoner to the Tower, but soon admitted to bail. His 
papers were forcibly seized, for which be charged the secretaries of state with a 
robbery, and which was afterwards, by the court of the King's Bench, determined to 
have been illegal.
	Before his trial came on, Mr. Wilkes fled to France, under the pretext of 
restoring his health, which had suffered from his wound, and the harrassing measures 
taken against him by the secretaries of state, lord Egremont and lord Halifax. No 
sooner was he out of the kingdom, than they proceeded to outlaw him, dismissed him 
from his command as colonel of the Buckinghanishire militia, and expelled him from 
this seat in parliament.
	But even a foreign land did not shelter him from the resentment of his fellow 
subjects. On the 15th of August, captain Forbes, in the British service, met Wilkes 
walking with lord Palmelston in Paris, and though he had never seen either of them, 
yet, from a drawing, he conceived one of them to be the man who had so much abused 
his native country, Scotland. Finding his conjecture right, he told Wilkes, that, as the 
author of the North Briton, he must fight him, and Mr. Wilkes referred him to his 
hotel; but when Mr. Forbes got an interview with him, which he stated to have been 
attended with much difficulty, he was answered that Mr. Wilkes would meet no man 
in combat, until he had fought lord Egremont, whom he could not challenge while he 
held his high official station under government.
	The captain insisted to no purpose; and then calling him a scoundrel, 
threatened him with a caning, on their next meeting in the public streets. Lord 
Egremont's death, which happened at this juncture, released Wilkes from his 
pretended sanguinary determination against that nobleman.
	In a few months Mr. Wilkes returned to London, and gave notice, that he 
would, on a certain day, surrender himself on the information filed against him. He 
then appeared in his place as an alderman at Guildhall; and on his return, the mob 
took the horses from his carriage, and dragged it to his house, crying, "Wilkes and 
Liberty!"
	On the 21st of February, 1764, the trial of Mr. Wilkes for the libels before-
mentioned, came on before lord Mansfield, and he was found guilty of both. More 
than two years were occupied in law proceedings on the validity of his apprehension, 
the seizure of his papers, and the outlawry, the detail of which would afford little 
entertainment to our readers.
	On the 27th of April, 1768, Mr. Wilkes was served with a writ of Capias Ut 
Logatum, and he appeared before the court of King's Bench, in the custody of the 
proper officer. His counsel moved to admit him to bail, but it was opposed by the 
counsel for the crown; who contended that no precedent could be produced of a 
person under a criminal conviction being admitted to bail, for, by such an indulgence 
it might be said, that a man who flies from justice, and is thereupon outlawed, would 
be in a better state than the man who submits to it; in the latter case, after conviction, 
he must remain in custody until sentence is passed; whereas, in the former case, he 
would be at large.
	The court was convinced by this argument, and Mr. Wilkes was ordered to the 
King's Bench prison. In his way thither, the coach in which he was carried, was stopt 
by the mob, who took off the horses and dragged it, with him, through the city, to a 
public-house, in Spital-fields, where they permitted him to alight. From thence, about 
eleven at night, he made his escape, and immediately proceeded towards the prison, 
where he surrendered himself.
	The next day he was visited by many of his friends, and the prison was 
surrounded by a vast concourse of people, who, it was feared, would have offered 
some outrage; but all remained quiet until night, when they pulled up the rails which 
inclosed the footway, with which they made a bonfire, and obliged the inhabitants of 
the borough of Southwark, to illuminate their houses; nor would they disperse until 
the arrival of a captain's guard of soldiers.
	From this time a mob constantly surrounded the King's Bench prison for 
several days. At length the justices appeared, followed by the military, the riot-act was 
read, and the mob not dispersing, the soldiers were ordered to fire upon them. Many 
were killed, and among them some passers-by, at a considerable distance from the 
scene of confusion.
	On the 28th the case of the outlawry was finally argued in the court of King's 
Bench; serjeant Glynn, on the part of Mr. Wilkes, greatly added to his reputation, as a 
sound lawyer, and was ably answered by the attomey-general; but the judges, though 
they somewhat differed in their reasons on the illegality of the outlawry, were 
unanimous in their opinion, that it should be reversed. This was a great point obtained 
by Mr. Wilkes, and obnoxious as he was to government, the determination, consistent 
with law, was upright and honourable in the learned bench.
	Mr. Wilkes was not, however, destined to clear himself by this single point 
gained, for the attorney-general immediately moved, that judgment might be passed 
upon him on his several convictions. The prisoner's counsel upon this, moved an 
arrest of judgment; and the court appointed the next Thursday to hear the arguments 
thereon. The general warrant on which Mr. Wilkes was apprehended, was also 
declared illegal.
	These determinations will shew the reader, that however great a man's crimes, 
he must be proceeded against according to the strict letter of the law of the land. In 
this respect Mr. Wilkes was hardly dealt with, and he took especial care to promulgate 
those hardships to the people.
	In his address to his constituents, the freeholders of Middlesex, he says,
	"in the whole progress of ministerial vengeance against me for several years, I 
have shewn, to the conviction of all mankind, that my enemies have trampled on the 
laws, and have been actuated by the spirit of tyranny and arbitrary power.
	"The general warrant under which I was first apprehended has been judged 
illegal. The seizure of my papers was condemned judicially. The outlawry, so long the 
topic of violent abuse, is, at last, declared to have been contrary to law; and on the 
ground first taken by my friend, Mr. Serjeant Glynn, is formally reversed."
	On the day apppinted for that purpose, the last effort was made to get rid of the 
remainder of the proceedings against Mr. Wilkes. The arguments for an arrest of 
judgment, though carried on with great ingenuity, would not hold, and he was found 
legally convicted of writing the libels. For that in The True Briton, he was fined 500L. 
and sentenced to two years imprisonment in the King's Bench prison; and for The 
Essay on Woman, 500L. more, a farther imprisonment of twelve months, and to find 
security for his good behaviour for seven years.
	Previous to his imprisonment, Mr. Wilkes was elected member of parliament 
for Middlesex, when the mob proceeded to various acts of outrage. They broke the 
windows of lord Bute, the prime minister, and of the mansion-house, even that of the 
lady mayoress's bed-chamber, forced the inhabitants of the metropolis to illuminate 
their houses, crying out, "Wilkes and Liberty!" and all who refused to echo it back, 
were knocked down. The outrages of the populace, were too many to be enumerated; 
several innocent people were killed, and numbers wounded. They broke windows 
without number, destroyed furniture, and even insulted royalty itself.
	Thus we find, that Wilkes was long the idol of the mob, but like all other such 
leaders, he fell into oblivion, and passed through the crowd with as little notice as any 
other man. He greatly wished to possess the chamberlainship of London, but the better 
class of citizens were too wary to trust him with their cash, and after a contested 
election for that lucrative place, alderman Hopkins was chosen.
	The metropolis, as well as various other parts of the kingdom, had not been so 
convulsed with riots and partial insurrections since the civil wars, as during the short 
time of Wilkes's popularity.
	These disgraceful tumults, and the lenity, or as some would have it, the 
timidity of government, spread disaffection into all classes of mechanics, who, 
thinking the time at hand, when they might exact what wages they pleased, and 
perhaps beyond their masters' profits, struck their work.
	The Watermen of the Thames assembled in a body before the mansion-house, 
and complained to the lord-mayor of the low prices of their fares, when his lordship 
advised them to draw up a petition to parliament, which he would himself present, 
upon which they gave him three cheers and departed.
	The Spitalfields Weavers proceeded to greater outrages. A great number of 
them forcibly entered the house of Mr. Nathaniel Fair, in Pratt's-alley, cut to pieces 
and destroyed the silk-work manufactory in two different looms. They forcibly 
entered the house of his relation, Mrs. Elizabeth Pratt, in the same alley, and murdered 
a lad of seventeen years of age, by shooting hun through the head with a pistol loaded 
with slugs. A reward was offered for apprehending these rioters, and his Majesty's 
pardon offered to him who discovered the murderer.
	The Sawyers assembled in large bodies, pulled down the saw-mill, lately 
erected at a great expence, on pretence that it deprived many workmen of 
employment. They also wanted more wages.
	The Hatters at the same time struck, and demanded encreased wages; but we 
do not hear of any outrages being committed by them.
	The Labouring Husbandmen rose in several parts of England, in order to 
reduce the price of grain.
	At Tenderton, in Kent, a paper was pasted on the church door, threatening the 
farmers, if they refused to sell their wheat at 10L. a load, and the millers, if they gave 
more; and exciting all the poor to assemble, and raise a mob, and those who refused 
were to have their right arms broke. At Hastings in Sussex, the mob committed 
various outrages on the farmers in That neighbourhood, and threatened the life of a 
justice of the peace for attempting to commit one of them to prison.
	The Journeymen Coopers at Liverpool also rose in a body, and in a cruel 
manner forced one of their masters on a pole, and carried him through the streets, 
pretending he had hurt their trade.
	The Subalterns of the Army and Marines also petitioned, though not in a 
tumultuous manner, for an increase of pay which being granted, they assembled at the 
Globe Tavern, in the Strand, and deputed lieutenant Carrol to wait upon the Marquis 
of Granby, and General Conway, to return them thanks for their support on that 
occasion.
	The Lieutenants of the Navy, followed their example, and deputed one of their 
rank to return thanks to the honourable Captain Henry, for his unvarying perseverance 
in obtaining them the addition to their pay, of one shilling per day.
	The Sailors also followed the example of the landsmen, went in a body of 
many thousands, with drums beating and colours flying, to St. James's Palace, and 
presented a petition to the king, praying a "Relief of Grievances." Two days 
afterwards they assembled in much greater numbers, and proceeded as far as Palace-
yard in order to petition parliament for an increase of wages; where they were 
addressed by two gentlemen standing on the top of a hackney-coach, who told them 
that their petition could not be immediately answered, but that it would be considered 
and answered in due time, where upon the tars gave three cheers, and for a while 
dispersed. A short time, however, afterwards, they assembled at Limehouse, boarded 
several outward-bound ships, and forcibly carried away several of their crews, under 
pretence of not suffering ships to sail, until the seamens' wages were increased.


WILLIAM HAWKINS AND JOSEPH WILD 
Indicted for rioting, July, 1768

  
Hawkins and the rioters before the Mansion House

	AT the sessions of the Old Bailey for July, 1768, William Hawkins and Joseph 
Wild were tried for assaulting and wounding two of the servants of the lord mayor of 
London, and for other unlawful acts against the peace of our sovereign lord the king.
	On the part of the prosecution the first witness called was Mr. Way, a 
gentleman who was accidentally passing on the evening of this riot. He deposed that 
be saw a crowd of people carrying a gibbet, on which hung a boot and a petticoat, and 
making a stand at the Mansion House; be saw the lord mayor come out, and rush 
among the people who carried the gibbet, on which an affray began, and he presently 
heard the words 'Knock him down, knock him down!' At this instant he saw the 
prisoner, Hawkins, laying about him with a stick, which he afterwards found was 
stuck with nails, and he saw him strike one or two people, who proved to be his 
lordship's servants. They then seized Hawkins, and were dragging him into the 
Mansion House; but the mob rescued him, and he was making off, when the witness 
collared him, and, with the assistance of the wounded servants, secured him in the 
Mansion House.
	Philip Pyle swore that, being in waiting upon the lord mayor the night of the 
riot (the 9th of May, the next day after the outlawry against Wilkes was reversed), he 
observed a great mob advancing with a gibbet, a boot and a petticoat hanging upon it; 
and being ordered by his lordship to seize it, he gave it a shake, which obliged the 
mob to quit it; that he was pulling it along, when a man, whom he believed to be the 
prisoner Hawkins, caught a flambeau out of his hand, and broke his head with it in 
several places. Dropping the gibbet, he recovered the flambeau, and made a stroke at 
the assailants (for there were now two or three striking at him), and was endeavouring 
to retreat for fear of falling, in which case, he said, he must undoubtedly have been 
murdered, when he received several blows on his head with a stick stuck full of nails, 
which happened to fly out of the prisoner's, Hawkins, hand, and his fellow-servant 
snatched it up. The prisoner then endeavoured to defend himself with his hands, but 
the witness dragged him, in his rage, near twenty yards through the mob; but when he 
bad got him within ten yards of the Mansion House the mob rescued him, and when 
he was making off Mr. Way collared him, and brought him back.
	Thomas Woodward, another servant of the lord mayor, corroborated the 
evidence of the two former witnesses.
	There being no positive proof against the prisoner Wild, he was acquitted; but 
Hawkins was found guilty, and sentenced to death.


SARAH METYARD AND SARAH MORGAN METYARD, 
HER DAUGHTER 
Executed at Tyburn, 19th of July, 1768, for the Cruel Murders of Parish 
Apprentices

	SARAH METYARD was a milliner, and the daughter her assistant, in Bruton 
Street, Hanover Square, London. In the year 1758 the mother had five apprentice girls 
bound to her from different parish workhouses, among whom were Anne Naylor and 
her sister. Anne Naylor, being of a sickly constitution, was not able to do so much 
work as the other apprentices about the same age, and therefore she became the more 
immediate object of the fury of the barbarous women, whose repeated acts of cruelty 
at length occasioned the unhappy girl to abscond. Being brought back, she was 
confined in an upper apartment, and allowed each day no other sustenance than a 
small piece of bread and a little water.
	Seizing an opportunity of escaping from her confinement, unperceived she got 
into the street, and ran to a milk-carrier, whom she begged to protect her, saying that 
if she returned she must certainly perish, through the want of food and severe 
treatment she daily received. Being soon missed, she was followed by the younger 
Metyard, who seized her by the neck, forced her into the house, and threw her upon 
the bed in the room where she had been confined, and she was then seized by the old 
woman, who held her down while the daughter beat her with the handle of a broom in 
a most cruel manner.
	They afterwards put her into a back room on the second storey, tied a cord 
round her waist, and her hands behind her, and fastened her to the door in such a 
manner that it was impossible for her either to sit or lie down. She was compelled to 
remain in this situation for three successive days; but they permitted her to go to bed 
at the usual hours at night. Having received no kind of nutriment for three days and 
two nights, her strength was so exhausted that, being unable to walk upstairs, she 
crept to the garret, where she lay on her hands and feet.
	While she remained tied up on the second floor the other apprentices were 
ordered to work in an adjoining apartment, that they might be deterred from 
disobedience by being witnesses to the unhappy girl's sufferings; but they were 
enjoined, on the penalty of being subjected to equal severity, against affording her any 
kind of relief.
	On the fourth day she faltered in speech, and presently afterwards expired. The 
other girls, seeing the whole weight of her body supported by the strings which 
confined her to the door, were greatly alarmed, and called out: "Miss Sally! Miss 
Sally! Nanny does not move." The daughter then came upstairs, saying: "If she does 
not move, I will make her move"; and then beat the deceased on the head with the 
heel of a shoe.
	Perceiving no signs of life, she called to her mother, who came upstairs and 
ordered the strings that confined the deceased to be cut; she then laid the body across 
her lap and directed one of the apprentices where to find a bottle with some hartshorn 
drops.
	When the child had brought the drops, she and the other girls were ordered to 
go downstairs; and the mother and daughter, being convinced that the object of their 
barbarity was dead, conveyed the body into the garret . They related to the other 
apprentices that Nanny had been in a fit, but was perfectly recovered, adding that she 
was locked into the garret lest she should again run away; and, in order to give an air 
of plausibililty to their tale, at noon the daughter carried a plate of meat upstairs, 
saying it was for Nanny's dinner.
	They locked the body of the deceased in a box on the fourth day after the 
murder, and, having left the garret door open and the street door on the jar, one of the 
apprentices was told to call Nanny down to dinner, and to tell her that, if she promised 
to behave well in future, she would be no longer confined. Upon the return of the 
child, she said Nanny was not above-stairs; and after a great parade of searching every 
part of the house they reflected upon her as being of an intractable disposition and 
pretended she had run away.
	The sister of the deceased, who was apprenticed to the same inhuman mistress, 
mentioned to a lodger in the house that she was persuaded her sister was dead; 
observing that it was not probable she had gone away, since parts of her apparel still 
remained in the garret. The suspicions of this girl coming to the knowledge of the 
inhuman wretches, they, with a view of preventing a discovery, cruelly murdered her, 
and secreted the body.
	The body of Anne remained in the box two months, during which time the 
garret door was kept locked, lest the offensive smell shouild lead to a discovery. The 
stench became so powerful that they judged it prudent to remove the remains of the 
unhappy victim of their barbarity; and therefore, on the evening of the 25th of 
December, they cut the body in pieces, and tied the head and trunk up in one cloth and 
the limbs in another, excepting one hand, a finger belonging to which had been 
amputated before death, and that they resolved to burn.
	When the apprentices had gone to bed, the old woman put the hand into the 
fire, saying: "The fire tells no tales." She intended to consume the entire remains of 
the unfortunate girl by fire but, afraid that the smell would give rise to suspicion, 
changed that design, and took the bundles to the gully-hole in Chick Lane and 
endeavoured to throw the parts of the mangled corpse over the wall into the common 
sewer; but being unable to effect that, she left them among the mud and water that 
was collected before the grate of the sewer.
	Some pieces of the body were discovered about twelve o'clock by the 
watchman, and he mentioned the circumstance to the constable of the night. The 
constable applied to one of the overseers of the parish, by whose direction the parts of 
the body were collected and taken to the watchhouse. On the following day the matter 
was communicated to Mr Umfreville, the coroner, who examined the pieces found by 
the watchman; but he supposed them to be parts of a corpse taken from a churchyard 
for the use of some surgeon, and declined to summon a jury.
	Four years elapsed before the discovery of these horrid murders, which at 
length happened in the following manner. Continual disagreements prevailed between 
the mother and daughter; and, though the latter had now arrived at the age of maturity, 
she was often beaten, and otherwise treated with severity. Thus provoked, she 
sometimes threatened to destroy herself, and at others to give information against her 
mother as a murderer.
	At last information concerning the affair was given to the overseers of 
Tottenham parish, and mother and daughter were committed to the Gatehouse. At the 
ensuing Old Bailey sessions they were both sentenced to be executed on the following 
Monday, and then to be conveyed to Surgeons' Hall for dissection.
	The mother, being in a fit when she was put into the cart, lay at her length till 
she came to the place of execution, when she was raised up, and means were used for 
her recovery, but without effect, so that she departed this life in a state of insensibility. 
From the time of leaving Newgate to the moment of her death the daughter wept 
incessantly.
	After hanging the usual time the bodies were conveyed in a hearse to 
Surgeons' Hall, where they were exposed to the curiosity of the public, and then 
dissected.


ELIZABETH RICHARDSON 
Executed at Tyburn, 21st of December, 1768, for murdering an Attorney-at-
Law, in Symond's Inn, Chancery Lane

	THIS unhappy woman was seduced from the precepts of virtue and honour at 
an early period of life, and, after subsisting some years on the wages of casual 
prostitution, was taken into keeping by Mr Pimlot, an attorney-at-law, who had 
chambers in Symond's Inn.
	Whether she had cause for jealousy is uncertain, but she was inflamed with 
that passion to a degree of violence, and frequently went to his chambers in the 
expectation of finding him engaged with some other woman.
	One Sunday evening Mr Pimlot was engaged with some friends at a house in 
Fleet Street; and Richardson, going to his chambers and finding him not there, 
determined to wait till his return. About twelve o'clock Mr Pimlot entered his 
chambers, without being perceived by the woman, and went to bed.
	About half-an-hour afterwards she in a most riotous manner insisted upon 
being admitted, declaring, with horrid imprecations, that she would not depart till she 
had seen Mr Pimlot, who for some time made no answer. This exasperating her to still 
greater outrage, she gave vent to her passion in the most profane language, and, after 
breaking one of the panes of the window, went towards the passage leading to 
Chancery Lane, but turning back, she was met by Mr Pimlot, who gave her into 
custody of the watch. She was no sooner taken into custody than, with a sharp-pointed 
penknife, with a blade about two inches long, she struck Mr Pimlot under the left 
breast. The watchman said: "You break the peace, madam, and I must take you to the 
watch-house." Immediately after this Mr Pimlot, taking the knife from the wound, 
said, in a faint and tremulous voice: "Here, watchman, take this knife; she has stabbed 
me."
	Mr Pimlot proceeded to the watch-house, being followed by the constable and 
his prisoner. He sat down in the constable's chair, and on opening his waistcoat the 
blood was seen issuing from his wound, Leaning down his head, he presently expired, 
without speaking. The knife was examined, and blood appeared upon the blade.
	When she perceived the blood issuing from Mr Pimlot's wound she clasped 
her hands and exclaimed: "What have I done! Oh, Mr Wilson, it was I that did this 
shocking deed: instantly send for a surgeon, send for a surgeon! I have murdered my 
dear Pimlot." She was immediately sent to New Prison; and her tears and other 
passionate expressions of sorrow proved her to be deeply penetrated by affliction for 
the crime she had committed.
	A watchman was sent for Mr Minors, a surgeon, in Chancery Lane; but he 
being in bed, two of his pupils accompanied the watchman. Upon their arrival they 
found the gentleman dead.
	On the following day the body was opened by Mr Minors, who found that the 
heart was penetrated, and that the wound exactly corresponded with the figure of the 
knife. The coroner's jury being summoned, a verdict of wilful murder was found 
against the prisoner, who was brought to trial at the next sessions at the Old Bailey; 
and being found guilty, she was sentenced to be executed on the following Monday.
	After her body had hung the usual time, it was carried to Surgeons' Hall for 
dissection.


WILLIAM TAUNTON 
Executed for the murder of Mrs. Phipps, 11th September, 1769

	THIS malefactor was a native of Gloucestershire, and brought up as a 
husbandman, which employment he quitted to live as ostler at an inn at Tewkesbury, 
in which capacity he continued several years, and then came to London.
	After this he was engaged in the service of Mrs. Phipps, a widow, who kept 
the Lamb Inn at Colnbrook. Though she was the mother of several children, yet a 
scandalous intimacy soon ensued between her and Taunton, and they lived together 
some years as husband and wife; and strangers calling at the inn presumed that he was 
the landlord, from the airs of authority which he assumed.
	Miserable, however, was this connexion in its progress, and fatal to both 
parties in its event. Continual quarrels arose between them, and frequent blows were 
the consequence of their reiterated disputes; and this way of life, as might be 
reasonably imagined, greatly injured the character of Mrs. Pbipps, and occasioned the 
loss of great part of her business.
	After a residence of some time, their situation becoming unhappy, Taunton 
went down to his friends in Gloucestershire, with an intention, as it was thought, to 
have remained there; but be had not been long in the country when be received a letter 
from Mrs. Phipps, earnestly inviting his return, alleging, as a reason for it, that she 
was unhappy without his company.
	The ill-fated man was weak enough to return on this invitation; but the 
connexion had not been long renewed before their quarrels became as frequent as 
before, and proceeded even to a greater degree of violence, till the neighbours were 
alarmed at their inconsistent conduct, and what began in illicit love ended in murder.
	After repeated disagreements, they sat down to supper one evening in apparent 
reconciliation; when Mrs. Phipps asked Mr. Taunton if she should pare him a 
cucumber, or would he eat it with the rind on. These words were scarcely pronounced 
when Taunton seized the kitchen poker, and told her to lay hold of one end of it. She 
wondered at this command, and asked him why it must be complied with. He still 
insisted on her taking hold of one end of it: on which she said 'If I must have it, let me 
have the clean end; but what am I to do with it?'-- His answer was 'You must, knock 
out my brains.' She replied 'No, Taunton, I will not hurt a hair of your head.' To this 
he said 'If you will not knock my brains out, I will knock your brains out;' and no 
sooner had be uttered this horrid expression than he struck her on the head with such 
force as almost to lay her skull bare; after which he gave her a blow on the face, 
which cut her in the most terrible manner.
	A surgeon, being sent for, dressed her wounds, and, addressing himself to 
Taunton, told him that, if he had murdered her, he would certainly have been hanged. 
The offender acknowledged that he knew that must have been the consequence; but 
desired the surgeon to take all proper care of the wounded woman.
	The injury took place on the 30th of July, and the surgeon attended the 
wounded woman for five days; at the end of which time she said to her daughter, 
'Peggy, you may go out of the room, for I want to sleep.' During the absence of the 
daughter Taunton entered the room, and struck Mrs. Phipps so forcibly on the neck 
with a hatchet, that her head hung over one side of the bed.
	The horrid murder being at length committed, Taunton threw down the 
instrument of death, and went to drink at a public house at about a mile distant; and 
the surgeon coming soon after to attend his duty, and finding Mrs. Phipps dead, 
dispatched the ostler and another man in search of the murderer. It was not long 
before they found him, and, bringing him back to Colnbrook, the surgeon hinted to 
him that the most fatal consequences would probably ensue from the crime of which 
he had been guilty.
	The coroner's jury, being summoned on the occasion, gave a verdict that 
Taunton had been guilty of the wilful murder of Mrs. Phipps; on which he was taken 
before a magistrate, who committed him to New Prison.
	In this place he was visited by many persons, who conversed with him on his 
unhappy situation; and one of them hinting his fears that he was guilty, Taunton 
acknowledged that he was, and expressed his sorrow for the crime; but said it was 
now too late to remedy the evil.
	His friend then inquired what could induce him to commit such an atrocious 
crime; to which he answered that she had traduced his character, by telling lies of him 
in the neighbourhood.
	Being brought to trial at the ensuing sessions at the Old Bailey, he produced 
several persons who deposed that he had been, at times, so much out of his mind, that 
he was not master of his own conduct: and one of these in particular swore that he had 
at one time attempted to destroy himself by drowning, and at another by hanging; but 
this plea being thought unsatisfactory by the jury, he was capitally convicted, and 
sentenced to die.
	After conviction he gave the fullest proof of being in possession of his 
intellectual faculties; exercising himself in the offices of devotion, and receiving the 
sacrament from the hands of the Ordinary of Newgate.
	He was tried on Saturday, the 9th of September, 1769, and ordered for 
execution on the Monday following. A most extraordinary shower of rain falling that 
morning, he was taken from Newgate in a hackney coach, the Ordinary attending him, 
and the executioner riding behind; and in this manner he was conveyed to the place of 
death.
	On his arrival at the fatal tree a person who had formerly known him went into 
the cart, and assisted him in his devotion. After the body had hung the usual time it 
was cut down, and carried to Surgeons' Hall for dissection.
	This malefactor suffered at Tyburn on the 11th of September, 1769.
	It is very seldom that we hear of unmarried persons living together as man and 
wife with any tolerable degree of happiness; and bow, indeed, is it to be expected they 
should? -- Those, who have mutual reason to reproach each other with their crimes, 
will hardly fail to avail themselves of every opportunity of doing so; for the guilty 
mind conceives that it lifts a load from its own breast when it seeks to criminate 
another.
	From the whole of this narrative we ought to learn that there is no happiness in 
this life equal to that which is to be found in the married state. Trifling difficulties 
may occur; trifling differences may arise between the married pair; but their mutual 
interest, and their mutual love, will soon reconcile all differences, and overcome all 
difficulties. The vow which has been made at the altar will perpetually recur to the 
honest mind: -- the man will consider himself as obliged to the woman who once 
honoured him with her hand; nor will the woman deem herself less obliged to the man 
who undertook to be her guardian and protector for life.


MUNGO CAMPBELL 
A Gentleman, who was convicted of killing the Earl of Eglinton, and to 
avoid an Ignominious Death hanged himself, 28th of February, 1770

	THE unhappy subject of this narrative was protected by an uncle, who gave 
him a learned education; but this generous friend died when the youth was about 
eighteen years of age, leaving him sixty pounds, and earnestly recommending him to 
the care of his other relations. The young man was a finished scholar, yet seemed 
averse to making the choice of any of the learned professions. His attachment 
appeared to be to the military life, in which line many of his ancestors had most 
gloriously distinguished themselves.
	Mr Campbell entered as a cadet in the royal regiment of Scots Greys, then 
commanded by his relation, General Campbell, and served during two campaigns at 
his own expense, in the fond hope of military preferment.
	After the battle of Dettingen, at which he assisted, he had an opportunity of 
being appointed quartermaster if he could have raised one hundred pounds, but this 
place was bestowed on another person while Campbell was making fruitless 
application for the money.
	Thus disappointed of what he thought a reasonable expectation, he quitted the 
army and went into Scotland, where he arrived at the juncture when the rebels had 
quitted Edinburgh, in 1745, Lord Loudoun having then the command of loyal 
Highlanders, who exerted so much bravery in the suppression of the Rebellion; and 
Mr Campbell, having the honour to be related to his lordship, went and fought under 
him with a bravery that did equal credit to his loyalty and courage.
	Not long after the decisive battle of Culloden, Lord Loudoun procured his 
kinsman to be appointed an officer of the excise; and prevailed on the commissioners 
to station him in the shire of Ayr, that he might have the happiness of residing near his 
friends and relations.
	In the discharge of his new duty Mr Campbell behaved with strict integrity to 
the Crown, yet with so much civility as to conciliate the affections of all those with 
whom he had any transactions. He married when he was somewhat advanced in life; 
and so unexceptionable was his whole conduct that all the nobility and gentry in the 
neighbourhood (the Earl of Eglinton excepted) gave him permission to kill game on 
their estates. However, he was very moderate in the use of this indulgence, seldom 
shooting but with a view to gratify a friend with a present; hardly ever for his own 
emolument.
	Mr Campbell had a singular attachment to fishing; and, a river in Lord 
Eglinton's estate affording the finest fish in that country, he would willingly have 
angled there, but his lordship being as strict with regard to his fish as his game, 
Campbell, unwilling to offend him, gave away his fishing-tackle, which was excellent 
in its kind. He was likewise in possession of a fine pointer, which he sold; but would 
not part with his gun, which produced him the greatest pleasure of his life.
	Campbell, being in search of smugglers, and having his gun with him, was 
crossing part of Lord Eglinton's estate when a hare started up, and he shot her. His 
lordship hearing the report of the gun, and being informed that Campbell had fired it, 
sent a servant to command him to come to the seat. Campbell obeyed the disagreeable 
summons, but was treated very cavalierly by his lordship, who even descended to call 
him by names of contempt. The other apologised for his conduct, which he said arose 
from the sudden starting of the hare, and declared that he had no design of giving 
offence. This might have been a sufficient apology to any other man than Lord 
Eglinton.
	A man named Bartleymore was among the servants of Lord Eglinton, and was 
a favourite of his lordship, and this man dealt largely in contraband goods. Mr 
Campbell, passing along the seashore, met Bartleymore with a cart containing eighty 
gallons of rum, which he seized as contraband; and the rum was condemned, but the 
cart was restored, being the property of Lord Eglinton.
	In this affair it will appear evident that Mr Campbell did not exceed his duty; 
but Bartleymore was so incensed against him that he contrived many tales to his 
disadvantage, and at length engaged his lordship's passions so far that he conceived a 
more unfavourable opinion of Campbell than he had hitherto done.
	About ten in the morning of the 24th of October, 1769, Campbell took his gun 
and went out with another officer with a view to detecting smugglers. Mr Campbell 
took with him a licence for shooting, which had been given him by Dr Hunter, though 
he had no particular design of killing any game, but intended to shoot a woodcock if 
he should see one.
	They crossed a small part of Lord Eglinton's estate, in order to reach the 
seashore, where they intended to walk. When they arrived at this spot it was near 
noon, and Lord Eglinton came up in his coach, attended by Mr Wilson, a carpenter, 
and followed by four servants on horseback. On approaching the coast his lordship 
met Bartleymore who told him there were some poachers at a distance, and that 
Campbell was among them. Lord Eglinton quitted his coach and, mounting a led 
horse, rode to the spot, where he saw Campbell and the other officer, whose name was 
Brown. His lordship said: "Mr Campbell, I did not expect to have found you so soon 
again on my grounds, after your promise when you shot the hare." He then demanded 
Campbell's gun, which the latter declared he would not part with.
	Lord Eglinton now rode towards him, while Campbell retreated, with his gun 
presented, desiring him to keep at a distance. Still, however, his lordship advanced, 
smiling, and said: "Are you going to shoot me?" Campbell replied: "I will, if you do 
not keep off." Hereupon Lord Eglinton called to his servants to bring him a gun, 
which one of them took from the coach, and delivered to another to carry to their 
master.
	In the interim Lord Eglinton, leading his horse, approached Mr Campbell and 
demanded his gun, but the latter would not deliver it. The peer then quitted his horse's 
bridle and continued advancing, while Campbell still retired, though in an irregular 
direction, and pointed his gun towards his pursuer.
	At length Lord Eglinton came so near him that Campbell said: "I beg your 
pardon, my lord, but I will not deliver my gun to any man living; therefore keep off, 
or I will certainly shoot you." At this instant Bartleymore, advancing, begged 
Campbell to deliver his gun to Lord Eglinton; but the latter answered he would not, 
for he "had a right to carry a gun."
	His lordship did not dispute his general right, but said that he could not have 
any to carry it on his estate without his permission. Campbell again begged pardon, 
and still continued retreating, but with his gun in his hand, and preparing to fire in his 
own defence. While he was thus walking backwards his heel struck against a stone 
and he fell, when he was about the distance of three yards from the pursuer. Lord 
Eglinton observed him fall on his back, and stepped forward, as if he would have 
passed by Campbell's feet. The latter, observing this, reared himself on his elbow, and 
lodged the contents of his piece in the left side of his lordship's body.
	A contest now ensued, during which Bartleymore repeatedly struck Campbell. 
Being observed by Lord Eglinton, he called out: "Do not use him ill." Campbell, 
being secured, was conducted to the wounded man, then lying on the ground, who 
said: "Mr Campbell, I would not have shot you." But Campbell made no answer. His 
hands were tied behind him, and he was conducted to the town of Saltcoats, the place 
of his former station as an exciseman.
	Lord Eglinton dying, after languishing ten hours, Mr Campbell was, on the 
following day, committed to the prison of Ayr, and the next month removed to 
Edinburgh, in preparation for his trial before the High Court of Justiciary. The trial 
commenced on the 27th of February, 1770, and the jury having found Mr Campbell 
guilty he was sentenced to die.
	On his return to prison he was visited by several of his friends, among whom 
he behaved with apparently decent cheerfulness; and, retiring to his apartment, he 
begged the favour of a visit from them on the following day. But in the morning he 
was found dead, hanging to the end of a form which he had set upright, with a silk 
handkerchief round his neck.
	The following lines were found upon the floor, close to the body:--
"Farewell, vain world, I've had enough of thee, 
And now am careless what thou say'st of me,  
Thy smiles I court not, nor thy frowns I fear,  
My cares are past, my heart lies easy here,  
What faults they find in me take care to shun,  
And look at home, enough is to be done."


Mr BARETTI 
An Italian, who was indicted for the wilful Murder of Evan Morgan, and 
acquitted

	AT the sessions held at the Old Bailey in November, 1769, Mr Baretti was 
brought to his trial, for the murder of Evan Morgan, on the 6th of October preceding; 
when the substance of the evidence against him was to the following effect.
	Elizabeth Ward deposed, that, between nine and ten at night on the 6th of 
October, she heard a woman, whom she had never seen before, ask the prisoner to 
give her a glass of wine, and at the same time take hold of him in a manner 
inconsistent with decency: -- that the prisoner proceeded forward, but, soon turning 
back, doubled his fist and struck this deponent a violent blow on the face: -- that, on 
her screaming out, three men came up, and demanded 'how he could strike a woman,' 
and, shoving him once or twice, pushed him off the pavement. At this time, she said, 
Baretti drew a knife, while the men followed him, calling out 'Murder! he has a knife 
out!' and this deponent believed that the deceased was stabbed at this juncture.
	The deposition of Thomas Patman was to the following effect. That he had 
been in company with a Mr Clark and the deceased on the night abovementioned; that 
he saw Mr Baretti strike a woman, whom he did not know, on the head; and, on her 
screaming out, Morgan and Clark pushed Patman, though not with much violence, 
against Baretti, who gave him a blow on the left side, in consequence of which the 
blood ran down into his shoe: -- that he then called out he was stabbed; that Baretti 
retreated; that Morgan followed him about half-way up Panton Street, where Morgan 
received a wound from the prisoner in Patman's presence, in consequence of which he 
fell to the ground.
	The testimony of John Clark confirmed, in several particulars, that of the 
preceding evidence; but, on his being cross-examined, he acknowledged that Patman 
did not know he was stabbed till Mr Baretti ran into Panton Street. He likewise 
owned, that himself had sworn before the coroner, 'that Morgan collared Baretti 
before he knew Patman was wounded; and that one of the women said the prisoner 
ought to have a knock over the head with her patten.'
	The evidence of Mr Lambert, a tallow-chandler in Panton Street, was to the 
following effect. He said, that Mr Baretti ran into a grocer's shop, opposite his house; 
that Patman was standing at the door, with the blood running down his shirt, and said 
that a gentleman in the shop had stabbed him. Mr Baretti had at that time a knife in 
one hand, and a silver case over the blade, which was bloody. Mr Lambert, who at 
that time was in the office of constable, called to Baretti to surrender, and, 
immediately running towards him, seized him, and took him into custody, in order to 
convey him before a magistrate.
	Morgan having been carried to the Middlesex-hospital, one of the patients, 
who had been there at the time, declared, that he had heard the deceased say, that he 
saw a gentleman assault two women; on which, without intending to give offence, he 
went to assist them; when Baretti stabbed him in two places, and that he then turned 
round, and stabbed him a third time; and that the third wound hurt him more than the 
two former.
	The testimony of Mr Wyatt, the surgeon who attended Morgan, imported, that 
the deceased had received three wounds, one of which, being in the belly, was the 
immediate occasion of his death. He farther said, that, while he was dressing Patman, 
Clark being present, and enquiring into what gave rise to the misfortune, Clark said, 
that they saw a gentleman abusing a lady who was acquainted with Morgan; that 
Morgan pushed Clark against Patman, and that Clark pushed him against the prisoner; 
that he was not struck by either of them, but he believed the woman damned him for a 
French bougre, and said he ought to have his head cloven with a patten.
	A short time after this, Mr Wyatt demanded of Clark whether the woman was 
of his acquaintance; and he replied in the negative, and then denied that she was even 
acquainted with Morgan; though, not more than two minutes before, he had confessed 
that she was.
	This being the substance of the evidence on the trial, Mr Baretti read the 
following defence, which will probably be deemed to give more insight into the real 
state of the case, than all that has preceded it.
	'On Friday the 6th I spent the whole day at home, correcting my Italian and 
English dictionary, which is actually reprinting and working off; and upon another 
book in four volumes, which is to be published in February next, and has been 
advertised in the newspapers. I went a little after four to the club of royal 
academicians in Soho, where I stopped about half an hour, waiting for my friends, and 
warming myself in the club-room.
	'Upon nobody's coming, I went to the Orange coffee house, to see if a letter 
was come for me (for my letters come there) but there was none. I went back to go to 
the club, and going hastily up the Haymarket, there was a woman at a door: they say 
there were two, but I took notice of but one, as I hope God will save me; there might 
have been two, though I only saw one; that is a fact. There was a woman eight or ten 
yards from the corner of Panton Street, and she clapped her hands with such violence 
about my private parts, that it gave me great pain. This I instantly resented, by giving 
her a blow on the hand, with a few angry words. The woman got up directly, raised 
her voice, and finding by my pronunciation I was a foreigner, she called me several 
bad names, in a most contumelious strain; among which, French bougre, d--ned 
Frenchman, and a woman-hater, were the most audible.
	'I had not quite turned the corner, before a man made me turn back, by giving 
me a blow with his fist, and asking me how I dare strike a woman; another pushed 
him against me, and pushed me off the pavement; then three or four more joined 
them. I wonder I did not fall from the high step which is there. The pathway is much 
raised from the coachway. A great number of people surrounded me presently, many 
beating me, and all d--ning me on every side, in a most frightful manner. I was a 
Frenchman in their opinion, which made me apprehensive I must expect no favour nor 
protection, but all outrage and blows.
	'There is generally a great puddle in the corner of Panton street, even when the 
weather is fine; but that day it had rained incessantly, which made it very slippery. I 
could plainly perceive my assailants wanted to throw me into the puddle, where I 
might be trampled on; so I cried out, murder! There was a space in the circle, from 
whence I ran into Panton Street, and endeavoured to get into the footway. I was in the 
greatest horror, lest I should run against some stones, as I have such bad eyes. I could 
not run so fast as my pursuers, so that they were upon me, continually beating and 
pushing me, some of them attempting to catch me by the hair-tail: if this had 
happened, I had been certainly a lost man. I cannot absolutely fix the time and place 
where I first struck. I remember, somewhere in Panton Street I gave a quick blow to 
one who beat off my hat with his fist.
	'When I was in Oxendon Street, fifteen or sixteen yards from the Haymarket, I 
stopped, and faced about. My confusion was great, and seeing a shop open, I ran into 
it for protection, quite spent with fatigue. I am certainly sorry for the man; but he 
owed his death to his own daring impetuosity. Three then came into the shop, one of 
them cried to me to surrender myself to him, who was a constable. I asked them if 
they were honest men, and friends; they said yes. I put up my knife, desired them to 
arrest me, begged they would send for a coach, and take me to Sir John Fielding.
	'I appeal to them how I behaved when I surrendered, and how thankful I was 
for their kind protection. Sir John heard what I and the men had to say. They sent me 
into a room below, from whence I dispatched a man to the club in Gerrard Street, 
when Sir Joshua Reynolds and other gentlemen came to me.
	'A messenger was dispatched to the Middlesex hospital, where they said 
Morgan was carried. A surgeon came, and took his oath that Morgan was in danger. 
Sir John committed me to Tothill-fields-bridewell. Two gentlemen, as well as the 
constable, can witness to my behaviour when the coachman lost his way, which 
forced us to alight in the mire and darkness, in order to find the way to Tothill-fields 
bridewell. I humbly conceive this will shew I had no intention of escaping. That 
woeful night I passed without rest.
	'My face had been observed to be hurt, while I was at Sir John Fielding's; and 
the constable was the first who took notice of a blow I had received on my chin. But 
when the heat and fear had subsided, I found a great pain in divers parts of my body. 
Mr Molini and Mr Low, being with me, desired me to let them see what was the 
matter with my back, which I complained of. I stripped, and they saw several bruises.
	'This, my lord and gentlemen of the jury, is the best account I can give of my 
unfortunate accident: for what is done in two or three minutes, in fear and terror, is 
not to be minutely described; and the court and the jury are to judge. I hope your 
lordship, and every person present, will think that a man of my age, character, and 
way of life, would not spontaneously quit my pen, to engage in an outrageous tumult. 
I hope it will easily be conceived that a man almost blind could not but be seized with 
terror on such a sudden attack as this. I hope it will be seen that my knife was neither 
a weapon of offence or defence; I wear it to carve fruit and sweatmeats, and not to kill 
my fellow-creatures.
	'It is a general custom in France not to put knives upon the table, so that even 
ladies wear them in their pockets for general use. I have continued to wear it after my 
return, because I have found it occasionally convenient. Little did I think such an 
event would ever have happened. Let this trial turn out as favourable as my innocence 
may deserve, still my regret will endure as long as life shall last.
	'A man who has lived full fifty years, and spent most of that time in a studious 
manner, I hope, will not be supposed to have voluntarily engaged in so desperate an 
affair. I beg leave, my lord and gentlemen, to add one thing more. Equally confident 
of my own innocence, and English discernment to trace out truth, I did resolve to 
waive the privilege granted to foreigners by the laws of this kingdom: nor was my 
motive a compliment to this nation: my motive was my life and honour; that it should 
not be thought I received undeserved favour from a jury, part my own country. I chose 
to be tried by a jury of this country; for, if my honour is not saved, I cannot much 
wish for the preservation of my life. I will wait for the determination of this awful 
court with that confidence, I hope, which inno cence has a right to obtain. So God 
bless you all.'
	Several gentlemen now appeared in behalf of Mr Baretti; among whom, Mr 
Lambert proved that he had received a blow, that his hat was lost, and that his face 
was swelled.
	Mr Molini swore that, on the day after the affray, he had observed a swelling 
on Mr Baretti's cheek, and several bruises on his back and shoulder; and Mr Low 
deposed, that, when he visited Mr Baretti in prison, he had seen six or seven bruises 
on different parts of his body.
	Justice Kelynge, major Alderton, and Mr Petrin, deposed, that some 
abandoned women, attended by bullies, had severally attacked them in an indelicate 
way in the Haymarket.
	To the character of Mr Baretti appeared Sir Joshua Reynolds, doctor Johnson, 
Mr Fitzherbert, and Edmund Burke, esquire, all of whom represented him as a man of 
benevolence, sobriety, modesty, and learning. The honourable Mr Beauclerk, Mr 
Garrick, and Mr Molini, all confirmed this testimony, adding, that persons who travel 
in foreign countries are accustomed to carry such knives as that which had been 
unhappily made use of by the prisoner.
	After considering the whole matter, the jury acquitted Mr Baretti of murder 
and manslaughter, and gave a verdict of 'Self-defence.'
	This case of Mr Baretti may be deemed one of the extraordinary kind. It seems 
evident, from the depositions made on his trial, and from the substance of his defence, 
that he had been assaulted by people of abandoned character; but the question is, 
whether he had a right to defend himself with such a weapon as he made use of; 
however, we shall not presume to decide on this question, as the jury solemnly 
determined that he had, by the verdict they gave.
	Mr Baretti's character was of the utmost service to him on this solemn 
occasion. His learning, his connexions, his disposition, were all of the highest 
importance to him; and though the alledged crime was no less than murder, we well 
remember that he was bailed by four gentlemen of distinguished character; so that he 
did not lay in Newgate even a single hour.
	His generous refusal to accept of the usual favour of being tried by a jury 
composed of an equal number of foreigners with Englishmen, furnishes an admirable 
proof of his disdain of taking any advantage; nor is it a small presumptive proof of his 
innocence: and his declaration that his regret would endure as long as life should last, 
though the trial should turn out as favourably as innocence might deserve, is greatly in 
favour of his humanity: and indeed no man of liberal feelings can have been even the 
accidental occasion of the death of a fellow creature, without sincerely lamenting the 
misfortune.
	The people of this country may wonder that Mr Baretti, an Italian by birth, 
should make his defence in such correct English: but it is to be remembered, that he 
had lived long among us, had studied our language with critical attention, and wrote it 
with a degree of purity scarce ever equalled by a Foreigner; to whom the English 
language, of all others, is said to be the most difficult of acquisition.
	Upon the whole, this inference should be drawn from the present case:-- those 
who would consult their own safety should avoid giving offence to others in the 
streets. The casual passenger has, at least, a right to pass unmolested; and he or she 
that may insult him cannot deserve pity, whatever consequences may follow.
	Foreign gentlemen, however, should consider, that the best method of 
escaping the fury of a mob is to take shelter in the first house they may see open: there 
are few people who could be so hard of heart as not to afford them protec tion; and we 
must think, for the honour of our country, that the generality would protect them 
against their assailants.
	The number of abandoned women, who infest the streets of the metropolis 
every evening, are in some measure to be pitied; but, when they add insult to indecent 
application, they ought to be punished with the utmost severity. But what must those 
men think of themselves, whose seductive arts have reduced women to a state so 
deplorable? If they have any sensibility left, horror and remorse must seize their 
minds: yet, however great their sufferings, they are not deserving of pity.-- Violators 
of all the laws of honour, they have no claim to our compassion!


JAMES ATTAWAY AND RICHARD BAILEY 
Executed at Tyburn, 4th of July, 1770, for committing a Burglary after tying 
up the Butler

	THE crime for which these men so justly suffered was committed in a manner 
most artful and daring.
	About nine o'clock one evening they went to the house of Thomas Le Merr, 
Esq., in Bedford Row, London, a public and genteel street. They had received 
information that Mr Le Merr was in the country. On their knocking at the door it was 
opened by a footman, to whom Bailey delivered a letter, saying that it was for his 
master. Before the servant could answer, Attaway, another daring ruffian who had 
escaped justice, rushed in, shut the street door, and stabbed him in the belly with a 
dagger. They then drew cords from their pockets, tied the bleeding man's hands 
behind his back, and dragged him downstairs into the kitchen, unloosed his hands, and 
ordered him to light a candle, though, being summer, it was not dark. This done, 
regardless of his wound, which he begged time to bind up, they again tied his hands 
behind him, bringing the rope first about his neck, and then across his face in such a 
manner that it went through his mouth, which it kept open, and then made it fast 
behind. Thus bound, they dragged him into a cellar and bolted the door.
	In a few minutes one of the villains returned and asked him if he was fast. 
Being answered, as well as the poor man could speak, that he was secure enough, they 
broke open the pantry, where the plate chest was kept, forced the lock, and 
deliberately packed up its contents.
	In the meantime the bound man gnawed the rope in his mouth, and soon 
liberated himself. He then forced open the door which confined him and got into the 
area, over which was a skylight; and, apprehensive that he was bleeding to death, he 
made an effort to climb up a pipe to get through it and give an alarm. Making a last 
exertion he succeeded, and, dragging the rope after him, got to the stables behind the 
house, and called for help as loudly as his almost exhausted strength would permit. 
Five or six grooms immediately came to his assistance, and seized the robbers as they 
were coming out of the house, thus fortunately saving the poor fellow's life and Mr Le 
Merr's property.
	On this evidence the two men were found guilty, and were hanged at Tyburn, 
on the 4th of July, 1770.


PETER CONWAY AND MICHAEL RICHARDSON 
Executed at Tyburn, 19th of July, 1770, for a Murder which was their first 
Essay in Crime

	THESE men were two of a gang who had associated themselves for the 
purpose of plunder, and in their very first attempt committed murder; at which they 
were so terrified that they fled without rifling the pockets of the deceased.
	On Saturday,the 26th of May, 1770, Richardson, Conway, and two men, 
named Jackson and Fox, went to the shop of Mr Robert Dun, in Prince's Square, near 
Ratcliff Highway, and purchased a pair of pistols. The above-mentioned Jackson was 
afterwards an evidence against his accomplices, but we do not learn that Fox was ever 
taken into custody.
	Having purchased the pistols, they left them at the house of an acquaintance, 
named Thomas; after which they all went to the lodgings of Conway, where they 
spent the night. On the succeeding day (Sunday) they took a coach to Whitechapel, 
where they continued drinking till the dusk of the evening, when they went to 
Thomas's house for the pistols. Being unprovided with balls, they remained for a 
while in consultation what to substitute in their stead; and at length they cut a pewter 
spoon in pieces and loaded their pistols. This being done, Conway and Richardson 
went together, and the other two accompanied them, but at a short distance, that they 
might not appear to be a gang of ruffians. They met a gentleman's servant, whom they 
stopped; but, as he had no money, he was permitted to pass without further 
molestation.
	It happened that, in the afternoon, Mr Venables, a butcher in Whitechapel, had 
been walking to Stepney with his neighbour, Mr Rogers, a carpenter, and they were 
returning to town when they were met by the villains above mentioned, a few minutes 
after they had parted from the gentleman's servant. Mr Venables and Mr Rogers had 
the appearance of men from whom a considerable booty might be expected; 
whereupon Conway stopped the former and demanded his money. Instead of 
delivering it, Mr Venables, who was a robust man, twice knocked down Richardson 
and Fox; and they had no sooner recovered their legs than Richardson and Conway 
immediately fired their pistols, and the two unoffending passengers were killed on the 
spot. The villains hurried away towards Stepney, whence they went to Ratcliff 
Highway, and thence to Wapping, where they stopped a man and robbed him of 
eighteen shillings and his watch.
	The bodies of the deceased were found in the road and conveyed to the watch-
house, and a surgeon was sent for, who examined the wounds, and found that they had 
been made by pieces of pewter. On the following Wednesday Jackson was 
apprehended on suspicion of having been concerned in the commission of the 
murders. On his examination he gave information who were his accomplices; on 
which he was admitted an evidence for the Crown. A few days after Jackson was 
taken into custody Conway went to the shop of Mr Burtman, a pawnbroker in Jermyn 
Street, where he offered a watch in pledge. An advertisement in the newspaper 
describing the person of Conway having been read by Mr Burtman, the latter 
imagined that he was the man thus described; on which he gave a hint to one of his 
servants to sit by Conway while he (Burtman) examined the watch.
	The servant, apprehending danger, whispered to his master that it was 
probable he had pistols in his possession. On which a person was sent out to request 
the attendance of the neighbours, with a view to prevent mischief. In the interim 
Conway, remarking that they whispered together, begged permission to retire to the 
vault, which he was readily allowed to do; but on his return he was taken into custody, 
and a coach was called to convey him to Sir John Fielding's office in Bow Street. 
When he was brought to the house of the magistrate he was confronted with Jackson, 
when they mutually endeavoured to incriminate each other; but the circumstances 
against Conway were so very suspicious that Sir John Fielding did not hesitate to 
commit him to Newgate.
	Richardson was likewise apprehended within five days after this commitment, 
and taken to Bow Street for examination, when the charge against him was so very 
strong that he was likewise committed to Newgate. At the next sessions at the Old 
Bailey the jury did not hesitate to convict them, and they were condemned to die.
	After execution their bodies were cut down and conveyed to Bow Common, 
where they were put in chains and hung on a gibbet. More than fifty thousand visited 
the spot within the first five days. On Sunday, particularly, the place resembled a 
crowded fair; and many people made money by selling liquors and other provisions to 
the assembled multitudes.


CAPTAIN DAVID FERGUSON 
Hanged in chains at Execution Dock, 5th January 1771, for the murder of 
his cabin-boy.

	AT the Admiralty sessions, held at the Old Bailey, on the 17th of December, 
1770, David Ferguson, master of the merchant-ship Betsey, was tried for the murder 
of his cabin-boy, a lad about thirteen years of age, during his voyage from Virginia to 
Antigua.
	It appeared that four of Captain Ferguson's crew died, and he was charged 
with the murder of them all. On one of these alleged crimes he was tried in Virginia, 
and acquitted.
	Lord Bortelot, the then governor of that colony, transmitted the proceedings of 
the Court to the secretary of state for foreign affairs in London, with a favourable 
opinion thereon.
	Though we have had too frequent occasion, in the course of this work, to state 
the wanton exercise of that power necessarily given to commanders at sea, yet we also 
know that the crew are too often ready to construe necessary correction into cruelty; 
and, should any of the hands corrected by the captain die, even by accident, or the 
common course of nature, they are sure to aggravate the affair, and persecute their 
commander.
	The ship Betsey sailed from the Capes of Virginia in the depth of winter, when 
the cold is intense to a degree, of which Englishmen have hardly a conception. Heavy 
gales of wind and long falls of snow succeed each other, day after day. The shrouds 
and rigging are incrusted with ice, and they often snap from the tension thereby 
occasioned. The masts, thus deprived of their principal support, are often ready to fall 
by the board, while the deck is deeply covered with snow.
	(Note: A shocking instance of the sad effects of these sudden snow storms, on 
the coast of America, happened to the officers of the Assistance man of war, lying off 
Sandy-Hook, near New York, in the year 1784. Six Seamen of that ship confederated 
to desert, jumped into the yawl, and pushed off from the ship towards the shore, 
Another boat was got ready for a pursuit, and was manned by the first lieutenant, 
eleven other officers, and one seaman. Before they could come up with the deserters, 
a snow storm came on, which, as is often the case, so overpowered them, and so 
darkened the horizon, that they lost sight both of the yawl and the ship, and were all, 
except one, next morning found dead on the beach, near Middleton Point, in New 
Jersey, most of them sticking in the mud.)
	In such cases seamen do their duty with much reluctance; and, when their 
extravagance in harbour has deprived them of the means of laying in an allowance of 
brandy and tobacco, they grow clamorous to their captain for those indispensable 
articles, with which he is not bound to supply them; in fact, he generally provides 
little more than may serve himself.
	Captain Ferguson's crew, thus situated, were often remiss in their duty; and, on 
several occasions, his utmost exertions were called upon for the safety of his ship; but 
that he exceeded the bounds of moderation must be admitted, from his conviction by 
an English jury of the murder of his cabin-boy.
	Perhaps the severity of the season, the crew being unprovided with liquor, and 
also without sufficient warm clothing, contributed more to the death of the remaining 
three that perished than correction. The survivors imputed the murder of them all to 
the cruelty of their captain.
	To come to the charge on which he was convicted: it was proved that he had 
frequently beat the boy in a manner far too severe for his tender years to bear; and that 
he had knocked him down, and then stamped upon him. After this barbarous usage he 
confined him almost an hour upon deck, to the weather-side of his long-boat, when 
the weather was so severe that snow covered the deck, and the shrouds were snapping. 
That he again pushed him down, and trod upon him with both his feet.
	The seamen said that the boy provoked this punishment by coming upon deck 
with only one stocking on. The sufferer did not make complaint of the effects of his 
usage until eleven o'clock at night; and the next day he fell into the hold, and was 
missing five hours. He was found dead upon the ballast.
	In his defence Captain Ferguson proved the distress his ship was in from the 
weather, and the refractory spirit of the crew, several of whom he was obliged to force 
to their duty.
	On the passage of the Betsey home to England, Major Watson and Captain 
Lilly, who were passengers, proved that she was wrecked on the coast of Sussex; and 
that it was owing to the resolution and good conduct of Captain Ferguson that they, 
together with the crew, were saved. It also appeared that many vessels at sea with the 
Betsey, on the coast of America, had several of their crews frost-bitten, which turning 
to gangrene, they died. The inference attempted to be made was that the frost had 
killed the cabin-boy.
	Several respectable merchants gave the prisoner a good character for integrity 
and humanity; but the jury found him guilty, and sentence of death was passed upon 
him accordingly.
	Considerable interest was made to obtain the royal mercy, and (a circumstance 
seldom granted to murderers, and then only when some doubts arise in the minds of 
the privy council on the case) he received a respite.
	On the 4th of January, 1771, eighteen days after conviction, the warrant 
arrived for his execution; and the next day, attended by the marshal of the Admiralty, 
carrying a silver oar, he was carried from Newgate to Execution Dock, and there 
hanged.
	His body was hung in chains upon the marshes of the river Thames.
	Thus perished Captain David Ferguson, a victim to his ungovernable passion, 
in the twenty-sixth year of his age.


PETER M'CLOUD 
Hanged for Housebreaking, on 27th of May, 1771, before he had attained 
the Age of Sixteen

	THIS ill-fated youth was the son of a poor man at Shields, near Newcastle, 
who brought him to London while he was quite a child. His father dying in a short 
time, the boy was left to the care or, perhaps, more properly speaking, to the neglect 
of his mother, who was a woman of very doubtful character, and was said to 
encourage young lads in the practice of theft.
	M'Cloud had been connected with a lad named Younger, who had been 
concerned with him in a variety of irregular practices. At length M'Cloud engaged 
himself on board one of the colliers trading to Newcastle; and, while he was absent, 
Younger accused his mother of having been the receiver of stolen goods, the 
consequence of which was that she was apprehended, and brought to trial, but was 
discharged in defect of evidence.
	When M'Cloud returned from his voyage, and learned in what manner his 
mother had been treated by Younger, he made the most solemn vow of taking 
vengeance on him, whatever might be the consequence of such a procceding.
	That he might effect the ruin of his old companion in iniquity he surrendered 
himself to a magistrate, and gave information that he and Younger had been 
concerned in a robbery; on which the latter was soon taken into custody, and 
committed to Newgate, M'Cloud being admitted an evidence for the Crown against 
his presumed accomplice. But at the ensuing sessions M'Cloud was incapable of 
giving anything like evidence against his companion, who was of course acquitted, 
and the scheme of revenge was consequently frustrated.
	It is no less astonishing than true that, notwithstanding what had passed, these 
young fellows soon renewed their former connection; so that whatever degree of 
malice might have harboured in the breast of M'Cloud, he seemed to have forgotten it 
in the wish to recommence his depredations on the public with his former accomplice 
in iniquity.
	They now joined, with five or six other boys, in the practice of picking 
pockets, in which, for some time, they met with too much success; but their thefts 
were of the lowest kind, being principally confined to the stealing of handkerchiefs, in 
the practice of which they were frequently detected, but dismissed after receiving the 
discipline of the horse-pond. M'Cloud, in particular, had been so often dragged 
through horse-ponds, and exposed to the derision of the public, that he seemed to have 
lost all sense of shame, and his paltry gains by theft consoled him for the ignominy 
that attended it. He was three times tried at the Old Bailey for different offences, and 
had repeatedly the good fortune to escape.
	At length, after a series of lessons in the picking of pockets, the gang of young 
villains determined to commence housebreaking, for which they were qualified not so 
much by their strength as by their artifice. They furnished themselves with a variety of 
tools proper for the wrenching of doors and window-shutters. Occasionally they 
would climb over roofs, enter at the garret windows of houses, and descend to the 
lower rooms to commit their robberies; and at other times they would enter through 
any small opening that had been casually left unguarded.
	At length three of the gang, of whom M'Cloud was one, repaired to Poplar, 
where they broke open the house of Joseph Hankey, Esq., in the dead of night. The 
family were all asleep; but the barking of a dog awoke one of the servants, who 
alarmed the rest, and begged them to oppose the intruders. Two of the thieves made 
an immediate escape, but M'Cloud was apprehended, and lodged in the watch-house.
	On the following day he was carried before a magistrate, who committed him 
to Newgate, and at the next sessions held at the Old Bailey he was brought to trial, 
capitally convicted, and sentenced to die.
	When he arrived at the fatal tree he requested a person to beg that his mother 
would not unreasonably grieve at his death, as he had hopes that he was departing to 
the regions of eternal glory. He suffered at Tyburn, on the 27th of May, 1771, in the 
sixteenth year of his age.


JOHN EYRE, ESQ. 
Transported, in 1771, for stealing Paper out of the Guildhall of the City of 
London

	JOHN EYRE was convicted at the Old Bailey for steal ing paper out of the 
Guildhall. On the 1st of September, 1771, this unfortunate gentleman, who was 
possessed of considerable property, surrendered himself to take his trial for that 
offence, to which he pleaded guilty, and was immediately put into the bail-dock with 
other prisoners.
	The recorder observed to his solicitor that he was unacquainted with his 
motive for using such a plea; but if anything was designed to be urged to the Court to 
soften his offence, he desired it might then be done, while there was a full court. The 
solicitor replied that his client meant nothing more than to throw himself upon the 
mercy of the Court.
	He was instantly convicted, and sentenced to transportation. On the 23rd of the 
same month one hundred and twenty prisoners, who had received a similar sentence, 
were conveyed on board a vessel bound for Virginia. Among them was Mr Eyre, who 
was indulged with a coach.


DR LEVI WEIL, ASHER WEIL, JACOB LAZARUS AND 
SOLOMON PORTER 
A Gang of Robbers who committed Murder, and were executed at Tyburn, 
9th of December, 1771

	THIS daring violation of the law, which long roused the public indignation 
against the whole Jewish people, happened in the house of Mrs Hutchings, in King's 
Road, Chelsea, who was a farmer's widow, left by her husband in good circumstances, 
and with three children, two boys and a girl.
	One Saturday evening, just as the Jewish Sabbath was ended, a numerous gang 
of Jews assembled in Chelsea Fields; and, having lurked about there until ten o'clock, 
at that hour went to the house of Mrs Hutchings and demanded admittance. The 
family had all retired to rest, with the exception of Mrs Hutchings and her two female 
servants, and, being alarmed by the unseasonable request of the applicants, they 
proceeded in a body to know their business. The door was no sooner opened, 
however, than a number of fellows -- all of whom had the appearance of Jews -- 
rushed in, seized the terrified females, and threatened them with instant death in the 
event of their offering any resistance. Mrs Hutchings, being a woman of considerable 
muscular strength, for a time opposed them; but her antagonists soon overpowered 
her, tied her petticoats over her head, and proceeded to secure the servants. The girls 
having been tied back to back, five of the fellows proceeded to ransack the house, 
while the remainder of the gang remained below to guard the prisoners. Having 
visited the rooms occupied by the children of Mrs Hutchings in turn, the ruffians 
proceeded to the apartment in which two men, employed as labourers on the farm, 
named John Slow and William Stone, were lying undisturbed by the outcry which had 
been raised below. It was soon determined that these men were likely to prove 
mischievous, and that they must be murdered; and Levi Weil, a Jewish physician, who 
was one of the party, and was the most sanguinary villain of his gang, aimed a blow at 
the breast of Stone, intended for his death, but which only stunned him. Slow started 
up, and the villains cried: "Shoot him! Shoot him!" A pistol was instantly fired at him, 
and he fell, exclaiming: "Lord have mercy on me! I am murdered!"
	They dragged the wounded man out of the room to the head of the stairs; but 
in the meantime Stone, recovering his senses, jumped out of bed and escaped to the 
roof of the house, through the window. The thieves now descended and plundered the 
house of all the plate they could discover, but finding no money they went to Mrs 
Hutchings, and threatened to murder her if she did not disclose the place of its 
concealment. She gave them her watch, and was afterwards compelled to give up a 
purse containing sixty-five pounds, with which they immediately retired. Mrs 
Hutchings now directly set her female servants at liberty, and, having gone in search 
of the men, found Slow, who declared he was dying, and then dropped insensible on 
the floor. He languished until the following afternoon, when he died of the wounds 
which he had received.
	It was a considerable time before the perpetrators of this most diabolical 
outrage were discovered; but they were at length given up to justice by one of their 
accomplices, named Isaacs, who was a German Jew, and who, reduced to the greatest 
necessity, was tempted by the prospect of reward to impeach his fellows. It then 
turned out that the gang consisted of eight persons, who were headed by the physician 
before mentioned. Dr Weil had been educated in a superior manner. He had studied 
physic in the University of Leyden, where he was admitted to the degree of doctor in 
that faculty. Coming to England, he practised in London, with no inconsiderable 
degree of success, and was always known by the name of Doctor Weil. But so 
destitute was he of all principle, and such was the depravity of his heart, that he 
determined to engage in the dangerous practice of robbery; and, having formed this 
fatal resolution, he wrote to Amsterdam, to some poor Jews, to come to England and 
assist him in his intended depredations on the public; and at the same time informed 
them that in England large sums were to be acquired by the practice of theft.
	The inconsiderate men no sooner received Dr Weil's letter than they procured 
a passport from the English consul, and, embarking in the Harwich packet-boat, 
arrived in England.
	They lost no time in repairing to London, and, immediately attending Dr Weil, 
he informed them that his plan was that they should go out in the daytime and 
minutely survey such houses near London as might probably afford a good booty, and 
then attack them at night.
	At the sessions held at the Old Bailey, in the month of December, 1771, Levi 
Weil, Asher Weil, Marcus Hartagh, Jacob Lazarus, Solomon Porter and Lazarus 
Harry were indicted for the felony and murder above mentioned, when the two of the 
name of Weil, with Jacob Lazarus and Solomon Porter, were capitally convicted; 
while Marcus Hartagh and Lazarus Harry were acquitted, for want of evidence.
	The men, as is customary in all cases of murder, when it can be made 
convenient to the Court, were tried on a Friday, and on the following day they were 
anathematised in the synagogue. As their execution was to take place on the Monday 
following, one of the rabbis went to them in the press-yard of Newgate and delivered 
to each of them a Hebrew book; but declined attending them to the place of death, nor 
even prayed with them at the time of his visit.
	They were attended to Tyburn, the place of execution, by immense crowds of 
people, who were anxious to witness the exit of wretches whose crimes had been so 
much the object of public notice. Having prayed together, and sung a hymn in the 
Hebrew language, they were launched into eternity, on the 9th of December, 1771.


HENRY JONES, FRANCIS PHOENIX AND CHARLES 
BURTON 
Executed at Tyburn, 3rd of February, 1772, for Burglary at the House of Sir 
Robert Ladbroke, a City Banker

	THIS was a daring robbery, committed by breaking into the house of Sir 
Robert Ladbroke, an alderman and banker, in the City of London.
	Notwithstanding the precautions taken by bankers against robbers, and 
particularly housebreakers, we have many instances of men being hardy enough to 
break into their strong-rooms and therefrom steal cash, silver-plate, or whatever 
valuables might have been therein deposited. The plunder to which bankers were 
further liable was from knavish clerks running off with large sums which they were in 
the daily habit of collecting. But their profits being enormous, and without risk (for 
surely those who cannot take care of their own money ought to pay those handsomely 
who keep it safe for them), they still made immense fortunes.
	Mr Child, the celebrated banker at Temple Bar, would not give his consent to 
his daughter marrying the Earl of Westmorland; and actually pursued the young 
couple in their flight to Gretna Green, solely because the purse-proud parent had a 
fortune to portion her to a duke.
	In the year 1755 the cashier of a bank in Dublin, kept by a Quaker, ran off 
with no less a sum than eighty-four thousand pounds of their money, which caused 
business there to be at a standstill, other houses failing with the loss. He was 
apprehended, and lodged at Mr Sheriff Crampton's and only twenty-four thousand 
pounds was found upon him. Enormous as this robbery was, capital punishment could 
not reach him; it was, by the law, held merely a breach of trust.
	The daring gang, the immediate subjects of the case before us, on the night of 
the 20th of December, 1771, with iron crowbars wrenched open the doors of the 
house of Sir Robert Ladbroke, on St Peter's Hill, and though the whole family were in 
bed, and five men-servants in the house, yet the villains effected their purpose, and 
escaped undiscovered.
	The articles which at the time were advertised to have been stolen on this 
occasion were: 
Sir Robert's gold chain, the insignia of his 
office, as alderman of London, worth 
L.100
An alderman's wife's gold chain
L.80
Several pieces of plate 
L.100 
A coronation medal, a broad 25s. piece, a 
guinea of the coin of Oliver Cromwell, a 
guinea of the coin of George I. and other 
pieces
L.40
In old crown-pieces, about
L.15
Two gold snuff-boxes
L.20
A brilliant breast-buckle
L.25 
A diamond hoop-ring
L.20 
A pair of valuable Morocco studs
L.10 
A pair of cluster-stone buttons
L.10 
And other articles, at a small computation
L.30
Total 
L.450
	The robbers, finding this large booty in the apartment they first broke open, 
appear to have been satisfied, for they searched no other part of the house. A silver-
hilted sword, which hung in the room, was not carried off, though it was taken down 
and laid upon a chair. An iron crow was found next morning in the passage.
	Though Sir Robert and his whole family slept so sound as not to hear what 
was going on below them, a gentleman living at the next house was alarmed by a 
noise, which he fancied arose from the wrenching open of a door and breaking into a 
house. He sprang out of bed, seized a blunder-buss, and threw open his window. 
Observing a watchman standing on the other side of the way, he asked him if he had 
not heard a disturbance. The treacherous guardian of the night answered that it was 
nothing but the wind, for everything was safe in that quarter.
	The gentleman then asked him why he did not cry the hour, as the clock had 
some time struck; to which the watchman replied that he had called it, and, on being 
contradicted, went surlily away.
	A short time after this another watchman, in passing, saw that Sir Robert 
Ladbroke's house had been broken open, and immediately gave the alarm; but the 
robbers had decamped.
	In the morning the first watchman was sent for, but he was nowhere to be 
found -- in fact, he was privy to the villainy; and by such wicked connivance many 
robberies were accomplished which could not have been effected if watchmen had 
been honest and done their duty.
	The villains melted the gold articles; and on their trial a dispute arose between 
Sir Robert Ladbroke, the loser of the gold, which had been cast into an ingot, and Mr 
Cox, the purchaser. The latter urged that he had bought it in the face of day, in an 
open shop, and at a fair price; while Sir Robert insisted on a prior claim, of which he 
had been violently deprived.
	The Court were inclined to favour Sir Robert, who, finding this, offered it as a 
favour to Mr Cox; but he disclaimed all favour, standing up for his right to the ingot, 
and then put it into his pocket. Thus he may be said to have very wisely "pocketed the 
affront." The thieves were carried to Tyburn, and executed, on the 3rd of February, 
1772.


JAMES BOLLAND 
A Sheriff Officer, and a most unconscionable Villain, executed at Tyburn, 
18th of March, 1772, for Forgery

	JAMES BOLLAND was the son of a butcher. The youth gave early proofs of 
a profligate turn of mind, and constantly associated with worthless people of both 
sexes. The term of his servitude being expired, Bolland opened a shop in the borough 
of Southwark, and his business afforded him a very favourable prospect of success; 
but through his irregularity and extravagance his trade gradually declined, and, to free 
himself from some embarrassments which his misconduct had produced, he sold his 
effects. Bolland's favourite associates for some years had been bailiffs, bailiffs' 
followers, thief-takers, and runners to the different prisons; and, the natural cruelty of 
his disposition being encouraged by the example of the worthless people in whose 
company he spent the greatest part of his time, he resolved to gain a maintenance by 
preying upon the distresses of his fellow-creatures.
	Having procured himself to be appointed one of the officers to the sheriff of 
the county of Surrey, he hired a house at the bottom of Falcon Court, facing St 
George's Church, Southwark; and, having fitted it up in the manner of a prison, it was 
soon inhabited by a number of unfortunate persons. The people he arrested who were 
in indigent circumstances he took to jail as soon as the law would permit, but such as 
were in a different situation were entertained in his house till all their money was 
spent, or till they insisted upon going to prison to avoid further imposition, or till the 
writs by which they were detained became returnable. The money he extorted from 
his guests by divers stratagems was so considerable that he held the fees usually paid 
at lock-up houses as almost beneath his regard, and frequently distributed them among 
his followers and other servants.
	Bolland was continually endeavouring to encourage card-playing in his house; 
and when his unfortunate guests had recourse to that diversion he seldom failed to 
join in the game; and though he suffered no opportunity of cheating them, even in the 
most palpable manner, to escape him, they were obliged to submit to the insult and 
imposition; for if they ventured to expostulate on the unfairness of his proceedings it 
was his custom to discharge a volley of blasphemous oaths, and to threaten that he 
would instantly take them to jail for daring to affront him in his own house.
	Though the emoluments arising from the infamous practices of Bolland were 
very considerable, they were not equal to the expenses of his profligate course of life, 
and he procured a person to issue out a commission of bankruptcy against him; but 
before the commission took place he secreted his most valuable effects. He further 
defrauded his creditors by giving notes and other securities to a number of people who 
had received no valuable considerations from him; and by means of these nominal 
creditors he obtained his certificate in a very short time.
	The infamous practices of Bolland had now rendered his character so 
notorious that the attorneys imagined that if they continued to employ him they should 
be reflected upon for encouraging so abandoned a villain; and such repeated and 
heavy complaints were made against him that his business rapidly declined. But 
instead of endeavouring to obtain better success by an amendment of his conduct he 
seized every opportunity of practising extortion and fraud with greater rapacity, and 
became a still more abominable pest to society.
	Bolland was an almost daily frequenter of places where billiards and other 
games were practised; and at one of these meetings he fell into company with a 
gentleman who employed him to arrest the captain of a ship in the East India service 
for a debt of three hundred pounds, and promised him a handsome compliment on 
condition that he recovered the money, or took the prisoner into custody. The 
following morning the gentleman set out for the country, and in the course of the day 
Bolland arrested the captain, who immediately paid the debt, and costs.
	In a short time the captain proceeded on his voyage, and the gentleman at 
whose suit he had been arrested returned to London soon afterwards. Bolland waited 
upon him, and said that, though he had made use of every stratagem he could possibly 
devise, the captain had eluded all his art, and got to sea; and in order to enhance the 
promised gratuity he pretended that his extraordinary vigilance to serve the writ had 
involved him in much trouble, and some expense, and the gentleman, being thus 
deceived, made Bolland a handsome present.
	Upon the return of the ship from the East Indies another writ was taken out; 
but, Bolland having gone to a horse race, it was given to another officer. The bailiff 
went to Blackwall, and presently found the captain, and said he must either pay the 
three hundred pounds or go with him to a place of security. But when the captain 
showed the officer Bolland's receipt for the money he returned to town and informed 
his employer that the debt was discharged to Bolland previous to the captain's sailing 
for India.
	A suit at law was now instituted against Bolland for the recovery of three 
hundred pounds. Justice was so indisputably clear on the side of the plaintiff that 
Bolland knew he must inevitably be cast if the matter came to trial; yet, at a 
considerable expense, he protracted a judicial decision of the case, imagining his 
adversary would give up his claim rather than pursue him through all the delays and 
chicanery of the law.
	The cause at length was brought to a hearing, and judgment was pronounced 
in favour of the plaintiff. Bolland, being surrendered by his bail, was taken in 
execution. He was conducted to a lock-up house, where he remained some time, and 
then moved himself by habeas corpus to the Fleet Prison, from which place he was 
released by virtue of an Act of Insolvency.
	Bolland and a person with whom he had contracted an acquaintance in the 
Fleet were enlarged nearly at the same time; and the latter soon after went into 
business, and found means to procure bondsmen for his companion, who was again 
appointed an officer to the Sheriff of Middlesex. Bolland now hired a large house in 
Great Shire Lane, near Temple Bar, but, that the outward appearance might not 
convey an intimation of the service and tyrannical treatment that was to be exercised 
within, the windows were not, according to the general custom with spunging-houses, 
secured with iron bars.
	When prisoners came into the house, he informed them that it was his custom 
to charge six shillings per day for board and lodging; adding that the entertainment 
would be such as should give universal satisfaction, and that all trouble and 
disagreements concerning reckonings would be avoided; and such as refused to 
comply with the exorbitant terms were instantly conducted to jail. When Bolland's 
prisoners appeared inclined to remove to the King's Bench or Fleet he used every 
artifice he could suggest for detaining them in his house till they had exhausted the 
means of supplying his extravagant avarice; but when their money was expended no 
entreaties could prevail on the merciless villain to give them credit for the most 
trifling article, or to suffer them to continue another hour in his house.
	He also defrauded a great number of tradesmen of property to a considerable 
amount, and among them was an upholsterer, of whom he obtained household 
furniture to the value of two hundred pounds, under false pretences.
	Though Bolland was a married man, he was violently addicted to the company 
of abandoned women; and when his wife expostulated on the impropriety of his illicit 
connections he applied to her the most disgraceful epithets, accompanied with volleys 
of profane oaths, and frequently beat her in a barbarous manner. His conversation 
proved the vulgarity of his breeding, and his whole behaviour marked him as a 
worthless and detestable character.
	A young gentleman whose imprudences had drawn upon him the displeasure 
of his friends was arrested at the suit of his tailor, and confined in Bolland's house. 
His money was soon expended, and despairing of being able to effect a compromise 
with his creditor he expressed a desire to be moved to the King's Bench or the Fleet. 
Bolland in formed him that he must be taken to Newgate, that being the jail for the 
county, and that he could not be moved to either of the other prisons but by means of 
a writ of habeas corpus.
	The young gentleman was greatly alarmed at the idea of being confined in 
Newgate, which he supposed to be a place for the reception of felons only. Bolland 
perceived his anxiety, and advised him to recall his resolution, saying that if he would 
follow his directions a method might still be adopted for relieving him from all his 
difficulties. Anxious to recover his liberty, the youth said that if Bolland would 
signify the means by which so desirable a purpose was to be obtained he would gladly 
embrace the proposal, and ever consider him as his most generous benefactor. 
Thereupon Bolland informed him that he would immediately procure bail, and then 
recommended him to different tradesmen, of whom he might obtain a chariot and 
horses, household furniture and other effects, on credit; adding, that he would find no 
difficulty in obtaining a fortune by marriage before he would be called upon for the 
discharge of his debts.
	The young man was released on the bail of two of Bolland's accomplices, a 
chariot was procured, and a house hired and furnished very elegantly; and one of 
Bolland's followers assumed the character of a footman, from the double motive of 
assisting in the scheme of villainy and reporting to his principal all the particulars of 
the conduct of the imprudent young man. Reports were industriously propagated that 
the youth was heir to an immense fortune; and, by a variety of stratagems, effects to a 
considerable amount were obtained from different tradesmen, the greater part of 
which were deposited in Bolland's house, by way of security to him for the bail he had 
procured. When payment for the furniture and other effects was demanded, the 
creditors were for some time amused by a variety of plausible pretences; but at length 
they became exceedingly importunate for their money, and Bolland, now concluding 
that the young man could no longer be made subservient to his villainous stratagems, 
surrendered him in discharge of his bail, and caused him to be conveyed to Newgate.
	The persons whom he had been seduced to defraud were no sooner acquainted 
with the imprisonment of the young adventurer than they lodged detainers against 
him. His unfortunate connections having greatly exasperated his relations and friends, 
they refused to afford him any kind of assistance, and his situation became truly 
deplorable. His present distress, and the upbraidings, of conscience for the 
impropriety of his conduct, overwhelmed him with affliction, which soon put a period 
to his life.
	Bolland, regarding the wreck he had occasioned with apathy, went on in his 
course of wickedness. He provided fictitious bail for persons who were under arrest, 
and when he knew that the persons whom he himself had arrested were not in 
desperate circumstances he frequently released them, after exacting money from 
them, and the promise to surrender if they could not settle matters with their creditors. 
He applied to these people to become bail for others, who paid him in proportion to 
the sums for which they were arrested; and, circumstanced as they were, it was 
seldom that he met with a refusal, for, upon their making the least hesitation, he 
threatened to take them into custody and convey them instantly to prison.
	He provided genteel apparel for Jews, and other men in desperate 
circumstances, and encouraged them to commit perjury, by bribing them to swear 
themselves housekeepers and men of property, in order that their bail might be 
admitted.
	Having supplied two men of most profligate character with genteel clothes, 
they attended him to Westminster Hall, and there justified bail for sums to a 
considerable amount, though they were not possessed of property to the value of 
twenty shillings. After the business these three infamous associates adjourned to a 
tavern in Covent Garden, and, while they were regaling themselves, some of Sir John 
Fielding's officers took the two men who had justified bail into custody, on a charge 
of highway robbery. They were convicted at the ensuing sessions at the Old Bailey, 
and soon afterwards Bolland, being a sheriff's officer, attended them to Tyburn, where 
they were hanged in the very apparel that he himself had provided for them.
	A publican in Cecil Street in the Strand, named Wilkinson, went into 
Lancashire, in the year 1768, upon a visit to his relations, leaving the care of his house 
to a female servant. Upon the landlord's return he found that two men had taken 
possession of his household goods and stock of liquors, under a warrant of distress. 
He asked by what authority they had made a seizure of his effects; and the reply was, 
that if he presumed to dispute their authority they would knock out his brains, or put 
him to death in some other manner.
	Wilkinson made application to Justice Kynaston, and made an affidavit that 
Bolland had no legal claim upon him. A warrant was granted for the recovery of 
Wilkinson's goods, but before it could be put into execution the greater part of them 
had been moved from the premises. The following day Bolland caused Wilkinson to 
be arrested for five hundred and fifty pounds, which was falsely alleged to be a debt 
he had some time before contracted. The unfortunate Wilkinson, being unable to 
procure bail for so considerable a sum, moved himself to the King's Bench. The 
attorney employed by Wilkinson was an accomplice of Bolland, and, under the 
pretence of defending him against the machinations of that accomplished villain, he 
extorted from him his last shilling; and after the unhappy man had suffered a long 
imprisonment, in a most deplorable state of poverty, he was restored to liberty, by 
virtue of an Act of Insolvency.
	A captain in the navy going on a voyage, and leaving his wife insufficiently 
provided with money, she contracted a debt to the amount of thirty pounds, for which 
she gave a note. The note not being paid when it became due, the creditor ordered 
Bolland to serve a writ upon the unhappy woman. After she had remained some days 
a prisoner in his house he procured bail for her, on her paying him five guineas. In a 
few days she was again taken into custody, Bolland urging that, upon making inquiry 
into her affairs, the bail deemed themselves not secure, and had surrendered her from 
motives of prudence. Terrified at the idea of going to prison she paid him ten guineas 
to procure bail a second time; but he insisted on having a bond to confess judgment 
for the furniture of her house, as a collateral security. Being ignorant of the nature of 
the security proposed, she complied with the terms offered by the villain, who, on the 
following day, entered upon judgment, and took possession of her effects. When she 
discovered that she had been made a dupe to the consummate art and villainy of 
Bolland, the unfortunate woman was driven almost to distraction, and while in that 
state of mind she attempted to set fire to the house, in consequence of which a warrant 
was granted to apprehend her, and she was accordingly committed to Newgate. In a 
short time the husband returned to England, and Bolland bribed an infamous woman 
to swear a false debt against him, in consequence of which he was arrested, and being 
in confinement at the time of his wife's trial at the Old Bailey, she was deprived of 
that assistance he might have afforded her. She was convicted, and sentenced to suffer 
death; but her cause being espoused by a number of humane persons, they drew up an 
authentic state of her case, which was presented to the King, who was graciously 
pleased to grant her an unconditional pardon.
	Bolland was ordered by an attorney in the City to serve a writ on a colonel in 
his Majesty's service for one hundred pounds, and he arrested the gentleman the next 
day and was paid the debt and costs; but, instead of delivering the money for the 
plaintiff's use, he declared that he had not served the writ. The attorney, however, 
soon learned that the debt was discharged, and commenced a suit against the sheriffs; 
and the persons who had become sureties for Bolland were compelled to pay the 
hundred pounds, with full costs.
	The colonel had neglected to take Bolland's receipt, and of this circumstance 
the villain determined to avail himself. He, a second time, arrested the gentleman for 
one hundred pounds. The action was bailed, and a trial ensued, in the course of which 
a witness swore that he was present when the colonel paid Bolland one hundred 
pounds, and costs, in discharge of the writ. Thereupon the jury pronounced in favour 
of the colonel.
	Though Bolland's character was notorious throughout the kingdom, he might, 
perhaps, have continued his depredations much longer had not his infamous practices 
been exposed in the newspapers. When the sheriffs were informed of Bolland's 
villainy they were highly exasperated against him, and suspended him from acting as 
their officer, and assigned the bail bonds as security, by which the parties he had 
injured might obtain some recompense.
	The office of upper City Marshal becoming vacant by the decease of Osmond 
Cook, Esq., Bolland determined to dispose of part of his infamously acquired property 
in the purchase thereof. The place was put up for sale by auction, and he became the 
purchaser for two thousand, four hundred pounds. Having paid the deposit money, it 
was lodged in the Chamberlain's office, and he anxiously waited for the approbation 
of the Court of Aldermen, which was all that was wanted to give him that power over 
the citizens which he was predetermined to abuse.
	A letter was addressed to the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen exhibiting 
Bolland's character in all its horrid deformity, and on proper inquiries being made the 
facts appeared to be well founded; in consequence of which the Court of Aldermen 
refused him the place, and ordered the Chamberlain to return the deposit money.
	He declared that he would commence a suit at law against the Court of 
Aldermen for the recovery of damages; and when the recorder communicated to him 
the very strong reasons that had induced the Court to deem him unqualified for the 
place of City Marshal he behaved in a manner extremely reprehensible.
	His last crime was forging the endorsement of a bill of exchange for one 
hundred pounds, for which he was apprehended, and tried at the Old Bailey. His 
counsel exerted their utmost abilities to prove that he had not committed forgery, but 
the jury found him guilty of the indictment. When sentence of death had been 
pronounced against him the recorder pathetically exhorted him to employ the short 
time he had to live in preparing for eternity.
	On the morning of his execution he acknowledged that he had been guilty of 
innumerable sins, but declared that the fact for which he was to die was not 
committed with a view to defraud. He was hanged at Tyburn, and his body was taken 
to Highgate in a hearse, and in the evening carried to an undertaker's in Prince's 
Street, Drury Lane, whence it was conveyed to Bunhill Fields for interment.


JONATHAN BRITAIN 
A plausible Rascal, who was executed at Bristol, 15th of May, 1772, for 
Forgery
J
	ONATHAN BRITAIN was born near Thirsk, in the county of York. His 
parents were poor people, and not able to give him a liberal education. They sent him 
to York to an attorney, whom he was to serve as an errand-boy; but he had not been 
long in this station before his master discovered such uncommon marks of genius and 
ability in him that he articled him as a clerk, and took him into his office. But an 
impatience of restraint induced him to leave a master who had behaved to him with so 
much civility. He had not, however, been long out of a place when the master of a 
public academy employed him as a teacher of mathe- matics, for which his own 
studies had qualified him; and he was promoted to be principal usher in the school. In 
this situation he was as restless as in the former, and therefore quitted it, and entered 
as a soldier in the regiment of the 10th Dragoons.
	As he was a man of remarkably fine appearance he was taken great notice of 
by his officers, who paid such attention to him that it very much flattered his vanity; 
and, inducing him to rival his superiors in point of expense, his circumstances were 
soon greatly reduced, and he had recourse to the art of chicane and knavery to support 
his extravagance. In these reduced circumstances he committed a variety of frauds, 
most of them of such artful contrivance as to elude all possibility of detection.
	He had a custom of introducing himself into the company of persons who had 
no suspicion of deceit, and then he would so far insinuate himself into their good 
opinion as to take undue advantage of their unsuspecting honesty.
	Reduced to circumstances of great distress, he was tempted to the commission 
of forgery. Having forged several drafts, he passed them at Bristol, and then repaired 
to London, in fear of detection. On his arrival in the metropolis he wrote several 
letters to the King, intimating that he had been concerned in setting fire to the 
dockyard at Portsmouth. No regard being paid to these letters to his Majesty, he wrote 
to the Lord Mayor, declaring that he was ready to surrender himself, and make a 
discovery of his accomplices, on condition that his pardon should be promised in an 
advertisement in The London Gazette.
	At length a pardon to any accomplice was advertised in the Gazette; on which 
Britain went to Reading to meet his wife. But on the very evening of his arrival in that 
town he offered some forged drafts in payment; the consequence of which was that he 
was apprehended, and lodged in jail. Britain then wrote letters, which he caused to be 
inserted in some of the newspapers, in which he charged Lord Mansfield and the Earls 
of Halifax and Faulconbridge, together with other persons of rank, with having been 
bribed by the Court of France to "encourage the setting fire to the dockyard at 
Portsmouth."
	Improbable as this story was, many people gave a temporary attention to it, 
and some even affected to believe it; but it was too absurd to obtain credit for any 
considerable time. At the next assizes for the county of Berks a bill of indictment for 
forgery was preferred against Britain, but thrown out by the grand jury, on what they 
considered as defective evidence; and his discharge would have ensued, of course, but 
that three detainers were lodged against him, which kept him in prison at Reading till 
he was removed to Bristol by a writ of habeas corpus.
	Britain was now visited by numbers of people, who, from motives of curiosity, 
wished to inquire into the validity of the tale he had invented respecting the fire; but 
they could make no satisfactory discoveries. They saw that the whole tale was a lie, 
yet they contributed to his immediate support in a manner so liberal as to do honour to 
their humanity.
	On the commencement of the sessions he was arraigned on several indictments 
for forgery; but being put to the bar, he refused to plead, and held in his hand the 
Gazette which contained the offer of pardon, insisting that he had given information 
against his accomplices who had set fire to the dockyard at Portsmouth.
	On this he was informed by the recorder that he could take no notice of the 
proclamation inserted in the Gazette. But Britain, instead of paying attention to this 
declaration, threw the Gazette upon the table where the clerk sat, and declared that a 
scheme was formed to deprive him of life, contrary to the due course of law.
	Thereupon the recorder mentioned a late Act of Parliament by which he would 
be deemed guilty if he refused to plead to the indictment; but the magistrate did not 
choose to proceed on the trial without being in possession of the Act in question; on 
which a special messenger was sent to London to procure the Act, if it could be had in 
print, or otherwise to bring an attested copy of it from the Record Office.
	The messenger returned with the Act of Parliament in print at the end of two 
days, and Britain was again brought to his trial, when he pleaded not guilty to the 
indictment. The recorder would have allowed him counsel, but he refused all such 
kind of assistance, and was determined to plead for himself. He cross-examined the 
witnesses in a manner that gave sufficient testimony of his abilities; but the evidence 
against him was such as not to admit of a doubt of his guilt, and in consequence he 
was capitally convicted, and sentenced to die. He was executed on the 15th of May, 
1772.


JOHN ADSHEAD AND BENJAMIN ALSWORTH 
Hanged for housebreaking, 8th July, 1772

  
Adshead and Alsworth searched in St Giles's watch-house

	THE former of these malefactors was a native of Northamptonshire, and 
trained up to the business of husbandry, which he followed till he approached nearly 
to manhood, when he repaired to London, and lived in the service of different persons 
in quality of a footman.
	By an attention to the rules of frugality he became possessed of a sum of 
money, ten guineas of which he gave to a person to instruct him in the art of a 
gunsmith; and, having acquired the knowledge of the art, he for some time laboured 
industriously to support himself; but, getting into bad company, he was prevailed on 
to commence the dangerous practice of housebreaking. Becoming, at length, too well 
known in London, he was afraid of being discovered, and therefore repaired to 
Bristol, to commit his depredations in that city.
	Soon after he arrived at Bristol he broke into the house of a watchmaker, and 
carried off effects to the amount of one hundred and fifty pounds. These he conveyed 
to London, where be disposed of them, and with the produce took a public house in 
Princes Street, Drury Lane; but, no success attending him in this situation, he quitted 
business, and recommenced the practice of housebreaking, which ended in his 
destruction, as will be seen in the course of this narrative.
	Alsworth (the other criminal) was a native of Birmingham, and followed the 
profession of gunmaking. After practising his trade some time, he repaired to London, 
and, enlisting in the army, became a drummer in the 85th regiment of foot. He served 
in Portugal during the last war, in the reign of King George II. and was likewise 
present at the siege of Belleisle; but when the peace came on be returned to his 
original profession.
	During his military life his behaviour was consistent with his duty. On his 
return to England he married a young woman, who bore him two children; but, 
happening to become acquainted with Adshead, his ruin soon followed. These men 
were frequently in company; and Alsworth, observing that Adshead dressed in a style 
of gentility which he presumed to be above his circumstances, asked bow he afforded 
to make such an appearance; to which the other replied, that an uncle, who was lately 
dead, had left him several articles of considerable value.
	Their intimacy now daily increased; and Alsworth's children being indisposed, 
and himself deficient of employment, he asked the other to lend him three or four 
guineas, which he would not fail to return on a happier change in his circumstances.
	Adshead said that he was not then in possession of so much money; but, if the 
other would take his advice, he would instruct him how to 'obtain a hundred pounds in 
an hour.'
	Alsworth thought lie spoke jestingly, but begged to know his real meaning; on 
which the other confessed that he subsisted by housebreaking, and invited his 
acquaintance to come to his lodgings that evening. This invitation was complied with, 
a co-partnership in iniquity was agreed on, and they committed several burglaries; but 
that, of which we are now about to relate the particulars, brought them to their fatal 
end.
	About one o'clock in the morning of the 18th of May, 1772, they broke into 
the house of Mrs. Bellamy, a widow lady, in Newman Street, Oxford Road, whence 
they carried off silk, wearing apparel, and other effects, to a considerable amount.
	They packed the goods in two parcels, and proceeded towards Tottenham 
Court Road, where they were observed by two watchmen, who followed them 
towards Russell Street, Bloomsbury, where they were noticed by another watchman, 
belonging to the parish of St. Giles, who seized on Alsworth; on which the other 
threw down his parcel and ran off, but was soon taken into custody.
	Being conveyed to the watch-house, they were searched by the constable of 
the night, who likewise examined the parcels of stolen goods. On the following 
morning they were carried before Justice Cox, to whom they asserted that the things 
were their own property, and that they were removing them from their lodgings, to 
prevent their landlord seizing on them for rent.
	This story did not seem to be at all plausible; and, as they refused to give an 
account of their place of residence, a well-grounded suspicion arose that they were 
thieves; on which they were committed for re-examination, when the persons who had 
been robbed could be found.
	When Mrs. Bellamy's family arose in the morning, the servants discovered 
that the house had been robbed, as above mentioned. Hereupon hand-bills were 
instantly printed, and circulated through London; the consequence of which was that 
Justice Cox sent for Mrs. Bellamy and her servants, and, the prisoners being brought 
to a re-examination, the stolen effects were identified, and the two men were 
committed to Newgate for trial.
	(Note: The immediate circulation of hand-bills is the readiest method of 
detecting thieves. This has been proved in a thousand instances that have occurred at 
the public office in Bow Street, Thieves generally carry stolen goods immediately to 
the pawnbrokers; but, when they do not, the bills frequently fall into the hands of 
peace-officers, and a discovery follows of course.)
	At the sessions held at the Old Bailey in the month of June, 1772, the 
prisoners were indicted for breaking and entering the dwelling-house of Mary 
Bellamy, widow, and stealing a gauze sack and petticoat, with silk and gold flowers, 
three silk sacks and petticoats, a brocaded silk night-gown, a chased gold outside 
watchcase, and a variety of other valuable articles, the property of Mrs. Bellamy and 
her daughter.
	Adshead pleaded guilty to the indictment, begging for mercy on account of his 
youth; and the evidence against his accomplice was so conclusive, that the jury could 
not hesitate to convict him; in consequence of which they both received sentence of 
death.
	After conviction their behaviour was very various. On some occasions they 
appeared hardened in a very high degree, and at others were free to confess the crime 
of which they bad been guilty; but, when they found that their names were included in 
the warrant for execution, their behaviour was more regular, consistent, and penitent; 
and the Ordinary of Newgate, forming a favourable opinion of their sincerity, 
administered the sacrament to them, and gave them such advice as he deemed proper 
in their unhappy situation; he cautioned them not to trust to their own penitence, but 
to rely on the merits of Christ for eternal salvation.
	On the day appointed for their execution the Ordinary attended them early in 
the morning, renewed his good advice, and besought them to fix their minds on a 
better world than that to which they were so soon to bid a final adieu. On being put 
into the cart they shed many tears, and lifted up their eyes to heaven in the hope of 
that mercy whence alone, in their situation, it could be expected.
	At the fatal tree they confessed that they were guilty of the crime of which 
they had been convicted, and cautioned their auditors never to be guilty of a similar 
violation of the laws of justice. An immense concourse of people attended this 
execution; and, when the bodies had hung the usual time, they were delivered to the 
friends of the deceased, in order for interment.
	John Adshead and Benjamin Alsworth suffered at Tyburn on the 8th of July, 
1772.
	The reflections arising from the case of these men can but little deviate from 
those we have made on that of former housebreakers; but we see that a co-partnership 
in iniquity is no bar to the inevitable consequences of guilt. Adshead's confession of 
his crime amounted to little less than an accusation of his accomplice, since they were 
both taken into custody almost immediately after the commission of the fact.
	Upon consideration of the whole matter, it will appear evident that nothing can 
so effectually secure our peace of mind as a strict adherence to the laws of honesty, 
and a regular and constant attendance on the duties of religion.


SAMUEL ROBERTS and THOMAS BACCHUS 
Hanged for High Treason, in counterfeiting the current Coin of this Realm.

	THE first mentioned of these malefactors was a native of Shrewsbury. He was 
descended of parents of very fair character, but in circumstances rather contracted; 
however, they gave him what education was in their power, and then apprenticed him 
to a baker.
	After the expiration of the term of his apprenticeship, he repaired to the 
metropolis, and laboured as a journeyman with different masters for a considerable 
time, still supporting the character of an industrious and honest man. Some friends, 
observing the goodness of his disposition, advanced him money, with which he took a 
shop in Graysinn-lane, and met with such success in business as rewarded his 
assiduity.
	At length, very unhappily for himself, he became acquainted with the father of 
Bacchus, from the casual meeting him at a public house. Soon after their acquaintance 
the old man advised him to remove into Southwark, where he said an excellent house 
and shop offered for his accommodation. Roberts being married, and having four 
children, listened to this advice, in the hope of making a better provision for his 
family.
	A very short time after his residence in Southwark, the elder Bacchus and his 
son, with some other people who were coiners, told Roberts that they would be ready 
to assist him with money on any emergency. It happened that, some little time 
afterwards, Roberts wanted some money to make up a bill due for flour, on which he 
mentioned the affair to the elder Bacchus, and he was immediately furnished with the 
requisite sum.
	This circumstance had not long taken place, when the younger Bacchus 
informed Roberts that his father was out of town, and begged his assistance in 
coining, on the condition of which he should be amply supplied with such money as 
he might want.
	Roberts hesitated for a while to comply with a scheme big with such evident 
destruction; but the prospect of gain becoming at length too strong for his more 
virtuous resolutions, he fatally consented, and ruin was the consequence. The nature 
of the partnership, for such it may be deemed, was this: Bacchus was generally the 
immediate coiner of the counterfeit money, which Roberts put off to unsuspecting 
people. They had imitated a variety of gold and silver coin, which was so well 
executed that it could hardly be distinguished from the real money made at the Tower; 
yet the adulteration was so great, that, in many pieces, the intrinsic value was not a 
fourth of the nominal.
	A great part of this counterfeit money was put off at country fairs, where the 
agents employed to dispose of it (for there were others besides Roberts) appeared as 
horse-dealers, and found several country tradesmen ready enough to traffic with them 
for this false coin.
	The coiners used to sell this money by weight to the countrymen, who 
circulated it in the course of their connexions; so that the evil spread wide, to the 
injury of many an unfortunate individual.
	In the interim Bacchus and Roberts lived in a very handsome manner on the 
profits of their iniquitous trade. Their neighbours could not conceive how they 
procured a subsistence; and it is possible that they might have continued their 
practices a considerable time longer, but that one of their accomplices gave such hints 
as led to the ready means of detecting them.
	Some constables being employed to search the house, they found Bacchus, 
with all the implements proper for coining, in the act of making counterfeit money, 
while Roberts was assisting him in this unlawful transaction; on which both the 
parties were taken into custody, and being carried before Sir John Fielding, that 
magistrate committed them to Newgate.
	It may be now proper to mention that Bacchus was a native of the town of 
Stafford, and was, at a very early age, initiated into the art of coining by his father, 
who seems purposely to have trained him to the gallows. The younger Bacchus never 
followed any business but coining, except occasionally dealing in smuggled goods 
when he happened to have a considerable sum of money in his possession.
	The prisoners remained in Newgate several months before they were brought 
to trial; but at length they were convicted on the clearest evidence, and sentenced to 
die.
	The behaviour of Roberts after conviction was exceedingly well adapted to his 
unhappy situation. He was regular and devout in his attendance on religious duties, 
employed much time in reading books of devotion, and was regardful of the 
instructions given him by the ordinary of Newgate. On learning that the warrant for 
his execution was arrived, his seriousness and penitence appeared to be augmented, 
and he looked forward to eternity in the humble hope of the divine pardon.
	Nor was the behaviour of Bacehus less regular, penitent, and devout. He made 
a decent preparation for his approach ing death. The father of Bacchus had retired into 
the country, whence he sent his son a letter after condemnation, of which the 
following is a copy:
	'My dear Child, 
	'I send you these few lines to comfort you; I should have sent you some money 
before, but I hope, my dear child, you will forgive me, as you hope to be forgiven in 
heaven. There you will find a better father than you have found in me. Be as happy as 
you can; -- you are going to happiness, and leave me behind to be miserable. I hope 
you will die happy, because you know you are innocent. Thou art now going, I shall 
soon follow thee. I hope you will meet your dear mother in heaven. As we shall soon 
part in this world, may my prayers be heard for you in heaven! 
	'From your loving father till death, 
	'WILLIAM BACCHUS' 
	'P.S. My dear love to Roberts; and tell him, if it should be in my power to 
serve his family, I will, I shall think it a pleasure. May heaven receive you both!'
	The unhappy convicts received the holy sacrament on the morning of 
execution, and behaved in a manner suitable to their calamitous circumstances. They 
were drawn to the gallows on a sledge, as is usual in the case of coiners. They warned 
the multitude not to follow their evil example, and acknowledged the justice of that 
sentence by which they had been condemned to an ignominious death.
	After the customary exercises of devotion, the prisoners underwent the final 
sentence of the law; and when the bodies had hung the usual time, they were delivered 
to their relations, in order that the bodies might be deposited with the parent earth.
	Samuel Roberts and Thomas Bacchus were hanged at Tyburn on the 21st of 
May, 1772.
	There is something singular in the affair before us. We see that the counterfeit 
money was sold by weight to people in the country, who could be mean enough to 
make such purchases from avaricious motives, though they must know that their 
neighbours would be ultimately defrauded.
	The young Bacchus, though a professed coiner, appears to have been in some 
measure an object of pity. His father had trained him to the business from his early 
youth: but surely that father ought to be the general object of execration. It is difficult 
to form an idea of the aggravated guilt of that man who can wilfully train his own 
child to destruction. The paternal and the filial duty ought to be mutual: a failure on 
either side is usually fatal to the happiness of one of the parties.


WILLIAM GRIFFITHS 
Executed at Tyburn, 20th of January, 1773, for a Highway Robbery

	THE person robbed in this case was the celebrated and unfortunate Dr Dodd, 
whom, a few years afterwards, Fate decreed to be hanged at the very spot where 
Griffiths suffered.
	William Griffiths was a native of Shropshire, and followed the business of 
husbandry till he had attained his eighteenth year, when he engaged in a naval life, 
and remained nearly three years in the East Indies. The ship was paid off on his return 
to England, and Griffiths, receiving a considerable sum for wages, spent his money, as 
sailors too generally do, in no very reputable company, at public-houses in Wapping 
and adjacent parts.
	By his connection with men and women of abandoned character his money 
was soon spent, and he began to think of going to sea for a supply -- and happy might 
it have been for him if he had done so -- but David Evans and Timothy Johnson, two 
of his newly acquired associates, and men of very abandoned character, advised him 
to be concerned with them in committing robberies on the highway; and this triple 
association of thieves did actually commit a variety of depredations on the public, 
treating those they attacked with great inhumanity, but never obtaining anything 
considerable by their lawless pursuits.
	The Rev. Dr Dodd and his lady were returning from a visit they had been 
making to a gentleman at St Albans, but were detained on the way at Barnet, because 
a post-chaise could not be immediately procured. Night was hastily approaching when 
they left Barnet, but they proceeded unmolested till they came near the turnpike at the 
extremity of Tottenham Court Road, when three men called to the driver of the 
carriage, and threatened his instant destruction if he did not stop. The post-boy did not 
hesitate to obey such summons; but no sooner was the carriage stopped than a pistol 
was fired, the ball from which went through the front glass of the chaise, but did not 
take any effect to the injury of the parties in it, though it terrified them in a very high 
degree, as they apprehended that the most fatal consequences might ensue. While the 
Doctor was waiting at Barnet for the chaise it occurred to him that there might be 
danger on the road, whereupon he concealed all his money except two guineas, which 
he put in his purse, with a bill of exchange.
	Soon after the pistol was fired, Griffiths opened the door of the chaise; on 
which the Doctor begged him to behave with civility, on account of the presence of 
the lady. He then delivered the purse, with its contents, and likewise gave the robber 
some loose silver. Griffiths, having received the booty, decamped with the utmost 
precipitation.
	Dr Dodd lost no time in repairing to Sir John Fielding's office, where he and 
his lad gave so full a description of the person of the principal robber that it was easily 
conjectured Griffiths must have been the party; but who had been his associates in the 
business never yet transpired.
	In consequence of this information, Griffiths was soon taken into custody. On 
his examination before Sir John Fielding, Dr Dodd hesitated to swear positively to his 
person; but Mrs Dodd, who had regarded him with more attention, positively declared 
on oath that he was the person who had committed the robbery.
	Thereupon the magistrate committed Griffiths to Newgate. A bill of 
indictment was found against him by the grand jury, and he was called down to trial at 
the next sessions at the Old Bailey, when the jury did not hesitate to find him guilty; 
in consequence of which he received sentence of death.


GEORGE BARRINGTON 
A Well-Dressed Pickpocket who "worked" in Churches and the Houses of 
Parliament, and was convicted on 15th of March, 1773

	BARRINGTON was convicted of stealing a watch from a lady in the pit of 
one of the theatres, and sentenced to labour three years on the Thames. When about a 
year of the time had expired he procured a petition to be presented to the Court, 
praying that the remaining part of his sentence might be remitted; and the officers of 
the Justitia hulk made so favourable a report of his behaviour that, some time after, an 
order was sent to Mr Campbell for his release.
	A few days after Barrington's release he went to St Sepulchre's Church, where 
Doctor Mylne was to preach a sermon for the benefit of the Society for the Recovery 
of Persons apparently Drowned. William Payne, a constable, saw him put his hand 
into a lady's pocket, in the south aisle, and presently after followed him out of the 
church and took him into custody, near the end of Cock Lane, upon Snow Hill. 
Having taken the prisoner to St Sepulchre's watch house, and found a gold watch and 
some other articles in his possession, Payne returned to the church and spoke to the 
lady whom he had seen the prisoner attempt to rob; and she informed him that she had 
lost nothing, for, expecting the church to be much crowded, she had taken the 
precaution of emptying her pockets before leaving her house.
	Upon Payne's return to the watch-house a gentleman advised that the prisoner 
should be more strictly searched. He was desired to take off his hat, and, raising his 
left arm, he cautiously removed his hat from his head, when a metal watch dropped 
upon the floor, He was now obliged to pull off the greatest part of his clothes. He 
wore three pairs of breeches, in one of the pockets of which was found a purse, 
containing thirteen guineas and a bank-note for ten pounds made payable to himself.
	In consequence of an advertisement inserted the next day in the newspapers a 
Mrs Ironmonger came to Payne's house and described a watch she had lost, and it 
proved to be that which had been concealed in Barrington's hair and had dropped on 
the floor when he took off his hat. She attended the examination of the prisoner, and, 
having sworn that the watch produced by Payne was her property, was bound over to 
prosecute.
	Upon his trial Barrington made a long, artful and plausible defence. He said 
that, upon leaving the church, he perceived the watch mentioned in the indictment 
lying upon the ground, and picked it up, intending to advertise it the next day; that he 
was followed to Snow Hill by Payne and another constable, who apprehended him, 
and had in all probability seen him pick up the watch. "I reflected," said he, "that how 
innocently soever I might have obtained the article in question, yet it might cause 
some censure; and no man would wonder, considering the unhappy predicament I 
stood in, [alluding to a former conviction] that I should conceal it as much as 
possible."
	The jury having pronounced the prisoner guilty, he addressed the Court, and 
earnestly supplicated that he might be permitted to enter into his Majesty's service, 
and promised to discharge his trust with fidelity and attention; or, if he could not be 
indulged in that request, that his sentence might be banishment for life from his 
Majesty's dominions. The Court informed him that by an application to the Throne he 
might obtain a mitigation of his sentence, if his case was attended by such 
circumstances of extenuation as would justify him in humbly petitioning to be 
considered as an object of the Royal favour. He requested that the money and bank-
note be returned. Thereupon the Court observed that, in consequence of his 
conviction, the property found on him when he was apprehended became vested in the 
hands of the sheriffs of the City of London, who had discretionary power either to 
comply with or reject his request.
	He was convicted to labour on the Thames for the space of five years, on 
Tuesday, the 5th of April, 1778. He was by profession a surgeon; and his education, 
abilities and address were such as, had they been properly employed, would certainly 
have introduced him to a genteel competency, and a reputable station in life. He 
seems to have had a natural taste for dress, in which particular he was never beneath 
gentility, but frequently bordering upon elegance. His appearance gained him ready 
admission to the most respectable public assemblies; and he was a frequent visitor in 
the galleries of both Houses of Parliament.
	Count Orlow, the Russian Minister, when in one of the boxes of Drury Lane 
playhouse, was robbed of a gold snuff box set with diamonds, estimated to be worth 
an immense sum; and one of the Count's attendants, suspecting Barrington, seized 
him, and found the snuff-box in his possession. He was examined by Sir John 
Fielding; but the Count, being in a foreign country, was influenced by motives of 
delicacy to decline a prosecution.
	Some time after the above circumstance a gentleman observed Barrington in 
the House of Lords, and pointed him out to Philip Quarme, Esq., Deputy Usher of the 
Black Rod, who insisted upon his immediately quitting the House, assuring him that 
his attendance in Parliament would, for the future, be dispensed with.


JOHN LENNARD 
Executed for Rape, 11th August, 1773

	A PAIR of such finished villains as Bolland and Lennard can hardly be 
paralleled. The long course of iniquity of the former we have already exposed; yet, 
though on the same pursuit, there will be found some variety in the crimes of the 
latter.
	Bolland was a principal in hunting down the miserable -- Lennard a follower; 
and hence their appetites in knavery differed widely in an honest master and his man. 
Bolland plundered by stratagem -- Lennard by force.
	Vere, a sheriff's officer, having put an execution into a house of Mr. 
Brailsford, in Petty France, West minster, he placed Lennard, Graves, and Gay, three 
of his followers, in possession. On the second floor of this house lodged Miss Boss, a 
young lady, whom Lennard robbed of that which constitutes the fairest part of the 
female sex -- her chastity and peace of mind.
	To enter into the particulars of the evidence given in Court, in proof of the 
guilt of this umnanly and most atrocious offence, would not meet every eye in its 
proper sense: we shall, therefore, let the outlines suffice.
	On the 15th of June these three ruffians were in possession of the house for the 
cause above named; and the family were all out, in different pursuits of the means to 
raise money to redeem their goods, save Miss Boss, who was at work in her own 
apartment; when Lennard opened the door, and began in a familiar manner to speak to 
her. At first terror deprived her of utterance; but, finding him proceed to take those 
liberties which female virtue can never suffer, she resisted, screamed out, seized the 
villain by the throat, struggled until she was exhausted, and then sunk down, deprived 
of reason. In this situation, which would have raised the compassion of a brute, he 
used her in the way that constituted the offence for which he was justly executed.
	A neighbour, hearing the cries of the distressed female, and suspecting some 
foul deed, knocked at the street door, and inquired the cause of the noise; to which 
Lennard, opening the window, replied that it was only a drunken woman: upon which 
the inquirer retired.
	The three villains, Lennard, Graves, and Gay, were indicted for this cruel 
outrage; Lennard as the principal, and the others as accessories to the fact; and upon 
their trial they were all found guilty. Graves and Gay were burnt in the hand and 
imprisoned; but sentence of death was immediately passed upon Lennard.
	Although convicted upon the clearest evidence, this obdurate man denied that 
he was guilty; and, on the Sunday before h suffered, he received the sacrament from 
the hands of the Rev. Mr. Temple, and then, in the most solemn manner, declared to 
that gentleman that he was entirely innocent of the fact for which he was to die; that 
he hd been repeatedly intimate with Miss Boss, with her own consent; and that all the 
reason he could conjecture for her prosecuting him was, that he had communicated 
this matter to Graves, one of the other followers, who availed himself of the secret, 
and found means to get into the young lady's room, and who really perpetrated the 
fact with which she had falsely accused Lennard.
	In this story he persisted all the time be remained in Newgate; but Mr. Temple, 
suspecting his veracity, delivered a paper to Mr. Toll, another gentleman who usually 
administered spiritual comfort to the malefactors in their last moments, in which be 
requested him to ask Lennard about those two assertions before he was turned off.
	This request Mr. Toll and his colleague punctually complied with, and the 
unhappy man then acknowledged that he had taken the sacrament to an absolute 
falsehood; that there was not a word of truth in his impeaching Miss Boss, but that he 
alone abused her; that he was taught in Newgate to believe that the falsehood might 
do him service; that be found his mistake too late, and all the atonement he could 
make was to acknowledge the truth before he left the world, and to beg pardon of God 
for having acted in so atrocious a manner.
	All the charity which can be accorded to the fate of this most wretched man is 
to hope that his last confession and repentance were sincere, and that they might reach 
the throne of grace.
	With Lennard, on the 11th of August, 1713, suffered the following malefactors 
at Tyburn -- William Eames, for uttering a bank-note of forty pounds, knowing it to 
be forged; Thomas Younger and Thomas Green, for a burglary in the house of Mrs. 
Mortimer, milliner, in Gravel Lane, Ratcliffe Highway; Joseph Holmes and Maurice 
Murry, for a burglary in the house of John Wiley, in Crown Court, Whitecross Street; 
and Thomas Plunket, for robbing Mr. Dudley on the highway.


WILLIAM FIELD ALIAS GREEN 
Executed on Kennington Common, 1st of September, 1773, for Highway 
Robbery

  
Field sold as a slave in North America

	WILLIAM FIELD had been a gentleman's livery servant, and had been turned 
out of several places for his irregularities. At length the badness of his character 
prevented any gentleman from taking him into his house. The highway being the 
general recourse of discharged footmen, Field commenced as a highwayman.
	To the pert insolence of a footman he added the daring impulse of desperation 
as a highwayman. While in service he had made a large acquaintance with ostlers, 
jockeys and post-boys. He therefore found no difficulty in borrowing horses to carry 
him through his depredations, and he gained information of travellers of property 
from the gang who had long been his comrades.
	One of the most daring attempts at robbery was upon the late celebrated 
Colonel Luttrell, brother to the late Duchess of Cumberland, and another gentleman, 
whom he stopped near Gunsbury House. The Colonel immediately fired a pistol, 
without effect, at the highwayman, who in return presented one at the traveller; but 
from its having been some time loaded it would not go off, upon which he rode away. 
This pistol, Field confessed, he took from Colonel West's housekeeper some time 
before, when he stopped and fired at that officer.
	The money of which he robbed travellers for some time he squandered upon 
lewd women and abandoned discarded servant-men. He was, however, at length 
apprehended, and convicted of a robbery; but, through the lenity of his prosecutor, the 
sentence of death was remitted to seven years' transportation to America. Thither he 
was sent, and sold as a slave; but soon finding means to escape, with others, from 
bondage, he fled to New York, and there embarked on board a vessel bound for Poole, 
in Dorsetshire. Being again in London, Field frequently committed four or five 
robberies a night, sometimes on Finchley Common, and often on Shooter's Hill, 
Blackheath, and other places in that neighbourhood; and once, being closely pursued, 
he effected a difficult escape to town. After this he frequented Putney Common and 
its adjacencies, whence he brought considerable booty into London. Notice having 
been given at Sir John Fielding's office, persons were sent out on different roads, and 
Field was conveyed, handcuffed to Tothill Fields Bridewell. Though he had returned 
from transportation, it was thought proper to indict him at the Surrey Assizes for the 
subsequent robberies, when he would have pleaded guilty, but Lord Chief Baron 
Smythe advised him to put himself on his trial; and the jury having given a verdict 
against him, the judge pronounced sentence, after addressing him in the most pathetic 
manner; and he was executed accordingly.


WILLIAM COX 
Who played Marbles and kept a Pet Sparrow to aid him in the Commission 
of Robberies. Executed at Tyburn, 27th of October, 1773

	COX'S father having been transported -- first initiating his son in the art of 
robbery -- young Cox was left to act on his own account, and as usual, with other 
wicked habits, he began by picking pockets; but he was soon apprehended and 
committed to Bridewell, where he was reduced to a most miserable degree of poverty. 
He no sooner obtained his liberty than he procured decent apparel, and was from that 
time remarkably clean and neat in his appearance. He lived some years at the house of 
his uncle, West, in Feather's Court, High Holborn, who encouraged him to pursue 
those illegal courses which led to his destruction.
	He got unperceived into a grocer's, at the corner of Long Lane, in Aldersgate 
Street, and stole a silver-hilted sword from a room on the first floor. Returning 
through the shop with his booty, he was asked some questions; on which he said he 
had been playing with Master Billy, which, he had informed himself, was the name of 
the grocer's son. But on going out of the shop the sword struck against the steps, and 
he was taken into custody and brought to trial; but it was his fortune to escape 
conviction.
	Being provided with a tame sparrow, he let the bird fly into a window of a 
house in Hanover Street, and the door happening to be open he went in, and concealed 
plate to a considerable amount. Hearing some person walking toward the room he 
sought refuge in the area, where, being perceived by an elderly gentlewoman, who 
was the only person in the house, he burst into tears, and saying his sparrow had 
flown into the window begged he might be allowed to catch it. The old lady complied; 
and he soon found an opportunity of decamping with his booty.
	It was the common practice of Cox to play at marbles, and other games, with 
young gentlemen before the doors of their parents, and he seldom suffered an 
opportunity to escape of getting into and robbing the houses. He had a very 
remarkable boyish appearance; and on a variety of occasions that circumstance greatly 
assisted him in the pursuit of his felonious designs. So childish, in fact, was his 
appearance -- for he was very short and slender for his years -- that sometimes he 
provided himself with marbles, and, dressing himself like young master, would ask to 
play with any gentleman's children whom he might observe in the environs of London 
amusing themselves in their father's courtyard. Thus he would insidiously get every 
information from the innocent and unsuspicious boys, and repay their little acts of 
hospitality by plundering the houses of their parents.
	Cox was connected with a notorious thief, who called himself Captain Davis; 
and by means of the most artful stratagems that could be suggested these accomplices 
perpetrated a surprising number of robberies. Davis was at length apprehended, and 
sentenced to suffer death; but he was reprieved on condition of transportation.
	About the middle of the summer, 1773, the apartments of Mr Kendrick, in 
Oxford Street, were privately entered, and a bureau was opened and three bank-notes 
of one hundred pounds each, a hundred and thirty guineas, and a silver watch were 
stolen thereout, to the amount of four hundred and forty pounds. Soon after Mr 
Kendrick's robbery Cox and William Claxton went together to Reading, in Berkshire, 
and there purchased three horses, for which Claxton paid with one of the notes stolen 
from Mr Kendrick, receiving in part of the change a fifty-pound bank-note, which he 
afterwards changed at the bank for notes of smaller value, two of which were found in 
the possession of West, Cox's uncle.
	On the first examination of these offenders at the public office in Bow Street, 
which was on Wednesday, the 11th of August, West said he received the notes from 
his wife on the day preceding that of her decease, which was about the time of Mr 
Kendrick's robbery; but on the following Wednesday he assured the magistrates that 
the notes had been in his possession three years. In contradiction to this it was proved 
that the notes had not been many days issued from the bank.
	Mr Knapp and Mr White, of Reading, appeared, and the fifty-pound note, 
given in part change of that of a hundred, was regularly traced from the hands of 
Claxton to the bank, where he had changed it for others of smaller value. West was 
discharged, and Claxton was admitted an evidence against Cox, who was committed 
for trial at the ensuing sessions at the Old Bailey.
	The evidence against Cox was chiefly circumstantial; but it was of such a 
nature as to be almost as strong as positive proof, and on that evidence he was 
convicted.
	Finding the end of his career fast approaching, Cox began to prepare himself 
for eternity. He was executed along with four more unhappy men, who excited much 
commiseration from the spectators.


ELIZABETH HARRIET GREEVE 
A clever Swindler, transported for Felony, in the Year 1773

	ELIZABETH HARRIET GREEVE was one of those specious swindlers who, 
pretending to great patronage, cheated the credulous by promises of preferment.
	With one of the dupes of her artifice she was first cousin to Lord North; with 
another, second cousin to the Duke of Grafton; to a third, nearly related to Lady 
Fitzroy: on some occasions she affected great intimacy with Lord Guilford; and had 
the young Premier then ruled the State she would, without much doubt, have boasted 
the patronage of Mr Pitt.
	On Wednesday, the 3rd of November, 1773, this female sharper and 
consummate impostor was brought to the bar of the public office, Bow Street, under 
various charges of fraud.
	William Kidwell, a coach-carver, swore that the woman at the bar, who called 
herself the Honourable Elizabeth Harriet Greeve, had defrauded him of thirty-six 
pounds, under a promise of procuring him the place of clerk to the stores in the 
Victualling Office. He said that, the fashion of carving coaches being on the decline, 
he wished to invest the little sum he had by dint of frugality and hard labour saved in 
the purchase of some place, and for this purpose advertised for such a situation. This 
pretended honourable lady answered, and soon lured him out of the sum above 
mentioned.
	William Kent, of Streatly, in Berkshire, charged her with defrauding him of 
thirty pounds in cash and obtaining from him his conditional bond for two hundred 
and fifty pounds more, which, together, was the price of the place of a coast-waiter.
	This deluded man, upon the promises of Mrs Greeve, quitted his business in 
the country, and with his wife and children came to London, and remained there some 
time in the most anxious expectation before he discovered the imposition.
	Elizabeth Cooper next appeared before the magistrates and charged the 
prisoner with defrauding her late husband of sixty-two pounds on a similar pretence to 
the last case, the loss of which, and his disappointment, the poor afflicted widow said, 
broke his heart.
	The sum of her villainy was proved by another witness, whom the rest had, 
through some industry, found out: this was her factotum, agent, clerk and friend, an 
occasional esquire, of the name of Francis Crook. This man swore that when he first 
acted as her agent he did not know she was an impostor; that he had agreed with a 
number of persons for the sale of places, whom he took to his mistress, but she always 
took the money paid in advance.
	This artful female was soon recognised as one who had been transported two 
years before, but had returned before the expiration of the term of her service. She 
was again disposed of in a similar manner.


JOHN RANN 
Commonly called "Sixteen-String Jack." Executed at Tyburn, 30th of 
November, 1774, for Highway Robbery

  
Rann on his trial before Judge Henry Fielding

	THIS fellow was entitled to be classed among the impudent and arrogant self-
created gentlemen who levied arbitrary contributions on the highway: he was also of 
considerable notoriety in acts of such species of depredations, having been regularly 
initiated, from the humble pickpocket.
	John Rann was born at a village a few miles from Bath, of honest parents, who 
were in low circumstances, and incapable of giving him any kind of education. For 
some time he obtained a livelihood by vending goods, which he drove around the city 
and adjacent country on an ass.
	A lady of distinction, who happened to be at Bath, took Rann into her service 
when he was about twelve years of age; and his behaviour was such, that he became 
the favorite of his mistress and fellow servants.
	At length he came to London, and got employment as a helper in the stables at 
Brooke's Mews, in which station he bore a good character. He then became the driver 
of a postchaise, after which he was servant to an officer, and in both these stations he 
was well spoken of.
	About four years before his execution he was coachman to a gentleman of 
fortune near Portman Square, and it was at this period that he dressed in the manner 
which gave rise to the appellation of "Sixteen-string Jack," by wearing breeches with 
eight strings at each knee.
	After living in the service of several noblemen he lost his character, and turned 
pickpocket, in company with three fellows, named Jones, Clayton, and Colledge, the 
latter of whom, a mere boy, obtained the name of "Eight-stringed Jack."
	At the sessions held at the Old Bailey in April, 1775, Rann, Clayton, and one 
Shcpherd, were tried for robbing Mr. William Somers on the highway, and acquitted 
for want of evidence. They were again tried for robbing Mr. Langford, but acquitted 
for the same reason.
	For some time past Rann had kept company with a young woman named 
Roche, who, having been apprenticed to a milliner, and being seduced by an officer of 
the guards, was reduced to obtain bread by the casual wages of prostitution; and, at 
length associating with highwaymen, received such valuable effects as they took on 
the road.
"A woman's honour is a woman's all, 
You're lost for ever if perchance you fall; 
In this, wit, beauty, fortune, form, and mind, 
You give like atoms to the whistling wind; 
All worth, all pleasure, is with honour lost, 
A truth which thousands witness to their cost. 
The fate of woman deeply we deplore, 
They fall like stars that set to rise no more."
	On the 30th of May Rann was taken into custody, and, being brought to Bow 
Street on the following Wednesday, was charged with robbing John Devall, Esq., near 
the nine-mile stone on the Hounslow road, of his watch and money. This watch he had 
given to Miss Roche, who had delivered it to Catherine Smith, by whom it was 
offered in pledge to Mr. Hallam, a pawnbroker, who, suspecting that it was not 
honestly obtained, caused all the parties to be taken into custody.
	Miss Roche was now charged with receiving the watch, knowing it to have 
been stolen; and Miss Smith, being sworn, deposed that on the day Mr. Devall was 
robbed, Roche told her that "she expected Rann to bring her some money in the 
evening"; that he accordingly came about ten at night, and, having retired some time 
with Miss Roche, she, on her return, owned that she had received a watch and five 
guineas from him, which he said he had taken from a gentleman on the highway; and 
that she, Miss Smith, carried the watch to pawn to Mr. Hallam, at the request of Miss 
Roche.
	Sir John Fielding asked Rann if he would offer anything in his defence; on 
which the latter said, "I know no more of the matter than you do, nor half so much 
neither." On this occasion Rann was dressed in a manner above his style of life and 
his circumstances. He had a bundle of flowers in the breast of his coat almost as large 
as a broom; and his irons were tied up with a number of blue ribands.
	For this offence Rann was tried at the sessions held at the Old Bailey, in July, 
1774, and acquitted.
	Two or three days after this acquittal Rann engaged to sup with a girl at her 
lodgings in Bow Street; but, not being punctual to his appointment, the girl went to 
bed, and Rann, not being able to obtain admittance at the door, attempted to get in at 
the window on the first floor, and had nearly accomplished his purpose, when he was 
taken into custody by the watchman.
	For this burglarious attempt he was examined at Bow Street on the 27th of 
July, when the girl, whose apartments he had attempted to break open, declared that 
he could not have had any felonious intention, as he knew that he would have been a 
welcome guest, and have been readily admitted, if she had not fallen asleep. On this 
he was dismissed, after Sir John Fielding had cautioned him to leave his dangerous 
profession, and seek for some more honest means of support.
	On the Sunday following Rann appeared at Bagnidge Wells, dressed in a 
scarlet coat, tambour waistcoat, white silk stockings, laced hat, &c., and publicly 
declared himself to be a highwayman. Having indulged pretty freely, he became 
extremely quarrelsome, and several scuffles ensued, in one of which he lost a ring 
from his finger, and when he discovered his loss, he said it was but a hundred guineas 
gone, which one evening's work would replace. He be came at length so troublesome 
that part of the company agreed to turn him out of the house; but they met with so 
obstinate a resistance that they were obliged to give up their design; when a number of 
young fellows, possessed of more spirit than discretion, attacked this magnanimous 
hero, and actually forced him through the window into the road. Rann was not much 
injured by this severe treatment; but he complained bitterly against those who could 
so affront a gentleman of his character.
	Rann, being arrested for a debt of fifty pounds, which he was unable to pay, 
was confined in the Marshalsea prison, where he was visited by a number of men and 
women of bad character, some of whom paid his debt, and produced his discharge.
	At another time, Rann being with two companions at an alehouse in 
Tottenham Court Road, two sheriff's officers arrested Rann, who, not having money 
to pay the debt, deposited his watch in the hands of the bailiffs, and his associates 
advanced three guineas, which together made more than the amount of the debt; and, 
as a balance was to be returned to Rann when the watch should be redeemed, he told 
the bailiffs that, if they would lend him five shil lings, he would treat them with a 
crown bowl of punch. This they readily did; and, while they were drinking, Rann said 
to the officers, "You have not treated me like a gentleman. When Sir John Fielding's 
people come after me they use me genteelly; they only hold up a finger, beckon me, 
and I follow them as quietly as a lamb."
	When the bailiffs were gone, Rann and his companions rode off; but our hero, 
soon returning, stopped at the turnpike, and asked if he had been wanted. "No," said 
the tollman. "Why," replied the other, "I am Sixteen-string Jack, the famous 
highwayman -- have any of Sir John Fielding's people been this way?" "Yes," said the 
man, "some of them are but just gone through." Rann replied, "If you see them again, 
tell them I am gone towards London"; and then rode off with the utmost unconcern.
	Soon afterwards Rann appeared at Barnet races, dressed in a most elegant 
sporting style, his waistcoat being blue satin, trimmed with silver; and he was 
followed by hundreds of people, who were eager to gratify their curiosity by the sight 
of a man who had been so much the subject of public conversation.
	A very short time before Rann was capitally convicted he attended a public 
execution at Tyburn, and, getting within the ring formed by the constables around the 
gal lows, desired that he might be permitted to stand there, "for," said he, "perhaps it 
is very proper that I should be a spectator on this occasion."
	On the 26th of September, 1774, Rann and William Collier went on the 
Uxbridge road, with a view to commit robberies on the highway; and on the 
Wednesday following they were examined at the public office in Bow Street, when 
Dr. William Bell, chaplain to the Princess Amelia, deposed that, between three and 
four o'clock in the afternoon of Monday, the 26th of September, as he was riding near 
Ealing, he observed two men of rather mean appearance, who rode past him; and that 
he remarked they had suspicious looks; yet neither at that time, nor for some little 
time afterwards, had he any idea of being robbed: that soon afterwards one of them, 
which he believed was Rann, crossed the head of his horse, and, demanding his 
money, said "Give it to me, and take no notice, or I'll blow your brains out." On this 
the doctor gave him one shilling and sixpence, which was all the silver he had, and 
likewise a common watch in a tortoise-shell case.
	On the evening of the day on which the robbery was committed Eleanor 
Roche, who was kept by Rann, and her maid-servant, carried a watch to pledge with 
Mr. Cordy, pawnbroker, in Oxford Road, who, suspecting that it had not been 
honestly acquired, stopped it, and applied to Mr. Gregnion, watchmaker, in Russell 
Street, Covent Garden, who had made the watch for Dr. Bell.
	Mr. Clark swore that, on going to Miss Roche's lodgings on the Monday night, 
he found two pair of boots wet and dirty, which had evidently been worn that day; and 
Mr. Haliburton swore that he waited at Miss Roche's lodgings till Rann and Collier 
came thither; in consequence of which they were taken into custody.
	On the 5th of October, John Rann, William Collier, Eleanor Roche, and 
Christian Stewart (servant to Roche), were brought to Bow Street; when Dr. Bell 
deposed in substance as he had done the proceeding week: and William Hills, servant 
to the Princess Amelia, swore that he saw Rann, whom he well knew, ascend the hill 
at Acton about twenty minutes before the robbery was committed -- a circumstance 
which perfectly agreed with Dr. Bell's account of the time he was robbed.
	John Rann and William Collier were therefore committed to Newgate, to take 
their trials for the highway robbery; Miss Roche was sent to Clerkenwell Bridewell, 
and Christian Stewart, her servant, to Tothill Fields' Bridewell, to be tried as 
accessories after the fact.
	The evidence given on this trial was, in substance, the same as that which had 
been given at Bow Street; but, some favorable circumstances appearing in behalf of 
Collier, he was recommended to mercy, and afterwards respited during the king's 
pleasure. Miss Roche was sentenced to be transported for fourteen years; her servant 
was acquitted; and Rann was left for execution.
	When Rann was brought down to take his trial he was dressed in a new suit of 
pea-green clothes; his hat was bound round with silver strings; he wore a ruffled shirt; 
and his behaviour evinced the utmost unconcern.
	Rann was so confident of being acquitted that he had ordered a genteel supper 
to be provided for the entertainment of his particular friends and associates on the 
joyful occasion; but their intended mirth was turned into mourning, and the madness 
of guilty joy gave way to the sullen melancholy of equally guilty grief.
	When Rann received his sentence he attempted to force a smile, but it was 
evident that his mind was racked with pains that no language can express.
	After conviction the behaviour of this malefactor was, for some time, very 
improper for one in his unhappy circumstances. On Sunday, the 23rd of October, he 
had seven girls to dine with him. The company were remarkably cheerful; nor was 
Rann less joyous than his companions. His conduct was expressive of great unconcern 
till the time that the warrant for his execution arrived; after which he began to be 
somewhat serious in his preparation for a future state.
	On the morning of execution he received the sacrament in the chapel of the 
prison, and at the fatal tree behaved with great decency, but did not appear so much 
affected by his approaching fate as some printed accounts have represented him. 
When he came near the gallows he turned round, and looked at it as an object which 
he had long expected to see, but not as one that he dreaded, as might reasonably have 
been expected.
	He was turned off November the 30th, 1774, and having hung the usual time, 
his body was delivered to his friends for interment.


AMOS MERRITT 
Having saved an Innocent Man from the Gallows, he himself was executed 
at Tyburn, 10th of January, 1775, for Burglary

	PATRICK MADEN, convicted of a foot robbery on the highway, and William 
Waine and Levi Barnet, for burglary, were, on the 19th of August, 1774, carried to 
Tyburn, for execution, pursuant to their sentence.
	When the cart was drawn under the gallows a man among the crowd of 
spectators called out for the others to make way for him, as he had something to 
communicate to the sheriff respecting one of the malefactors. This being effected, the 
man, who proved to be Amos Merritt, addressed Mr Reynolds, the under-sheriff, and 
declared that Patrick Maden was innocent of the crime for which he was about to 
suffer. Mr Reynolds desired he would look upon the prisoner and speak aloud what he 
had represented to him. He did so, and declared that he was not guilty, but declined 
accusing himself. The sheriffs, hearing this declaration, dispatched Mr Reynolds with 
the information to the Secretary of State, and to request his further orders, of whom he 
obtained a respite for Maden, who was carried back to Newgate, amid the 
acclamations of the people.
	During Mr Reynolds's absence, which was almost an hour, the other culprits 
remained with the ropes round their necks, and were then executed.
	Merritt was taken into custody, and at the public office in Bow Street, before 
Mr Justice Addington, confessed that he himself was the person who had committed 
the robbery of which Maden had been convicted. The latter was pardoned. Though no 
doubt remained of Merritt's guilt, yet, as no proof could be adduced to that effect, he, 
for a while, escaped justice.
	At the sessions held at the Old Bailey in the month of December, 1774, Merritt 
was indicted for feloniously breaking and entering the dwelling-house of Edward 
Ellicott, early on the morning of the 26th of October, and robbing it of plate, a gold 
watch, and other valuable articles to a large amount. The evidence was deemed so 
satisfactory that the jury did not hesitate to find Merritt guilty: in consequence of 
which he received sentence of death.
	He confessed that he had committed the burglary and robbery, and he suffered 
at the same place, within a single year, where he had been the means of saving the life 
of Maden.


JOHN BOLTON 
Convicted of murdering a girl he had seduced and made pregnant, but 
cheated justice by committing suicide, 29th March, 1775

	This unhappy man was reputably descended, and well educated. He served for 
some time in the army during the late war, and was distinguished by his gallant 
behaviour; but was dismissed from the military line of life in consequence of the 
peace of 1763.
	While he was in the army, and on a recruiting party in Yorkshire, he became 
acquainted with a young lady, who possessing a moderate estate in her own right, he 
married her after he quitted the service, and turned farmer.
	By this marriage he had six children, some of whom were living at the time of 
his death. In this station he continued happily for about ten years, when the event took 
place which ended in his destruction.
	Near Mr. Bolton's place of residence was the village of Ackworth, in which 
was a house where the poor of several parishes were maintained by contract. From 
this house, in the year 1768, he took, as apprentices, a boy, named Emanuel Bowes, 
and a girl of ten years old, called Elizabeth Rainbow. The girl grew up in his service, 
and was remarkable for her beauty; a circumstance very unfortunate for herself, as it 
induced Mr. Bolton to seduce her, the consequence of which was that her pregnancy 
ensued.
	When Bolton was assured that the girl was with child, he went to York, and 
purchased a medicine, in order to procure an abortion; which medicine being 
administered to the young woman, she was thrown into violent convulsions; but, the 
strength of her constitution effectually combating the potion, she advanced in her 
pregnancy without any appearance of having received the least injury.
	Bolton, alarmed lest his intercourse with the girl should be known to his wife 
and family, formed the shocking resolution of murdering her who had fallen a victim 
to his seductive artifices; but no opportunity offered of perpetrating the horrid deed till 
Sunday, the 21st of August, 1774.
	On this day Mrs. Bolton took one of her children on a visit to a lady who lived 
at two miles distance; and there being no persons in the house but Emanuel Bowes, 
the young girl who had been seduced, and a child of six years old, who was sick in 
bed, Bolton considered this as the proper time for perpetrating the crime on which he 
had previously resolved. He therefore sent the boy to fetch a cow-doctor, to look at a 
beast that was presumed to be disordered. The boy returning in about two hours, and 
finding the door fast, went to an adjoining field, and put a horse to grass; after which 
he knocked at the door, and his master, letting him in, told him that 'Elizabeth 
Rainbow had run away, and left most of her clothes behind her.'
	The boy was surprised at this intelligence, and some near neighbours said that 
the girl had not left the house that day; and a woman, who had been to the house to 
pay for milk, declared that she had given the money to Rainbow, on account of the 
absence of her mistress.
	Mrs. Bolton, returning at seven at night, observed that her husband appeared to 
be very uneasy, and inquired into the cause of it; to which he only answered that the 
girl had gone away, and left her clothes on the table in the dining-room. Whether Mrs. 
Bolton was, or was not, suspicions of her husband's criminal connexion with 
Rainbow, is a matter of doubt; but it seems probable that she was, as a violent quarrel 
ensued on this occasion.
	About ten days after this affair happened, the neighbours being suspicious that 
murder had been committed, one of them, who was a constable, went to a magistrate, 
who granted a warrant for the apprehension of Bolton. The latter, having heard that a 
warrant was issued, went to the justice, and told him that the report intended to 
prejudice him was circulated with a malicious view to injure his character. On this the 
justice told Bolton to attend him in the afternoon, when the constable would be 
present; instead of which Bolton went home, and, packing up some plate, set off for 
York, whither he was followed by the constable, who apprehended him, and, carrying 
him before a justice of the peace, he was lodged in prison.
	On the trial, which came on at the ensuing assizes, the following 
circumstances were discovered, viz. when Bolton had sent the boy for the cow-doctor, 
he took the girl into the cellar, and strangled her with a cord which he drew round her 
neck, placing a fife within the cord, so as to twist it to a proper tightness.
	On the Monday after this affair he directed Emanuel Bowes to wheel several 
barrows filled with rubbish into the cellar, as it had been overflowed with water, 
which furnished him with a very plausible pretence for the concealment of his guilt, 
which he presumed would now remain undiscovered.
	At length the body of the deceased was found under the rubbish in the cellar; 
and the coroner's inquest, being summoned on the occasion, gave a verdict of wilful 
murder; on which Mr. Bolton was committed to the castle of York.
	The evidence on his trial was deemed so conclusive, that the jury did not 
hesitate to find him guilty, in consequence of which he received sentence of death. 
During his trial he behaved with uncommon effrontery; and, when the judge had 
passed sentence on him, be turned to the Court, and declared his innocence.
	On the following day a clergyman went to him, with a charitable view to 
prepare his mind to enable him to support himself with decency in the arduous trial be 
had to undergo, and to fortify it for the awful event that was so soon to await him.
	Still, however, he persisted that he was innocent of the alleged crime; and, 
when the officers of justice went the next morning to convey him to the place of 
execution, they found that, by hanging himself, he had put a period to his existence.
	This event of self-murder happened in the castle of York, on the 29th of 
March, 1775.
	There is no language in which to express our proper sense of the crimes of this 
unhappy man. He was first guilty of seducing a young woman from the path of virtue; 
he then murdered her in the fear of detection; and at length laid violent bands on 
himself. Such a complication of guilt must make the heart shudder; and, we trust, it 
cannot be necessary to write a single word to deter our readers from the commission 
of any of these offences.


LAMBERT READING 
Hackney-Coachman and Leader of a Gang of Robbers, executed at 
Chelmsford, 10th of August, 1775, for Burglary

	LAMBERT READING was the principal of a desperate gang of hackney-
coachmen who robbed Copped Hall, in Essex, not far from London. He had a 
hackney-coachman in confederacy, who waited for him at Stratford. A magistrate of 
the county, happening to pass by the coach, was struck at its being there at an unusual 
hour of the night, from which circumstance he was induced to observe its number.
	Hearing, the next day, of the robbery at Copped Hall, he wrote to Sir John 
Fielding his suspicions, and named the number of the coach. From this information 
the thief-takers traced Reading to a house in Brick Lane, where they found him in bed 
with a woman who passed as his wife.
	He was surrounded with pistols, hangers, picklock keys, dark lanterns and 
other apparatus of a housebreaker. He had an opportunity of using some of these arms 
in his defence, but he was so greatly intimidated that he quietly surrendered himself. 
The material result of the search was the recovery of the plate stolen from Copped 
Hall, which was found hidden in Reading's apartment, in three sacks.
	On evidence to this effect, added to other corroborating circumstances, he was 
convicted and executed.
	The other hackney-coachman, whose name was Chapman, and who drove for 
one Conyers, the owner, was taken on the day of Reading's trial; and, being found 
guilty as an accessory, also received sentence of death, which was afterwards 
commuted for transportation.


WILLIAM CORBETT 
An American, executed at Tyburn, 4th of April, 1764, for the Murder of his 
Landlord and his Family

	THIS man of blood was born in Portsmouth, in New Hampshire, and bred a 
shipwright. His mother dying when he was very young, he ran away to Connecticut, 
in New England, where he entered on board a sloop, and made two or three voyages; 
but not living so well as he expected on board the ship, he deserted. When he came to 
Boston he contracted himself with a gentleman who dealt in lumber, which he sent in 
vessels to the West Indies; and Corbett made several voyages in his service, but was 
so addicted to drinking and theft that he received frequent correction for those vices.
	At length he sailed to Newfoundland with one Captain Warton, and as he was 
a good ship-carpenter he might have been happy in his situation, but his irregularities 
obliged the Captain to dismiss him. Then he procured employment in repairing 
fishing-boats and other craft; but, spending his earnings in great extravagance, he 
involved himself in debt, which obliged him to embark on board a ship for Barbados, 
to avoid prison.
	Then he sailed to several parts of North America, and at length settled at 
Halifax, in Nova Scotia; after which he sailed to England, and associated with the 
worst of company in Wapping and Rotherhithe, which tended still further to debauch 
a mind already much depraved.
	A few weeks before Corbett committed the crime for which he suffered he 
took lodgings at the house of Mr Knight, a publican at Rotherhithe. He had not been 
long in the family, which consisted only of the man, his wife and the maid-servant, 
before he resolved on the murder of them all; but the maid-servant escaped his fury.
	At the Surrey Assizes in 1764 William Corbett was indicted for the murder of 
Henry Knight and Anne, his wife, by cutting their throats; and was again indicted, on 
the coroner's inquest, for the said murder; and a third time, for robbing the house. He 
was found guilty on his own confession and a variety of collateral evidence.
	After having committed the murder he rifled the house of money, and even put 
on some of Mr Knight's linen and other clothes. He then went to Billingsgate, where 
he was apprehended. After conviction he acknowledged that he endeavoured to set 
fire to Mr Knight's house.
	On the day of execution he was conveyed to Kennington Common, where he 
again acknowledged his guilt, and, having spent about a quarter of an hour in 
devotion, underwent the sentence of the law, and was hung in chains on the road 
between Rotherhithe and Deptford.


MAJOR COLIN CAMPBELL 
Cashiered for the murder of Captain M'Kaarg, 1764

  
Captain M'Kaarg killed by Major Campbell

	COLIN CAMPBELL was major-commandant of the hundredth regiment of 
foot when that corps was quartered in the island of Jersey, from whence it embarked 
for Marttinique. Among the officers in this regiment was Captain M'Kaarg, who had 
so far embezzled the money he received to pay his company, that the men were 
starving in the streets of St. Hillary, in Jersey, and was himself so greatly involved in 
debt, that he took methods to elude the payment of what he owed so unbecoming an 
officer and a gentleman, that the secretary at war acquainted Major Campbell, by 
letter, that, if he did not find means to satisfy his creditors, he should be obliged to lay 
his case before his majesty.
	Upon receipt of this letter the major, with the advice of the commander-in-
chief at Jersey, who had before sent to inform him that M'Kaarg's men were begging 
in the streets, took the payment of his company out of his hands.
	This necessary step of his commander M'Kaarg, in his mind, resented, but he 
apparently lived with him upon amicable terms; and, when the troops were embarking 
at Jersey, his necessities became so pressing, that he could not proceed on his voyage 
without pecuniary assistance, which in vain he endeavoured to obtain from the 
paymaster and several other officers. He then applied to Major Campbell; and through 
him alone he was enabled to head his company on board the transports, without which 
he must have staid behind.
	Generous actions we every day see ill requited in civil society. Do a good turn, 
and, unless you follow it up by acceding to extravagant demands, you will too often 
he treated with ingratitude. Resentment follows, and the donor is often impelled to 
violence upon the ingrate.
	M'Kaarg aspersed the character of his benefactor; and the major resorted to 
unjustifiable resentment. He, however, first sent the following letter to the man whom 
he was assured had treated him with dishonour and ingratitude:--
	'Sir, 
	'I am this moment informed that on some occasions you have taken liberties 
with my character unbecoming an officer and a gentleman. I desire an immediate and 
explicit answer, per bearer; and am, till then, 
	'Your humble servant, 
'	C. CAMPBELL.'
	To this letter he received the following answer--
	'Sir, 
	'I have just now received yours, and have taken no liberties with your 
character but what I am able to answer for. 
	'Yours, &c.  
	'J. M'KAARG'
	The moment the major received this answer he went, with a bayonet by his 
side, and a drawn sword in his hand, to Captain M'Kaarg's tent; and his rashness was 
the cause of his disgrace. Hence let officers learn to moderate their passions, and to 
seek lawful reparation for injuries.
	At the court-martial held on Major Campbell it was proved that, thus armed, 
he assailed the tent of Captain M'Kaarg, which he entered, and said to him, 'You have 
aspersed my character–turn out.' The captain replied that 'he had no small sword.' 
Then the major ordered him to turn out as he was: a struggling then ensued, and they 
came out of the tent. Again they struggled, and both fell to the ground; in which 
M'Kaarg was run through the body. When both were down Major Campbell said, 'Beg 
your life, or you are a dead man;' to which the captain replied I do beg my life:' and 
then he exclaimed 'I am a dead man!'–The major then got up, and ordered a surgeon to 
be sent for; but the wound proved mortal, and the captain soon expired.
	This was the substance of the charge against Major Campbell. In his defence 
he attempted to prove that Captain M'Kaarg was armed, which the Court gave no 
credit to, pronouncing the following curious sentence:--
	'The Court, on due consideration of the whole matter before them, are of 
opinion that Major Colin Campbell is guilty of the crime laid to his charge; but there 
not being a majority of voices sufficient to punish with death as required by the 
articles of war, the Court doth adjudge the said major-commandant Colin Campbell to 
be cashiered for the same; and it is the further opinion of the Court he is incapable of 
serving his majesty in any military employment whatever.'
	We have called this a curious sentence, because, if there was not a majority of 
the Court sufficient to punish with death, how could there be a majority sufficient to 
find him guilty of a crime by which he became liable to suffer death? The law 
requires, in capital cases, that three-fourths of the members of a court-martial must 
agree in opinion to find the party guilty. This Court declares that it did find him 
guilty, but could not punish him equal to his offence. If three-fourths had found him 
guilty, they would surely have been sufficient to punish adequately to the guilt found; 
but, as three-fourths did not find him capitally guilty, the Court could not be 
competent to inflict any kind of punishment. On the contrary, upon the very face of 
their opinion and sentence, however guilty, in fact, ha might have been, he was 
entitled to an acquittal in point of law.
	Major Campbell taking offence at the conduct, during this trial, of General 
Monkton, under whom the island of Martinique had been captured, brought the 
following charge against that gallant general, before a court-martial at the horse 
Guards, on the 14th of April, 1764:--
	'For many wrongs and deliberate acts of oppression towards the said Cohn 
Campbell, when under his command, in the island of Martinique, in the year 1762, 
particularly by several acts of affront and indignity, both in the person of the said 
Colin Campbell, and the corps then under his command; and also, whilst a trial was 
pending on a charge exhibited against the said Colin Campbell before a general court 
martial, by discouraging his friends, intimidating his witnesses, and depriving him of 
the lawful means of defence, as well as by suppressing the proceedings of the said 
general court-martial from the Earl of Albemarle, lieutenant-general of his majesty's 
forces, under a pretence of the said proceedings having been transmitted to Great 
Britain, when, in truth, they were still in his own custody; and, furthermore, by a cruel 
confinement of the said Colin Campbell, who was then ill, in a noisome unhealthy 
prison, even though it was at that time known to the said Major-general Monkton that 
the sentence against the said Colin Campbell was not capital.'
	The opinion of the Court on the trial of this victorious general was pronounced 
by the president in these words: 'The Court is of opinion that the charge and complaint 
of Colin Campbell, Esq. against Major-general Robert Monkton is altogether 
unsupported by evidence, and, in some points, extremely contradicted by the 
complainant's own witnesses, and doth hereby most honourably acquit the said Major-
general Robert Monkton of the same, and every part thereof; and the Court is further 
of opinion that the said charge and complaint is groundless, malicious, and 
scandalous, in the highest degree; and tending not only to injure the said major-
general's character, but to hurt the service in general, as it must greatly affect every 
officer, who may have the honour of commanding a body of his majesty's troops, 
when he reflects that his character and reputation are liable to he thus publicly 
attacked by a person who has been dismissed his majesty's service with ignominy.'


JOHN WESKET AND JOHN COOPER 
The Former was executed at Tyburn, 9th of January, 1765, for robbing his 
Master, the Earl of Harrington; and the Latter transported for Fourteen 
Years for receiving Stolen Goods

	JOHN WESKET had been for many years a gentleman's servant, and had 
pilfered from several of his employers. In company with one Bradley he robbed the 
house of a gentleman in Hatton Garden, and also the chambers of Mr Montague, a 
Master in Chancery.
	Wesket was engaged as a porter to Lord Harrington in the year 1762, but 
continued his acquaintance with Bradley, and was likewise intimate with Cooper, who 
kept a chandler's shop in Little Turnstile, at whose house Bradley lodged; and both 
these men visited Wesket at his new place.
	Wesket having formed a plan for robbing his noble master imparted his design 
to the other two. He and Bradley agreed to commit the robbery on the following 
Saturday night, when Lord and Lady Harrington were going to the opera, which 
would give Wesket an opportunity of concealing his accomplice in the house. Wesket 
secreted Bradley in his chamber, and told him to remain there till about midnight, 
when he would come to him.
	Lord Harrington and his lady came from the opera about twelve at night, and 
less than two hours afterwards, when all the family were quiet, Wesket went to his 
accomplice and took him into the kitchen, where an impression from Bradley's dirty 
shoes was made on the dresser, and they then made a similar impression in the area, 
first leaving the kitchen window open, as an intimation that the robber had gone off 
that way.
	They now went into the study, where they lighted a candle; and Wesket having 
forced open the bureau, by means of a gimlet and chisel, they took out notes, jewels 
and money, to the amount of two thousand pounds, all which Wesket assigned to the 
care of Bradley, bidding him carry the booty to Cooper, and then let him out at the 
street door and went to bed.
	When Lord Harrington went into his study he discovered the depredation that 
had been made on his property, whereupon a strict search was made through the 
house, to find which way the thief had escaped; and then it was that the impression of 
Bradley's shoes was noticed on the dresser and in the area. But, as it was observed that 
no footsteps appeared except in the kitchen and area, it was presumed that some 
person within the house had committed the robbery.
	The chisel, gimlet and tinder-box were found by the steward, who interrogated 
Wesket respecting the robbery. Some suspicion arising that he had a concern in it, 
Lord Harrington sent for a magistrate, who questioned all the servants in the strictest 
manner; and Wesket, in whose pocket ten guineas were found, was turned away, on 
the presumption of his guilt, as nothing arose that could justify the magistrate in 
committing him to prison.
	He was no sooner dismissed than he went into one of the boxes at Covent 
Garden Theatre, when Bradley, happening to see him from the gallery, waited for him 
at the playhouse door, after the entertainment was over. Wesket having informed his 
companion of what had passed since the robbery, Bradley told him what booty had 
been obtained, and desired him to come to Cooper's and inspect it. They accordingly 
met on the following day, when Bradley, representing the danger of trying to put off 
the notes in London, proposed to attempt doing it at Chester Fair. This being agreed 
to, Bradley went to the fair, where he purchased a quantity of linen, for which he paid 
the notes to the Irish dealers, and received the balance in cash. The Earl of Harrington 
having kept the number of one of the notes of which he had been robbed, it was 
carried to the bank, where the payment of it was stopped, and it was traced through 
the hands of many persons to those of Mr Smith, a Liverpool merchant, who said he 
took it of Mr Breath, a linen factor, at Newry, in Ireland. Mr Breath being written to, 
his answer was that he received it of a person at Chester Fair, who said his name was 
Walker, and was dressed like a gentleman, but had nothing in his behaviour that could 
warrant his assuming that title.
	On this Lord Harrington's steward went to Chester to endeavour to learn where 
the supposed Walker had lodged during the fair; which he found to have been at the 
house of a shoemaker named Rippington. He learned further that Walker had set out 
for London in a post-chaise, and on his arrival in the metropolis had written a letter 
desiring that a pocket-book, which he had left behind him, might be sent to the St 
Clement's Coffee-House, in the Strand.
	The steward received this letter, and brought it to London and delivered it to 
Sir John Fielding, when it was discovered to be Bradley's writing. Thereupon the 
active magistrate above mentioned caused several persons to attend at the coffee-
house; but no discovery arose from this diligence.
	Bradley's person was immediately described in handbills, which were 
circulated through the kingdom, and a reward was offered for taking him. At this 
juncture a hackney-coachman declared in a public-house that in his hayloft was a 
large chest belonging to one Bradley, and that Cooper had delivered the chest to his 
care; but he knew not its contents. On this Cooper was sent for to Sir John Fielding's; 
and, strong suspicions of the guilt both of him and Wesket arising, they were 
committed to Newgate for trial.
	In a few days Bradley was found, dressed in seaman's apparel, at a public-
house in Wapping, and, being conducted to Bow Street, he made such a declaration 
respecting the robbery that Sir John Fielding thought proper to admit him an evidence 
against the other parties.
	At the next sessions at the Old Bailey, Wesket and Cooper were brought to 
trial, when the former was capitally convicted for the burglary, and sentenced to die; 
and Cooper was sentenced to be transported for fourteen years, as the receiver of 
stolen effects.


BARNEY CARROL AND WILLIAM KING 
Convicted under the Coventry Act for cutting and maiming, and executed at 
Tyburn, 31st of July, 1765

	BY an Act of Parliament passed in the 22nd and 23rd of King Charles II. it 
was enacted that: "If any person, on purpose, and by malice aforethought, and by 
lying in wait, shall unlawfully cut or disable the tongue, put out an eye, slit the nose, 
cut off a nose or lip, or cut off or disable any limb or member of any subject, with 
intention in so doing to maim or disfigure him; the person so offending, his 
counsellors, aiders, abettors (knowing of, and privy to, the offence), shall be guilty of 
felony, without benefit of clergy."
	This Act was called the Coventry Act, because it was made on Sir John 
Coventry's being assaulted in the street and having his nose slit.
	Carrol and King had both been soldiers, and as such behaved unexceptionably, 
particularly at the siege of Havana, where Carrol was distinguished by his bravery; 
but on their return to England they determined to commence as robbers, and this on a 
plan attended with the most infernal cruelty.
	They procured two boys, named Byfield and Matthews, who were to pick 
pockets, and if they were seized the men were to procure their release by cutting the 
parties who held them across their faces with a knife.
	Carrol having sharpened his weapon of destruction, they all went out together 
on the night of the 17th of June, 1765, and, continuing their route from Covent 
Garden to the Strand, saw a gentleman, named Kirby, near Somerset House, who was 
walking very slow, on account of the heat of the weather, which made them think him 
a proper object of attack.
	On this Carrol directed Byfield to pick the gentleman's pocket. Byfield had got 
his hand in the pocket, when Mr Kirby seized him and threatened to carry him before 
a magistrate, but only to terrify him from such practices for the future.
	On this the other three villains followed Mr Kirby so closely that he suspected 
their connection; but he still held the boy, to frighten him the more, though he 
observed Carrol sometimes before and sometimes behind him. At length the villain 
came so near that the boy cried out, "Keep off; the gentleman will let me go!" when 
Carrol replied, "Damn him, but I will cut him!"
	Mr Kirby now felt great pain, but had no idea that he had been wounded by 
any sharp instrument, apprehending that his pain proceeded only from a common 
blow. At length he found a defect in his sight, and presumed that dust had been 
thrown in his eyes; but on putting his hand to his face he found that it streamed with 
blood.
	Going to the Crown and Anchor tavern, in the Strand, Mr Ingram, a surgeon of 
eminence, almost immediately attended him; but, though the utmost expedition was 
used in calling in the assistance of that gentleman, Mr Kirby had lost nearly two 
quarts of blood in the short interval. On examination it appeared that the wound had 
been given in a transverse direction, from the right eye to the left temple; that two 
large vessels were divided by it; that there was a cut across the nose, which left the 
bone visible; and that the eyeballs must have been divided by the slightest deviation 
from the stroke.
	The abominable assassins were very soon apprehended, found guilty, and 
hanged, amid the execrations of an offended multitude.


PATRICK OGILVIE AND CATHARINE NAIRN 
Convicted of Murder. Ogilvie hanged 13th November, 1765, but Nairn 
escaped from custody.

	As the case of these malefactors made a great noise in the world at and after 
the commission of the crime, we shall be the more careful to give all the particulars of 
it.
	At East Miln, in the county of Forfar, in Scotland, lived Mr. Thomas Ogilvie, 
a man of moderate fortune, whose life was of the domestic kind, with his mother, till 
he was about forty years of age, when he married Catharine, the beautiful daughter of 
Sir Thomas Nairn, of Dunsinan, on the 31st of January, 1765, the young lady being 
then about twenty-one years of age.
	(It may be proper to observe that in Scotland women are sometimes called by 
their maiden names after marriage. Hence this unhappy woman is called Nairn instead 
of Ogilvie.)
	Patrick Ogilvie, the brother of Thomas, having served as a lieutenant in the 
East Indies, returned to Scotland soon after the celebration of the nuptials, and went to 
congratulate his brother on the occasion.
	From this visit arose all that scene of distress which gives rise to the following 
narrative; for Patrick having beheld his sister with eyes of unwarrantable love, they 
were seen within three weeks after the wedding, by the servants, walking in the fields 
with too great familiarity, and kissing each other with all the fondness of enraptured 
lovers.
	Soon afterwards Anne Clarke, a kinswoman of Mr. Ogilvie, paying a visit in 
the family, remarked a great intimacy between the lovers, who frequently went to bed 
together without the precaution of shutting the chamber-door. Mrs. Clarke remarked 
on the scandalous impropriety of the lady's conduct; but, so far from blushing at it, 
she boasted of her love for her brother-in-law, with whom she said she would 
abscond, or otherwise give a dose to her husband, whom she detested.
	Mr. Ogilvie the elder was of so pacific a disposition, that, though the criminal 
conversation became every day more conspicuous, he contented himself with 
representing to his brother how much he dishonoured the family by so sinful a 
practice; but he did not even forbid him the house.
	At length he paid the lieutenant a sum of money bequeathed him by his father; 
and then Patrick departed, to take the diversions of the country: but he still 
corresponded with his sister—in-law; and they left letters for each other under a stone, 
and even occasionally met together in the fields.
	When this was known, the injured husband, so far from resenting the conduct 
of his brother, wrote to him, expressing his inclination to bequeath him both his wife 
and the principal part of his estate, saying he would consult his own peace of mind in 
retirement: he even entreated him to return, adding 'My wife cannot be happy without 
you.'
	Mrs. Nairn had, in the mean time, written to Patrick Ogilvie to send her some 
poison; and accordingly he sent her some white arsenic, under the name of salts,for 
her use.
	Mrs. Clarke, above mentioned, no sooner heard that the packet was arrived, 
than she cautioned Mr. Ogilvie not to drink any thing given him by his wife, unless 
she first partook of it: but this precaution proved fruitless; for the unhappy man being 
ill one morning, his wife conveyed a quantity of the arsenic into a basin of tea which 
the maid-servant was carrying to him; and then the base woman waited at his bed-side 
while he drank it.
	The most excruciating pains in his bowels, accompanied with a violent 
retching, was the consequence of this draught, and at nine at night Mr. Ogilvie expired 
in the greatest agony, after a marriage of little more than four months, during which 
he scarcely enjoyed one happy day.
	His brother now gave directions respecting the funeral; but, in the mean time, 
Mrs. Clarke wrote to a younger brother of thedeceased, who was then a student at 
Edinburgh, intimating her suspicions that Mr. Ogilvie had been poisoned. Hereupon 
the young gentleman set out for East Miln, being determined to inquire into the real 
state of the case. He took with him the under-sheriff of the county, and two surgeons. 
The under-sheriff recommended opening the body of the deceased; but, as he had 
been dead six days, and as it was now the middle of June, and the weather intensely 
hot, this was opposed by the surgeons, lest some noisome effluvia should arise from 
the body.
	The presumed murderers were now taken into custody, and committed to the 
prison of Forfar, whence they were removed to Edinburgh, to take their trials in the 
High Court of Justiciary. Mrs. Clarke had concealed herself from the time that the 
murder was committed; but on the 3d of August, 1765, she went to Edinburgh, and 
surrendered her self to the lord-advocate, as the trials of the offenders were to 
commence on the Monday following. Here upon his lordship committed her, and two 
women-servants of the deceased, to the Castle, that there might be no obstruction to 
the course of public justice.
	The prisoners being brought into court on the appointed day, a copy of their 
indictments, with a list of the jury and witnesses, was respectively delivered to them; 
and then the Court was adjourned to the 12th of the same month, at eight in the 
morning.
	In the interim the counsel for the prisoners petitioned the Court that Anne 
Clarke might be removed from her usual place of confinement with the servant-maids, 
lest she should prevail on them to perjure themselves, to the prejudice of the 
prisoners.
	The Court granted the prayer of this petition; and Mrs. Clarke was removed 
into another room: but Lord George Beauclerk, the then commander-in-chief of the 
forces in North Britain, caused her to be conveyed to her former place of confinement, 
on an information that the room in which the governor of the castle had placed her 
was not secure enough to prevent her escape.
	Complaint of this procedure being made by the counsel for the prisoner, Lord 
George insisted that it was his duty to prevent the escape of the evidence, 
notwithstanding any order of Court.
	The trial was at length proceeded upon on Monday, the 12th of August, and 
continued without inter mission till three o'clock on the Wednesday morning, when 
the jury retired, and at four in the afternoon of that day gave their verdict that the 
prisoners were both guilty.
	The lord-advocate now demanded that judgment should be passed on them; 
but this was opposed by their counsel, who urged that there were several informalities 
in the trial, which would destroy the force of the verdict, as they were incompatible 
with the principles of the laws of Scotland.
	On this a debate ensued, which continued near five hours, when the Lord 
Justice Clerk declared that, unless a special plea was stated in arrest of judgment, he 
would pronounce sentence against the prisoners.
	Hereupon it was agreed that, on the following day, at eleven o'clock, the 
arguments in writing should be delivered into court; and, when that was done, a 
farther argument of six hours ensued thereon.
	The counsel for the prisoners, having at length no other plea left to urge, 
hinted that Mrs. Nairn was with child, but did not pretend to say how far she might be 
advanced in her pregnancy.
	On this sentence of death was passed against Patrick Ogilvie, to be executed 
on the 25th of September, in the Grass Market, Edinburgh; and Mrs. Nairn being 
remanded to prison, orders were given for a jury of matrons to be summoned on the 
following day, to inquire into her real situation.
	The Court being once more assembled, the matrons were sworn, and retired; 
and, on their return, declared that they could not determine whether she was pregnant 
or not. On this the judgment against her was suspended till November; and the 
matrons were directed to visit her frequently in the interval.
	The utmost interest of the relations of the convicts was now exerted to prevent 
the disgrace of a public execution, by procuring a reprieve for Mr. Ogilvie, who 
constantly asserted his innocence respecting the death of his brother.
	Such diligence was used in this matter, that Counsellor M'Carty was heard in h 
is behalf before the king in council, where he contended for a right of appealing from 
the decision of the Court of Justiciary to the House of Lords.
	The lord-advocate of Scotland, in reply hereto, insisted that the determination 
of the Court of Justiciary must be final, as it was a criminal court, in which the 
prisoner had been tried and convicted by a jury of his countrymen. He referred to the 
19th article of the Act of Union, by which the Court of Justiciary was established.
	The matter having been maturely considered, Mr. Ogilvie was left to suffer the 
sentence of the law.
	The day before his death he was attended by two clergymen, and several of his 
friends, to whom he made a solemn avowal of his innocence of the facts alleged 
against him, and thought that his brother, who had undertaken the prosecution, had 
behaved in a manner undeservedly rigorous; yet he declared that he should die in 
perfect charity with all mankind.
	At the place of execution he made an address to the populace, still asserting 
his innocence; and, as soon as he had concluded his devotions, he was turned off, 
amidst an immense concourse of people. No sooner was he turned off, than, the rope 
slipping, he dropped to the ground; but, being immediately tied up again, he said 
aloud, ' I adhere to my former confession, and die an innocent man.' This being said, 
he was executed, and his body delivered to a surgeon for dissection.
	This unhappy man suffered in the Grass Market at Edinburgh on the 13th of 
November, 1765.
	Mrs. Nairn having remained in custody till November, it then appeared that 
she was pregnant, on which she was respited till the time when she should be brought 
to bed, which was in the month of January, 1766.
	After she had been delivered a month an order was issued for her execution; 
but, a short time before this event would have taken place, she escaped from the 
prison at nine at night, in the uniform of an officer; and an old footman, who had lived 
in her father's family, being waiting for her with a post-chaise, they set oft together.
	Mrs. Nairn was not missed till near noon on the following day; and persons 
were sent express to reapprehend her; but she had arrived in London before them.
	She now engaged the master of a Dutch fishing-smack to convey her to 
Holland for fifty guineas; but the wind blew with such violence that he was obliged to 
land her on the Kentish shore, whence she travelled to Dover, attended by her faithful 
servant. They immediately got on board the packet-boat bound for Calais; and no 
authentic accounts respecting her have transpired since that period.
	Such were the different fates of two people, who, as far as we can judge of the 
affair, appear to have been involved in the same crime. The one dies, avowing his 
perfect innocence; the other escapes the immediate stroke of justice, which was 
suspended over her by the most slender thread.
	Mysterious are the ways of Providence, and, in the language of Scripture, 'past 
finding out;' but it is for mortals humbly to submit to all its dispensations.
	One pertinent remark will naturally arise on this occasion, viz, the absurdity of 
disproportionate marriages. Mr. Thomas Ogilvie was nearly twice the age of his wife, 
and had therefore much the less chance of happiness with her.
	The bond of marriage will be frequently found to be a rope of sand where 
fortune is made the sole consideration on either side, and where unity of mind, and a 
tolerable equality in aged are not consulted.
	We make this remark for the sake of those parents who may be tempted to 
compel their children to unequal marriages on the idea that riches alone can bestow 
that happiness which must generally, if not always, depend on consent of mind.


PETER M'KINLIE, GEORGE GIDLEY, ANDREW 
ZEKERMAN, AND RICHARD ST. QUINTIN 
Executed for Piracy and Murder, December 19th, 1765

  
Mrs Glass and her daughter imploring the pirates to spare their lives

	BEFORE we enter upon the bloody deeds of these inhuman monsters, we shall 
present our readers with an account of the cruel fortune of Captain Glass, who had 
fought against the enemies of his country; and, after undergoing from them a long 
series of cruel treatment, at length fell a victim to the abominable cruelty of the pirates 
above named.
	This unfortunate man was the son of the Reverend Mr. John Glass, a minister 
of the Church of Scotland, who in several publications zealously opposed the practice 
of religion according to particular forms. The adherents to his religious opinions 
obtained the appellation of Glassites; and his doctrines being first propagated in 
England by Mr. Sandeman, his son-in-law, those who adopted them were called 
Sandemanians. At a very early period young Mr. Glass afforded strong proof of an 
acute and penetrating understanding, greatly beyond what could be reasonably 
expected at his tender years. After the fine genius of this promising youth had 
received some cultivation at a respectable grammar-school, he was removed to the 
University, where he attained to a great proficiency in the sciences. Having taken up 
the degree of Master of Arts, he applied himself to the study of physic and surgery, in 
which he made a rapid progress. He afterwards engaged as a surgeon on board a 
trading vessel bound to the coast of Guinea; and in that capacity made several 
voyages to America. His superior qualifications gained him a distinguished place in 
the esteem of several capital merchants, who intrusted to him the command of a vessel 
in the Guinea trade; and his conduct proved highly to the advantage of his owners, 
and equally honourable to himself.
	When the war against France was declared, Captain Glass, upon the minute 
review of his affairs, found himself in possession of a very considerable sum; a great 
part of which he determined to venture on board a privateer. He caused a vessel to be 
fitted out with all possible expedition, and took the command on himself. A mutiny 
happened among the sailors when they had been on board about three days; and news 
of this disagreeable circumstance being communicated to the captain, he hastened to 
the vessel, and, going upon deck, dared to single combat any man who should 
presume to dispute his authority; but his challenge was declined! and, by coolly 
representing the dangerous consequences that might result from such unjustiflable 
proceedings, exhorting them to an exact observance of necesssary discipline, and 
assuring them that his utmost endeav ours should be exerted to procure them 
satisfaction in every particular, the harmony and good understanding of his crew were 
restored; and in a short time after the vessel proceeded on her voyage.
	In about ten days they made a prize of a ship, richly laden, belonging to 
France, which they carried into a port in the West Indies. They soon after engaged two 
ships of war, but, after an obstinate contest, were compel led to submit to the superior 
power of the enemy. The captain, however, did not strike his flag till he had received 
a dangerous wound on the shoulder, and the greatest part of his men were slain. He 
was put into one of the French prisons, where he experienced very severe treatment. 
An exchange of prisoners taking place, Captain Glass was no sooner restored to 
freedom than he resolved to make a reserve of two thousand pounds, and to venture 
the remainder of his fortune on board a privateer. He had sailed in his second vessel 
but a short time when he was again conquered by the enemy, and conveyed to a 
French prison. Captain Glass, on his return to England, was esteemed one of the most 
expert, judicious, and intrepid seamen in the British navy. The war being concluded, 
he conceived a design of sailing in search of discoveries; and, in pursuance of this 
plan, he purchased a vessel adapted to his purpose; and, having carefully made every 
necessary preparation for the prosecution of his design, directed his course towards 
the coast of Africa.
	Between the river Senegal and Cape de Verde he discovered a commodious 
harbour, from which circumstance he entertained the reasonable expectation that very 
great commercial advantages would be derived. The captain now returned to England, 
and communicated his discovery to government, who granted him an exclusive trade 
to the harbour for the space of twenty years. That he might be enabled to pursue his 
project with the greater advantage, he engaged in partnership with two or three 
gentlemen of fortune; and a vessel, furnished with all necessary articles, being 
prepared, he sailed for the harbour, where he arrived without meeting with any 
occurrences worthy of recording. He sent one of his men on shore, with orders for 
offering proposals for a commercial intercourse with the natives; but the messenger 
had no sooner landed than he was cruelly murdered by the barbarians. The captain 
now suggested a plan for informing the king of the country that, by opening a trade, 
his subjects would derive great advantages. The king affected the utmost willingness 
to comply with his proposals; but, under the appearance of friendship, endeavored to 
effect his destruction. Having failed in other treacherous schemes, he sent poisoned 
provisions to Captain Glass, who prudently made experiments upon them, and by that 
means preserved his life. Being in great distress for the necessaries of life, Captain 
Glass and three of his men ventured to sea in an open boat, intending to direct their 
course towards the Canaries, for the purpose of purchasing provisions. The natives, 
being apprized of their departure, attempted to plunder the ship; but they were 
effectually repulsed by the remaining part of the crew.
	The men who continued in the vessel being extremely distressed, judging that 
it would be dangerous to remain longer in the harbour, and despairing of their 
captain's re turn so early as was expected, they sailed for England, where they arrived, 
after encountering a variety of dangers, difficulties, and distresses. Captain Glass 
arrived at one of the Canary Islands, and presented a petition to the governor, 
supplicating permission to purchase provisions; but the inhuman Spaniard caused him 
to be apprehended as a spy, and ordered him to be confined in a noisome dungeon, 
where he was allowed no other sustenance than bread and water; and, to aggravate his 
distress, the barbarous tyrant denied him the use of pen, ink, and paper. In this 
unhappy situation the captain remained upwards of six months. At length he climbed 
up to the iron bars that were across the space for admitting light to the dungeon, and 
perceived an English vessel in the harbour. The sight of a vessel belonging to his 
native country inspired him with hopes of regaining his liberty; but his despair was re 
newed upon considering the apparent impossibility of making his miserable fate 
known to those who would be inclined to afford him relief. At length he adopted the 
following experiment:-- by means of a piece of charcoal he wrote his name, and some 
words intimating his distress, upon a biscuit, which he fortunately dropped from the 
grate of the dungeon at the moment when an English sailor was passing beneath. The 
man, observing the captain's name upon the biscuit, carried it to his commander, who 
immediately made application to the governor for the relief of his countryman. In 
consequence of this humane intercession, the cruel and tyrannical Spaniard subjected 
the petitioner to severity of treatment equal to that sustained by Captain Glass. A ship 
that soon afterwards sailed for England conveyed news to our ministry of the arbitrary 
and barbarous conduct of the governor; and, speedy application being made to the 
King of Spain, he issued an order for the release of the two captains. About the time 
that Captain Glass recovered his freedom, his wife and daughter, a young lady about 
twelve years old, remarkable for her beauty and fine accomplishments, arrived at the 
Canaries, on board a ship from London; and their first interview with him afforded a 
scene truly affecting. Captain Glass now embarked, with his wife and daughter, on 
board a ship bound to London, under the command of Captain Cockeran.
	While the ship lay at the Canaries, a plot was concerted between Peter 
M'Kinlie, the boatswain, a native of Ireland; George Gidley, the cook, born in the 
west of Yorkshire; Richard St. Quintin, a native of the same country; and Andrew 
Zekerman, a Dutchman–for murdering all the other persons on hoard, and seizing the 
treasure, which, including what Captain Glass had shipped in behalf of him self and 
his partners, amounted to a hundred thousand pounds in dollars. The villains made 
three attempts on different nights to carry their horrid plan into execution, but were 
prevented through the circumspection of their commander. The conspirators were 
appointed to the night-watch on the 13th of November, when the ship had reached the 
British Channel; and, about midnight, the captain going upon the quarter deck to see 
that all things were disposed in proper order, he, upon his return, was seized by the 
boatswain, who held him while Gidley struck him with an iron bar, and fractured his 
skull, after which they threw him into the sea. Two of the seamen, who were not 
concerned in the conspiracy, hearing the captain's groans, came upon deck, and were 
immediately murdered and thrown overboard.
	Captain Glass, being alarmed, went up the gangway, and judging that a mutiny 
had happened, returned to fetch his sword. M'Kinlie, guessing his design, followed 
him down the steps leading to the cabin, and waited in the dark till the captain 
returned with a drawn sword in his hand, when, getting unperceived behind him, he 
seized both his arms, and then called to his accomplices to murder him. Captain Glass, 
being a very powerful man, had nearly disengaged himself from the ruffian, when 
Zekerman came up, whom the captain wounded in the arm; but before he could 
recover his sword he was overpowered, the other villains soon joining their associates. 
The unhappy man was no sooner disarmed than he was many times run through the 
body; after which he was thrown overboard.
	Mrs. Glass and her daughter now came on deck, and, falling on their knees, 
supplicated for mercy; but they found the villains utterly destitute of the tender 
feelings of humanity; and Zekerman telling them to prepare for death, they embraced 
each other in a most affectionate manner, and were then forced from each other's arms 
and thrown into the sea. Having put all the crew to death, excepting a boy who had 
attended Captain Glass, and another boy who was an apprentice on board the ship, the 
murderers steered towards the Irish coast, and on the 3rd of December found them 
selves within ten leagues of the harbour of Ross. They hoisted out the long-boat, and 
put into it dollars to the amount of two tons; and, after knocking out the windows of 
the ballast ports, rowed towards shore, leaving the two boys to sink with the vessel. 
Captain Glass's boy could not swim, and he therefore soon drowned; but the other lad 
swam to the boat, when Zekerman struck him a violent blow on the breast, which 
occasioned him immediately to sink.
	Having thus massacred eight innocent persons, the villains proceeded to the 
mouth of the river Ross; but, thinking it would be dangerous to go up the river with so 
much riches, they buried two hundred and fifty bags of dollars in the sand, and 
conveyed as much treasure as they could possibly bear about their persons to a village 
called Fishertown, where they stopped for refreshment; and, during their regale, an 
Irishman privately robbed them of a bag containing twelve hundred dollars. On the 
following day they went to Ross, and there sold twelve hundred dollars. Having 
purchased each a pair of pistols, and hired horses for themselves and two guides, they 
rode to Dublin, and took up their residence at the Black Bull, in Thomas Street.
	The wreck of the ship was driven on shore on the day of their leaving Ross; 
and the manner in which the villains had lived at Fishertown and Ross, their general 
behaviour, and other circumstances, being understood as grounds for suspicion of 
their being pirates, an express was dispatched by two gentlemen to the lords of the 
regency at Dublin, exhibiting the several causes of suspicion, and giving a particular 
description of the supposed delinquents. On board the wreck was found a sampler 
worked by Miss Glass, from which it appeared that a part of the work was done on her 
birthday, which afterwards proved to be the day preceding on which the murders were 
perpetrated; and this sampler proved a principal means of leading to a discovery of the 
guilt of these abominable villains.
	The gentlemen who were commissioned to attend the lords of the regency had 
no sooner communicated their business than the lord-mayor and sheriffs were sent 
for; and proper instructions being given them, they on the same night caused M'Kinlie 
and Zekerman to be taken into custody. The prisoners were separately examined, and 
they both confessed the particulars of their guilt, and that their accomeplices had that 
morning hired a post-chaise for Cork, where they meant to embark on a vessel bound 
for England. Gidley and St. Quintin were the next day taken into custody at an inn on 
the road to Cork; and they followed the example of their accomplices, in 
acknowledging themselves guilty. The sheriff of Ross took possession of the effects 
found in the wreck, and the bags of dollars that the villains had buried in the sand, and 
deposited the whole in the treasury of Dublin, for the benefit of the proprietors.
	The prisoners being brought to trial, they confessed them selves guilty of the 
charges alleged in the indictment, and they were condemned, and suffered death, 
December the 19th, 1765, after which their bodies were hung in chains in the 
neighbourhood of Dublin.


WILLIAM WHITTLE 
Excited by religious zeal he murdered his wife and children and was 
executed April 5th, 1766

	THE shocking crimes of this monster in human shape show the danger to be 
apprehended from religious enthusiasm.
	The blood that has been shed, under the pretext of religion, in and since the 
Crusades, or, as they were de nominated, the holy wars, is greater than the torrents 
shed by tyrants fighting for each other's empire.
	William Whittle was a poor ignorant wretch, worked up to a state of frenzy by 
the abominable doctrine of some ignorant popish priest; for this wretched man was a 
Roman Catholic, and murdered his wife and his two children!
	On being interrogated, after conviction, and while under sentence of death, as 
to his motive for committing such horrid deeds, he replied that his priest often told 
him he should be damned for marrying a heretic. But why murder your innocent 
children? To this he answered, 'The mother had carried them to the church of the 
heretics: so they would have been damned if he had not killed them; but now they 
were in purgatory, and would go to heaven in time.'
	This wicked sinner, exulting in his fell deed, was executed on Lancaster Moor, 
April the 5th, 1768, and his body hung in chains.
	Soon after execution, the Rev. Mr. Oliver, who held it a duty to attend the last 
moments of the wretched man, under the hope of working in him contrition, and a 
renunciation of tenets too dangerous to be implanted in weak minds, received the 
following threatening letter, evidently the composition of one of the same persuasion 
as the malefactor:--
	Sir, 
	I make bold to acquaint you, that your house, and every clergyman's that's in 
this town (Lancaster), or any black son of a b--h like you–for you are nothing but 
heretics and damned souls–if William Whittle, that worthy man, hangs up ten days, 
you may fully expect to be blown to damnation.'


JOHN CROUCH AND WIFE 
Convicted for offering to sell, on the Royal Exchange, a Young Girl, 12th of 
May, 1766

	ON the 15th of January, 1766, an elderly man and woman were observed on 
the Royal Exchange, London, with a fine young girl, apparently fourteen years of age, 
but thinly and shabbily clothed, and consequently shivering with cold in that 
inclement season of the year. It was first conceived that they were asking charity, as 
the man had addressed two or three gentlemen, from whom he received a 
contemptuous denial. At length he accosted an honest captain of a ship, who instantly 
made known the base proposal which had been made to him, which was to purchase 
the unfortunate and innocent girl.
	The parties were immediately taken into custody by the beadles of the 
Exchange, and carried before the sitting magistrate at Guildhall, who committed the 
man and woman to prison, as vagrants, and ordered the girl to be taken care of in the 
London Workhouse. On their examination they persisted that the girl was their own 
child; but it appeared so unnatural that parents in Britain should offer for sale their 
offspring that an inquiry into the transaction was set on foot.
	At the general sessions of the peace, held at Guildhall aforesaid, on the 12th of 
May following, this unnatural man and woman were brought to the bar. It appeared 
that the man was named John Crouch, and that his residence was at Bodmin, in 
Cornwall. The woman was his wife, and the unfortunate girl his niece; and having 
heard "that young maidens were very scarce in London, and that they sold for a good 
price," he took her out of the poorhouse there and, accompanied by his wife, had set 
off, and travelled on foot from Bodmin to London, two hundred and thirty-two miles, 
in order to mend their fortune by her sale.
	The jury found the man guilty on an indictment presented against him for an 
offence far short of his crime; but considering the woman under his influence 
acquitted her. The husband was sentenced to six months' imprisonment in Newgate, 
and to pay a fine of one shilling.


THE COUNTESS OF BRISTOL, OTHERWISE THE 
DUCHESS OF KINGSTON 
Whose Trial for Bigamy, at Westminster Hall, was attended by the Queen 
and other Members of the Royal Family

  
Portrait of the Duchess of Kingston

	FEW women have attracted so large a portion of public attention as the 
Countess of Bristol, otherwise the Duchess of Kingston. She was the daughter of 
Colonel Chudleigh, the descendant of an ancient family in the county of Devon; but 
her father dying while she was yet young, her mother was left possessed only of a 
small estate with which to bring her up, and to fit her for that grade of society in 
which from her birth she was entitled to move. Being possessed, however, of 
excellent qualities, she improved the connection which she had among persons of 
fashion, with a view to the future success in life of her daughter. The latter 
meanwhile, as she advanced in years, improved in beauty; and upon her attaining the 
age of eighteen was distinguished as well for the loveliness of her person as for the 
wit and brilliancy of her conversation. Her education had not been neglected; and, 
despite the small fortune possessed by her mother, no opportunity was lost by which 
her mind might be improved, and a means was about this time afforded for the display 
of her accomplishments. The father of George III. held his Court at Leicester House; 
and Mr Pulteney, who then blazed as a meteor on the Opposition benches in the 
House of Commons, was honoured with the particular regard of his Royal Highness. 
Miss Chudleigh had been introduced to Mr Pulteney; and he had admired her for the 
beauties of her mind and of her person, and, his sympathies being excited on her 
behalf, he obtained for her, at the age of eighteen, the appointment of maid-of-honour 
to the Princess of Wales. His efforts, however, did not stop at thus elevating her to a 
situation of the highest honour, but he also endeavoured to improve the cultivation of 
her understanding by instruction; and to him Miss Chudleigh read, and with him, 
when separated by distance, she corresponded.
	The station to which Miss Chudleigh had been advanced, combined with her 
numerous personal attractions, produced her many admirers–some with titles, and 
others in the expectation of them. Among the former was the Duke of Hamilton, 
whom Miss Gunning had afterwards the good fortune to obtain for a consort. The 
Duke was passionately attached to Miss Chudleigh, and pressed his suit with such 
ardour as to obtain a solemn engagement on her part that, on his return from a tour, 
for which he was preparing, she would become his wife. There were reasons why this 
event should not immediately take place; but that the engagement would be fulfilled at 
the specified time was considered by both parties as a moral certainty. A mutual 
pledge was given and accepted; the Duke commenced his proposed tour, and the 
parting condition was, that he should write by every opportunity, and that Miss 
Chudleigh of course should answer his epistles. Thus the arrangement of Fortune 
seemed to have united a pair who possibly might have experienced much happiness, 
for between the Duke and Miss Chudleigh there was a strong similarity of disposition, 
but Fate had not destined them for each other.
	Miss Chudleigh had an aunt, whose name was Hanmer: at her house the Hon. 
Mr Hervey, son of the Earl of Bristol, and a captain in the Royal Navy, was a visitor. 
To this gentleman Mrs Hanmer became so exceedingly partial that she favoured views 
which he entertained towards her niece, and engaged her efforts to effect, if possible, 
a matrimonial connection. There were two difficulties, which would have been 
insurmountable had they not been opposed by the fertile genius of a female–Miss 
Chudleigh disliked Captain Hervey, and she was betrothed to the Duke of Hamilton.
	No exertions which could possibly be made were spared to render this latter 
alliance nugatory; and the wits of this woman were exerted to the utmost to favour the 
object which she had in view. The letters of his Grace were intercepted by Mrs 
Hanmer; and his supposed silence giving offence to her niece, she worked so 
successfully on her pride as to induce her to abandon all thoughts of her lover, whose 
passion she had cherished with delight. A conduct the reverse of that imputed to the 
Duke was observed by Captain Hervey: he was all that assiduity could dictate or 
attention perform. He had daily access to Miss Chudleigh, and each interview was 
artfully improved by the aunt to the promotion of her own views. The letters of his 
Grace of Hamilton, which regularly arrived, were as regularly suppressed; until, 
piqued beyond endurance, Miss Chudleigh was prevailed on to accept the hand of 
Captain Hervey, and by a private marriage to ensure the participation of his future 
honours and fortune. The ceremony was performed in a private chapel adjoining the 
country mansion of Mr Merrill, at Lainston, near Winchester, in Hampshire.
	The hour at which she became united with Captain Hervey proved to her the 
origin of every subsequent unhappiness. The connubial rites were attended with 
unhappy consequences; and from the night following the day on which the marriage 
was solemnised Miss Chudleigh resolved never to have any further connection with 
her husband. To prevail on him not to claim her as his wife required all the art of 
which she was mistress; and the best dissuasive was the loss of her situation as maid-
of-honour should the marriage become publicly known. The circumstances of Captain 
Hervey were not in a flourishing condition, and were ill calculated to enable him to 
ride with a high hand over his wife; and the fear of the loss of the emoluments of her 
office operated most powerfully with him to induce him to obey the injunctions which 
she imposed upon him in this respect. Her marriage being unknown to mere outward 
observers, Miss Chudleigh, or Mrs Hervey–a maid in appearance, a wife in disguise–
was placed in a most enviable condition. Her Royal mistress smiled upon her; the 
friendship of many was at her call; the admiration of none could be withheld from her: 
but amidst all her conquests and all her fancied happiness she wanted that peace of 
mind which was so necessary to support her against the conflicts which arose in her 
own breast. Her husband, quieted for a time, grew obstreperous as he saw the jewel 
admired by all, which was, he felt, entitled only to his love; and feeling that he 
possessed the right to her entire consideration resolved to assert his power. In the 
meantime every art which she possessed had been put into operation to soothe him to 
continued silence; but her further endeavours being unsuccessful she was compelled 
to grant his request, and to attend an interview which he appointed at his own house, 
and to which he enforced obedience by threatening an instant and full disclosure in 
case of her non-compliance. The meeting was strictly private, all persons being sent 
from the house with the exception of a black servant; and on Mrs Hervey's entrance to 
the apartment in which her husband was seated his first care was to prevent all 
intrusion by locking the door. This meeting, like all others between her and her 
husband, was unfortunate in its effects: the fruit of it was the birth of a boy, whose 
existence it will be readily supposed she had much difficulty in concealing. Her 
removal to Brompton for a change of air became requisite during the term of her 
confinernent, and she returned to Leicester House perfectly recovered from her 
indisposition; but the infant soon sinking in the arms of death, left only the tale of its 
existence to be related.
	In the meantime the sum of her unhappiness had been completed by the return 
of the Duke of Hamilton. His Grace had no sooner arrived in England than he 
hastened to pay his adoration at the feet of his idol, and to learn the cause of her 
silence when his letters had been regularly dispatched to her. An interview which took 
place soon set the character of Mrs Hanmer in its true light; but while Miss Chudleigh 
was convinced of the imposition which had been practised upon her, she was unable 
to accept the proffered hand of her illustrious suitor, or to explain the reason for her 
apparently ungracious rejection of his addresses. The Duke, flighty as he was in other 
respects, in his love for Miss Chudleigh had at least been sincere; and this strange 
conduct on the part of his betrothed, followed as it was by a request on her part that he 
would not again intrude his visits upon her, raised emotions in his mind which can 
hardly be described. The rejection of his Grace was followed by that of several other 
persons of distinction; and the mother of Miss Chudleigh, who was quite unaware of 
her private marriage with Captain Hervey, could not conceal her regret and anger at 
the supposed folly of her daughter.
	It was impossible that these circumstances could long remain concealed from 
the society in which Miss Chudleigh moved; and, in order to relieve herself from the 
embarrassments by which she was surrounded, she determined to travel on the 
Continent. Germany was the place selected by her for her travels; and she, in turn, 
visited the chief cities of its principalities. Possessed as she was of introductions of the 
highest class, she was gratified by obtaining the acquaintance of many crowned heads. 
Frederick of Prussia conversed and corresponded with her. In the Electress of Saxony 
she found a friend whose affection for her continued to the latest period of life.
	On her return from the Continent Miss Chudleigh ran over the career of 
pleasure, enlivened the Court circles, and each year became more ingratiated with the 
mistress whom she served. She was the leader of fashion, played whist with Lord 
Chesterfield, and revelled with Lady Harrington and Miss Ashe. She was a constant 
visitant at all public places, and in 1742 appeared at a masked ball in the character of 
Iphigenia.
	Captain Hervey, like a perturbed spirit, was, however, eternally crossing the 
path trodden by his wife. If in the rooms at Bath, he was sure to be there. At a rout, 
ridotto or ball, this destroyer of her peace embittered every pleasure, and even 
menaced her with an intimation that he would disclose the marriage to the Princess.
	Miss Chudleigh, now persuaded of the folly and danger of any longer 
concealment from her Royal mistress, determined that the design which her husband 
had formed from a malicious feeling should be carried out by herself from a principle 
of rectitude; and she, in consequence, communicated to the Princess the whole of the 
circumstances attending her unhappy union. Her Royal mistress pitied her, and 
continued her patronage up to the hour of her death.
	At length a stratagem was either suggested or it occurred to Miss Chudleigh at 
once to deprive Captain Hervey of the power to claim her as his wife. The clergyman 
who had married them was dead. The register-book was in careless hands. A 
handsome compliment was paid for the inspection; and, while the person in whose 
custody it was listened to an amusing story, Miss Chudleigh tore out the register. Thus 
imagining the business accomplished she for a time bade defiance to her husband, 
whose taste for the softer sex having subsided from some unaccountable cause, 
afforded Miss Chudleigh a cessation of inquietude.
	A change in the circumstances of the Captain, however, effected an alteration 
in the feelings of his wife. His father having died, he succeeded to the title of the Earl 
of Bristol, and his accession to nobility was not unaccompanied by an increase of 
fortune. Miss Chudleigh saw that by assuming the title of Countess of Bristol she 
would probably command increased respect, and would obtain greater power; and 
with a degree of unparalleled blindness she went to the house of Mr Merrill, the 
clergyman in whose chapel she had been married, to restore those proofs of her union 
which she had previously taken such pains to destroy. Her ostensible reason was a 
jaunt out of town; her real design was to procure, if possible, the insertion of her 
marriage with Captain Hervey in the book which she had formerly mutilated. With 
this view she dealt out promises with a liberal hand. The officiating clerk, who was a 
person of various avocations, was to be promoted to the extent of his wishes. The 
book was managed by the lady to her content, and she returned to London, secretly 
exulting in the excellence and success of her machination.
	While this was going on, however, her better fate influenced in her favour the 
heart of a man who was the exemplar of amiability–this was the Duke of Kingston; 
but, remarried as it were by her own stratagem, the participation of ducal honours 
became legally impossible. The chains of wedlock now became galling in the 
extreme. Every advice was taken, every means tried, by which her liberation might be 
obtained; but all the efforts which were made proved useless, and it was found to be 
necessary to acquiesce in that which could not be opposed successfully or pass 
unnoticed. The Duke's passion, meanwhile, became more ardent and sincere; and, 
finding the apparent impossibility of a marriage taking place, he for a series of years 
cohabited with Miss Chudleigh, although with such external observances of decorum 
that their intimacy was neither generally remarked nor known.
	The disagreeable nature of these proceedings on their part was, however, felt 
by both parties, and efforts were again made by means of which a marriage might be 
solemnised. The Earl of Bristol was sounded; but upon his learning the design with 
which a divorce was sought he declared that he would never consent to it, for that his 
Countess's vanity should not be flattered by her being raised to the rank of a duchess. 
The negotiations were thus for a time stopped; but afterwards, there being a lady with 
whom he conceived that he could make an advantageous match, he listened to the 
suggestions which were made to him with more complacency, and at length declared 
that he was ready to adopt any proceedings which should have for their effect the 
annihilation of the ties by which he was bound to Miss Chudleigh. The civilians were 
consulted, a jactitation suit was instituted; but the evidence by which the marriage 
could have been proved was kept back, and the Earl of Bristol failing, as it was 
intended he should fail, in substantiating the marriage, a decree was made, declaring 
the claim to be null and unsupported. Legal opinion now only remained to be taken as 
to the effect of this decree, and the lawyers of the Ecclesiastical Courts, highly 
tenacious of the rights and jurisdiction of their own judges, declared their opinion to 
be that the sentence could not be disturbed by the interference of any extrinsic power. 
In the conviction, therefore, of the most perfect safety, the marriage of the Duke of 
Kingston with Miss Chudleigh was publicly solemnised. The wedding favours were 
worn by persons of the highest distinction in the kingdom; and during the lifetime of 
his Grace no attempt was made to dispute the legality of the proceedings. For a few 
years the Duchess figured in the world of gaiety without apprehension or control. She 
was raised to the pinnacle of her fortune, and she enjoyed that which her later life had 
been directed to accomplish–the parade of title–but without that honour which 
integrity of character can alone secure. She was checked in her career of pleasure, 
however, by the death of the Duke. The fortune which his Grace possessed, it appears, 
was not entailed, and it was at his option, therefore, to bequeath it to the Duchess or to 
the heirs of his family, as seemed best to his inclination. His will, excluding from 
every benefit an elder, and preferring a younger, nephew as the heir in tail, gave rise 
to the prosecution of the Duchess, which ended in the beggary of her prosecutor and 
her own exile. The demise of the Duke of Kingston was neither sudden nor 
unexpected. Being attacked with a paralytic affection, he lingered but a short time, 
which was employed by the Duchess in journeying his Grace from town to town, 
under the false idea of prolonging his life by change of air and situation. At last, when 
real danger seemed to threaten, even in the opinion of the Duchess, she dispatched 
one of her swiftest-footed messengers to her solicitor, Mr Field, of the Temple, 
requiring his immediate attendance. He obeyed the summons, and, arriving at the 
house, the Duchess asked him to procure the Duke to execute, and be himself a 
subscribing witness to, a will made without his knowledge, and more to the taste of 
the Duchess than that which had been executed. The difference between these two 
wills was this: the Duke had bequeathed the income of his estates to his relict during 
her life expressly under the condition of her continuing in a state of widowhood. 
Perfectly satisfied, however, as the Duchess seemed with whatever was the inclination 
of her dearest lord, she could not resist the opportunity of carrying her secret wishes 
into effect. She did not relish the temple of Hymen being shut against her. Mr Field, 
however, positively refused either to tender the will or to be in any manner concerned 
in endeavouring to procure its execution; and with this refusal he quitted the house. 
Soon after the frustration of this attempt the Duke of Kingston expired.
	No sooner were the funeral rites performed than the Duchess adjusted her 
affairs and embarked for the Continent, proposing Rome for her temporary residence. 
Ganganelli at that time filled the papal chair. He treated her with the utmost civility–
gave her, as a sovereign prince, many privileges–and she was lodged in the palace of 
one of the cardinals. Her vanity being thus gratified, her Grace, in return, treated the 
Romans with a public spectacle. She had built an elegant pleasure yacht; a gentleman 
who had served in the navy was the commander. Under her orders he sailed for Italy; 
and the vessel, at considerable trouble and expense, was conveyed up the Tiber. The 
sight of an English yacht in this river was one of so unusual a character that it 
attracted crowds of admirers; but, while all seemed happiness and pleasure where the 
barque rested quietly on the waters of the river, proceedings were being concocted in 
London which would effectually put a stop to any momentary sensations of bliss 
which the Duchess might entertain.
	Mrs Craddock, who, in the capacity of a domestic, had witnessed the marriage 
which had been solemnised between her Grace and the Earl of Bristol, found herself 
so reduced in circumstances that she was compelled to apply to Mr Field for 
assistance. The request was rejected; and, not withstanding her assurance that she was 
perfectly well aware of all the circumstances attending the Duchess's marriage, and 
that she should not hesitate to disclose all she knew in a quarter where she would be 
liberally paid–namely, to the disappointed relations of the Duke of Kingston–she was 
set at defiance. Thus refused, starvation stared her in the face; and, stung by the 
ingratitude of the Duchess's solicitor, she immediately set about the work of ruin 
which she contemplated. The Duke of Kingston had borne a marked dislike to one of 
his nephews, Mr Evelyn Meadows, one of the sons of his sister, Lady Frances 
Pierpoint. This gentleman, being excluded from the presumptive heirship, joyfully 
received the intelligence that a method of revenging himself against the Duchess was 
presented to him. He saw Mrs Craddock; learned from her the particulars of the 
statement which she would be able to make upon oath; and, being perfectly satisfied 
of its truth, he preferred a bill of indictment against the Duchess of Kingston for 
bigamy, which was duly returned a true bill. Notice was immediately given to Mr 
Field of the proceedings, and advices were forthwith sent to the Duchess to appear 
and plead to the indictment, to prevent a judgment of outlawry.
	The Duchess's immediate return to England being thus required, she set about 
making the necessary preparations for her journey; and, as money was one of the 
commodities requisite to enable her to commence her homeward march, she 
proceeded to the house of Mr Jenkins, the banker in Rome, in whose hands she had 
placed security for the advance of all such sums as she might require. The opposition 
of her enemies, however, had already commenced; they had adopted a line of policy 
exactly suited to the lady with whom they had to deal. Mr Jenkins was out, and could 
not be found. She apprised him, by letter, of her intended journey, and her consequent 
want of money; but still he avoided seeing her. Suspecting the trick, her Grace was 
not to be trifled with, and, finding all her efforts fail, she took a pair of pistols in her 
pocket and, driving to Mr Jenkins's house, once again demanded to be admitted. The 
customary answer, that Mr Jenkins was out, was given; but the Duchess declared that 
she was determined to wait until she saw him, even if it should not be until a day, 
month or year had elapsed; and she took her seat on the steps of the door, which she 
kept open with the muzzle of one of her pistols, apparently determined to remain 
there. She knew that business would compel his return, if he were not already indoors; 
and at length Mr Jenkins, finding further opposition useless, appeared. The nature of 
her business was soon explained. The conversation was not of the mildest kind. 
Money was demanded, not asked. A little prevarication ensued, but the production of 
a pistol served as the most powerful mode of reasoning, and, the necessary sum being 
instantly obtained, the Duchess quitted Rome. Her journey was retarded before she 
reached the Alps; a violent fever seemed to seize on her vitals: but she recovered, to 
the astonishment of her attendants. An abscess then formed in her side, which 
rendering it impossible for her to endure the motion of the carriage, a kind of litter 
was provided, in which she slowly travelled. In this situation nature was relieved by 
the breaking of the abscess; and, after a painfully tedious journey, the duchess reached 
Calais. At that place she made a pause; and there it was that her apprehension got the 
better of her reason. In idea she was fettered and incarcerated in the worst cell of the 
worst prison in London. She was totally ignorant of the bailable nature of her offence, 
and therefore expected the utmost that can be imagined. Colonel West, a brother of 
the late Lord Delaware, whom the duchess had known in England, became her 
principal associate; but he was not lawyer enough to satisfy her doubts. By the means 
of former connections, and through a benevolence in his own nature, the Earl of 
Mansfield had a private meeting with the duchess and the venerable peer conducted 
himself in a manner which did honour to his heart and character.
	Her spirits being soothed by the interview, the duchess embarked for Dover, 
landed, drove post to Kingston-house, and found friends displaying both zeal and 
alacrity in her cause. The first measure taken was to have the duchess bailed. This was 
done before Lord Mansfield; the Duke of Newcastle, Lord Mountstuart, Mr Glover, 
and other characters of rank attending. The prosecution and consequent trial of the 
duchess becoming objects of magnitude, the public curiosity and expectation were 
proportion ably excited. The duchess had through life distinguished herself as a most 
eccentric character. Her turn of mind was original, and many of her actions were 
without a parallel. Even when she moved in the sphere of amusement, it was in a style 
peculiarly her own. If others invited admiration by a partial display of their charms at 
a masquerade, she at once threw off the veil, and set censure at defiance. Thus, at 
midnight assemblies, where Bacchus revelled, and the altars of Venus were encircled 
by the votaries of love, the duchess, then Miss Chudleigh, appeared almost in the 
unadorned simplicity of primitive nature. The dilemma, therefore, into which she was 
thrown by the pending prosecution, was, to such a character, of the most perplexing 
kind.
	She had already in a manner invited the disgrace, and she now neglected the 
means of preventing it. Mrs Cradock, the only existing evidence against her, again 
personally solicited a maintenance for the remaining years of her life: and voluntarily 
offered, in case a stipend should be settled on her, to retire to her native village, and 
never more intrude. The offer was rejected by the duchess, who would only consent to 
allow her twenty pounds a year, on condition of her sequestering herself in some place 
near the Peak of Derbyshire. This the duchess considered as a most liberal offer; and 
she expressed her astonishment that it should be rejected.

  
The Duchess of Kingston's interview with Foote, the comedian

	Under the assurances of her lawyers, the duchess was as quiet as that 
troublesome monitor, her own heart, would permit her to be; and reconciled in some 
measure to the encounter with which she was about to meet, her repose was most 
painfully disturbed by an adversary, who appeared in a new and most unexpected 
quarter. This was the celebrated Foote, the actor, who, having mixed in the first 
circles of fashion, was perfectly acquainted with the leading transactions of the 
duchess's life, and had resolved to turn his knowledge to his own advantage. As, in the 
opinion of Mandeville, private vices are public benefits, so Foote deemed the crimes 
and vices of individuals lawful game for his wit. On this principle he proceeded with 
the Duchess of Kingston; and he wrote a piece, founded on her life, called "The Trip 
to Calais." The scenes were humorous: the character of the duchess admirably drawn; 
and the effect of the performance of the farce on the stage would have been that which 
was most congenial to the tastes of the scandal-mongers of the day–namely, to make 
the duchess ashamed of herself. The real object of Mr. Foote, however, was one of a 
nature more likely to prove advantageous to himself–it was to obtain money to secure 
the suppression of the piece; and with this view he contrived to have it communicated 
to her grace that the Haymarket Theatre would open with an entertainment in which 
she was taken off to the life. Alarmed at this, she sent for Foote, who attended with 
the piece in his pocket; but having been desired to read it, he had not gone far before 
the character of Lady Kitty Crocodile being introduced, the duchess could no longer 
control her anger, and rising in a violent rage, she exclaimed, "Why, this is 
scandalous; what a wretch you have made me." Mr. Foote assured her that the 
character was not intended to"caricature her;"–even in his serious moments being 
unable to control his desire to pun–for he left her to infer that it was a true picture; and 
the duchess, having taken a few turns about the room, became more composed, and 
requested that the piece might be left for her perusal, engaging that it should be 
returned by the ensuing evening. The actor readily complied, and retired; but the lady 
being left to consider her own portrait, was so displeased with the likeness, that she 
determined, if possible, to prevent its exposure on the stage. The artist had no 
objection to sell his work, and she was inclined to become the purchaser; but on the 
former being questioned as to the sum which he should expect for suppressing the 
piece, he proportioned his expectations to what he deemed the duchess's power of 
gratifying them, and demanded two thousand guineas, besides a sum to be paid as 
compensation for the loss of the scenes, which had been painted for the farce, and 
which were not applicable to any other purpose. The magnitude of the demand, as 
well it might, staggered the duchess; and having intimated her extreme astonishment 
at so exorbitant a proposition, she expressed a wish that the sum might be fixed at one 
within the bounds of moderation and reason. The actor was positive; concluding, that 
as his was the only article in the market, he might name his own price: but the result 
was, that by demanding too much, he lost all. A cheque for fourteen hundred pounds 
was offered; the amount was increased to sixteen hundred pounds, and a draft on 
Messrs. Drummond's was actually signed; but the obstinacy of the actor was so great, 
that he refused to abate one guinea from his original demand. The circumstance might 
at any other time have passed among the indifferent events of the day, and as wholly 
undeserving of the public notice; but those long connected with the duchess, and in 
habits of intimacy, felt the attack made on her as directed by a ruffian hand, at a 
moment when she was least able to make resistance. His grace the Duke of Newcastle 
was consulted. The chamberlain of the household (the Earl of Hertford) was apprised 
of the circumstance; and his prohibitory interference was earnestly solicited. He sent 
for the manuscript copy of "The Trip to Calais," perused, and censured it.
	But besides these and other powerful aids, the duchess called in professional 
advice. The sages of the robe were consulted, and their opinions were that the piece 
was a malicious libel; and that, should it be represented, a shorthand writer ought to 
be employed to attend on the night of representation, to minute each offensive 
passage, as the groundwork of a prosecution. This advice was followed, and Foote 
was intimidated. He denied having made a demand of two thousand guineas; but the 
Rev Mr Foster contradicted him in an affidavit. Thus defeated in point of fact, Foote 
found himself baffled also in point of design. The chamberlain would not permit the 
piece to be represented.
	Foote now had recourse to another expedient. He caused it to be intimated 
"that it was in his power to publish if not to perform; but were his expenses 
reimbursed (and the sum which her grace had formerly offered would do the 
business), he would desist." This being communicated to the duchess, she in this, as in 
too many cases, asked the opinion of her friends, with a secret determination to follow 
her own. Foote, finding that she began to yield, pressed his desire incessantly; and she 
had actually provided bills to the amount of one thousand six hundred pounds, which 
she would have given him but for the Rev Mr Jackson, who, being asked his opinion 
of the demand, returned this answer: "Instead of complying with it, your grace should 
obtain complete evidence of the menace and demand, and then consult your counsel 
whether a prosecution will not lie for endeavouring to extort money by threats. Your 
grace must remember the attack on the first Duke of Marlborough by a stranger, who 
had formed a design either on his purse or his interest, and endeavoured to menace 
him into a compliance." This answer struck the Earl of Peterborough and Mr Foster 
very forcibly, as in perfect coincidence with their own opinions; and Mr Jackson was 
then solicited to wait on Mr Foote; Mr Foster, the chaplain of the duchess, professing 
himself to be too far advanced in years to enter into the field of literary combat. Mr 
Jackson consented to be the champion on the following condition: that the duchess 
would give her honour never to retract her determination, nor to let Foote extort from 
her a single guinea. Her grace subscribing to this condition, Mr Jackson waited on Mr 
Foote at his house in Suffolk-street, and intimated to him the resolution to which the 
duchess had come. The actor, however, still wished to have matters compromised; and 
to this end he addressed a letter to the duchess, which began with stating "that a 
member of the privy council and a friend of her grace (by whom he meant the Duke of 
Newcastle) had conversed with him on the subject of the dispute between them; and 
that, for himself, he was ready to have every thing adjusted." This letter afforded the 
duchess a triumph. Every line contained a concession; and, contrary to the advice of 
her friends, she insisted upon the publication of the whole correspondence.
	This circumstance for a time served to turn the current of attention into a new 
channel. But while the public notice was withdrawn from her grace, she felt too 
heavily the necessity which existed to adopt some course to enable her either to evade 
or meet the impending danger. Her line of procedure was soon determined upon–she 
affected an earnest desire to have the trial, if possible, accelerated, while in secret she 
took every means in her power to evade the measures which her opponents had taken 
against her, Her conduct in other respects appears to have been strangely inconsistent. 
An opportunity presented itself which remained only to be embraced to secure her 
object. It became the subject of a discussion in the House of Lords whether the trial of 
her grace should not be conducted in Westminster Hall; and the expense which would 
necessarily be incurred by the country was by many urged as being a burden which 
ought not to rest upon the public purse. Lord Mansfield, privately desiring to save the 
duchess from the disgrace and ignominy of a public trial, strove to avail himself of 
this objection in her favour; and so great had become the differences of opinion 
entertained upon the subject, that the withdrawal of the prosecution altogether would 
have been a matter which would have been considered desirable rather than improper. 
Here then was the critical moment at which the duchess might have determined her 
future fate. A hint was privately conveyed to her that the sum of ten thousand pounds 
would satisfy every expectation, and put an end to the prosecution; and doubts being 
expressed of the sincerity of the proposal; the offer was made in distinct terms. The 
duchess was entreated by her friends to accept the proposition which was made, and 
so at once to relieve herself and them from all fear of the consequences which might 
result to her; but through a fatal mistaken confidence either in the legal construction 
of her case, or in her own machinations, she refused to accede to the offers which 
were held out. Resting assured of her acquittal, she resisted every attempt at 
dissuasion from her purpose of going to trial; and she assumed an air of indifference 
about the business which but ill accorded with the doubtful nature of her position. She 
talked of the absolute necessity of setting out for Rome; affected to have some 
material business to settle with the Pope; and, in consequence, took every means and 
urged every argument in her power to procure the speedy termination of the 
proceedings–as if the regular course of justice had not been swift enough to overtake 
her. In the midst of her confidence, however, she did not abandon her manoeuvring; 
but at the very moment when she was petitioning for a speedy trial, she was engaged 
in a scheme to get rid of the principal witness against her. Mrs Cradock, to whom 
before she had refused a trifling remuneration, might now have demanded thousands 
as the price of her evidence. A negotiation was carried on through the medium of a 
relation of hers, who was a letter-carrier, which had for its object her removal from 
England; and an interview was arranged to take place between her and the duchess, at 
which the latter was to appear disguised, and was to reveal herself only after some 
conversation, the object of which was that terms might be proposed; but her grace was 
duped: for having changed her clothes to those of a man, she waited at the am pointed 
hour and place without seeing either Mrs Cradock or the person who had promised to 
effect the meeting; and she afterwards learned that every particular of this business 
had been communicated to the prosecutors, who instructed the letter-carrier to pretend 
an acquiescence in the scheme.
	Thus baffled in a project which had a plausible appearance of success, the only 
method left was the best possible arrangement of matters preparatory to the trial.

  
The trial of the Duchess of Kingston

	About nine o'clock in the morning of Monday the 15th of April, 1776, the 
peeresses, foreign ambassadors, &c. concluded the ceremony of assuming their 
respective places in Westminster hall: and at half past ten her majesty, accompanied 
by the prince of Wales, the bishop of Osnaburgh, two other young princes, and the 
princess royal, and attended by lord and lady Holdernesse, lord Hinchinbroke, and 
others of the nobility, entered the hall from the duke of Newcastle's house in New 
Palace Yard, and took her seat in the centre of his grace's gallery.
	The procession came into the hall in the following order at a quarter past 
eleven: the eldest sons of peers, preceded by the domestics of the lord high steward, 
masters in chancery, king's serjeants and judges, barons, bishops, viscounts, earls, 
marquesses and dukes; the serjeant at arms, the lord high steward with black rod on 
his right, and garter on his left; the lord president, and the lord privy seal. The barons 
proceeded to their seats next the bar, the junior barons taking the left hand seat next 
the bar, and the other barons following in that order till the seats were filled in the 
front of the court. The archbishops and bishops occupied the side benches on the 
right, and the dukes the benches extending from the throne to the table.
	The persons who composed the court having taken their seats with the usual 
formalities, the lord high steward directed the clerk of the crown to read the 
certiorari, the return thereof, the caption of the indictment, the indictment itself, and 
other official papers; which being done, the serjeant at arms made proclamation for 
the usher of the black rod to place the prisoner at the bar.
	The duchess then came forward, attended by Mrs Egerton, Mrs Barrington, 
and Miss Chudleigh, three of the ladies of her bedchamber, and her chaplain, 
physician, and apothecary; and as she approached the bar she made three reverences, 
and then dropped on her knees, when the lord high steward said, 'Madam, you may 
rise.' Having risen, she curtsied to the lord high steward and the house of peers; and 
her compliments were returned.
	Proclamation being made for silence, the lord high steward mentioned to the 
prisoner the fatal consequences attending the crime of which she stood indicted, 
signifying that, however alarming and awful her present circumstances, she might 
derive great consolation from considering that she was to be tried by the most liberal, 
candid, and august assembly in the universe.
	The duchess then read a paper, setting forth that she was guiltless of the 
offence alledged against her, and that the agitation of her mind arose, not from the 
consciousness of guilt, but from the painful circumstance of being called before so 
awful a tribunal on a criminal accusation; begging, therefore, that if she was deficient 
in the observance of any ceremonial points, her failure might not he understood as 
proceeding from wilful disrespect, but be attributed to the unfortunate peculiarity of 
her situation. It was added in the paper that she had travelled from Rome in so 
dangerous a state of health, that it was necessary for her to be conveyed in a litter; and 
that she was perfectly satisfied that she should have a fair trial, since the 
determination respecting her cause, on which materially depended her honor and 
fortune, would proceed from the most unprejudiced and august assembly in the world.
	The lord high steward desired the lady to give attention while she was 
arraigned on an indictment for bigamy. Proclamation for silence being made, the 
duchess (who had been permitted to sit) arose, and read a paper, representing to the 
court that she was advised by her counsel to plead the sentence of the ecclesiastical 
court in the year 1769, as a bar to her being tried on the present indictment. The lord 
high steward informed her that she must plead to the indictment; in consequence of 
which she was arraigned; and, being asked by the clerk of the crown whether she was 
guilty of the felony with which she stood charged, she answered with great firmness, 
'Not guilty, my lords.' The clerk of the crown then asking her how she would be tried, 
she said, 'by God and her peers;' on which the clerk said, 'God send your ladyship a 
good deliverance.'
	The serjeant at arms made proclamation for all persons who had evidence to 
produce against the prisoner to appear. The lord high steward requested, that, as his 
seat was so distant from the bar, he might be allowed, for the convenience of hearing, 
to go to the table; to which the court readily acquiesced.
	Mr Dunning, in a concise speech, opened the pleadings in support of the 
prosecution. He was followed by Mr Thurloe, the attorney general, who learnedly 
animadverted on the plea advanced by the prisoner, and said that, being counsel for 
the prosecution, it became his duty to declare his opinion on the case in question, 
which was, that he could not discover any reasonable foundation for the plea urged by 
the prisoner; and he desired that, if there were reasons sufficient to support it, they 
might be produced by the counsel on the opposite side.
	Lord Mansfield moved, that a proper officer from Doctors Commons might 
read the sentence of the ecclesiastical court. Hereupon the attorney general said that it 
would be necessary for all the allegations, replications, &c. on which the sentence was 
founded, to he read; and the clerk of the crown read the allegations, and was 
proceeding with the replications, when Lord Mansfield observed, that it would not be 
necessary to read the latter papers, since the counsel, in the course of their pleadings, 
would introduce the material arguments therein contained.
	Mr Wallace rose to reply to the attorney general, and in an eloquent strain of 
forcible argument endeavoured to prove the determination of the ecclesiastical court 
to be conclusive. Mr Wallace was followed by Mr Mansfield, who displayed great 
ingenuity and learning in support of the same doctrine.
	Doctor Calvert, a civilian, spoke nearly for the space of two hours, and 
produced many precedents to prove the sentence of the consistory court to be 
definitive and irrevocable. The same ground of argument was pursued by Doctor 
Wynne, another civilian, who also quoted several cases in point in behalf of the 
Duchess; and on the conclusion of this gentleman's speech the court was adjourned on 
the motion of Lord Gower.
	The business of the second day was opened by the lord high steward, who 
desired the counsel for her Grace to reply to the arguments advanced on the preceding 
day against evidence being admitted in support of the prosecution.
	The attorney general entered upon a minute examination of the pleadings on 
the other side, and endeavoured to confute the arguments of the counsel and civilians, 
and to prove that the cases they had quoted were ill-applied, and undeserving 
authority. This gentleman spoke about an hour and twenty minutes.
	The solicitor general then arose, and delivered a learned and elaborate speech, 
wherein he was extremely severe on the consistory court, saying he could not allow 
authority to that doctrine which puts the decisions of that court above the cognizance 
of the temporal ones. He said, that if the sentences of the ecclesiastical court were to 
be deemed conclusive, persons addicted to indulge a disposition to variety might each, 
by the exercise of industry and ingenious collusion, gratify his passions with seventy-
five wives before attaining his thirtieth year. His witty and humorous allusions 
frequently provoked a general laugh at the expence of Doctors Commons; and he 
concluded with giving it as his opinion that the supreme court of legislature was 
invested with an indisputable power of reversing the decisions of the consistory 
courts. Mr Dunning spoke next, strongly supporting the arguments of the solicitor 
general, and producing several authorities from the law-books in justification of his 
opinion, that the plea could not be admitted as a bar against calling evidence to prove 
the criminality of the prisoner.
	Doctor Harris, a civilian, rose in behalf of the prosecution; and, taking an 
extensive view of the pleadings of the Doctors Calvert and Wynne, exerted his utmost 
power to prove them nugatory.
	Lord Talbot then addressed the court, observing, that as the matter in agitation 
was of the utmost importance both to the noble prisoner, and the right honourable 
court in general, the pleadings on both sides could not be weighed with too minute an 
attention; and lest the memory should be encumbered (candidly acknowledging that 
he had already heard more than he believed his mind would retain) he moved for the 
court to adjourn to the chamber of parliament. Hereupon the lord high steward came 
from the table to the throne, and requested to be informed whether it was the pleasure 
of the house to adjourn; and the question being put, it passed in the affirmative.
	On Friday, the 19th of April, Mr Wallace was called upon by the lord high 
steward to reply in behalf of the prisoner. Lord Ravensworth then begged he might 
propose question to the counsel at the bar. His lordship's question was, 'Is the sentence 
of the ecclesiastical court in this case final and conclusive, or is it not?' Upon this 
Lord Mansfield said, 'If the noble lord means–Is there any precedent for reversing the 
sentence of the ecclesiastical court? the answer must certainly be in the negative. As 
to any other meaning, the question is in debate among the counsel at the bar, and has 
been so these three days.'
	Mr Wallace then largely expatiated in support of his former cases, and pleaded 
powerfully in refutation of the arguments advanced by the counsel on the opposite 
side, producing many other cases in point, and urging that they were incontrvertble. 
the next speaker was Doctor Calvert, who pleaded very ably in support of the power 
of the ecclesiastical court he concluded with insisting that the sentence of the 
consistory court was indisputably a legal plea in bar of evidence being produced 
against the prisoner.
	It being intimated that the counsel for the Duchess had concluded their replies, 
a motion was made by Lord Gower for adjourning to the parliament chamber, and for 
allowing her Grace permission to retire to her apartment till the peers should return 
into court; upon which the lord high steward adjourned the court about half past three 
o'clock.
	The peers having taken their seats in the parliament chamber, Lord Camden 
proposed the following questions to the judges:-- 'Whether it was their opinion that 
the court had power to call evidence in support of the prosecution? or whether they 
deemed the sentence of the ecclesiastical court conclusive and irrevocable? and 
whether the prosecutor could or could not proceed in this court against the prisoner 
for obtaining the decision of the consistory court by collusion and fraud?' The opinion 
of the judges was, 'That in either case the prosecutor was authorised to enter into 
evidence in support of the indictment on which the prisoner stood arraigned.'
	In conscquence of the above determination, the house, after having withdrawn 
for about half an hour, returned into court; and the lord high steward informed the 
attorney general, that he was directed by their lordships to order him to proceed with 
the trial.
	Mr Attorney then explained the nature of the evidence he meant to produce, 
and recapitulated a great number of facts and circumstances from the year 1742, 
previous to the supposed marriage of her Grace with Mr Hervey, to the time of her 
marriage with the late Duke of Kingston.
	The solicitor general rose to examine the witnesses, and Anne Craddock being 
called to the bar, the Duke of Richmond observed that it would he proper for her to 
stand a a greater distance from the prisoner, and, after some debate on this head, Mr 
Quarme, deputy usher of the black rod, was placed between them. One of the clerks of 
the house put the questions from the counsel, and delivered the answers of the witness 
with an audible voice.
	The evidence of Anne Craddock was to the following purpose:–I have known 
her Grace the Duchess of King ston ever since the year 1742; at which time she came 
on a visit to Mr Merrill's, at Launceston in Hampshire, during the Winchester races. 
At that time I lived in the family of Mrs Hanmer, Miss Chudleigh's aunt, who was 
then on a visit at Mr Merrill's, where Mr Hervey and Miss Chudleigh first met, and 
soon conceived a mutual attachment towards each other. They were privately married 
one evening about eleven o'clock in Launceston church, in the presence of Mr 
Mountney, Mrs Hanmer, the Reverend Mr Ames, the rector, who performed the 
ceremony, and myself. I was ordered out of the church, to entice Mr Merrill's servants 
out of the way. I saw the bride and bridegroom put to bed together; and Mrs Hanmer 
obliged them to rise again: they went to bed together the night following. In a few 
days Mr Hervey was under the necessity of going to Portsmouth, in order to embark 
on board Sir John Danvers's fleet, in which he was a lieutenant; and being ordered to 
call him at five o'clock in the morning, I went into the bed chamber at the appointed 
hour, and found him and his lady sleeping in bed together, and was unwilling to 
disturb them, thinking the delay of an hour or two would not be of any consequence. 
My husband, to whom I was not married till after the time I have mentioned, 
accompanied Mr Hervey in the capacity of his servant. When Mr Hervey returned 
from the Mediterranean, his lady and he lived together. I then thought her in a state of 
pregnancy. Some months after, Mr Hervey went again to sea, and during his absence, 
I was informed that the lady was brought to bed. She herself told me she had a little 
boy at nurse, and that his features greatly resembled those of Mr Hervey.
	The Duke of Grafton asked the witness, whether she had seen the child? and 
she answered in the negative. His Grace also asked, whether, as the ceremony was 
performed at night, there were any lights in the church? In reply to which she said, Mr 
Mountney had a wax light fixed to the crown of his hat. In reply to questions proposed 
by Lord Hillsborough, the witness acknowledged that she had received a letter from 
Mr Fossard, of Piccadilly, containing a promise of a sinecure place, on condition of 
her appearing to give evidence against the lady at the bar, and expressing that if she 
thought proper she might shew the letter to Mr Hervey.
	On Saturday the 20th of April Anne Craddock was further examined. The 
Lords Derby, Hillsborough, Buckinghamshire, and others, questioning her whether 
she had not been promised a reward by the prosecutor on condition of her giving 
evidence to convict the prisoner; her answers were evasive, but she was at length 
brought to acknowledge that pecuniary offers had been made to induce her to give 
evidence in support of the prosecution.
	Mrs Sophia Pettiplace, sister to Lord Howe, was next examined; but her 
evidence was of no consequence. She lived with her Grace at the time when her 
supposed marriage took place with Mr Hervey, but was not present at the ceremony; 
and she only believed that the Duchess had mentioned the circumstance to her.
	Caesar Hawkins, Esquire, deposed, that he had been acquainted with the 
Duchess several years, he believed not less than thirty. He had heard of a marriage 
between Mr Hervey and the lady at the bar, which circumstance was afterwards 
mentioned to him by both parties, previous to Mr Hervey's last going to sea. By the 
desire of her Grace he was in the room when the issue of the marriage was born, and 
once saw the child. He was sent for by Mr Hervey soon after his return from sea, and 
desired by him to wait upon the lady, with proposals for procuring a divorce, which he 
accordingly did; when her Grace declared herself absolutely determined against 
listening to such terms; and he knew that many messages passed on the subject. Her 
Grace some time after informed him, at his own house, that she had instituted a 
jactitation suit against Mr Hervey in Doctors Commons. On another visit she appeared 
very grave, and desiring him to retire into another apartment, said she was 
exceedingly unhappy in consequence of an oath, which she had long dreaded, having 
been tendered to her at Doctors Commons to disavow her marriage, which she would 
not do for ten thousand worlds. Upon another visit, a short time after, she informed 
him, that a sentence had passed in her favour at Doctors Commons, which would be 
irrevocable, unless Mr Hervey pursued certain measures within a limited time, which 
she did not apprehend he would do. Hereupon he enquired how she got over the oath; 
and her reply was, that the circumstance of her marriage was so blended with falsities 
that she could easily reconcile the matter to her conscience; since the ceremony was a 
business of so scrambling and shabby a nature, that she could as safely swear she was 
not, as that she was married.
	Judith Philips being called, swore, that she was the widow of the Reverend Mr 
Ames; that she remembered when her late husband performed the marriage ceremony 
between Mr Hervey and the prisoner; that she was not present, but derived her 
information from her husband; that some time after the marriage the lady desired her 
to prevail upon her husband to grant a certificate, which she said she believed her 
husband would not refuse; that Mr Merrill, who accompanied the lady, advised her to 
consult his attorney from Worcester; that in compliance with the attorney's advice a 
register-book was purchased, and the marriage inserted therein, with some late burials 
in the parish. The book was here produced, and the witness swore to the writing of her 
late husband.
	The writing of the reverend Mr Ames was proved by the reverend Mr Inchin, 
and the reverend Mr Dennis; and the entry of a caveat to the duke's will was proved 
by a clerk from Doctor's Commons. The book in which the marriage of the duke of 
Kingston with the lady at the bar was registered on the 8th of March, 1769, was 
produced by the reverend Mr Trebeck of St Margaret's, Westminster; and the reverend 
Mr Samuel Harpur, of the Museum, swore, that he performed the marriage ceremony 
between the parties on the day mentioned in the book produced by Mr Trebeck.
	Monday the 22d of April, after the attorney-general had declared the evidence 
in behalf of the prosecution to be concluded, the lord high steward called upon the 
prisoner for her defence, which she read; and the following are the most material 
arguments it contained to invalidate the evidence adduced by the proseeutor:–she 
appealed to the Searcher of all hearts, that she never considered herself as legally 
married to Mr Hervey; she said that she con sidered herself as a single woman, and as 
such was addressed by the late duke of Kingston; that, influenced by a legitimate 
attachment to his grace, she instituted a suit in the ecclesiastical court, where her 
supposed marriage with Mr Hervey was declared null and void; but, anxious for every 
conscientious as well as legal sanction, she submitted an authentic state of her case to 
the archbishop of Canterbury, who, in the most decisive and unreserved manner, 
declared that she was at liberty to marry, and afterwards granted, and delivered to 
doctor Collier, a special licence for her marriage with the late duke of Kingston. She 
said that, on her marriage, she experienced every mark of gracious esteem from their 
majesties, and her late royal mistress, the princess dowager of Wales, and was 
publicly recognized as duchess of Kingston. Under such respectable sanctions and 
virtuous motives for the conduct she pursued, strengthened by a decision that had 
been esteemed conclusive and irrevocable for the space of seven centuries, if their 
lordships should deem her guilty, on any rigid principle of law, she hoped, nay, she 
was conscious, they would attribute her failure as proceeding from a mistaken 
judgment and erroneous advice, and not censure her for intentional guilt.
	She bestowed the highest encomiums on the deceased duke, and solemnly 
assured the court, that she had in no one instance abused her ascendency over him; 
and that, so far from endeavouring to engross his possessions, she had declared herself 
amply provided for by that fortune for life which he was extremely anxious to 
bequeath in perpetuity. As to the neglect of the duke's eldest nephew, she said it was 
entirely the consequence of his disrespectful behaviour to her; and she was not 
dissatisfied at a preference to another nephew, whose respect and attention to her had 
been such as the duke judged to be her due, in consequence of her advancement to the 
honour of being the wife of his uncle.
	The lord high steward desired Mr Wallace to proceed with the evidence. The 
advocate stated the nature of the evidence he meant to produce to prove that Anne 
Craddock had asserted to different people that she had no recollection of the marriage 
between Mr Hervey and the lady at the bar; and that she placed a reliance on a 
promise of having a provision made for her in consequence of the evidence she was to 
give on the present trial; and, to invalidate the depositions of Judith Phillips, he 
ordered the clerk to read a letter, wherein she supplicated her grace to exert her 
influence to prevent her husband's discharge from the duke's service, and observed, 
that Mrs Phillips had, on the preceding day, swore, that her husband was not 
dismissed, but voluntarily quitted his station in the household of his grace.
	Mr Wallace called Mr Berkley, Lord Bristol's attorney, who said his lordship 
told him he was desirous of obtaining a divorce, and directed him to Anne Craddock, 
sayng she was the only person then living who was present at his marriage; and that, a 
short time previous to the commencement of the jactitation suit, he waited upon Anne 
Craddock, who informed him that her memory was bad and that she could remember 
nothing perfectly in relation to the marriage, which must have been a long time 
before.
	Anne Pritchard deposed that about three months had elapsed since being 
informed by Mrs Craddock that she expected to be provided for soon after the trial, 
and of being enabled to procure a place in the custom-house for one of her relations.
	The lord high steward addressed himself to the court; saying, that their 
lordships had heard the evidence on both sides, and that the importance and solemnity 
of the occasion required that they should severally pronounce their opinions in the 
absence of the prisoner, observing that the junior baron was to speak first–their 
lordships declared the prisoner to be guilty.
	Proclamation was then made that the Usher of the Black Rod should replace 
the prisoner at the bar; and, immediately on her appearing, the Lord High Steward 
informed her that the Lords had maturely considered the evidence adduced against 
her, as well as the testimony of the witnesses who had been called on her behalf, and 
that they had pronounced her guilty of the felony for which she was indicted. He then 
inquired whether she had anything to say why judgment should not be pronounced 
against her.
	The Duchess immediately handed in a paper containing the words, "I plead the 
privilege of the peerage," which were read by the clerk at the table. The Lord High 
Steward then informed her Grace that the Lords had considered the plea, and agreed 
to allow it, adding: "Madam, you will be discharged on paying the usual fees."
	The Duchess during the trial appeared to be perfectly collected, but on 
sentence being pronounced she fainted, and was carried out of court.
	This solemnity was concluded on the 22nd of April, 1776. But the prosecutors 
still had a plan in embryo to confine the person of the Countess of Bristol–for to this 
rank she was now again reduced–to the kingdom, and to deprive her of her personal 
property; and a writ of ne exeat regno was actually in the course of preparation, but 
private notice being conveyed to her of this circumstance she was advised 
immediately to quit the country. In order to conceal her flight she caused her carriage 
to be driven publicly through the streets, and invited a large party to dine at her house; 
but, without waiting to apologise to her guests, she drove to Dover in a post-chaise, 
and there entering a boat with Mr Harvey, the captain of her yacht, she accompanied 
him to Calais. Circumstances of which she had been advised, and which had occurred 
during the period of her absence from Rome, rendered her immediate presence in that 
city necessary, and proceeding thither, without loss of time, she found that a Spanish 
friar, whom she had left in charge of her palace and furniture, had found means to 
convert her property into money, and after having seduced a young English girl, who 
had also been left in the palace, had absconded. Having now obtained the whole of her 
plate from the public bank where she had deposited it, she returned to Calais, which 
she adopted as the best place at which she could fix her residence, in consequence of 
the expeditious communication which existed between that town and London, by 
means of which she might be afforded the earliest intelligence of the proceedings of 
her opponents.
	Their business was now to set aside, if possible, the will of the Duke of 
Kingston. There was no probability of the success of the attempt, but there was 
sufficient doubt upon the subject in the mind of the Countess to keep all her 
apprehensions alive. The will of his Grace of Kingston, however, received every 
confirmation which the Courts of Justice could give, and the object of the Countess 
now was to dissipate rather than expend the income of his estates.
	A house which she had purchased at Calais was not sufficient for her purpose; 
a mansion at Montmartre, near Paris, was fixed on, and the purchase of it was 
negotiated in as short a time as the Countess could desire. This house being in a 
ruinous condition a lawsuit was brought by her. Going to St Petersburg, she turned 
brandy-distiller, but returned to Paris before the lawsuit was settled. The possession of 
such a place, however, was not sufficient for the Countess, and she proceeded to make 
a second purchase of a house, built upon a scale of infinite grandeur. The brother of 
the existing French king was the owner of a domain suited in every respect for the 
residence of a person of such nobility, and the Countess determined to become its 
mistress. It was called the territory of St Assise, and was situated at a pleasant 
distance from Paris, abounding in game of all descriptions, and rich in all the 
luxuriant embellishments of nature. The mansion was of a size which rendered it fit 
for the occupation of a king: it contained three hundred beds. The value of such an 
estate was too considerable to be expected in one payment; she therefore agreed to 
discharge the whole of the sum demanded, which was fifty-five thousand pounds, by 
instalments. The purchase on the part of the Countess was a good one. It afforded not 
only game, but rabbits in plenty; and, finding them of superior quality and flavour, her 
ladyship, during the first week of her possession, had as many killed and sold as 
brought her three hundred guineas. At St Petersburg she had been a distiller of brandy; 
and now at Paris she turned rabbit-merchant.
	Such was her situation when one day, while she was at dinner, her servants 
received the intelligence that judgment respecting the house near Paris had been 
awarded against her, the sudden communication of the news produced an agitation of 
her whole frame. She flew into a violent passion, and burst an internal blood vessel. 
She walked a little about her room, and afterwards said: "I will lie down on the couch; 
I can sleep, and after that I shall be entirely recovered." She seated herself on the 
couch, a female having hold of each hand. In this situation she soon appeared to have 
fallen into a sound sleep, until the women felt her hands colder than ordinary, and she 
was found to have expired. She died on the 26th of August, 1796.


SAMUEL ORTON 
Clerk to the Court of Requests, executed 14th of January,1767, for forging 
Two Letters of Attorney, in the Name of Captain Bishop, by means of which 
he received One Thousand Pounds from the Bank of England

	SAMUEL ORTON was a native of London. While he was in a state of infancy 
his father died, leaving Mrs Orton in possession of a handsome fortune. She was a 
Protestant dissenter, and placed her son under the care of a dissenting minister, at 
whose academy he made some progress in several branches of learning.
	The young man discovered a very strong inclination for trade, and he was 
therefore apprenticed to a reputable dealer in London, to whom he proved a faithful 
and industrious servant. Upon the expiration of his apprenticeship he purchased the 
place of Clerk to the Court of Requests, in the borough of Southwark, which produced 
an income of about three hundred pounds a year.
	He soon afterwards embarked in the wine trade, which he successfully pursued 
some years; and, being generally considered as a man of large property, many 
persons, who supported their credit by the circulation of notes of hand and bills of 
exchange, applied for his endorsements, knowing that his name would give their 
paper currency, and he was so imprudent as to make himself liable to the payment of 
fourteen hundred pounds.
	The persons with whom Mr Orton had engaged in such imprudent connections 
being declared bankrupts, he became answerable to the holders of the notes. Having 
debts of his own to the amount of nine hundred pounds, and the notes for fourteen 
hundred to discharge within a fortnight, he formed the resolution of committing 
forgery.
	A friendship had long subsisted between Mr Orton and Captain Bishop, who, 
upon leaving England, had entrusted him with a letter of attorney, authorising him to 
receive his pay and dividend of bank stock.
	He forged two letters of attorney, by means of which he received a thousand 
pounds at the bank. It must be observed that his intention was not ultimately to 
defraud the Captain, but merely to support his credit till remittances from his 
correspondents should enable him to replace the money; and he flattered himself in 
the opinion that if, through disappointments, he should be unable to restore the 
property before the Captain's return, he would readily excuse his conduct.
	Captain Bishop, being at Portsmouth in August, 1766, wrote to Mr Orton, 
mentioning that his ship was coming round to Woolwich, and that he was desirous of 
an interview as soon as possible after his arrival. Orton wrote the Captain word that he 
would certainly meet him at Woolwich, and, having some business to negotiate at 
Yarmouth, he set out on horseback for that place.
	On his return to London he left his horse at an inn near Charing Cross and 
went into St James's Park, where he accidentally met Captain Bishop, whose ship had 
arrived at Woolwich on the preceding day. They supped together at the Belle 
Sauvage, on Ludgate Hill; and the next day Mr Orton dined with the Captain on board 
his ship, at Woolwich.
	Before leaving Woolwich, Mr Orton intended to inform the Captain of his 
conduct with regard to the money he had received at the bank, but he declined 
introducing the subject upon learning that the Captain meant to remain at Woolwich 
till his ship was cleared, which he expected would be in not less than a week.
	Mr Orton now went a second time to Yarmouth, and, on his return in four 
days, found a letter at his house from Captain Bishop, signifying that, having received 
his pay, he had more money by him than he had occasion for, and therefore desired 
Mr Orton to meet him at the Belle Sauvage and receive a sum in order to dispose of it 
in such a manner as he should judge would prove most advantageous. They met 
according to appointment, and Mr Orton was about to mention the forged letters of 
attorney when the Captain said he was under the necessity of immediately attending 
Admiral Knowles; and they parted with every appearance of friendship, mutually 
promising to meet the following evening.
	The next night he had not been in the house where he had appointed to meet 
Captain Bishop more than half-an-hour when he was arrested for two hundred pounds 
at the suit of the Captain, and immediately conducted to a spunging-house. He was the 
next day examined in the presence of some of the directors of the bank, and 
committed to Newgate in order for trial.
	The violent agitation of spirits which this unfortunate man experienced when 
he was charged with the commission of forgery will not admit of description. Being 
brought to trial, his guilt was proved by indisputable evidence; and he was sentenced 
to be executed.
	While he remained in Newgate his behaviour was perfectly consistent with his 
unhappy circumstances. He was conveyed to the place of execution in a mourning-
coach; and, after he had employed some time in devout prayer, the sentence of the law 
was put in force, and his body was delivered to his friends. Samuel Orton was 
executed at Tyburn, on the 14th of January, 1767.


JOHN WILLIAMSON 
A deliberate and cruel Murderer, who tortured and starved his Wife to 
Death. Executed in Moorfields, 19th of January, 1767

	WILLIAMSON was the son of people in but indifferent circumstances, who 
put him apprentice to a shoemaker. When he came to be a journeyman he pursued his 
business with industry, and in a short time he married an honest and sober woman, by 
whom he had three children. His wife dying, he continued some time a widower, 
maintaining himself and his children in a decent manner.
	At length he contracted an acquaintance with a young woman so deficient in 
point of intellect that it may be said she bordered upon idiocy. Her relations had 
bequeathed her money sufficient for her maintenance, and this circumstance induced 
Williamson to make proposals of marriage, which she accepted. Being asked in 
church, the banns were forbidden by the gentleman appointed guardian to the unhappy 
woman.
	Williamson having procured a licence, the marriage was solemnised; and in 
consequence thereof he received the money that was in the hands of the guardian. 
About three weeks after the marriage he cruelly beat his wife, threw water over her, 
and otherwise treated her with great severity; and this kind of brutality he frequently 
repeated. At length he fastened the miserable creature's hands behind her with 
handcuffs, and, by means of a rope passed through a staple, drew them so tight above 
her head that only the tips of her toes touched the ground.
	On one side of the closet wherein she was confined was now and then put a 
small piece of bread-and-butter, so that she could just touch it with her mouth; and she 
was allowed daily a small portion of water.
	She once remained a whole month without being released from this miserable 
condition; but during that time she occasionally received assistance from a female 
lodger in the house and a little girl, Williamson's daughter by his former wife.
	The girl having once released the poor sufferer, the inhuman villain beat her 
with great severity. When the father was abroad the child frequently gave the unhappy 
woman a stool to stand upon, by which means her pain was in some degree abated. 
This circumstance being discovered by Williamson, he beat the girl in a most 
barbarous manner, and threatened that if she again offended in the same way he would 
punish her with still greater severity.
	Williamson released his wife on the Sunday preceding the day on which she 
died, and at dinner-time cut her some meat, of which, however, she ate only a very 
small quantity. This partial indulgence he supposed would prove a favourable 
circumstance for him, in case of being accused of murder.
	Her hands being greatly swelled, through the coldness of the weather and the 
pain occasioned by the handcuffs, she begged to be permitted to go near the fire, and, 
the daughter joining in her request, Williamson complied. When she had sat a few 
minutes, Williamson, observing her throwing the vermin that swarmed upon her 
clothes into the fire, ordered her to "return to her kennel." Thereupon she returned to 
the closet, the door of which was then locked till next day, when she was found to be 
in a delirious state, in which she continued till the time of her death, which happened 
about two o'clock on the Tuesday morning.
	The coroner's jury being summoned to sit on the body, and evidence being 
adduced to incriminate Williamson, he was committed to Newgate. At the ensuing 
sessions at the Old Bailey he was brought to trial before Lord Chief Baron Parker, and 
sentenced to death. From the time of his commitment to prison till the time of his 
execution he behaved in a very decent and penitent manner. The gallows was placed 
on the rising ground opposite Chiswell Street, in Moorfields. After he had sung a 
psalm and prayed some time, with an appearance of great devotion, he was turned off, 
amidst an amazing concourse of people. His body was conveyed to Surgeons' Hall for 
dissection, and his children were placed in Cripplegate Workhouse.


ELIZABETH BROWNRIGG 
Executed at Tyburn, 14th of September, 1767, for torturing her Female 
Apprentices to Death

  
Portrait of Elizabeth Brownrigg

	THE long and excruciating torture in which this inhuman woman kept the 
innocent object of her remorseless cruelty, before she finished the long-premeditated 
murder, more engaged the attention and roused the indignation of all ranks, than any 
criminal in the whole course of our melancholy narratives.
	Elizabeth Brownrigg was married to James Brownrigg, a plumber, who, after 
being seven years in Greenwich, came to London and took a house in Flower-de-Luce 
Court, Fleet Street, where he carried on a considerable share of business, and had a 
little house at Islington for an occasional retreat.
	She had been the mother of sixteen children, and, having practised midwifery, 
was appointed by the overseers of the poor of St Dunstan's parish to take care of the 
poor women in the workhouse; which duty she performed to the entire satisfaction of 
her employers.
	Mary Mitchell, a poor girl, of the precinct of Whitefriars, was put apprentice 
to Mrs Brownrigg in the year 1765; and at about the same time Mary Jones, one of the 
children of the Foundling Hospital, was likewise placed with her in the same capacity; 
and she had other apprentices. As Mrs Brownrigg received pregnant women to lie-in 
privately, these girls were taken with a view of saving the expense of women-
servants. At first the poor orphans were treated with some degree of civility; but this 
was soon changed for the most savage barbarity. Having laid Mary Jones across two 
chairs in the kitchen, she whipped her with such wanton cruelty that she was 
occasionally obliged to desist through mere weariness. This treatment was frequently 
repeated; and Mrs Brownrigg used to throw water on her when she had done 
whipping her, and sometimes she would dip her head into a pail of water. The room 
appointed for the girl to sleep in adjoined the passage leading to the street door, and, 
as she had received many wounds on her head, shoulders and various parts of her 
body, she determined not to bear such treatment any longer if she could effect her 
escape.
	Observing that the key was left in the street door when the family went to bed, 
she opened the door cautiously one morning and escaped into the street. Thus freed 
from her horrid confinement, she repeatedly inquired her way to the Foundling 
Hospital till she found it, and was admitted, after describing in what manner she had 
been treated, and showing the bruises she had received. The child having been 
examined by a surgeon, who found her wounds to be of a most alarming nature, the 
governors of the hospital ordered Mr Plumbtree, their solicitor, to write to James 
Brownrigg, threatening a prosecution if he did not give a proper reason for the 
severities exercised towards the child.
	No notice of this having been taken, and the governors of the hospital thinking 
it imprudent to indict at common law, the girl was discharged, in consequence of an 
application to the Chamberlain of London. The other girl, Mary Mitchell, continued 
with her mistress for the space of a year, during which she was treated with equal 
cruelty, and she also resolved to quit her service. Having escaped out of the house, she 
was met in the street by the younger son of Brownrigg, who forced her to return 
home, where her sufferings were greatly aggravated on account of her elopement. In 
the interim the overseers of the precinct of Whitefriars bound Mary Clifford to 
Brownrigg; it was not long before she experienced similar cruelties to those inflicted 
on the other poor girls, and possibly still more severe. She was frequently tied up 
naked and beaten with a hearth broom, a horsewhip or a cane till she was absolutely 
speechless. This poor girl having a natural infirmity, the mistress would not permit her 
to lie in a bed, but placed her on a mat in a coal-hole that was remarkably cold; 
however, after some time, a sack and a quantity of straw formed her bed, instead of 
the mat. During her confinement in this wretched situation she had nothing to subsist 
on but bread and water; and her covering, during the night, consisted only of her own 
clothes, so that she sometimes lay almost perished with cold.
	On a particular occasion, when she was almost starving with hunger, she broke 
open a cupboard in search of food, but found it empty; and on another occasion she 
broke down some boards, in order to procure a draught of water. Though she was thus 
pressed for the humblest necessaries of life, Mrs Brownrigg determined to punish her 
with rigour for the means she had taken to supply herself with them. On this she 
caused the girl to strip to the skin, and during the course of a whole day, while she 
remained naked, she repeatedly beat her with the butt-end of a whip.
	In the course of this most inhuman treatment a jack-chain was fixed round her 
neck, the end of which was fastened to the yard door, and then it was pulled as tight as 
possible without strangling her. A day being passed in the practice of these savage 
barbarities, the girl was remanded to the coal-hole at night, her hands being tied 
behind her, and the chain still remaining about her neck.
	The husband being obliged to find his wife's apprentices in wearing apparel, 
they were repeatedly stripped naked, and kept so for whole days, if their garments 
happened to be torn. Sometimes Mrs Brownrigg, when resolved on uncommon 
severity, used to tie their hands with a cord and draw them up to a water-pipe which 
ran across the ceiling in the kitchen; but that giving way, she desired her husband to 
fix a hook in the beam, through which a cord was drawn, and, their arms being 
extended, she used to horsewhip them till she was weary, and till the blood flowed at 
every stroke.
	The elder son one day directed Mary Clifford to put up a half-tester bedstead, 
but the poor girl was unable to do it; on which he beat her till she could no longer 
support his severity; and at another time, when the mother had been whipping her in 
the kitchen till she was absolutely tired, the son renewed the savage treatment. Mrs 
Brownrigg would sometimes seize the poor girl by the cheeks and, forcing the skin 
down violently with her fingers, cause the blood to gush from her eyes.
	Mary Clifford, unable to bear these repeated severities, complained of her hard 
treatment to a French lady who lodged in the house; and she having represented the 
impropriety of such behaviour to Mrs Brownrigg, the inhuman monster flew at the 
girl and cut her tongue in two places with a pair of scissors.

  
Elizabeth Brownrigg flogging her apprentice

	On the morning of the 13th of July this barbarous woman went into the 
kitchen and, after obliging Mary Clifford to strip to the skin, drew her up to the staple; 
and though her body was an entire sore, from former bruises, yet this wretch renewed 
her cruelties with her accustomed severity.
	After whipping her till the blood streamed down her body she let her down, 
and made her wash herself in a tub of cold water, Mary Mitchell, the other poor girl, 
being present during this transaction. While Clifford was washing herself Mrs 
Brownrigg struck her on the shoulders, already sore with former bruises, with the 
butt-end of a whip; and she treated the child in this manner five times in the same day.
	The poor girl's wounds now began to shew evident signs of mortification; and 
it is probable that she might have been privately buried, and the murderess escaped 
detection, but for the following circumstance. Mary Clifford's mother-in-law, who had 
resided some time in the country, came to town, and enquired after the child; and 
being informed that she was placed at Brownrigg's, she went thither, but was refused 
admittance by Mr Brownrigg, who even threatened to carry her before the lord-mayor 
if she came there to make farther disturbances.
	Hereupon the mother-in-law was going away, when Mrs Deacon, wife of Mr 
Deacon, baker at the adjoining house, called her in, and informed her that she and her 
family had often heard moanings and groans issue from Brownrigg's house, and that 
she suspected the apprentices were treated with unwarrantable severity. Mrs Deacon 
likewise promised to exert herself to come at the truth of the affair.
	At this juncture Mr Brownrigg, going to Hampstead on business, bought a 
hog, which he sent home. This hog was put into a covered yard, to which there was a 
sky-light, which it was thought necessary to remove, in order to give air to the animal.
	As soon as it was known that the sky-light was removed, Mr Deacon ordered 
his servants to watch, in order, if possible, to discover the girls. Deacon's servant-
maid, looking from a window, saw one of the girls stooping down; on which she 
called her mistress, and she desired the attendance of some of the neighbours, who, 
having been witnesses of the shocking scene, some men got upon the leads, and 
dropped bits of dirt, to induce the girl to speak to them; but she seemed wholly 
incapable.
	Hereupon Mrs Deacon sent to the girl's mother-in-law, who going to the 
overseers who had placed out the child, they called on Mr Grundy, one of the 
overseers of St Dunstan's, and all of them going together, they demanded a sight of 
Mary Clifford: but Brownrigg, who had nicknamed her Nan, told them that he knew 
no such person, but if they wanted to see Mary (meaning Mary Mitchell), they might; 
and accordingly produced her.
	Mr Deacon's servant now declared that Mary Mitchell was not the girl who 
had been seen in the shocking situation abovementioned; on which Mr Grundy sent 
for a constable, to search the house, which was done; but no discovery was then made.
	Mr Brownrigg threatened highly; but Mr Grundy, with the spirit that became 
the officer of a parish, took Mary Mitchell with him to the workhouse, where, on the 
taking off her leathern-boddice, it stuck so fast to her wounds, that she shrieked with 
the pain: but, on being treated with great humanity, and told that she should not be 
sent back to Brownrigg's, she gave an account of the horrid treatment that she and 
Mary Clifford had sustained; and confessed that she had met the latter on the stairs 
just before they came to the house.
	On this Mr Grundy and some others returned to the house, to make a stricter 
search; on which Brownrigg sent for a lawyer, in order to intimidate them, and even 
threatened a prosecution, unless they immediately quitted the house.
	Unterrified by these threats, Mr Grundy sent for a coach to carry Brownrigg to 
the compter; on which the latter promised to produce the girl in half an hour, if the 
coach was discharged. This being consented to, the girl was produced from a 
cupboard, under a beauset in the dining-room, after a pair of shoes, which young 
Brownrigg had in his hand during the proposal, had been put upon her.
	It is not in language to describe the miserable appearance this poor girl made: 
almost her whole body was ulcerated. Being taken to the workhouse, an apothecary 
was sent for, who pronounced her to be in danger.
	Brownrigg was conveyed to Wood Street Compter; but his wife and son made 
their escape, taking with them a gold watch and some money. Mr Brownrigg was 
carried before Alderman Crossby, who committed him, and ordered the girls to be 
taken to St Bartholomew's Hospital, where Mary Clifford died within a few days. The 
coroner's inquest was summoned, and found a verdict of wilful murder against James 
and Elizabeth Brownrigg, and John, their son.
	In the meantime Mrs Brownrigg and her son shifted from place to place in 
London, bought clothes in Rag Fair to disguise themselves, and then went to 
Wandsworth, where they took lodgings in the house of Mr Dunbar, who kept a 
chandler's shop.
	This chandler, happening to read a newspaper on the 15th of August, saw an 
advertisement which so clearly described his lodgers that he had no doubt but they 
were the murderers. A constable went to the house, and the mother and son were 
conveyed to London. At the ensuing sessions at the Old Bailey the father, mother and 
son were indicted, when Elizabeth Brownrigg, after a trial of eleven hours, was found 
guilty of murder, and ordered for execution; but the man and his son, being acquitted 
of the higher charge, were detained, to take their trials for a misdemeanour, of which 
they were convicted, and imprisoned for the space of six months.
	After sentence of death was passed on Mrs Brownrigg, she was attended by a 
clergyman, to whom she confessed the enormity of her crime) and acknowledged the 
justice of the sentence by which she had been condemned.
	The parting between her and her husband and son, on the morning of her, 
execution, was affecting beyond description. The son falling on his knees, she bent 
herself to him, and embraced him. The husband was kneeling on the other side; she 
also kneeled down, and, having besought the Almighty to have mercy on her soul, 
said 'Dear James, I beg that God, for Christ's sake, will be reconciled, and that he will 
not leave me, nor forsake me, in the hour of death, and in the day of judgment.'
	On her way to the place of execution the people expressed their abhorrence of 
her crime in terms which, though not proper for the occasion, testified their 
astonishment that such a wretch could have existed: they even prayed for her 
damnation instead of her salvation: they doubted not but that 'the devil would fetch 
her,' and hoped that 'she would go to hell.' Such were the sentiments of the mob.
	At the place of execution this miserable woman joined in prayers with the 
ordinary of Newgate, whom she desired to declare to the multitude, that she confessed 
her guilt, and acknowledged the justice of her sentence.
	After execution her body was put into a hackney-coach, conveyed to Surgeons' 
Hall, dissected and anatomised; and her skeleton was hung up in Surgeons' Hall.
	What is it possible to say on this subject that will not have occurred to every 
reader of feeling and humanity? This more than common murder–this murder by 
inches, has something so shocking in its nature, something so infernal in its progress, 
that there is no language in which to express our abhorrence of it.
	That Mrs Brownrigg, a midwife by profession, and herself the mother of many 
children, should wantonly murder the children of other women, is truly astonishing, 
and can only be accounted for by that depravity of human nature, which philosophers 
have always disputed, but which true christians will be ready to allow.
	Let her crimes be buried, though her skeleton be exposed; and may no one 
hereafter be found hardy enough to copy those crimes!
	Women who have the care of children from parish workhouses, or hospitals, 
should consider themselves at once as mistresses and as mothers; nor ever permit the 
strictness of the former character to preponderate over the humanity of the latter.


WILLIAM GUEST 
Executed at Tyburn, 14th of October, 1767, for High Treason, in 
diminishing the Current Coin of the Realm

	THIS man's crime was aggravated by a breach of public trust. He was the son 
of a clergyman of unblemished character, of the city of Worcester, who placed him 
apprentice to a genteel business.
	He then came to London and took a shop in Holborn, where he carried on 
business for some years, with the usual success of trade. His father's good name 
assisted him in procuring a clerkship in the Bank of England, and there the constant 
handling of gold shook his integrity. He took a house in Broad Street Buildings, in a 
room in the upper part of which he used to work. Having procured a curious machine 
for milling guineas, not unlike a machine made use of by mathematical-instrument 
makers, he used to take guineas from his drawer at the bank, file them, and then return 
them to the bank and take out guineas of full weight in their stead. Of their filings he 
made ingots, which he sold to an assayer, who, on his trial, deposed that the filings 
were of the same standard as our guineas.
	The cashier of the bank, having his suspicions aroused, sent Mr Sewallis and 
Mr Humberton, servants of the bank, with proper officers to search Mr Guest's house 
in Broad Street Buildings. In a room up two pair of stairs there stood a mahogany nest 
of drawers, in which, on being broken open, were found a vice, files, and an 
instrument proper for milling the edges of guineas.
	Mr Throughton, a jeweller, deposed he had sold two bars of gold for the 
prisoner, one of which weighed forty-six and the other forty-eight ounces.
	The circumstances above mentioned were deemed to adduce such evidence of 
guilt that the jury did not hesitate to convict Mr Guest; the consequence of which was, 
that sentence of death was passed on him.
	After conviction this malefactor made the most serious preparations for the 
awful change that awaited him. Consistent with the plan respecting persons convicted 
of high treason, he was conveyed to the place of execution on a sledge. His dress 
consisted of a suit of mourning and a club-wig. At Tyburn, the place of execution, he 
appeared to exhibit every mark of penitence and resignation. He prayed devoutly, and 
when he was turned off, and his body had hung the accustomed time, it was delivered 
to his friends to be buried.


JOHN POWER, Alias WINN 
Pirate, hanged at Execution Dock, 10th March, 1768

	THIS malefactor was a native of the West of England, and very early engaged 
in a seafaring life, serving on board a ship which sailed to the coast of Guinea on the 
slave-trade. This trade, of all others, is the most obnoxious to the feelings of 
humanity, the most contrary to the doctrines of Christianity; and it is astonishing that 
any man can call himself a Christian, yet professedly barter away the lives and 
liberties of his fellow-creatures!
	Captain Fox had the command of the vessel, and, while he was on shore on the 
African coast, Power and several other seamen determined to seize the ship, and to 
take her to sea on their own account.
	This resolution being formed, they swore fidelity to each other; and, giving the 
name of 'Bravo' to the ship (which had been called the Polly), they sailed for the West 
Indies, the command being given to Power, who now assumed the title of captain.
	The mate of the ship exerted his utmost influence to prevail on Power to let the 
real captain come on hoard before he sailed, and to return to his own duty; but all the 
return that the mate experienced for this good advice was the ball of a pistol lodged in 
his shoulder: Power likewise discharged a ball through the cheek of a sailor, and 
wounded a second who refused to submit to his imperious commands.
	Thus by violence becoming master of the vessel, he proceeded on his voyage 
with a lading of negro slaves; but among the other parties on board was a free negro, 
who had remained as a hostage for two of his country men; and this man was 
employed in splitting wood for firing.
	This free negro frequently conversing with the slaves, the pirates conceived 
that they were concerting plans to regain their liberty; for guilt is ever suspicious.
	One Robert Fitzgerald, aft Irishman, was the first who observed the free negro 
talking to the slaves; and hinting his suspicions to Power, and telling him to be on his 
guard, the latter, who was a fellow of the most unfeeling disposition, caused the poor 
man to be tied to the side of the ship, where he whipped him some minutes with a cat-
o'-nine-tails with such severity, that his body streamed with blood, and his bones in 
some places were visible.
	After this severe chastisement for no real offence Power took a cutlass from 
the hands of one of the sailors; but, not thinking it sharp enough to answer his horrid 
purpose, be directed that another should be brought him, with which he cut the poor 
negro in several places. Not contented with exercising this unprovoked severity, he 
directed Fitzgerald to cut him again, and the barbarous villain even exceeded his 
commission. Another of the sailors, named Potts, likewise cut him in two or three 
places; and at length Fitzgerald completed the murder by cutting off his bead, and 
throwing that, with the body, into the sea; though he had no order from Power for 
carrying the affair to such extremity.
	The horrid murder being thus committed, they continued their voyage for the 
West Indies, where they offered the negro slaves for sale; but, a suspicion arising of 
some illicit practices, they thought it prudent to depart; and, steering their course for 
North America, they came to anchor in the harbour of New York, where most of them 
thought it prudent to consult their safety in flight; but the surgeon of the ship (who 
had been obliged to dissemble his inclinations, to save his life) gave information 
against the murderers, some of whom were taken into custody.
	Fitzgerald had made his escape; but Power, and a seaman named Tomlin, were 
sent to England, where they were brought to trial; when the latter was acquitted from 
a variety of circumstances that arose in exculpation of his crime; but Power, being 
convicted on the fullest evidence, was sentenced to death for the murder of the negro.
	After conviction his behaviour was such as might have been expected from so 
hardened a wretch,–one who seemed to defy the laws of God and man, to be a wilful, 
a deliberate, murderer.
	This malefactor was hanged at Execution Dock on the 10th of March, 1768.
	After the various and repeated remarks we have made on the crimes of murder 
and piracy, nothing remains to be said on the present occasion but to reprobate in the 
severest manner the practice of engaging in the slave-trade. If a man possessed those 
generous feelings by which our nature is said to be distinguished, he could not be 
induced to engage in this infernal traffic; or, if he did engage in it, it is impossible but 
that his feelings must be called forth, and he would see that his life was little less than 
continued murder.
	We are convinced that it may be, because it has been, argued, that the petty 
princes of Africa make a practice of selling as slaves such of their countrymen as they 
have obtained possession of by right of conquest; but shall this be an argument of any 
weight in a humane, in a Christian breast? Forbid it honour! forbid it that genuine 
philanthropy which claims the first possession of our hearts and gives us a distinction 
from the beasts that perish!
	It is not reasonable to suppose that God has made any distinction between his 
creatures: why then should that distinction be made by man–vain, presumptuous, 
man–too fond of arrogating to himself something more than the attribute of the Deity!


JAMES SAMPSON 
A treacherous and base Villain, executed at Tyburn, 11th of March, 1768, 
for robbing and setting fire to his Benefactor's House

	EARLY in life Sampson gave proofs of an extraordinary genius for drawing, 
to which his friends afforded proper encouragement, and his progress in the art was 
exceedingly rapid. The youth's uncommon talents being mentioned to the Duke of 
Richmond, his Grace engaged him in his service on very liberal terms, and employed 
masters properly qualified to afford every possible improvement to his fine genius. 
Afterwards the Duke warmly recommended Sampson to the patronage of the Right 
Honourable General Conway, who appointed him one of the draughtsmen to the 
Tower.
	The greatest part of his time that was not engaged in a necessary attention to 
the duties of his office Sampson employed in making copies of the natural curiosities 
in the British Museum and in the conversation of learned and ingenious men, by 
whom that celebrated library was frequented; and he was so highly esteemed, both by 
the Duke of Richmond and General Conway, that he had free access to them on all 
occasions. Having married an upper servant in the General's family, he appeared to 
live in a state of great felicity; but unfortunately he maintained an illicit intercourse 
with some women of debauched principles, whose extravagances involved him in 
many embarrassments.
	Being allowed the liberty of amusing himself in the General's library, he 
learned that money and papers of consequence were kept there; and this tempted him 
to the fatal resolution of robbing his benefactor and setting fire to the house, as a 
means of covering up his guilt. Having concealed himself in the house, he waited till 
he supposed the family had retired to rest, and then entered the library, where he stole 
property to a considerable amount and set fire to some of the furniture.
	About six in the morning the General was alarmed by the cry of "Fire!" and 
perceived smoke issuing from the library; but he would not permit the door to be 
opened till the engines arrived, lest the flames should burst out and communicate to 
the other parts of the building. The engines being ready to play, he directed the 
firemen to use their endeavours to secure a writing-table that stood in a corner of the 
room, several bank-notes being deposited in a drawer thereof. This table was brought 
out, part of it being burned, and the drawer open in which the bank-notes had been 
deposited. The General put all the papers he found in the drawer into his pocket.
	When the confusion occasioned by the supposed accident had subsided, the 
General examined the papers taken out of the drawer, and missing a bank-note of five 
hundred pounds, and four of one hundred pounds each, concluded that the room had 
been fired for the purpose of concealing the robbery.
	All the domestics in the house had lived many years in the General's service, 
and he had the firmest confidence in their fidelity; but in order to secure his property, 
and discover the author of the horrid fact, which he strongly suspected to have been 
committed by some person well acquainted with his house, he made application to the 
bank, where he learned that the note for five hundred pounds had been already 
changed for others of smaller value; and, from the description of the person who had 
changed it, his suspicions were fixed on Sampson.
	It was now determined that Mr Camp, who had received the note, and Mr 
Lambert, who had delivered the smaller ones on Camp's ticket, should attend at the 
Duke of Richmond's house at an appointed hour.
	The Duke sent a servant to Sampson's lodgings, desiring to see him on 
business; and he presently attended, and entered into conversation on different 
subjects with his Grace and General Conway. The above-mentioned clerks of the bank 
were introduced, and, immediately recognising the person of Sampson, a signal was 
made that had been before agreed on; in consequence of which the General accused 
Sampson of the robbery and setting fire to the library. For some time he steadily 
denied the charge, but, finding no possibility of confuting the evidence of Camp and 
Lambert, he at length confessed all the particulars of his guilt.
	Sampson's lodgings at Pimlico were searched, and the two notes received at 
the bank and the four stolen from the drawer of the writing-table were found. The 
delinquent, being taken before Sir John Fielding, was committed to Newgate in order 
for trial, which came on at the following sessions at the Old Bailey, when he was 
convicted, and sentenced to be hanged.
	While he remained in Newgate he regularly attended prayers in the chapel, and 
on the morning of his execution he received the Sacrament. The passage of carriages 
being obstructed by the pavement being broken up in Holborn, Sampson was 
conveyed through Smithfield, Cow Cross, Turnmill Street and the King's Road to 
Tyburn, where he acknowledged the justice of his sentence, and, after some time 
employed in prayer, suffered the punishment due to his offences, on 11th March, 
1768.


FREDERIC LORD BALTIMORE, ELIZABETH 
GRIFFENBURG, AND ANNE HARVEY 
The former tried for committing a rape on Sarah Woodcock, and the two 
latter as accessories before the fact, 26th March, 1768

  
Sarah Woodcock forcibly introduced to Lord Baltimore

	THOUGH conviction did not follow the trials of these presumed offenders, it 
is our duty to state the affair as it was transmitted to the public at the time.
	Frederic Lord Baltimore was the lineal descendant of Mr. Calvert, who was 
promoted to the degree of a peer of Ireland by King James I. from whom he received 
the grant of an immense tract of land in America, which has since borne the name of 
Maryland.
	Lord Baltimore's father had a country seat at Epsom, where the object of our 
present notice was born, and sent for education to Eton School, where he became a 
great proficient in classical knowledge, and was said to have a singular taste and 
capacity for the learning and manners of the ancients; and his father dying before he 
was of age, left him in possession of a most ample fortune.
	His lordship married the daughter of the Duke of Bridgewater, and was 
exceedingly unhappy in the nuptial connexion, owing to his unbounded attachment to 
women. In fact, his passion for the sex was so illiberal and so gross, that his house had 
the appearance of a Turkish seraglio rather than that of an Englishman of fortune; nor 
was it reputable for any woman of character to have entered within his walls.
	Lord Baltimore, during his residence abroad, sailed from Naples to 
Constantinople, where he saw and admired the customs of the Turks and on his return 
to England, in 1766, he caused a part of his house to be taken down, and rebuilt in the 
form of a Turkish harem. He kept a number of women, who had rules given them by 
which to regulate their conduct; and he had agents, to procure him fresh faces, in 
different parts of the town.
	Elizabeth Griffenburg, wife of Dr. Griffenburg, a native of Germany, and 
Anne Harvey, a woman of low education, were two of the parties employed by Lord 
Baltimore in his irregular designs on the sex.
	In November, 1767, Mrs. Harvey told his lordship that young lady named 
Woodcock, who was very handsome, kept a milliner's shop on Tower Hill. Prompted 
by curiosity, and a still more ignoble motive, Lord Baltimore went once or twice to 
the shop, and purchased some trifling articles, by way of making an acquaintance. He 
then asked her if she would attend him to the play; but this she declined, having never 
been at a play in her life; and, as she had been bred up among that rigid sect of 
dissenters called Independents, she had been taught to consider theatrical diversions 
as incompatible with the duties of Christianity.
	Some time afterwards Lord Baltimore went hastily into Miss Woodcock's 
shop, saying that be had been splashed by mud from a hackney-coach. This was 
noticed by the young lady, who expressed her surprise that he could be so near the 
coach as to see, but not avoid it. He answered, 'I was thinking of you, Miss;' but she 
paid no regard to this compliment, as she considered him as a neighbour, and a 
married man.
	At length Lord Baltimore and his agents had completed the outlines of the 
ungenerous plan which they had determined, if possible, to carry into execution. Mrs. 
Harvey, going to Miss Woodcock's shop on the 14th of December, bespoke a pair of 
laced ruffles, which she desired might be made up against the next day, for the use of 
a lady, who might be a good customer if she was not disappointed, as she was fond of 
encouraging persons who were young in trade.
	On the following day Mrs. Harvey called and paid for the ruffles, and, having 
given orders for some other articles, desired that they might ho brought to her house 
in the Curtain Road, near Holywell Mount, Shoreditch, on the succeeding day.
	At the time appointed Miss Woodcock went to the house, where Mrs. Harvey 
received her politely, and desired her to drink tea; but as the days were short, and as 
she had no friend to attend her, she expressed her wish to decline the invitation. 
During their conversation one Isaac Isaacs, a Jew, came into the house, and, having 
paid his respects to Mrs. Harvey, said he was going to the play. Hereupon Mrs. 
Harvey said 'I was going to attend a lady with some millinery goods;' and then to 
Isaacs, 'This is the lady I was speaking to you of;' then again to Miss Woodcock, 'I 
would be glad you would go with me; the lady wants a great many things, and will be 
a very good customer to you.'
	Isaacs now observed, that, as it was necessary for him to have a coach, he 
could set them both down at the lady's house. This was objected to by Miss 
Woodcock, on account of her dress; but this objection was overruled by Mrs. Harvey, 
who said that circumstance could not have any weight with the lady they were about 
to attend.
	At this time Lord Baltimore's coach was waiting in the neighbourhood; and 
Isaacs, going out under the pretence of calling a coach, gave directions for drawing it 
to the door. This being done, the parties got into it; but Miss Woodcock did not 
observe whether it was a hackney-coach or not.
	The coachman drove at a great rate; the glasses were drawn up, and at length 
they arrived in the court-yard of a house, apparently that of a person of fashion. Mrs. 
Harvey took Miss Woodcock upstairs through a suite of rooms elegantly furnished, in 
one of which she saw an elderly man sitting, whom she afterwards knew to be Dr. 
Griffenburg, who politely desired her to repose herself, while he informed the lady of 
the house of her arrival.
	Dr. Griffenburg had not been long absent when Lord Baltimore entered; and 
Miss Woodcock was much alarmed when she discovered that he was the very person 
who had repeatedly been at her shop; but he desired her to be appeased, saying that he 
was steward to the lady on whom she was come to attend. Miss Woodcock desired 
that she might immediately see the lady; on which Lord Baltimore said he would fetch 
her; and, soon afterwards bringing in Mrs. Griffenburg, said that she was the lady who 
had ordered the millinery goods.
	Orders were now given for tea; and, when the equipage was taken from the 
table, Lord Baltimore brought from another room some purses, a ring, some smelling-
bottles, and other articles, which he said he had purchased for Miss Woodcock. She 
seemed to despise the trifles, which she intimated might have pleased her well enough 
when a child.
	As the evening advanced, she seemed importunate to depart, saying that her 
friends would become uneasy at her long absence; but at this time she had no idea of 
being forcibly detained.
	To divert her from the thought of departing, Lord Baltimore took her to view 
several apartments in the house. On their coming into one of which, where there was a 
harpsichord, he proposed to play a tune on that instrument to the young lady; and, 
when he had so done, and she became still more anxious to depart, he insisted that she 
should stay to supper, and gave a private intimation to Mrs. Griffenburg to make the 
necessary preparations.
	Mrs. Griffenburg being retired, Lord Baltimore took Miss Woodcock behind 
the window-curtain, and behaved to her in a manner very inconsistent with the rules 
of decency. On her making violent opposition to this insult, Dr. Griffenburg and Mrs. 
Harvey advanced, as if to assist his lordship; but she contested the matter with them 
all, and, forcing her way towards the door, declared that she would go home 
immediately: yet still it does not appear that she had any suspicion of sustaining the 
violence that was afterwards offered her.
	After this, Lord Baltimore insisted on her sitting with him at supper; but her 
mind was too much discomposed to admit of her thinking of taking any refreshment. 
He offered her a glass of syllabub; but she beat it out of his hand, and ran towards the 
door, with an intention to have departed: but he told her it was late; that no coach was 
then to be procured; and at length said positively that she should not go home.
	Dr. Griffenburg, with his wife and Mrs. Harvey, now endeavoured to prevail 
on the young lady to go to bed; but she declared that she would never sleep in that 
house. On this they conducted her to a room, in which they went to bed: but she 
continued walking about till the morning, and lamenting her unhappy situation.
	Looking out of the window about eight o'clock, she observed a young woman 
passing, to whom she threw out her handkerchief, which was then heavy with tears. 
As the party did not see her, she called out 'Young woman!' on which the other made 
a motion as if she would fling the handkerchief within the rails.
	As Miss Woodcock called to the woman, with an intention of sending her to 
her father, the two women now jumped out of bed, and forced her from the window, 
upbraiding her with what they called a rejection of her good fortune, and wishing 
themselves in so happy a situation.
	Her reply was, that all the fortune the man possessed should not prevail on her 
to think of living with him on dishonourable terms; and she again demanded that 
liberty to which she had so just a claim.
	The women now quitting the room, Lord Baltimore and Dr. Griffenburg came 
in soon afterwards; when the former said that he was astonished at her outrageous 
behaviour, as he had promised that she should go home at twelve o'clock. She replied 
that she would go home directly, as her sister, and particularly her father, would be 
inexpressibly anxious on occasion of her absence.
	Lord Baltimore now conducted her downstairs, and ordered breakfast; but she 
refused to eat, and wept incessantly till twelve o'clock, when she once more 
demanded her liberty. His lordship now said that he loved her to excess; that be could 
not part with her; that he did not intend any injury to her, and that he would write to 
her father: and on this be wrote a letter, of which the following is a copy; and in it sent 
a bank-note of two hundred pounds:-- 'Your daughter Sally sends you the enclosed, 
and desires you will not be uneasy on her account, because every thing will turn out 
well with a little patience and prudence. She is at a friend's house safe and well, in all 
honesty and honour; nothing else is meant, you may depend on it; and, sir, as your 
presence and consent are necessary, we beg of you to come, in a private manner, to 
Mr. Richard Smith's, in Broad Street Buildings.'
	Lord Baltimore showed this letter to Miss Woodcock; but so greatly was her 
mind disturbed, that she knew little of its contents; and so exceedingly was she 
terrified, that she wrote the following words at the bottom, by his direction: 'Dear 
father, this is true, and I should be glad you would come this afternoon: From your 
dutiful daughter.'
	After writing the above postscript, she appears to have been convinced of the 
impropriety of it, and, turning to his lordship, she said 'Can you look me in the face, 
and say that your name is Richard Smith, or that these are Broad Street Buildings?' 
Struck with guilt, be acknowledged his name was not Richard Smith, but said that 
gentleman lived within a few doors; and that the place was not the Broad Street 
Buildings in the city, but another of the same name at the west end of the town.
	She now wept incessantly at the thought of her unhappy situation, and 
repeatedly begged for her liberty; but, no sooner did she presume to go towards the 
window to make her distress evident to any casual passenger, than one or other of the 
women forced her away.
	At length Mrs. Griffenburg gave orders that the window should be nailed up; 
but Lord Baltimore came in at the juncture, and pretended to be very angry at this 
proceeding, lest it should be suspected that murder was intended to be committed in 
the house. His lordship then told Miss Woodcock that if she presumed to pull up the 
windows, or make any disturbance, he would throw her into, the street; a 
circumstance by which she was greatly terrified.
	This happened at the approach of night, and she continued weeping and 
lamenting her situation, and refused to take any refreshment at supper. When desired 
to go to bed, she refused to do so, unless Lord Baltimore would solemnly promise not 
to molest her. On this she spent the night walking about the room, while the two 
women who were appointed to guard her went to bed.
	In the morning she went into a parlour, where Lord Baltimore waiting on her, 
she endeavoured to represent his ill conduct in the most striking light, and begged that 
if he had the tenderness of a father for a child he would permit her to depart. He said 
that she might write to her father, which she did; and, fearful of giving offence, said 
that she had been treated 'with as much honour as she could expect, and begged her 
friends would come immediately.' Lord Baltimore was now out of the room; but the 
women told Miss Woodcock that his lordship had sent two hundred pounds to her 
father on the preceding day. She seemed amazed at this circumstance, which appears 
to be a proof of the anxiety of her mind at the time the letter was written.
	Soon after this a servant came in with a letter as from the presumed Richard 
Smith. It was written in a language she did not understand; but Lord Baltimore 
pretended to explain it to her, saying it intimated that her father had been at Mr. 
Smith's, but would not wait while she was sent for.
	In order to carry on the imposition, his lordship sent for a man who personated 
the supposed Mr. Smith; but Miss Woodcock was soon convinced that be had never 
seen her father, from the unsatisfactory answers that he gave to her inquiries.
	After this Lord Baltimore played a tune, while the pretended Mr. Smith and 
Mrs. Harvey danced to the music; but in the mean time Miss Woodcock was 
tormented by a thousand conflicting passions. She was then shown some fine 
paintings in the room, one of which being that of a ship in distress, she said it bore a 
great resemblance to her own unhappy situation.
	Then the man, called Smith was desired by Lord Baltimore to draw Miss 
Woodcock's picture; and he instantly pulled out a pencil, and made the drawing, while 
the young lady sat in a posture of extreme grief and dejection.
	At midnight Mr. Broughton, his lordship's steward, brought intelligence that 
Isaacs, the Jew, having offered a letter to Miss Woodcock's father, was stopped till he 
should give an account where the young lady was secreted. Lord Baltimore was, or 
affected to be, in a violent passion, and vowed vengeance against the father; but in the 
interim the Jew entered, and delivered a letter which he pretended to have received 
from Miss Woodcock's sister. She took it to read; but she had wept so much that her 
eyes were sore; and of all she read she could recollect but this passage:-- 'Only please 
to appoint a place where and when we may meet with you.'
	The hour of retirement being arrived, Miss Woodcock refused to go upstairs, 
unless she might be assured of not receiving any insult from his lordship. She had not 
taken any sustenance since she entered the house. For this night she laid down in her 
clothes, on a bed in which Mrs. Harvey reposed herself. She asked this bad woman if 
she had ever been in love; and acknowledged that she herself was addressed by a 
young fellow, who appeared to be very fond of her, and that they were to settle in 
business as soon as the marriage should take place; wherefore she desired Mrs. 
Harvey to show her the way out of a house that had been so obnoxious to her: but the 
answer of the latter was, that though she had lived in the house several years, she did 
not herself know the way out of it.
	On the following morning, when Miss Woodcock went downstairs, she 
pleaded earnestly with Lord Baltimore for her liberty; on which he became most 
violently enraged, called her by the vilest names, arid said that, if she spoke to him on 
the subject any more, he would either throw her out of the window, or send her home 
in a wheelbarrow, with her petticoats tied over her head; and, turning to Isaacs the 
Jew, he said, 'Take the slut to a mean house like herself;' which greatly terrified her, 
as she presumed he meant a house of ill fame.
	The sufferings she had undergone having by this time made her extremely ill, 
Lord Baltimore mixed a physical draught for her, which he insisted on her drinking.
	On the Sunday afternoon he begged her to sit and hear him talk. His discourse 
consisted of a ridicule on religion, and every thing that was sacred, even to the 
denying the existence of a soul.
	After supper he made six several attempts to ravish her within two hours; but 
she repulsed him in such a determined manner, that it was impossible for him to 
accomplish his dishonourable purpose. On that night she lay with Mrs. Harvey; but 
could get no rest, as she was in perpetual fear of renewed insults from his. lordship.
	On the Monday morning she was told that she should see her father, if she 
would dry her eyes, wash herself, and put on clean linen. Mrs. Griffenburg now 
supplied her with a change of linen; and then she was hurried into the coach with Lord 
Baltimore, Doctor Griftenburg, and two women. They were carried to Lord 
Baltimore's country seat at Epsom, where she experienced several fresh acts of 
indecency from her ignoble tormentor; and, on her again resisting him, he said she 
must submit that night, with or without her consent; and in this declaration he was 
supported by the two infamous women.
	At supper she ate a few mouthfuls; but declined drinking any thing, lest some 
intoxicating matter should be mixed with the liquor. Lord Baltimore and his people 
now diverted themselves with the game of blind-man's buff; but Miss Woodcock 
refused to take any share in their ridiculous folly.
	The two women now conducted her to the bed chamber, and began to undress 
her; nor was she capable of making much resistance, being weak, through want of 
food and continued grief. Still, however, she begged to be deprived of life, rather than 
submit to dishonourable treatment.
	On the drawing of the curtains she observed that Lord Baltimore was in bed, 
which added to her former terrors; but she was not suffered to remain long in doubt: 
the women left her; but, alas! not to her repose; for that night gave rise to the crime 
which furnished matter for the prosecution of which we are now reciting the 
particulars.
	Twice (according to Miss Woodcock's deposition) was this horrid purpose 
effected; and, though she called out repeatedly for help, yet she found none; and in the 
morning, when she went to Mrs. Harvey's room, and told her what had passed, the 
latter advised her to be quiet, for that she had made noise enough already.
	The infamous Harvey now hinting that worse consequences might still be 
expected, Miss Woodcock determined to seem content with her situation, disagreeable 
as it was, in the hope of obtaining the protection of her friends.
	In this hope she frequently went to the window, flattering herself that she 
might see some person whom she knew. With the same view she went out once with 
his lordship, and once with Mrs. Griffenburg; and, having accidentally heard the name 
of Lord Baltimore mentioned, she presumed this to be the person who had treated her 
so ill; nor had she a guess who it was till this period.
	On the afternoon of the day that she made this discovery they went to London, 
to the great joy of Miss Woodcock, who hoped now to find an easier communication 
with her friends. At her request she was permitted to sleep alone; and the next day he 
introduced her to Madam Saunier, the governess to his lordship's natural daughters, 
telling her that Miss Woodcock had been recommended as a companion to the young 
ladies.
	On this day he gave her some money, and desired her to dispose of it as she 
thought proper; and, when night advanced, he sent Mrs. Griffenburg to order her to 
come to bed. She at first refused to comply, and at length yielded only on conditional 
terms. What passed this night is too horrid for relation.
	On the following day Mrs. Griffenburg told her that she had been preparing 
another apartment for her, and begged that she would come and see it; and conducted 
her to a stone garret, which was remarkably cold and damp; and, being among the 
servants' apartments, she began to apprehend that Lord Baltimore, having gratified his 
own passion, was disposed to transfer her to his dependents.
	Miss Woodcock's friends now began to form some conjectures where she 
might be secreted; and Mr. Davis, a young fellow who had paid his addresses to her, 
determined to exert himself to ascertain the fact.
	On the Sunday he placed himself under a window of Lord Baltimore's house, 
and had not been there long before she saw him, and intimated that she did so. On this 
Davis took out a book, motioning with his hand for her to write. She then waved her 
hand for him to approach; but, as he did not seem to comprehend her meaning, she ran 
into another room, and said 'I cannot come to you; is my father well?' He answered 
that all parties were well, and asked what was become of Mrs. Harvey. The young 
lady now put down the window, and retired, unable any longer to continue the 
conversation.
	Mr. Davis now went and informed Miss Woodcock's father of the discovery 
he had made; on which the old gentleman went to Mr. Cay, a baker, in Whitecross 
Street, to ask his opinion. Mr. Cay went with him to Mr. Watts, an attorney, who 
advised them to make application to Lord Mansfield for a writ of habeas corpus. But 
it may be now necessary to take notice of what passed between Lord Baltimore and 
Miss Woodcock in the meantime.
	On the day following that on which she had been seen by Davis, his lordship 
told her that she should see her father that day, at Dr. Griffenburg's, in Dean Street, 
Soho; and he said he would make a settlement on her for life if she would 
acknowledge that she had been well treated. This she agreed to, in the hope of 
obtaining her freedom. She was then told that her father had caused Mrs. Harvey to be 
taken into custody.
	Lord Baltimore now went to Griffenburg's with Miss Woodcock, taking 
likewise a young lady, of whom she was to declare herself the companion: but they 
had been only a few minutes at Griffenburg's when a servant came to apprise his 
lordship that Sir John Fielding's people had surrounded his house.
	Lord Baltimore, having previously sent one of his servants with a letter to 
Miss Woodcock's father, now ordered a coach; and he, and Dr. Griffenburg and the 
young lady, now went to a tavern in Whitechapel, in quest of the servant, who told 
them that Mr. Woodcock having been out all day in search of his daughter, and not 
being returned, he (the servant) would not leave the letter, from a point of prudence.
	Hereupon they drove to a house in Covent Garden, where the servant soon 
arrived with a note from Sir John Fielding's clerk, desiring Miss Woodcock to come 
to Bow Street, where her friends were, in expectation of her arrival. Fearful of taking 
any step that might involve her in still farther difficulties, she showed Lord Baltimore 
the note, when he declared she should not comply with the contents; and they 
immediately drove to Dr. Griffenburg's.
	At this place they were met by his lordship's steward, who said his house was 
still surrounded by peace-officers; but, as they went away soon afterwards, this 
unworthy peer then took Miss Woodcock home in his own carriage.
	On their arrival the valet-de-chambre told his master that on the Sunday 
morning the young lady had spoken to a person from the window, His lordship now 
demanded if this was fact. She acknowledged that it was; but said she had not 
acquainted her friends with her distressed situation.
	He now tried to calm her mind, but said that she must sleep with him that 
night, which she positively refused, unless he would engage not to offer her any 
insult; and this promise was made, and complied with.
	In the morning Mr. Watts, the attorney, called at Lord Baltimore's house with 
a writ of habeas corpus; but the porter would not admit him till he produced the writ; 
but then he was asked into the house, and Lord Baltimore made acquainted with his 
business. On this his lordship told his prisoner Mr. Watts's business, and begged she 
would prepare to see him with all possible composure.
	In the interim his lordship waited on the attorney, who demanded whether one 
Sarah Woodcock was in his house: but, on his declining to give an immediate answer, 
Watts said that he would serve the writ unless she was instantly produced; and that the 
consequence would be that all his doors must be broke open till she was found: but he 
hoped that so violent a procedure would not be necessary.
	His lordship now begged his patience for a short time, and his requisition 
should be complied with. Mr. Watts agreed to wait, and the other, going to Miss 
Woodcock, requesting her to write to her father, and declare that she had been used 
with tenderness, and had consented to her then situation; and he desired her to add 
that she wished to see her father and sisters, but hoped their visit would be of the 
peaceful kind; and with all this she complied, in hope, as she afterwards declared, of 
obtaining her liberty.
	This letter being sealed, and dispatched by one of his lordship's servants, be 
introduced the attorney to Miss Woodcock, who asked her if her residence in that 
house was a matter of choice, or whether she was forcibly detained. She replied that 
she remained there by her own consent, but that she was anxious to see her father.
	With this declaration Mr. Watts appeared satisfied, saying that no person had 
any right to interfere, if she voluntarily consented to her situation.
	His lordship then intimated that it would be proper for her to go to Lord 
Mansfield, and make a similar declaration. She made no hesitation to comply with this 
proposal; but still appeared exceedingly anxious to have a conference with her father.
	On this the parties went to Lord Mansfield's house in Bloomsbury Square, 
where they were shown into different apartments; and Miss Woodcock's friends 
waited in an antechamber, to hear the issue of this extraordinary affair.
	The young lady being examined by Lord Mansfield, he inquired minutely into 
the circumstances respecting her being conveyed to Lord Baltimore's house. She 
answered every question in the most explicit manner; and, when the judge asked her if 
she was willing to live with his lordship, she answered in the affirmative; but 
expressed great earnestness to see her friends first.
	On this she was shown into the room where her friends waited; and the first 
question she asked was 'Who Lord Mansfield was, and whether he had a right to set 
her at liberty?' She was told that his right was indisputable; and his lordship being 
again consulted, he inquired if she still adhered to her former opinion; to which she 
replied that she did not, but desired to go home with her father.
	His lordship then asked her how happened the sudden change in her mind. Her 
answer was 'Because, till I saw them, I did not know you had power to release me.' 
His lordship then said 'Child, it is in my power to let you go;' and told her she was at 
full liberty to go where she pleased'; on which she went into the other room to her 
friends, but was unable to express her joy on the occasion.
	In the interim Lord Mansfield addressed the Reverend Mr. Watson, a 
dissenting minister, and some other persons present, to the following effect:-- 
'Gentlemen, I would have you take notice of Miss Woodcock's answers, because 
possibly this matter may be variously talked of in public, and justice ought to be done 
to both parties; for, when this lady came before me on her private examination, she 
expressed a desire to see her father and sister, or sisters: and now she has answered as 
you have heard.'
	On Miss Woodcock's discharge, Mr. Cay, the baker, in Whitecross Street (to 
whom her father bad delivered the two hundred pound bank-note, which had been 
enclosed in the letter by Lord Baltimore), conveyed the young lady to Sir John 
Fielding, before whom she swore to the actual commission of the rape by Lord 
Baltimore.
	At this time Mrs. Griffenburg and Mrs. Harvey were in custody; and a warrant 
was issued to apprehend Lord Baltimore; but he secreted himself for the present, and 
surrendered to the Court of King's Bench on the last day of Hilary term, 1768; and the 
two women being brought thither by habeas corpus, they were all admitted to bail, in 
order for trial at Kingston, in Surrey, because the crime was alleged to have been 
committed at his lordship's seat at Epsom.
	In the interim Miss Woodcock went to the house of Mr. Cay, in Whitecross 
Street; but, not being properly accommodated there, she went to the house of a friend, 
where she lived in great privacy and retirement till the time arrived for the trial of the 
offending parties.
	Bills of indictment being found against Lord Baltimore and the two women, 
they were all brought to trial before the Lord Chief Baron Smythe; and, after the 
evidence against them had been given, in substance as may be collected from the 
preceding narrative, Lord Baltimore made the following defence, which was read in 
Court by Mr. Hamersley, solicitor to his lordship:--
	'My Lord and Gentlemen, 
'I have put myself upon my country, in hopes that prejudice and clamour will avail 
nothing in this place, where it is the privilege of the meanest of time king's subjects to 
be presumed innocent until his guilt has been made appear by legal evidence. I wish I 
could say that I had been treated abroad with the same candour. I have been loaded 
with obloquy, the most malignant libels have been circulated, and every other method 
which malice could devise has been taken to create general prejudice against me. I 
thank God that, under such circumstances, I have had firmness and resolution enough 
to meet my accusers face to face, and provoke an inquiry into my conduct. Hic murus 
aheneus esto,–nil conscire sibi. The charge against me, and against these poor people 
who are involved with me, because they might otherwise have been just witnesses of 
my innocence, is in its nature very easy to be made, and hard to be disproved. The 
accuser has the advantage of supporting it by a direct and positive oath; the defence 
can only be collected from circumstances.
	'My defence is composed, then, of a variety of circumstances, all tending to 
show the falsity of this charge, the absurdity of it, the improbability that it could be 
true. It will be laid before the jury under the direction of my counsel; and I have the 
confidence of an innocent man, that it will be manifest to your lordship, the jury, and 
the whole world, that the story told by this woman is a perversion of truth in every 
particular. What could induce her to make such a charge I can only suspect: very soon 
after she came to my house, upon a representation to me that her father was distressed, 
I sent him a considerable sum of money: whether the ease with which the money was 
obtained from me might suggest the idea as a means of obtaining a larger sum of 
money, or whether it was thought necessary to destroy me, in order to establish the 
character of the girl to the world, I know not; but I do aver, upon the word of a man of 
honour, that there is no truth in any thing which has been said or sworn of my having 
offered violence to this girl. I ever held such brutality in abhorrence. I am totally 
against all force; and for me to have forced this woman, considering my weak state of 
health, and my strength, is not only a moral, but a physical, impossibility. She is, as to 
bodily strength, stronger than I am. Strange opinions, upon subjects foreign to this 
charge, have been falsely imputed to me, to inflame this accusation. Libertine as I am 
represented, I hold no such opinions. Much has been said against me, that I seduced 
this girl from her parents: seduction is not the point of this charge; but I do assure 
your lordship and the jury this part of the case has been aggravated exceedingly 
beyond the truth. If I have been in any degree to blame, I am sure I have sufficiently 
atoned for every indiscretion, which a weak attachment to this unworthy woman may 
have led me into, by having suffered the disgrace of being exposed as a criminal at the 
bar in the county which my father had the honour to represent in parliament, and 
where I had some pretensions to have attained the same honour, had that sort of an 
active life been my object.
	I will take up no more of your lordship's time than to add that, if I had been 
conscious of the guilt now imputed to me, I could have kept myself and my fortune 
out of the reach of the laws of this country, I am a citizen of the world; I could have 
lived any where: but I love my own country, and. submit to its laws, resolving that my 
innocence should be justified by the laws. I now, by my own voluntary act, by 
surrendering myself to the Court of King's Bench, stake, upon the verdict of twelve 
men, my life, my fortune, and, what is dearer to me, my honour. 
'BALTIMORE. 
'March 25, 1768.'
	The substance of the defences of Mrs. Griffenburg and Mrs. Harvey consisted 
principally in alleging that Miss Woodcock had consented to all that had passed, and 
that no force had been used towards her either by Lord Baltimore or themselves.
	The evidence of Dr. Griffenburg was not admitted, as his name was upon 
record, on a charge of having been concerned in a crime of a similar nature.
	After every thing alleged against the prisoners had been heard in the most 
dispassionate manner, the judge addressed himself to the jury in the following terms:--
	'Gentlemen of the Jury, 
The prisoner at the bar, Lord Baltimore, stands indicted for feloniously ravishing, and 
carnally knowing, Sarah Woodcock, spinster, against her will, on the 22d of 
December last, at Epsom, against the statute which makes this offence felony: and the 
other two prisoners are indicted as accessories before the fact, by feloniously and 
maliciously procuring, aiding, and abetting Lord Baltimore to commit the said rape, at 
the same time and place. To this they have pleaded not guilty, and you are to try if 
they are guilty. Before I state to you the evidence I will mention to you two or three 
things: in the first place, my lord complains of libels and printed accounts of this 
transaction, which have been circulated. It is a most unjustifiable practice, and tends 
to the perversion of public justice; and, therefore, if you have seen any thing printed 
on the side of the prosecutrix, or the prisoners, I must desire you to divest yourselves 
of any prejudice that such publications must have occasioned, and give your verdict 
only on the evidence now laid before you. Another thing I desire is, that, whichever 
way the verdict is given, none of the friends of any of the parties will make use of any 
expressions of approbation or applause, which are extremely improper and indecent in 
a court of justice, and I shall certainly commit any person whom I know to be guilty 
of it. The last thing that I shall mention to you is, to desire that no resentment you may 
feel at the manner in which she was carried to Lord Baltimore's house may have any 
influence on your verdict; for, however unwarrantable the manner was in which she 
came into his power, if, at the time he lay with her, it was by her consent, he is not 
guilty of the offence of which he is indicted; though it was proper to be given in 
evidence on this trial, to account for her being with him, and his having an 
opportunity of committing the crime: and to show, from the indirect manner of getting 
her to his house, the greater probability that her account is true. Having said this, I 
will now state to you the whole evidence as particularly as I can.'
	Mr. Baron Smythe then stated the whole of the evidence to the jury, as before 
given, which took up three hours, and then concluded thus:--
	'In point of law, the fact is fully proved on my lord and the two other 
prisoners, if you believe the evidence of Sarah Woodcock. It is a crime which in its 
nature can only be proved by the woman on whom it is committed; for she only can 
tell whether she consented or no: it is, as my lord observes, very easy to be made, and 
hard to be disproved; and the defence can only be collected from circumstances; from 
these you must judge whether her evidence is or is not to be believed. Lord Hale, in 
his 'History of the Pleas of the Crown,' lays down the rules:-- 1. If complaint is not 
made soon after the injury is supposed to be received; 2. If it is not followed by a 
recent prosecution; a strong presumption arises that the complaint is malicious. She 
has owned the injury was received December 22; the complaint was not made till 
December 29; but she has accounted for it in the manner you have beard. The strong 
part of the case on behalf of the prisoners is her not complaining when she was at 
Lord Mansfield's, the supreme magistrate in the kingdom in criminal matters. You 
have heard how she has explained and accounted for her conduct in that particular, 
which you will judge of. Upon the whole, if you believe that she made the discovery 
as soon as she knew she had an opportunity of doing it, and that her account is true, 
you will find all the prisoners guilty; if you believe that she did not make the 
discovery as soon as she had an opportunity, and from thence, or other circumstances, 
are not satisfied her account is true, you will find them all not guilty; for, if he is not 
guilty, they cannot be so; for they cannot be accessory to a crime which was never 
committed.'
	After an absence of an hour and twenty minutes, the jury returned with a 
verdict that the prisoners were Not Guilty.
	This singular affair was tried at Kingston, in Surrey, on the 20th of March, 
1768.
	Our readers will not be displeased with a few remarks on this very 
extraordinary transaction–The meanness of Lord Baltimore, and the unreasonable 
terror and ignorance of Miss Woodcock, will appear to be equal objects of 
astonishment. His lordship's devices to obtain possession of this woman were beneath 
the dignity of a nobleman, or, indeed, of any man; and her tame submission to the 
insult is a proof that she had little idea of the sacred protection which the laws of her 
country would have afforded her; for Lord Baltimore's house (at the bottom of 
Southampton Row, Bloomsbury) was not so obscurely situated but that she might 
have made application to many a passenger.
	Something, indeed, must be allowed to feminine fear on such an occasion, 
after she once found herself in the actual possession of a man from whom she thought 
it would be dangerous even to attempt an escape.
	Miss Woodcock's ignorance of Lord Mansfield's power will appear very 
extraordinary; but surely not more so than that of a man, who, being an evidence 
before Sir John Fielding, addressed him successively by the titles of sir! your honour! 
your worship! your lordship! your grace! and your majesty! These appellations were 
repeatedly heard to be given within half an hour by the writer of this narrative; and be 
presumes the circumstance may be considered as an apology for the superlative 
ignorance of Miss Woodcock.
	On the whole, however, this case is of the melancholy kind. What shall we 
think of a man, of Lord Baltimore's rank and fortune, who could debase himself 
beneath all rank and distinction, and, by the wish to gratify his irregular passions, 
submit to degrade him self in the opinion of his own servants and other domestics?
	Addison has a fine sentiment, by which our nobility ought to be influenced:--
'Honour 's a sacred tie; the law of kings; 
The noble mind's distinguishing perfection: 
It aids and strengthens Virtue where it meets her, 
And imitates her actions where she is not: 
It is not to be sported with.'--


JAMES GIBSON 
A Gentleman, executed at Tyburn, 23rd of March, 1768, for Forgery on the 
Bank of England

	THIS gentleman had received a liberal education, and was bound clerk to Mr 
Francis, an attorney of eminence, residing in Lincoln's Inn. His good behaviour and 
the rapid improvement he made in the profession of the law induced his master, on the 
expiration of his articles, to take him into partnership. In the early part of life he had 
married a young lady, with whom he received a genteel fortune, and by whom he had 
five children. Notwithstanding these tender pledges of his love, he deserted his wife 
and family for the embraces of a mistress who had been kept by a Scottish nobleman, 
leaving them to suffer the extremes of want while he was enjoying the luxuries of life.
	Mr Francis's business was of an extensive nature, and was principally 
transacted by Gibson, who gave proof of the most consummate abilities in his 
profession. Among other engagements, Mr Francis was employed in a cause 
respecting an estate in Chancery, on which an injunction was issued; and a person was 
appointed to receive the rents of the estate till the Lord Chancellor should make his 
final decree. In the interim, Gibson, having reduced himself by a profuse mode of 
living, forged the handwriting of the Accountant-General of the Court of Chancery in 
a suit which he was soliciting for Robert Lee, Esq., and others, executors to the late 
Sir G. Brown, Bart., Robert Pringle and others, in consequence of which he received 
above nine hundred pounds.
	Discovery of this transaction being made in a short time, Gibson was taken 
into custody, and lodged in Newgate, in September, 1766. When brought to trial for 
the forgery at the ensuing sessions at the Old Bailey the jury brought in a special 
verdict, subject to the determination of the twelve judges. From this time Gibson 
continued in Newgate till January, 1768 (upwards of fifteen months), and it was the 
prevailing opinion that no further notice would be taken of the affair. However, 
Gibson, by repeated applications, urged that this case might be determined by the 
judges; and at length, in Hilary Term, 1768, the learned Bench made a final decision 
on his case, importing that it came within the meaning of the law. Consequently he 
received sentence of death, and was removed into the cells of Newgate. After sentence 
his behaviour was in every way becoming to his melancholy situation, and he 
reflected with much sorrow on his unkindness to his wife and family. He was carried 
to execution in a mourning-coach, and requested that his fellow-sufferer, Benjamin 
Payne, a footpad, whom he saw placed in a cart, might accompany him, which the 
sheriff refused.


JOHN WILKES, ESQ., M.P. 
Whose arrest and conviction for writing seditious and blasphemous 
pamphlets led to riots in London in 1768.

	The year 1768 will ever be remembered in the annals of the English history, 
on account of the murders and mischief committed by a deluded mob, stimulated by 
the writings of John Wilkes, Esq. an alderman of London, and member of parliament 
for Aylesbury.
	The most scandalous and offensive of his writings, were in a periodical 
publication called "The North Briton," No. 45, and a pamphlet entitled "An Essay on 
Woman." The North Briton was of a political nature; the other a piece of obscenity; 
the one, calculated to set the people against the government, the other to corrupt their 
morals.
	Among the ministers who found themselves more personally attacked in the 
North Briton, was Samuel Martin, Esq. member for Camelford. This gentleman found 
his character, as secretary of the treasury, so vilified, that he challenged the writer to 
fight him. Wilkes had already been engaged in a duel with Lord Talbot, and escaped 
unhurt; but Mr. Martin shot him in the body, of which wound he laid in imminent 
danger, during several days, and was confined to his house for some weeks.
	The attorney-general filed informations against Wilkes, as author of the North 
Briton, No. 45, and a pamphlet emitted "An Essay on Woman." On these charges he 
was appre hended and committed prisoner to the Tower, but soon admitted to bail. His 
papers were forcibly seized, for which be charged the secretaries of state with a 
robbery, and which was afterwards, by the court of the King's Bench, determined to 
have been illegal.
	Before his trial came on, Mr. Wilkes fled to France, under the pretext of 
restoring his health, which had suffered from his wound, and the harrassing measures 
taken against him by the secretaries of state, lord Egremont and lord Halifax. No 
sooner was he out of the kingdom, than they proceeded to outlaw him, dismissed him 
from his command as colonel of the Buckinghanishire militia, and expelled him from 
this seat in parliament.
	But even a foreign land did not shelter him from the resentment of his fellow 
subjects. On the 15th of August, captain Forbes, in the British service, met Wilkes 
walking with lord Palmelston in Paris, and though he had never seen either of them, 
yet, from a drawing, he conceived one of them to be the man who had so much abused 
his native country, Scotland. Finding his conjecture right, he told Wilkes, that, as the 
author of the North Briton, he must fight him, and Mr. Wilkes referred him to his 
hotel; but when Mr. Forbes got an interview with him, which he stated to have been 
attended with much difficulty, he was answered that Mr. Wilkes would meet no man 
in combat, until he had fought lord Egremont, whom he could not challenge while he 
held his high official station under government.
	The captain insisted to no purpose; and then calling him a scoundrel, 
threatened him with a caning, on their next meeting in the public streets. Lord 
Egremont's death, which happened at this juncture, released Wilkes from his 
pretended sanguinary determination against that nobleman.
	In a few months Mr. Wilkes returned to London, and gave notice, that he 
would, on a certain day, surrender himself on the information filed against him. He 
then appeared in his place as an alderman at Guildhall; and on his return, the mob 
took the horses from his carriage, and dragged it to his house, crying, "Wilkes and 
Liberty!"
	On the 21st of February, 1764, the trial of Mr. Wilkes for the libels before-
mentioned, came on before lord Mansfield, and he was found guilty of both. More 
than two years were occupied in law proceedings on the validity of his apprehension, 
the seizure of his papers, and the outlawry, the detail of which would afford little 
entertainment to our readers.
	On the 27th of April, 1768, Mr. Wilkes was served with a writ of Capias Ut 
Logatum, and he appeared before the court of King's Bench, in the custody of the 
proper officer. His counsel moved to admit him to bail, but it was opposed by the 
counsel for the crown; who contended that no precedent could be produced of a 
person under a criminal conviction being admitted to bail, for, by such an indulgence 
it might be said, that a man who flies from justice, and is thereupon outlawed, would 
be in a better state than the man who submits to it; in the latter case, after conviction, 
he must remain in custody until sentence is passed; whereas, in the former case, he 
would be at large.
	The court was convinced by this argument, and Mr. Wilkes was ordered to the 
King's Bench prison. In his way thither, the coach in which he was carried, was stopt 
by the mob, who took off the horses and dragged it, with him, through the city, to a 
public-house, in Spital-fields, where they permitted him to alight. From thence, about 
eleven at night, he made his escape, and immediately proceeded towards the prison, 
where he surrendered himself.
	The next day he was visited by many of his friends, and the prison was 
surrounded by a vast concourse of people, who, it was feared, would have offered 
some outrage; but all remained quiet until night, when they pulled up the rails which 
inclosed the footway, with which they made a bonfire, and obliged the inhabitants of 
the borough of Southwark, to illuminate their houses; nor would they disperse until 
the arrival of a captain's guard of soldiers.
	From this time a mob constantly surrounded the King's Bench prison for 
several days. At length the justices appeared, followed by the military, the riot-act was 
read, and the mob not dispersing, the soldiers were ordered to fire upon them. Many 
were killed, and among them some passers-by, at a considerable distance from the 
scene of confusion.
	On the 28th the case of the outlawry was finally argued in the court of King's 
Bench; serjeant Glynn, on the part of Mr. Wilkes, greatly added to his reputation, as a 
sound lawyer, and was ably answered by the attomey-general; but the judges, though 
they somewhat differed in their reasons on the illegality of the outlawry, were 
unanimous in their opinion, that it should be reversed. This was a great point obtained 
by Mr. Wilkes, and obnoxious as he was to government, the determination, consistent 
with law, was upright and honourable in the learned bench.
	Mr. Wilkes was not, however, destined to clear himself by this single point 
gained, for the attorney-general immediately moved, that judgment might be passed 
upon him on his several convictions. The prisoner's counsel upon this, moved an 
arrest of judgment; and the court appointed the next Thursday to hear the arguments 
thereon. The general warrant on which Mr. Wilkes was apprehended, was also 
declared illegal.
	These determinations will shew the reader, that however great a man's crimes, 
he must be proceeded against according to the strict letter of the law of the land. In 
this respect Mr. Wilkes was hardly dealt with, and he took especial care to promulgate 
those hardships to the people.
	In his address to his constituents, the freeholders of Middlesex, he says,
	"in the whole progress of ministerial vengeance against me for several years, I 
have shewn, to the conviction of all mankind, that my enemies have trampled on the 
laws, and have been actuated by the spirit of tyranny and arbitrary power.
	"The general warrant under which I was first apprehended has been judged 
illegal. The seizure of my papers was condemned judicially. The outlawry, so long the 
topic of violent abuse, is, at last, declared to have been contrary to law; and on the 
ground first taken by my friend, Mr. Serjeant Glynn, is formally reversed."
	On the day apppinted for that purpose, the last effort was made to get rid of the 
remainder of the proceedings against Mr. Wilkes. The arguments for an arrest of 
judgment, though carried on with great ingenuity, would not hold, and he was found 
legally convicted of writing the libels. For that in The True Briton, he was fined 500L. 
and sentenced to two years imprisonment in the King's Bench prison; and for The 
Essay on Woman, 500L. more, a farther imprisonment of twelve months, and to find 
security for his good behaviour for seven years.
	Previous to his imprisonment, Mr. Wilkes was elected member of parliament 
for Middlesex, when the mob proceeded to various acts of outrage. They broke the 
windows of lord Bute, the prime minister, and of the mansion-house, even that of the 
lady mayoress's bed-chamber, forced the inhabitants of the metropolis to illuminate 
their houses, crying out, "Wilkes and Liberty!" and all who refused to echo it back, 
were knocked down. The outrages of the populace, were too many to be enumerated; 
several innocent people were killed, and numbers wounded. They broke windows 
without number, destroyed furniture, and even insulted royalty itself.
	Thus we find, that Wilkes was long the idol of the mob, but like all other such 
leaders, he fell into oblivion, and passed through the crowd with as little notice as any 
other man. He greatly wished to possess the chamberlainship of London, but the better 
class of citizens were too wary to trust him with their cash, and after a contested 
election for that lucrative place, alderman Hopkins was chosen.
	The metropolis, as well as various other parts of the kingdom, had not been so 
convulsed with riots and partial insurrections since the civil wars, as during the short 
time of Wilkes's popularity.
	These disgraceful tumults, and the lenity, or as some would have it, the 
timidity of government, spread disaffection into all classes of mechanics, who, 
thinking the time at hand, when they might exact what wages they pleased, and 
perhaps beyond their masters' profits, struck their work.
	The Watermen of the Thames assembled in a body before the mansion-house, 
and complained to the lord-mayor of the low prices of their fares, when his lordship 
advised them to draw up a petition to parliament, which he would himself present, 
upon which they gave him three cheers and departed.
	The Spitalfields Weavers proceeded to greater outrages. A great number of 
them forcibly entered the house of Mr. Nathaniel Fair, in Pratt's-alley, cut to pieces 
and destroyed the silk-work manufactory in two different looms. They forcibly 
entered the house of his relation, Mrs. Elizabeth Pratt, in the same alley, and murdered 
a lad of seventeen years of age, by shooting hun through the head with a pistol loaded 
with slugs. A reward was offered for apprehending these rioters, and his Majesty's 
pardon offered to him who discovered the murderer.
	The Sawyers assembled in large bodies, pulled down the saw-mill, lately 
erected at a great expence, on pretence that it deprived many workmen of 
employment. They also wanted more wages.
	The Hatters at the same time struck, and demanded encreased wages; but we 
do not hear of any outrages being committed by them.
	The Labouring Husbandmen rose in several parts of England, in order to 
reduce the price of grain.
	At Tenderton, in Kent, a paper was pasted on the church door, threatening the 
farmers, if they refused to sell their wheat at 10L. a load, and the millers, if they gave 
more; and exciting all the poor to assemble, and raise a mob, and those who refused 
were to have their right arms broke. At Hastings in Sussex, the mob committed 
various outrages on the farmers in That neighbourhood, and threatened the life of a 
justice of the peace for attempting to commit one of them to prison.
	The Journeymen Coopers at Liverpool also rose in a body, and in a cruel 
manner forced one of their masters on a pole, and carried him through the streets, 
pretending he had hurt their trade.
	The Subalterns of the Army and Marines also petitioned, though not in a 
tumultuous manner, for an increase of pay which being granted, they assembled at the 
Globe Tavern, in the Strand, and deputed lieutenant Carrol to wait upon the Marquis 
of Granby, and General Conway, to return them thanks for their support on that 
occasion.
	The Lieutenants of the Navy, followed their example, and deputed one of their 
rank to return thanks to the honourable Captain Henry, for his unvarying perseverance 
in obtaining them the addition to their pay, of one shilling per day.
	The Sailors also followed the example of the landsmen, went in a body of 
many thousands, with drums beating and colours flying, to St. James's Palace, and 
presented a petition to the king, praying a "Relief of Grievances." Two days 
afterwards they assembled in much greater numbers, and proceeded as far as Palace-
yard in order to petition parliament for an increase of wages; where they were 
addressed by two gentlemen standing on the top of a hackney-coach, who told them 
that their petition could not be immediately answered, but that it would be considered 
and answered in due time, where upon the tars gave three cheers, and for a while 
dispersed. A short time, however, afterwards, they assembled at Limehouse, boarded 
several outward-bound ships, and forcibly carried away several of their crews, under 
pretence of not suffering ships to sail, until the seamens' wages were increased.


WILLIAM HAWKINS AND JOSEPH WILD 
Indicted for rioting, July, 1768

  
Hawkins and the rioters before the Mansion House

	AT the sessions of the Old Bailey for July, 1768, William Hawkins and Joseph 
Wild were tried for assaulting and wounding two of the servants of the lord mayor of 
London, and for other unlawful acts against the peace of our sovereign lord the king.
	On the part of the prosecution the first witness called was Mr. Way, a 
gentleman who was accidentally passing on the evening of this riot. He deposed that 
be saw a crowd of people carrying a gibbet, on which hung a boot and a petticoat, and 
making a stand at the Mansion House; be saw the lord mayor come out, and rush 
among the people who carried the gibbet, on which an affray began, and he presently 
heard the words 'Knock him down, knock him down!' At this instant he saw the 
prisoner, Hawkins, laying about him with a stick, which he afterwards found was 
stuck with nails, and he saw him strike one or two people, who proved to be his 
lordship's servants. They then seized Hawkins, and were dragging him into the 
Mansion House; but the mob rescued him, and he was making off, when the witness 
collared him, and, with the assistance of the wounded servants, secured him in the 
Mansion House.
	Philip Pyle swore that, being in waiting upon the lord mayor the night of the 
riot (the 9th of May, the next day after the outlawry against Wilkes was reversed), he 
observed a great mob advancing with a gibbet, a boot and a petticoat hanging upon it; 
and being ordered by his lordship to seize it, he gave it a shake, which obliged the 
mob to quit it; that he was pulling it along, when a man, whom he believed to be the 
prisoner Hawkins, caught a flambeau out of his hand, and broke his head with it in 
several places. Dropping the gibbet, he recovered the flambeau, and made a stroke at 
the assailants (for there were now two or three striking at him), and was endeavouring 
to retreat for fear of falling, in which case, he said, he must undoubtedly have been 
murdered, when he received several blows on his head with a stick stuck full of nails, 
which happened to fly out of the prisoner's, Hawkins, hand, and his fellow-servant 
snatched it up. The prisoner then endeavoured to defend himself with his hands, but 
the witness dragged him, in his rage, near twenty yards through the mob; but when he 
bad got him within ten yards of the Mansion House the mob rescued him, and when 
he was making off Mr. Way collared him, and brought him back.
	Thomas Woodward, another servant of the lord mayor, corroborated the 
evidence of the two former witnesses.
	There being no positive proof against the prisoner Wild, he was acquitted; but 
Hawkins was found guilty, and sentenced to death.


SARAH METYARD AND SARAH MORGAN METYARD, 
HER DAUGHTER 
Executed at Tyburn, 19th of July, 1768, for the Cruel Murders of Parish 
Apprentices

	SARAH METYARD was a milliner, and the daughter her assistant, in Bruton 
Street, Hanover Square, London. In the year 1758 the mother had five apprentice girls 
bound to her from different parish workhouses, among whom were Anne Naylor and 
her sister. Anne Naylor, being of a sickly constitution, was not able to do so much 
work as the other apprentices about the same age, and therefore she became the more 
immediate object of the fury of the barbarous women, whose repeated acts of cruelty 
at length occasioned the unhappy girl to abscond. Being brought back, she was 
confined in an upper apartment, and allowed each day no other sustenance than a 
small piece of bread and a little water.
	Seizing an opportunity of escaping from her confinement, unperceived she got 
into the street, and ran to a milk-carrier, whom she begged to protect her, saying that 
if she returned she must certainly perish, through the want of food and severe 
treatment she daily received. Being soon missed, she was followed by the younger 
Metyard, who seized her by the neck, forced her into the house, and threw her upon 
the bed in the room where she had been confined, and she was then seized by the old 
woman, who held her down while the daughter beat her with the handle of a broom in 
a most cruel manner.
	They afterwards put her into a back room on the second storey, tied a cord 
round her waist, and her hands behind her, and fastened her to the door in such a 
manner that it was impossible for her either to sit or lie down. She was compelled to 
remain in this situation for three successive days; but they permitted her to go to bed 
at the usual hours at night. Having received no kind of nutriment for three days and 
two nights, her strength was so exhausted that, being unable to walk upstairs, she 
crept to the garret, where she lay on her hands and feet.
	While she remained tied up on the second floor the other apprentices were 
ordered to work in an adjoining apartment, that they might be deterred from 
disobedience by being witnesses to the unhappy girl's sufferings; but they were 
enjoined, on the penalty of being subjected to equal severity, against affording her any 
kind of relief.
	On the fourth day she faltered in speech, and presently afterwards expired. The 
other girls, seeing the whole weight of her body supported by the strings which 
confined her to the door, were greatly alarmed, and called out: "Miss Sally! Miss 
Sally! Nanny does not move." The daughter then came upstairs, saying: "If she does 
not move, I will make her move"; and then beat the deceased on the head with the 
heel of a shoe.
	Perceiving no signs of life, she called to her mother, who came upstairs and 
ordered the strings that confined the deceased to be cut; she then laid the body across 
her lap and directed one of the apprentices where to find a bottle with some hartshorn 
drops.
	When the child had brought the drops, she and the other girls were ordered to 
go downstairs; and the mother and daughter, being convinced that the object of their 
barbarity was dead, conveyed the body into the garret . They related to the other 
apprentices that Nanny had been in a fit, but was perfectly recovered, adding that she 
was locked into the garret lest she should again run away; and, in order to give an air 
of plausibililty to their tale, at noon the daughter carried a plate of meat upstairs, 
saying it was for Nanny's dinner.
	They locked the body of the deceased in a box on the fourth day after the 
murder, and, having left the garret door open and the street door on the jar, one of the 
apprentices was told to call Nanny down to dinner, and to tell her that, if she promised 
to behave well in future, she would be no longer confined. Upon the return of the 
child, she said Nanny was not above-stairs; and after a great parade of searching every 
part of the house they reflected upon her as being of an intractable disposition and 
pretended she had run away.
	The sister of the deceased, who was apprenticed to the same inhuman mistress, 
mentioned to a lodger in the house that she was persuaded her sister was dead; 
observing that it was not probable she had gone away, since parts of her apparel still 
remained in the garret. The suspicions of this girl coming to the knowledge of the 
inhuman wretches, they, with a view of preventing a discovery, cruelly murdered her, 
and secreted the body.
	The body of Anne remained in the box two months, during which time the 
garret door was kept locked, lest the offensive smell shouild lead to a discovery. The 
stench became so powerful that they judged it prudent to remove the remains of the 
unhappy victim of their barbarity; and therefore, on the evening of the 25th of 
December, they cut the body in pieces, and tied the head and trunk up in one cloth and 
the limbs in another, excepting one hand, a finger belonging to which had been 
amputated before death, and that they resolved to burn.
	When the apprentices had gone to bed, the old woman put the hand into the 
fire, saying: "The fire tells no tales." She intended to consume the entire remains of 
the unfortunate girl by fire but, afraid that the smell would give rise to suspicion, 
changed that design, and took the bundles to the gully-hole in Chick Lane and 
endeavoured to throw the parts of the mangled corpse over the wall into the common 
sewer; but being unable to effect that, she left them among the mud and water that 
was collected before the grate of the sewer.
	Some pieces of the body were discovered about twelve o'clock by the 
watchman, and he mentioned the circumstance to the constable of the night. The 
constable applied to one of the overseers of the parish, by whose direction the parts of 
the body were collected and taken to the watchhouse. On the following day the matter 
was communicated to Mr Umfreville, the coroner, who examined the pieces found by 
the watchman; but he supposed them to be parts of a corpse taken from a churchyard 
for the use of some surgeon, and declined to summon a jury.
	Four years elapsed before the discovery of these horrid murders, which at 
length happened in the following manner. Continual disagreements prevailed between 
the mother and daughter; and, though the latter had now arrived at the age of maturity, 
she was often beaten, and otherwise treated with severity. Thus provoked, she 
sometimes threatened to destroy herself, and at others to give information against her 
mother as a murderer.
	At last information concerning the affair was given to the overseers of 
Tottenham parish, and mother and daughter were committed to the Gatehouse. At the 
ensuing Old Bailey sessions they were both sentenced to be executed on the following 
Monday, and then to be conveyed to Surgeons' Hall for dissection.
	The mother, being in a fit when she was put into the cart, lay at her length till 
she came to the place of execution, when she was raised up, and means were used for 
her recovery, but without effect, so that she departed this life in a state of insensibility. 
From the time of leaving Newgate to the moment of her death the daughter wept 
incessantly.
	After hanging the usual time the bodies were conveyed in a hearse to 
Surgeons' Hall, where they were exposed to the curiosity of the public, and then 
dissected.


ELIZABETH RICHARDSON 
Executed at Tyburn, 21st of December, 1768, for murdering an Attorney-at-
Law, in Symond's Inn, Chancery Lane

	THIS unhappy woman was seduced from the precepts of virtue and honour at 
an early period of life, and, after subsisting some years on the wages of casual 
prostitution, was taken into keeping by Mr Pimlot, an attorney-at-law, who had 
chambers in Symond's Inn.
	Whether she had cause for jealousy is uncertain, but she was inflamed with 
that passion to a degree of violence, and frequently went to his chambers in the 
expectation of finding him engaged with some other woman.
	One Sunday evening Mr Pimlot was engaged with some friends at a house in 
Fleet Street; and Richardson, going to his chambers and finding him not there, 
determined to wait till his return. About twelve o'clock Mr Pimlot entered his 
chambers, without being perceived by the woman, and went to bed.
	About half-an-hour afterwards she in a most riotous manner insisted upon 
being admitted, declaring, with horrid imprecations, that she would not depart till she 
had seen Mr Pimlot, who for some time made no answer. This exasperating her to still 
greater outrage, she gave vent to her passion in the most profane language, and, after 
breaking one of the panes of the window, went towards the passage leading to 
Chancery Lane, but turning back, she was met by Mr Pimlot, who gave her into 
custody of the watch. She was no sooner taken into custody than, with a sharp-pointed 
penknife, with a blade about two inches long, she struck Mr Pimlot under the left 
breast. The watchman said: "You break the peace, madam, and I must take you to the 
watch-house." Immediately after this Mr Pimlot, taking the knife from the wound, 
said, in a faint and tremulous voice: "Here, watchman, take this knife; she has stabbed 
me."
	Mr Pimlot proceeded to the watch-house, being followed by the constable and 
his prisoner. He sat down in the constable's chair, and on opening his waistcoat the 
blood was seen issuing from his wound, Leaning down his head, he presently expired, 
without speaking. The knife was examined, and blood appeared upon the blade.
	When she perceived the blood issuing from Mr Pimlot's wound she clasped 
her hands and exclaimed: "What have I done! Oh, Mr Wilson, it was I that did this 
shocking deed: instantly send for a surgeon, send for a surgeon! I have murdered my 
dear Pimlot." She was immediately sent to New Prison; and her tears and other 
passionate expressions of sorrow proved her to be deeply penetrated by affliction for 
the crime she had committed.
	A watchman was sent for Mr Minors, a surgeon, in Chancery Lane; but he 
being in bed, two of his pupils accompanied the watchman. Upon their arrival they 
found the gentleman dead.
	On the following day the body was opened by Mr Minors, who found that the 
heart was penetrated, and that the wound exactly corresponded with the figure of the 
knife. The coroner's jury being summoned, a verdict of wilful murder was found 
against the prisoner, who was brought to trial at the next sessions at the Old Bailey; 
and being found guilty, she was sentenced to be executed on the following Monday.
	After her body had hung the usual time, it was carried to Surgeons' Hall for 
dissection.


WILLIAM TAUNTON 
Executed for the murder of Mrs. Phipps, 11th September, 1769

	THIS malefactor was a native of Gloucestershire, and brought up as a 
husbandman, which employment he quitted to live as ostler at an inn at Tewkesbury, 
in which capacity he continued several years, and then came to London.
	After this he was engaged in the service of Mrs. Phipps, a widow, who kept 
the Lamb Inn at Colnbrook. Though she was the mother of several children, yet a 
scandalous intimacy soon ensued between her and Taunton, and they lived together 
some years as husband and wife; and strangers calling at the inn presumed that he was 
the landlord, from the airs of authority which he assumed.
	Miserable, however, was this connexion in its progress, and fatal to both 
parties in its event. Continual quarrels arose between them, and frequent blows were 
the consequence of their reiterated disputes; and this way of life, as might be 
reasonably imagined, greatly injured the character of Mrs. Pbipps, and occasioned the 
loss of great part of her business.
	After a residence of some time, their situation becoming unhappy, Taunton 
went down to his friends in Gloucestershire, with an intention, as it was thought, to 
have remained there; but be had not been long in the country when be received a letter 
from Mrs. Phipps, earnestly inviting his return, alleging, as a reason for it, that she 
was unhappy without his company.
	The ill-fated man was weak enough to return on this invitation; but the 
connexion had not been long renewed before their quarrels became as frequent as 
before, and proceeded even to a greater degree of violence, till the neighbours were 
alarmed at their inconsistent conduct, and what began in illicit love ended in murder.
	After repeated disagreements, they sat down to supper one evening in apparent 
reconciliation; when Mrs. Phipps asked Mr. Taunton if she should pare him a 
cucumber, or would he eat it with the rind on. These words were scarcely pronounced 
when Taunton seized the kitchen poker, and told her to lay hold of one end of it. She 
wondered at this command, and asked him why it must be complied with. He still 
insisted on her taking hold of one end of it: on which she said 'If I must have it, let me 
have the clean end; but what am I to do with it?'-- His answer was 'You must, knock 
out my brains.' She replied 'No, Taunton, I will not hurt a hair of your head.' To this 
he said 'If you will not knock my brains out, I will knock your brains out;' and no 
sooner had be uttered this horrid expression than he struck her on the head with such 
force as almost to lay her skull bare; after which he gave her a blow on the face, 
which cut her in the most terrible manner.
	A surgeon, being sent for, dressed her wounds, and, addressing himself to 
Taunton, told him that, if he had murdered her, he would certainly have been hanged. 
The offender acknowledged that he knew that must have been the consequence; but 
desired the surgeon to take all proper care of the wounded woman.
	The injury took place on the 30th of July, and the surgeon attended the 
wounded woman for five days; at the end of which time she said to her daughter, 
'Peggy, you may go out of the room, for I want to sleep.' During the absence of the 
daughter Taunton entered the room, and struck Mrs. Phipps so forcibly on the neck 
with a hatchet, that her head hung over one side of the bed.
	The horrid murder being at length committed, Taunton threw down the 
instrument of death, and went to drink at a public house at about a mile distant; and 
the surgeon coming soon after to attend his duty, and finding Mrs. Phipps dead, 
dispatched the ostler and another man in search of the murderer. It was not long 
before they found him, and, bringing him back to Colnbrook, the surgeon hinted to 
him that the most fatal consequences would probably ensue from the crime of which 
he had been guilty.
	The coroner's jury, being summoned on the occasion, gave a verdict that 
Taunton had been guilty of the wilful murder of Mrs. Phipps; on which he was taken 
before a magistrate, who committed him to New Prison.
	In this place he was visited by many persons, who conversed with him on his 
unhappy situation; and one of them hinting his fears that he was guilty, Taunton 
acknowledged that he was, and expressed his sorrow for the crime; but said it was 
now too late to remedy the evil.
	His friend then inquired what could induce him to commit such an atrocious 
crime; to which he answered that she had traduced his character, by telling lies of him 
in the neighbourhood.
	Being brought to trial at the ensuing sessions at the Old Bailey, he produced 
several persons who deposed that he had been, at times, so much out of his mind, that 
he was not master of his own conduct: and one of these in particular swore that he had 
at one time attempted to destroy himself by drowning, and at another by hanging; but 
this plea being thought unsatisfactory by the jury, he was capitally convicted, and 
sentenced to die.
	After conviction he gave the fullest proof of being in possession of his 
intellectual faculties; exercising himself in the offices of devotion, and receiving the 
sacrament from the hands of the Ordinary of Newgate.
	He was tried on Saturday, the 9th of September, 1769, and ordered for 
execution on the Monday following. A most extraordinary shower of rain falling that 
morning, he was taken from Newgate in a hackney coach, the Ordinary attending him, 
and the executioner riding behind; and in this manner he was conveyed to the place of 
death.
	On his arrival at the fatal tree a person who had formerly known him went into 
the cart, and assisted him in his devotion. After the body had hung the usual time it 
was cut down, and carried to Surgeons' Hall for dissection.
	This malefactor suffered at Tyburn on the 11th of September, 1769.
	It is very seldom that we hear of unmarried persons living together as man and 
wife with any tolerable degree of happiness; and bow, indeed, is it to be expected they 
should?–Those, who have mutual reason to reproach each other with their crimes, will 
hardly fail to avail themselves of every opportunity of doing so; for the guilty mind 
conceives that it lifts a load from its own breast when it seeks to criminate another.
	From the whole of this narrative we ought to learn that there is no happiness in 
this life equal to that which is to be found in the married state. Trifling difficulties 
may occur; trifling differences may arise between the married pair; but their mutual 
interest, and their mutual love, will soon reconcile all differences, and overcome all 
difficulties. The vow which has been made at the altar will perpetually recur to the 
honest mind:–the man will consider himself as obliged to the woman who once 
honoured him with her hand; nor will the woman deem herself less obliged to the man 
who undertook to be her guardian and protector for life.


MUNGO CAMPBELL 
A Gentleman, who was convicted of killing the Earl of Eglinton, and to 
avoid an Ignominious Death hanged himself, 28th of February, 1770

	THE unhappy subject of this narrative was protected by an uncle, who gave 
him a learned education; but this generous friend died when the youth was about 
eighteen years of age, leaving him sixty pounds, and earnestly recommending him to 
the care of his other relations. The young man was a finished scholar, yet seemed 
averse to making the choice of any of the learned professions. His attachment 
appeared to be to the military life, in which line many of his ancestors had most 
gloriously distinguished themselves.
	Mr Campbell entered as a cadet in the royal regiment of Scots Greys, then 
commanded by his relation, General Campbell, and served during two campaigns at 
his own expense, in the fond hope of military preferment.
	After the battle of Dettingen, at which he assisted, he had an opportunity of 
being appointed quartermaster if he could have raised one hundred pounds, but this 
place was bestowed on another person while Campbell was making fruitless 
application for the money.
	Thus disappointed of what he thought a reasonable expectation, he quitted the 
army and went into Scotland, where he arrived at the juncture when the rebels had 
quitted Edinburgh, in 1745, Lord Loudoun having then the command of loyal 
Highlanders, who exerted so much bravery in the suppression of the Rebellion; and 
Mr Campbell, having the honour to be related to his lordship, went and fought under 
him with a bravery that did equal credit to his loyalty and courage.
	Not long after the decisive battle of Culloden, Lord Loudoun procured his 
kinsman to be appointed an officer of the excise; and prevailed on the commissioners 
to station him in the shire of Ayr, that he might have the happiness of residing near his 
friends and relations.
	In the discharge of his new duty Mr Campbell behaved with strict integrity to 
the Crown, yet with so much civility as to conciliate the affections of all those with 
whom he had any transactions. He married when he was somewhat advanced in life; 
and so unexceptionable was his whole conduct that all the nobility and gentry in the 
neighbourhood (the Earl of Eglinton excepted) gave him permission to kill game on 
their estates. However, he was very moderate in the use of this indulgence, seldom 
shooting but with a view to gratify a friend with a present; hardly ever for his own 
emolument.
	Mr Campbell had a singular attachment to fishing; and, a river in Lord 
Eglinton's estate affording the finest fish in that country, he would willingly have 
angled there, but his lordship being as strict with regard to his fish as his game, 
Campbell, unwilling to offend him, gave away his fishing-tackle, which was excellent 
in its kind. He was likewise in possession of a fine pointer, which he sold; but would 
not part with his gun, which produced him the greatest pleasure of his life.
	Campbell, being in search of smugglers, and having his gun with him, was 
crossing part of Lord Eglinton's estate when a hare started up, and he shot her. His 
lordship hearing the report of the gun, and being informed that Campbell had fired it, 
sent a servant to command him to come to the seat. Campbell obeyed the disagreeable 
summons, but was treated very cavalierly by his lordship, who even descended to call 
him by names of contempt. The other apologised for his conduct, which he said arose 
from the sudden starting of the hare, and declared that he had no design of giving 
offence. This might have been a sufficient apology to any other man than Lord 
Eglinton.
	A man named Bartleymore was among the servants of Lord Eglinton, and was 
a favourite of his lordship, and this man dealt largely in contraband goods. Mr 
Campbell, passing along the seashore, met Bartleymore with a cart containing eighty 
gallons of rum, which he seized as contraband; and the rum was condemned, but the 
cart was restored, being the property of Lord Eglinton.
	In this affair it will appear evident that Mr Campbell did not exceed his duty; 
but Bartleymore was so incensed against him that he contrived many tales to his 
disadvantage, and at length engaged his lordship's passions so far that he conceived a 
more unfavourable opinion of Campbell than he had hitherto done.
	About ten in the morning of the 24th of October, 1769, Campbell took his gun 
and went out with another officer with a view to detecting smugglers. Mr Campbell 
took with him a licence for shooting, which had been given him by Dr Hunter, though 
he had no particular design of killing any game, but intended to shoot a woodcock if 
he should see one.
	They crossed a small part of Lord Eglinton's estate, in order to reach the 
seashore, where they intended to walk. When they arrived at this spot it was near 
noon, and Lord Eglinton came up in his coach, attended by Mr Wilson, a carpenter, 
and followed by four servants on horseback. On approaching the coast his lordship 
met Bartleymore who told him there were some poachers at a distance, and that 
Campbell was among them. Lord Eglinton quitted his coach and, mounting a led 
horse, rode to the spot, where he saw Campbell and the other officer, whose name was 
Brown. His lordship said: "Mr Campbell, I did not expect to have found you so soon 
again on my grounds, after your promise when you shot the hare." He then demanded 
Campbell's gun, which the latter declared he would not part with.
	Lord Eglinton now rode towards him, while Campbell retreated, with his gun 
presented, desiring him to keep at a distance. Still, however, his lordship advanced, 
smiling, and said: "Are you going to shoot me?" Campbell replied: "I will, if you do 
not keep off." Hereupon Lord Eglinton called to his servants to bring him a gun, 
which one of them took from the coach, and delivered to another to carry to their 
master.
	In the interim Lord Eglinton, leading his horse, approached Mr Campbell and 
demanded his gun, but the latter would not deliver it. The peer then quitted his horse's 
bridle and continued advancing, while Campbell still retired, though in an irregular 
direction, and pointed his gun towards his pursuer.
	At length Lord Eglinton came so near him that Campbell said: "I beg your 
pardon, my lord, but I will not deliver my gun to any man living; therefore keep off, 
or I will certainly shoot you." At this instant Bartleymore, advancing, begged 
Campbell to deliver his gun to Lord Eglinton; but the latter answered he would not, 
for he "had a right to carry a gun."
	His lordship did not dispute his general right, but said that he could not have 
any to carry it on his estate without his permission. Campbell again begged pardon, 
and still continued retreating, but with his gun in his hand, and preparing to fire in his 
own defence. While he was thus walking backwards his heel struck against a stone 
and he fell, when he was about the distance of three yards from the pursuer. Lord 
Eglinton observed him fall on his back, and stepped forward, as if he would have 
passed by Campbell's feet. The latter, observing this, reared himself on his elbow, and 
lodged the contents of his piece in the left side of his lordship's body.
	A contest now ensued, during which Bartleymore repeatedly struck Campbell. 
Being observed by Lord Eglinton, he called out: "Do not use him ill." Campbell, 
being secured, was conducted to the wounded man, then lying on the ground, who 
said: "Mr Campbell, I would not have shot you." But Campbell made no answer. His 
hands were tied behind him, and he was conducted to the town of Saltcoats, the place 
of his former station as an exciseman.
	Lord Eglinton dying, after languishing ten hours, Mr Campbell was, on the 
following day, committed to the prison of Ayr, and the next month removed to 
Edinburgh, in preparation for his trial before the High Court of Justiciary. The trial 
commenced on the 27th of February, 1770, and the jury having found Mr Campbell 
guilty he was sentenced to die.
	On his return to prison he was visited by several of his friends, among whom 
he behaved with apparently decent cheerfulness; and, retiring to his apartment, he 
begged the favour of a visit from them on the following day. But in the morning he 
was found dead, hanging to the end of a form which he had set upright, with a silk 
handkerchief round his neck.
	The following lines were found upon the floor, close to the body:--
"Farewell, vain world, I've had enough of thee, 
And now am careless what thou say'st of me,  
Thy smiles I court not, nor thy frowns I fear,  
My cares are past, my heart lies easy here,  
What faults they find in me take care to shun,  
And look at home, enough is to be done."


Mr BARETTI 
An Italian, who was indicted for the wilful Murder of Evan Morgan, and 
acquitted

	AT the sessions held at the Old Bailey in November, 1769, Mr Baretti was 
brought to his trial, for the murder of Evan Morgan, on the 6th of October preceding; 
when the substance of the evidence against him was to the following effect.
	Elizabeth Ward deposed, that, between nine and ten at night on the 6th of 
October, she heard a woman, whom she had never seen before, ask the prisoner to 
give her a glass of wine, and at the same time take hold of him in a manner 
inconsistent with decency:–that the prisoner proceeded forward, but, soon turning 
back, doubled his fist and struck this deponent a violent blow on the face:–that, on her 
screaming out, three men came up, and demanded 'how he could strike a woman,' and, 
shoving him once or twice, pushed him off the pavement. At this time, she said, 
Baretti drew a knife, while the men followed him, calling out 'Murder! he has a knife 
out!' and this deponent believed that the deceased was stabbed at this juncture.
	The deposition of Thomas Patman was to the following effect. That he had 
been in company with a Mr Clark and the deceased on the night abovementioned; that 
he saw Mr Baretti strike a woman, whom he did not know, on the head; and, on her 
screaming out, Morgan and Clark pushed Patman, though not with much violence, 
against Baretti, who gave him a blow on the left side, in consequence of which the 
blood ran down into his shoe:–that he then called out he was stabbed; that Baretti 
retreated; that Morgan followed him about half-way up Panton Street, where Morgan 
received a wound from the prisoner in Patman's presence, in consequence of which he 
fell to the ground.
	The testimony of John Clark confirmed, in several particulars, that of the 
preceding evidence; but, on his being cross-examined, he acknowledged that Patman 
did not know he was stabbed till Mr Baretti ran into Panton Street. He likewise 
owned, that himself had sworn before the coroner, 'that Morgan collared Baretti 
before he knew Patman was wounded; and that one of the women said the prisoner 
ought to have a knock over the head with her patten.'
	The evidence of Mr Lambert, a tallow-chandler in Panton Street, was to the 
following effect. He said, that Mr Baretti ran into a grocer's shop, opposite his house; 
that Patman was standing at the door, with the blood running down his shirt, and said 
that a gentleman in the shop had stabbed him. Mr Baretti had at that time a knife in 
one hand, and a silver case over the blade, which was bloody. Mr Lambert, who at 
that time was in the office of constable, called to Baretti to surrender, and, 
immediately running towards him, seized him, and took him into custody, in order to 
convey him before a magistrate.
	Morgan having been carried to the Middlesex-hospital, one of the patients, 
who had been there at the time, declared, that he had heard the deceased say, that he 
saw a gentleman assault two women; on which, without intending to give offence, he 
went to assist them; when Baretti stabbed him in two places, and that he then turned 
round, and stabbed him a third time; and that the third wound hurt him more than the 
two former.
	The testimony of Mr Wyatt, the surgeon who attended Morgan, imported, that 
the deceased had received three wounds, one of which, being in the belly, was the 
immediate occasion of his death. He farther said, that, while he was dressing Patman, 
Clark being present, and enquiring into what gave rise to the misfortune, Clark said, 
that they saw a gentleman abusing a lady who was acquainted with Morgan; that 
Morgan pushed Clark against Patman, and that Clark pushed him against the prisoner; 
that he was not struck by either of them, but he believed the woman damned him for a 
French bougre, and said he ought to have his head cloven with a patten.
	A short time after this, Mr Wyatt demanded of Clark whether the woman was 
of his acquaintance; and he replied in the negative, and then denied that she was even 
acquainted with Morgan; though, not more than two minutes before, he had confessed 
that she was.
	This being the substance of the evidence on the trial, Mr Baretti read the 
following defence, which will probably be deemed to give more insight into the real 
state of the case, than all that has preceded it.
	'On Friday the 6th I spent the whole day at home, correcting my Italian and 
English dictionary, which is actually reprinting and working off; and upon another 
book in four volumes, which is to be published in February next, and has been 
advertised in the newspapers. I went a little after four to the club of royal 
academicians in Soho, where I stopped about half an hour, waiting for my friends, and 
warming myself in the club-room.
	'Upon nobody's coming, I went to the Orange coffee house, to see if a letter 
was come for me (for my letters come there) but there was none. I went back to go to 
the club, and going hastily up the Haymarket, there was a woman at a door: they say 
there were two, but I took notice of but one, as I hope God will save me; there might 
have been two, though I only saw one; that is a fact. There was a woman eight or ten 
yards from the corner of Panton Street, and she clapped her hands with such violence 
about my private parts, that it gave me great pain. This I instantly resented, by giving 
her a blow on the hand, with a few angry words. The woman got up directly, raised 
her voice, and finding by my pronunciation I was a foreigner, she called me several 
bad names, in a most contumelious strain; among which, French bougre, d--ned 
Frenchman, and a woman-hater, were the most audible.
	'I had not quite turned the corner, before a man made me turn back, by giving 
me a blow with his fist, and asking me how I dare strike a woman; another pushed 
him against me, and pushed me off the pavement; then three or four more joined 
them. I wonder I did not fall from the high step which is there. The pathway is much 
raised from the coachway. A great number of people surrounded me presently, many 
beating me, and all d--ning me on every side, in a most frightful manner. I was a 
Frenchman in their opinion, which made me apprehensive I must expect no favour nor 
protection, but all outrage and blows.
	'There is generally a great puddle in the corner of Panton street, even when the 
weather is fine; but that day it had rained incessantly, which made it very slippery. I 
could plainly perceive my assailants wanted to throw me into the puddle, where I 
might be trampled on; so I cried out, murder! There was a space in the circle, from 
whence I ran into Panton Street, and endeavoured to get into the footway. I was in the 
greatest horror, lest I should run against some stones, as I have such bad eyes. I could 
not run so fast as my pursuers, so that they were upon me, continually beating and 
pushing me, some of them attempting to catch me by the hair-tail: if this had 
happened, I had been certainly a lost man. I cannot absolutely fix the time and place 
where I first struck. I remember, somewhere in Panton Street I gave a quick blow to 
one who beat off my hat with his fist.
	'When I was in Oxendon Street, fifteen or sixteen yards from the Haymarket, I 
stopped, and faced about. My confusion was great, and seeing a shop open, I ran into 
it for protection, quite spent with fatigue. I am certainly sorry for the man; but he 
owed his death to his own daring impetuosity. Three then came into the shop, one of 
them cried to me to surrender myself to him, who was a constable. I asked them if 
they were honest men, and friends; they said yes. I put up my knife, desired them to 
arrest me, begged they would send for a coach, and take me to Sir John Fielding.
	'I appeal to them how I behaved when I surrendered, and how thankful I was 
for their kind protection. Sir John heard what I and the men had to say. They sent me 
into a room below, from whence I dispatched a man to the club in Gerrard Street, 
when Sir Joshua Reynolds and other gentlemen came to me.
	'A messenger was dispatched to the Middlesex hospital, where they said 
Morgan was carried. A surgeon came, and took his oath that Morgan was in danger. 
Sir John committed me to Tothill-fields-bridewell. Two gentlemen, as well as the 
constable, can witness to my behaviour when the coachman lost his way, which 
forced us to alight in the mire and darkness, in order to find the way to Tothill-fields 
bridewell. I humbly conceive this will shew I had no intention of escaping. That 
woeful night I passed without rest.
	'My face had been observed to be hurt, while I was at Sir John Fielding's; and 
the constable was the first who took notice of a blow I had received on my chin. But 
when the heat and fear had subsided, I found a great pain in divers parts of my body. 
Mr Molini and Mr Low, being with me, desired me to let them see what was the 
matter with my back, which I complained of. I stripped, and they saw several bruises.
	'This, my lord and gentlemen of the jury, is the best account I can give of my 
unfortunate accident: for what is done in two or three minutes, in fear and terror, is 
not to be minutely described; and the court and the jury are to judge. I hope your 
lordship, and every person present, will think that a man of my age, character, and 
way of life, would not spontaneously quit my pen, to engage in an outrageous tumult. 
I hope it will easily be conceived that a man almost blind could not but be seized with 
terror on such a sudden attack as this. I hope it will be seen that my knife was neither 
a weapon of offence or defence; I wear it to carve fruit and sweatmeats, and not to kill 
my fellow-creatures.
	'It is a general custom in France not to put knives upon the table, so that even 
ladies wear them in their pockets for general use. I have continued to wear it after my 
return, because I have found it occasionally convenient. Little did I think such an 
event would ever have happened. Let this trial turn out as favourable as my innocence 
may deserve, still my regret will endure as long as life shall last.
	'A man who has lived full fifty years, and spent most of that time in a studious 
manner, I hope, will not be supposed to have voluntarily engaged in so desperate an 
affair. I beg leave, my lord and gentlemen, to add one thing more. Equally confident 
of my own innocence, and English discernment to trace out truth, I did resolve to 
waive the privilege granted to foreigners by the laws of this kingdom: nor was my 
motive a compliment to this nation: my motive was my life and honour; that it should 
not be thought I received undeserved favour from a jury, part my own country. I chose 
to be tried by a jury of this country; for, if my honour is not saved, I cannot much 
wish for the preservation of my life. I will wait for the determination of this awful 
court with that confidence, I hope, which inno cence has a right to obtain. So God 
bless you all.'
	Several gentlemen now appeared in behalf of Mr Baretti; among whom, Mr 
Lambert proved that he had received a blow, that his hat was lost, and that his face 
was swelled.
	Mr Molini swore that, on the day after the affray, he had observed a swelling 
on Mr Baretti's cheek, and several bruises on his back and shoulder; and Mr Low 
deposed, that, when he visited Mr Baretti in prison, he had seen six or seven bruises 
on different parts of his body.
	Justice Kelynge, major Alderton, and Mr Petrin, deposed, that some 
abandoned women, attended by bullies, had severally attacked them in an indelicate 
way in the Haymarket.
	To the character of Mr Baretti appeared Sir Joshua Reynolds, doctor Johnson, 
Mr Fitzherbert, and Edmund Burke, esquire, all of whom represented him as a man of 
benevolence, sobriety, modesty, and learning. The honourable Mr Beauclerk, Mr 
Garrick, and Mr Molini, all confirmed this testimony, adding, that persons who travel 
in foreign countries are accustomed to carry such knives as that which had been 
unhappily made use of by the prisoner.
	After considering the whole matter, the jury acquitted Mr Baretti of murder 
and manslaughter, and gave a verdict of 'Self-defence.'
	This case of Mr Baretti may be deemed one of the extraordinary kind. It seems 
evident, from the depositions made on his trial, and from the substance of his defence, 
that he had been assaulted by people of abandoned character; but the question is, 
whether he had a right to defend himself with such a weapon as he made use of; 
however, we shall not presume to decide on this question, as the jury solemnly 
determined that he had, by the verdict they gave.
	Mr Baretti's character was of the utmost service to him on this solemn 
occasion. His learning, his connexions, his disposition, were all of the highest 
importance to him; and though the alledged crime was no less than murder, we well 
remember that he was bailed by four gentlemen of distinguished character; so that he 
did not lay in Newgate even a single hour.
	His generous refusal to accept of the usual favour of being tried by a jury 
composed of an equal number of foreigners with Englishmen, furnishes an admirable 
proof of his disdain of taking any advantage; nor is it a small presumptive proof of his 
innocence: and his declaration that his regret would endure as long as life should last, 
though the trial should turn out as favourably as innocence might deserve, is greatly in 
favour of his humanity: and indeed no man of liberal feelings can have been even the 
accidental occasion of the death of a fellow creature, without sincerely lamenting the 
misfortune.
	The people of this country may wonder that Mr Baretti, an Italian by birth, 
should make his defence in such correct English: but it is to be remembered, that he 
had lived long among us, had studied our language with critical attention, and wrote it 
with a degree of purity scarce ever equalled by a Foreigner; to whom the English 
language, of all others, is said to be the most difficult of acquisition.
	Upon the whole, this inference should be drawn from the present case:-- those 
who would consult their own safety should avoid giving offence to others in the 
streets. The casual passenger has, at least, a right to pass unmolested; and he or she 
that may insult him cannot deserve pity, whatever consequences may follow.
	Foreign gentlemen, however, should consider, that the best method of 
escaping the fury of a mob is to take shelter in the first house they may see open: there 
are few people who could be so hard of heart as not to afford them protec tion; and we 
must think, for the honour of our country, that the generality would protect them 
against their assailants.
	The number of abandoned women, who infest the streets of the metropolis 
every evening, are in some measure to be pitied; but, when they add insult to indecent 
application, they ought to be punished with the utmost severity. But what must those 
men think of themselves, whose seductive arts have reduced women to a state so 
deplorable? If they have any sensibility left, horror and remorse must seize their 
minds: yet, however great their sufferings, they are not deserving of pity.-- Violators 
of all the laws of honour, they have no claim to our compassion!


JAMES ATTAWAY AND RICHARD BAILEY 
Executed at Tyburn, 4th of July, 1770, for committing a Burglary after tying 
up the Butler

	THE crime for which these men so justly suffered was committed in a manner 
most artful and daring.
	About nine o'clock one evening they went to the house of Thomas Le Merr, 
Esq., in Bedford Row, London, a public and genteel street. They had received 
information that Mr Le Merr was in the country. On their knocking at the door it was 
opened by a footman, to whom Bailey delivered a letter, saying that it was for his 
master. Before the servant could answer, Attaway, another daring ruffian who had 
escaped justice, rushed in, shut the street door, and stabbed him in the belly with a 
dagger. They then drew cords from their pockets, tied the bleeding man's hands 
behind his back, and dragged him downstairs into the kitchen, unloosed his hands, and 
ordered him to light a candle, though, being summer, it was not dark. This done, 
regardless of his wound, which he begged time to bind up, they again tied his hands 
behind him, bringing the rope first about his neck, and then across his face in such a 
manner that it went through his mouth, which it kept open, and then made it fast 
behind. Thus bound, they dragged him into a cellar and bolted the door.
	In a few minutes one of the villains returned and asked him if he was fast. 
Being answered, as well as the poor man could speak, that he was secure enough, they 
broke open the pantry, where the plate chest was kept, forced the lock, and 
deliberately packed up its contents.
	In the meantime the bound man gnawed the rope in his mouth, and soon 
liberated himself. He then forced open the door which confined him and got into the 
area, over which was a skylight; and, apprehensive that he was bleeding to death, he 
made an effort to climb up a pipe to get through it and give an alarm. Making a last 
exertion he succeeded, and, dragging the rope after him, got to the stables behind the 
house, and called for help as loudly as his almost exhausted strength would permit. 
Five or six grooms immediately came to his assistance, and seized the robbers as they 
were coming out of the house, thus fortunately saving the poor fellow's life and Mr Le 
Merr's property.
	On this evidence the two men were found guilty, and were hanged at Tyburn, 
on the 4th of July, 1770.


PETER CONWAY AND MICHAEL RICHARDSON 
Executed at Tyburn, 19th of July, 1770, for a Murder which was their first 
Essay in Crime

	THESE men were two of a gang who had associated themselves for the 
purpose of plunder, and in their very first attempt committed murder; at which they 
were so terrified that they fled without rifling the pockets of the deceased.
	On Saturday,the 26th of May, 1770, Richardson, Conway, and two men, 
named Jackson and Fox, went to the shop of Mr Robert Dun, in Prince's Square, near 
Ratcliff Highway, and purchased a pair of pistols. The above-mentioned Jackson was 
afterwards an evidence against his accomplices, but we do not learn that Fox was ever 
taken into custody.
	Having purchased the pistols, they left them at the house of an acquaintance, 
named Thomas; after which they all went to the lodgings of Conway, where they 
spent the night. On the succeeding day (Sunday) they took a coach to Whitechapel, 
where they continued drinking till the dusk of the evening, when they went to 
Thomas's house for the pistols. Being unprovided with balls, they remained for a 
while in consultation what to substitute in their stead; and at length they cut a pewter 
spoon in pieces and loaded their pistols. This being done, Conway and Richardson 
went together, and the other two accompanied them, but at a short distance, that they 
might not appear to be a gang of ruffians. They met a gentleman's servant, whom they 
stopped; but, as he had no money, he was permitted to pass without further 
molestation.
	It happened that, in the afternoon, Mr Venables, a butcher in Whitechapel, had 
been walking to Stepney with his neighbour, Mr Rogers, a carpenter, and they were 
returning to town when they were met by the villains above mentioned, a few minutes 
after they had parted from the gentleman's servant. Mr Venables and Mr Rogers had 
the appearance of men from whom a considerable booty might be expected; 
whereupon Conway stopped the former and demanded his money. Instead of 
delivering it, Mr Venables, who was a robust man, twice knocked down Richardson 
and Fox; and they had no sooner recovered their legs than Richardson and Conway 
immediately fired their pistols, and the two unoffending passengers were killed on the 
spot. The villains hurried away towards Stepney, whence they went to Ratcliff 
Highway, and thence to Wapping, where they stopped a man and robbed him of 
eighteen shillings and his watch.
	The bodies of the deceased were found in the road and conveyed to the watch-
house, and a surgeon was sent for, who examined the wounds, and found that they had 
been made by pieces of pewter. On the following Wednesday Jackson was 
apprehended on suspicion of having been concerned in the commission of the 
murders. On his examination he gave information who were his accomplices; on 
which he was admitted an evidence for the Crown. A few days after Jackson was 
taken into custody Conway went to the shop of Mr Burtman, a pawnbroker in Jermyn 
Street, where he offered a watch in pledge. An advertisement in the newspaper 
describing the person of Conway having been read by Mr Burtman, the latter 
imagined that he was the man thus described; on which he gave a hint to one of his 
servants to sit by Conway while he (Burtman) examined the watch.
	The servant, apprehending danger, whispered to his master that it was 
probable he had pistols in his possession. On which a person was sent out to request 
the attendance of the neighbours, with a view to prevent mischief. In the interim 
Conway, remarking that they whispered together, begged permission to retire to the 
vault, which he was readily allowed to do; but on his return he was taken into custody, 
and a coach was called to convey him to Sir John Fielding's office in Bow Street. 
When he was brought to the house of the magistrate he was confronted with Jackson, 
when they mutually endeavoured to incriminate each other; but the circumstances 
against Conway were so very suspicious that Sir John Fielding did not hesitate to 
commit him to Newgate.
	Richardson was likewise apprehended within five days after this commitment, 
and taken to Bow Street for examination, when the charge against him was so very 
strong that he was likewise committed to Newgate. At the next sessions at the Old 
Bailey the jury did not hesitate to convict them, and they were condemned to die.
	After execution their bodies were cut down and conveyed to Bow Common, 
where they were put in chains and hung on a gibbet. More than fifty thousand visited 
the spot within the first five days. On Sunday, particularly, the place resembled a 
crowded fair; and many people made money by selling liquors and other provisions to 
the assembled multitudes.


CAPTAIN DAVID FERGUSON 
Hanged in chains at Execution Dock, 5th January 1771, for the murder of 
his cabin-boy.

	AT the Admiralty sessions, held at the Old Bailey, on the 17th of December, 
1770, David Ferguson, master of the merchant-ship Betsey, was tried for the murder 
of his cabin-boy, a lad about thirteen years of age, during his voyage from Virginia to 
Antigua.
	It appeared that four of Captain Ferguson's crew died, and he was charged 
with the murder of them all. On one of these alleged crimes he was tried in Virginia, 
and acquitted.
	Lord Bortelot, the then governor of that colony, transmitted the proceedings of 
the Court to the secretary of state for foreign affairs in London, with a favourable 
opinion thereon.
	Though we have had too frequent occasion, in the course of this work, to state 
the wanton exercise of that power necessarily given to commanders at sea, yet we also 
know that the crew are too often ready to construe necessary correction into cruelty; 
and, should any of the hands corrected by the captain die, even by accident, or the 
common course of nature, they are sure to aggravate the affair, and persecute their 
commander.
	The ship Betsey sailed from the Capes of Virginia in the depth of winter, when 
the cold is intense to a degree, of which Englishmen have hardly a conception. Heavy 
gales of wind and long falls of snow succeed each other, day after day. The shrouds 
and rigging are incrusted with ice, and they often snap from the tension thereby 
occasioned. The masts, thus deprived of their principal support, are often ready to fall 
by the board, while the deck is deeply covered with snow.
	(Note: A shocking instance of the sad effects of these sudden snow storms, on 
the coast of America, happened to the officers of the Assistance man of war, lying off 
Sandy-Hook, near New York, in the year 1784. Six Seamen of that ship confederated 
to desert, jumped into the yawl, and pushed off from the ship towards the shore, 
Another boat was got ready for a pursuit, and was manned by the first lieutenant, 
eleven other officers, and one seaman. Before they could come up with the deserters, 
a snow storm came on, which, as is often the case, so overpowered them, and so 
darkened the horizon, that they lost sight both of the yawl and the ship, and were all, 
except one, next morning found dead on the beach, near Middleton Point, in New 
Jersey, most of them sticking in the mud.)
	In such cases seamen do their duty with much reluctance; and, when their 
extravagance in harbour has deprived them of the means of laying in an allowance of 
brandy and tobacco, they grow clamorous to their captain for those indispensable 
articles, with which he is not bound to supply them; in fact, he generally provides 
little more than may serve himself.
	Captain Ferguson's crew, thus situated, were often remiss in their duty; and, on 
several occasions, his utmost exertions were called upon for the safety of his ship; but 
that he exceeded the bounds of moderation must be admitted, from his conviction by 
an English jury of the murder of his cabin-boy.
	Perhaps the severity of the season, the crew being unprovided with liquor, and 
also without sufficient warm clothing, contributed more to the death of the remaining 
three that perished than correction. The survivors imputed the murder of them all to 
the cruelty of their captain.
	To come to the charge on which he was convicted: it was proved that he had 
frequently beat the boy in a manner far too severe for his tender years to bear; and that 
he had knocked him down, and then stamped upon him. After this barbarous usage he 
confined him almost an hour upon deck, to the weather-side of his long-boat, when 
the weather was so severe that snow covered the deck, and the shrouds were snapping. 
That he again pushed him down, and trod upon him with both his feet.
	The seamen said that the boy provoked this punishment by coming upon deck 
with only one stocking on. The sufferer did not make complaint of the effects of his 
usage until eleven o'clock at night; and the next day he fell into the hold, and was 
missing five hours. He was found dead upon the ballast.
	In his defence Captain Ferguson proved the distress his ship was in from the 
weather, and the refractory spirit of the crew, several of whom he was obliged to force 
to their duty.
	On the passage of the Betsey home to England, Major Watson and Captain 
Lilly, who were passengers, proved that she was wrecked on the coast of Sussex; and 
that it was owing to the resolution and good conduct of Captain Ferguson that they, 
together with the crew, were saved. It also appeared that many vessels at sea with the 
Betsey, on the coast of America, had several of their crews frost-bitten, which turning 
to gangrene, they died. The inference attempted to be made was that the frost had 
killed the cabin-boy.
	Several respectable merchants gave the prisoner a good character for integrity 
and humanity; but the jury found him guilty, and sentence of death was passed upon 
him accordingly.
	Considerable interest was made to obtain the royal mercy, and (a circumstance 
seldom granted to murderers, and then only when some doubts arise in the minds of 
the privy council on the case) he received a respite.
	On the 4th of January, 1771, eighteen days after conviction, the warrant 
arrived for his execution; and the next day, attended by the marshal of the Admiralty, 
carrying a silver oar, he was carried from Newgate to Execution Dock, and there 
hanged.
	His body was hung in chains upon the marshes of the river Thames.
	Thus perished Captain David Ferguson, a victim to his ungovernable passion, 
in the twenty-sixth year of his age.


PETER M'CLOUD 
Hanged for Housebreaking, on 27th of May, 1771, before he had attained 
the Age of Sixteen

	THIS ill-fated youth was the son of a poor man at Shields, near Newcastle, 
who brought him to London while he was quite a child. His father dying in a short 
time, the boy was left to the care or, perhaps, more properly speaking, to the neglect 
of his mother, who was a woman of very doubtful character, and was said to 
encourage young lads in the practice of theft.
	M'Cloud had been connected with a lad named Younger, who had been 
concerned with him in a variety of irregular practices. At length M'Cloud engaged 
himself on board one of the colliers trading to Newcastle; and, while he was absent, 
Younger accused his mother of having been the receiver of stolen goods, the 
consequence of which was that she was apprehended, and brought to trial, but was 
discharged in defect of evidence.
	When M'Cloud returned from his voyage, and learned in what manner his 
mother had been treated by Younger, he made the most solemn vow of taking 
vengeance on him, whatever might be the consequence of such a procceding.
	That he might effect the ruin of his old companion in iniquity he surrendered 
himself to a magistrate, and gave information that he and Younger had been 
concerned in a robbery; on which the latter was soon taken into custody, and 
committed to Newgate, M'Cloud being admitted an evidence for the Crown against 
his presumed accomplice. But at the ensuing sessions M'Cloud was incapable of 
giving anything like evidence against his companion, who was of course acquitted, 
and the scheme of revenge was consequently frustrated.
	It is no less astonishing than true that, notwithstanding what had passed, these 
young fellows soon renewed their former connection; so that whatever degree of 
malice might have harboured in the breast of M'Cloud, he seemed to have forgotten it 
in the wish to recommence his depredations on the public with his former accomplice 
in iniquity.
	They now joined, with five or six other boys, in the practice of picking 
pockets, in which, for some time, they met with too much success; but their thefts 
were of the lowest kind, being principally confined to the stealing of handkerchiefs, in 
the practice of which they were frequently detected, but dismissed after receiving the 
discipline of the horse-pond. M'Cloud, in particular, had been so often dragged 
through horse-ponds, and exposed to the derision of the public, that he seemed to have 
lost all sense of shame, and his paltry gains by theft consoled him for the ignominy 
that attended it. He was three times tried at the Old Bailey for different offences, and 
had repeatedly the good fortune to escape.
	At length, after a series of lessons in the picking of pockets, the gang of young 
villains determined to commence housebreaking, for which they were qualified not so 
much by their strength as by their artifice. They furnished themselves with a variety of 
tools proper for the wrenching of doors and window-shutters. Occasionally they 
would climb over roofs, enter at the garret windows of houses, and descend to the 
lower rooms to commit their robberies; and at other times they would enter through 
any small opening that had been casually left unguarded.
	At length three of the gang, of whom M'Cloud was one, repaired to Poplar, 
where they broke open the house of Joseph Hankey, Esq., in the dead of night. The 
family were all asleep; but the barking of a dog awoke one of the servants, who 
alarmed the rest, and begged them to oppose the intruders. Two of the thieves made 
an immediate escape, but M'Cloud was apprehended, and lodged in the watch-house.
	On the following day he was carried before a magistrate, who committed him 
to Newgate, and at the next sessions held at the Old Bailey he was brought to trial, 
capitally convicted, and sentenced to die.
	When he arrived at the fatal tree he requested a person to beg that his mother 
would not unreasonably grieve at his death, as he had hopes that he was departing to 
the regions of eternal glory. He suffered at Tyburn, on the 27th of May, 1771, in the 
sixteenth year of his age.


JOHN EYRE, ESQ. 
Transported, in 1771, for stealing Paper out of the Guildhall of the City of 
London

	JOHN EYRE was convicted at the Old Bailey for steal ing paper out of the 
Guildhall. On the 1st of September, 1771, this unfortunate gentleman, who was 
possessed of considerable property, surrendered himself to take his trial for that 
offence, to which he pleaded guilty, and was immediately put into the bail-dock with 
other prisoners.
	The recorder observed to his solicitor that he was unacquainted with his 
motive for using such a plea; but if anything was designed to be urged to the Court to 
soften his offence, he desired it might then be done, while there was a full court. The 
solicitor replied that his client meant nothing more than to throw himself upon the 
mercy of the Court.
	He was instantly convicted, and sentenced to transportation. On the 23rd of the 
same month one hundred and twenty prisoners, who had received a similar sentence, 
were conveyed on board a vessel bound for Virginia. Among them was Mr Eyre, who 
was indulged with a coach.


DR LEVI WEIL, ASHER WEIL, JACOB LAZARUS AND 
SOLOMON PORTER 
A Gang of Robbers who committed Murder, and were executed at Tyburn, 
9th of December, 1771

	THIS daring violation of the law, which long roused the public indignation 
against the whole Jewish people, happened in the house of Mrs Hutchings, in King's 
Road, Chelsea, who was a farmer's widow, left by her husband in good circumstances, 
and with three children, two boys and a girl.
	One Saturday evening, just as the Jewish Sabbath was ended, a numerous gang 
of Jews assembled in Chelsea Fields; and, having lurked about there until ten o'clock, 
at that hour went to the house of Mrs Hutchings and demanded admittance. The 
family had all retired to rest, with the exception of Mrs Hutchings and her two female 
servants, and, being alarmed by the unseasonable request of the applicants, they 
proceeded in a body to know their business. The door was no sooner opened, 
however, than a number of fellows–all of whom had the appearance of Jews–rushed 
in, seized the terrified females, and threatened them with instant death in the event of 
their offering any resistance. Mrs Hutchings, being a woman of considerable muscular 
strength, for a time opposed them; but her antagonists soon overpowered her, tied her 
petticoats over her head, and proceeded to secure the servants. The girls having been 
tied back to back, five of the fellows proceeded to ransack the house, while the 
remainder of the gang remained below to guard the prisoners. Having visited the 
rooms occupied by the children of Mrs Hutchings in turn, the ruffians proceeded to 
the apartment in which two men, employed as labourers on the farm, named John 
Slow and William Stone, were lying undisturbed by the outcry which had been raised 
below. It was soon determined that these men were likely to prove mischievous, and 
that they must be murdered; and Levi Weil, a Jewish physician, who was one of the 
party, and was the most sanguinary villain of his gang, aimed a blow at the breast of 
Stone, intended for his death, but which only stunned him. Slow started up, and the 
villains cried: "Shoot him! Shoot him!" A pistol was instantly fired at him, and he fell, 
exclaiming: "Lord have mercy on me! I am murdered!"
	They dragged the wounded man out of the room to the head of the stairs; but 
in the meantime Stone, recovering his senses, jumped out of bed and escaped to the 
roof of the house, through the window. The thieves now descended and plundered the 
house of all the plate they could discover, but finding no money they went to Mrs 
Hutchings, and threatened to murder her if she did not disclose the place of its 
concealment. She gave them her watch, and was afterwards compelled to give up a 
purse containing sixty-five pounds, with which they immediately retired. Mrs 
Hutchings now directly set her female servants at liberty, and, having gone in search 
of the men, found Slow, who declared he was dying, and then dropped insensible on 
the floor. He languished until the following afternoon, when he died of the wounds 
which he had received.
	It was a considerable time before the perpetrators of this most diabolical 
outrage were discovered; but they were at length given up to justice by one of their 
accomplices, named Isaacs, who was a German Jew, and who, reduced to the greatest 
necessity, was tempted by the prospect of reward to impeach his fellows. It then 
turned out that the gang consisted of eight persons, who were headed by the physician 
before mentioned. Dr Weil had been educated in a superior manner. He had studied 
physic in the University of Leyden, where he was admitted to the degree of doctor in 
that faculty. Coming to England, he practised in London, with no inconsiderable 
degree of success, and was always known by the name of Doctor Weil. But so 
destitute was he of all principle, and such was the depravity of his heart, that he 
determined to engage in the dangerous practice of robbery; and, having formed this 
fatal resolution, he wrote to Amsterdam, to some poor Jews, to come to England and 
assist him in his intended depredations on the public; and at the same time informed 
them that in England large sums were to be acquired by the practice of theft.
	The inconsiderate men no sooner received Dr Weil's letter than they procured 
a passport from the English consul, and, embarking in the Harwich packet-boat, 
arrived in England.
	They lost no time in repairing to London, and, immediately attending Dr Weil, 
he informed them that his plan was that they should go out in the daytime and 
minutely survey such houses near London as might probably afford a good booty, and 
then attack them at night.
	At the sessions held at the Old Bailey, in the month of December, 1771, Levi 
Weil, Asher Weil, Marcus Hartagh, Jacob Lazarus, Solomon Porter and Lazarus 
Harry were indicted for the felony and murder above mentioned, when the two of the 
name of Weil, with Jacob Lazarus and Solomon Porter, were capitally convicted; 
while Marcus Hartagh and Lazarus Harry were acquitted, for want of evidence.
	The men, as is customary in all cases of murder, when it can be made 
convenient to the Court, were tried on a Friday, and on the following day they were 
anathematised in the synagogue. As their execution was to take place on the Monday 
following, one of the rabbis went to them in the press-yard of Newgate and delivered 
to each of them a Hebrew book; but declined attending them to the place of death, nor 
even prayed with them at the time of his visit.
	They were attended to Tyburn, the place of execution, by immense crowds of 
people, who were anxious to witness the exit of wretches whose crimes had been so 
much the object of public notice. Having prayed together, and sung a hymn in the 
Hebrew language, they were launched into eternity, on the 9th of December, 1771.


HENRY JONES, FRANCIS PHOENIX AND CHARLES 
BURTON 
Executed at Tyburn, 3rd of February, 1772, for Burglary at the House of Sir 
Robert Ladbroke, a City Banker

	THIS was a daring robbery, committed by breaking into the house of Sir 
Robert Ladbroke, an alderman and banker, in the City of London.
	Notwithstanding the precautions taken by bankers against robbers, and 
particularly housebreakers, we have many instances of men being hardy enough to 
break into their strong-rooms and therefrom steal cash, silver-plate, or whatever 
valuables might have been therein deposited. The plunder to which bankers were 
further liable was from knavish clerks running off with large sums which they were in 
the daily habit of collecting. But their profits being enormous, and without risk (for 
surely those who cannot take care of their own money ought to pay those handsomely 
who keep it safe for them), they still made immense fortunes.
	Mr Child, the celebrated banker at Temple Bar, would not give his consent to 
his daughter marrying the Earl of Westmorland; and actually pursued the young 
couple in their flight to Gretna Green, solely because the purse-proud parent had a 
fortune to portion her to a duke.
	In the year 1755 the cashier of a bank in Dublin, kept by a Quaker, ran off 
with no less a sum than eighty-four thousand pounds of their money, which caused 
business there to be at a standstill, other houses failing with the loss. He was 
apprehended, and lodged at Mr Sheriff Crampton's and only twenty-four thousand 
pounds was found upon him. Enormous as this robbery was, capital punishment could 
not reach him; it was, by the law, held merely a breach of trust.
	The daring gang, the immediate subjects of the case before us, on the night of 
the 20th of December, 1771, with iron crowbars wrenched open the doors of the 
house of Sir Robert Ladbroke, on St Peter's Hill, and though the whole family were in 
bed, and five men-servants in the house, yet the villains effected their purpose, and 
escaped undiscovered.
	The articles which at the time were advertised to have been stolen on this 
occasion were: 
Sir Robert's gold chain, the insignia of his 
office, as alderman of London, worth 
L.100
An alderman's wife's gold chain
L.80
Several pieces of plate 
L.100 
A coronation medal, a broad 25s. piece, a 
guinea of the coin of Oliver Cromwell, a 
guinea of the coin of George I. and other 
pieces
L.40
In old crown-pieces, about
L.15
Two gold snuff-boxes
L.20
A brilliant breast-buckle
L.25 
A diamond hoop-ring
L.20 
A pair of valuable Morocco studs
L.10 
A pair of cluster-stone buttons
L.10 
And other articles, at a small computation
L.30
Total 
L.450
	The robbers, finding this large booty in the apartment they first broke open, 
appear to have been satisfied, for they searched no other part of the house. A silver-
hilted sword, which hung in the room, was not carried off, though it was taken down 
and laid upon a chair. An iron crow was found next morning in the passage.
	Though Sir Robert and his whole family slept so sound as not to hear what 
was going on below them, a gentleman living at the next house was alarmed by a 
noise, which he fancied arose from the wrenching open of a door and breaking into a 
house. He sprang out of bed, seized a blunder-buss, and threw open his window. 
Observing a watchman standing on the other side of the way, he asked him if he had 
not heard a disturbance. The treacherous guardian of the night answered that it was 
nothing but the wind, for everything was safe in that quarter.
	The gentleman then asked him why he did not cry the hour, as the clock had 
some time struck; to which the watchman replied that he had called it, and, on being 
contradicted, went surlily away.
	A short time after this another watchman, in passing, saw that Sir Robert 
Ladbroke's house had been broken open, and immediately gave the alarm; but the 
robbers had decamped.
	In the morning the first watchman was sent for, but he was nowhere to be 
found–in fact, he was privy to the villainy; and by such wicked connivance many 
robberies were accomplished which could not have been effected if watchmen had 
been honest and done their duty.
	The villains melted the gold articles; and on their trial a dispute arose between 
Sir Robert Ladbroke, the loser of the gold, which had been cast into an ingot, and Mr 
Cox, the purchaser. The latter urged that he had bought it in the face of day, in an 
open shop, and at a fair price; while Sir Robert insisted on a prior claim, of which he 
had been violently deprived.
	The Court were inclined to favour Sir Robert, who, finding this, offered it as a 
favour to Mr Cox; but he disclaimed all favour, standing up for his right to the ingot, 
and then put it into his pocket. Thus he may be said to have very wisely "pocketed the 
affront." The thieves were carried to Tyburn, and executed, on the 3rd of February, 
1772.


JAMES BOLLAND 
A Sheriff Officer, and a most unconscionable Villain, executed at Tyburn, 
18th of March, 1772, for Forgery

	JAMES BOLLAND was the son of a butcher. The youth gave early proofs of 
a profligate turn of mind, and constantly associated with worthless people of both 
sexes. The term of his servitude being expired, Bolland opened a shop in the borough 
of Southwark, and his business afforded him a very favourable prospect of success; 
but through his irregularity and extravagance his trade gradually declined, and, to free 
himself from some embarrassments which his misconduct had produced, he sold his 
effects. Bolland's favourite associates for some years had been bailiffs, bailiffs' 
followers, thief-takers, and runners to the different prisons; and, the natural cruelty of 
his disposition being encouraged by the example of the worthless people in whose 
company he spent the greatest part of his time, he resolved to gain a maintenance by 
preying upon the distresses of his fellow-creatures.
	Having procured himself to be appointed one of the officers to the sheriff of 
the county of Surrey, he hired a house at the bottom of Falcon Court, facing St 
George's Church, Southwark; and, having fitted it up in the manner of a prison, it was 
soon inhabited by a number of unfortunate persons. The people he arrested who were 
in indigent circumstances he took to jail as soon as the law would permit, but such as 
were in a different situation were entertained in his house till all their money was 
spent, or till they insisted upon going to prison to avoid further imposition, or till the 
writs by which they were detained became returnable. The money he extorted from 
his guests by divers stratagems was so considerable that he held the fees usually paid 
at lock-up houses as almost beneath his regard, and frequently distributed them among 
his followers and other servants.
	Bolland was continually endeavouring to encourage card-playing in his house; 
and when his unfortunate guests had recourse to that diversion he seldom failed to 
join in the game; and though he suffered no opportunity of cheating them, even in the 
most palpable manner, to escape him, they were obliged to submit to the insult and 
imposition; for if they ventured to expostulate on the unfairness of his proceedings it 
was his custom to discharge a volley of blasphemous oaths, and to threaten that he 
would instantly take them to jail for daring to affront him in his own house.
	Though the emoluments arising from the infamous practices of Bolland were 
very considerable, they were not equal to the expenses of his profligate course of life, 
and he procured a person to issue out a commission of bankruptcy against him; but 
before the commission took place he secreted his most valuable effects. He further 
defrauded his creditors by giving notes and other securities to a number of people who 
had received no valuable considerations from him; and by means of these nominal 
creditors he obtained his certificate in a very short time.
	The infamous practices of Bolland had now rendered his character so 
notorious that the attorneys imagined that if they continued to employ him they should 
be reflected upon for encouraging so abandoned a villain; and such repeated and 
heavy complaints were made against him that his business rapidly declined. But 
instead of endeavouring to obtain better success by an amendment of his conduct he 
seized every opportunity of practising extortion and fraud with greater rapacity, and 
became a still more abominable pest to society.
	Bolland was an almost daily frequenter of places where billiards and other 
games were practised; and at one of these meetings he fell into company with a 
gentleman who employed him to arrest the captain of a ship in the East India service 
for a debt of three hundred pounds, and promised him a handsome compliment on 
condition that he recovered the money, or took the prisoner into custody. The 
following morning the gentleman set out for the country, and in the course of the day 
Bolland arrested the captain, who immediately paid the debt, and costs.
	In a short time the captain proceeded on his voyage, and the gentleman at 
whose suit he had been arrested returned to London soon afterwards. Bolland waited 
upon him, and said that, though he had made use of every stratagem he could possibly 
devise, the captain had eluded all his art, and got to sea; and in order to enhance the 
promised gratuity he pretended that his extraordinary vigilance to serve the writ had 
involved him in much trouble, and some expense, and the gentleman, being thus 
deceived, made Bolland a handsome present.
	Upon the return of the ship from the East Indies another writ was taken out; 
but, Bolland having gone to a horse race, it was given to another officer. The bailiff 
went to Blackwall, and presently found the captain, and said he must either pay the 
three hundred pounds or go with him to a place of security. But when the captain 
showed the officer Bolland's receipt for the money he returned to town and informed 
his employer that the debt was discharged to Bolland previous to the captain's sailing 
for India.
	A suit at law was now instituted against Bolland for the recovery of three 
hundred pounds. Justice was so indisputably clear on the side of the plaintiff that 
Bolland knew he must inevitably be cast if the matter came to trial; yet, at a 
considerable expense, he protracted a judicial decision of the case, imagining his 
adversary would give up his claim rather than pursue him through all the delays and 
chicanery of the law.
	The cause at length was brought to a hearing, and judgment was pronounced 
in favour of the plaintiff. Bolland, being surrendered by his bail, was taken in 
execution. He was conducted to a lock-up house, where he remained some time, and 
then moved himself by habeas corpus to the Fleet Prison, from which place he was 
released by virtue of an Act of Insolvency.
	Bolland and a person with whom he had contracted an acquaintance in the 
Fleet were enlarged nearly at the same time; and the latter soon after went into 
business, and found means to procure bondsmen for his companion, who was again 
appointed an officer to the Sheriff of Middlesex. Bolland now hired a large house in 
Great Shire Lane, near Temple Bar, but, that the outward appearance might not 
convey an intimation of the service and tyrannical treatment that was to be exercised 
within, the windows were not, according to the general custom with spunging-houses, 
secured with iron bars.
	When prisoners came into the house, he informed them that it was his custom 
to charge six shillings per day for board and lodging; adding that the entertainment 
would be such as should give universal satisfaction, and that all trouble and 
disagreements concerning reckonings would be avoided; and such as refused to 
comply with the exorbitant terms were instantly conducted to jail. When Bolland's 
prisoners appeared inclined to remove to the King's Bench or Fleet he used every 
artifice he could suggest for detaining them in his house till they had exhausted the 
means of supplying his extravagant avarice; but when their money was expended no 
entreaties could prevail on the merciless villain to give them credit for the most 
trifling article, or to suffer them to continue another hour in his house.
	He also defrauded a great number of tradesmen of property to a considerable 
amount, and among them was an upholsterer, of whom he obtained household 
furniture to the value of two hundred pounds, under false pretences.
	Though Bolland was a married man, he was violently addicted to the company 
of abandoned women; and when his wife expostulated on the impropriety of his illicit 
connections he applied to her the most disgraceful epithets, accompanied with volleys 
of profane oaths, and frequently beat her in a barbarous manner. His conversation 
proved the vulgarity of his breeding, and his whole behaviour marked him as a 
worthless and detestable character.
	A young gentleman whose imprudences had drawn upon him the displeasure 
of his friends was arrested at the suit of his tailor, and confined in Bolland's house. 
His money was soon expended, and despairing of being able to effect a compromise 
with his creditor he expressed a desire to be moved to the King's Bench or the Fleet. 
Bolland in formed him that he must be taken to Newgate, that being the jail for the 
county, and that he could not be moved to either of the other prisons but by means of 
a writ of habeas corpus.
	The young gentleman was greatly alarmed at the idea of being confined in 
Newgate, which he supposed to be a place for the reception of felons only. Bolland 
perceived his anxiety, and advised him to recall his resolution, saying that if he would 
follow his directions a method might still be adopted for relieving him from all his 
difficulties. Anxious to recover his liberty, the youth said that if Bolland would 
signify the means by which so desirable a purpose was to be obtained he would gladly 
embrace the proposal, and ever consider him as his most generous benefactor. 
Thereupon Bolland informed him that he would immediately procure bail, and then 
recommended him to different tradesmen, of whom he might obtain a chariot and 
horses, household furniture and other effects, on credit; adding, that he would find no 
difficulty in obtaining a fortune by marriage before he would be called upon for the 
discharge of his debts.
	The young man was released on the bail of two of Bolland's accomplices, a 
chariot was procured, and a house hired and furnished very elegantly; and one of 
Bolland's followers assumed the character of a footman, from the double motive of 
assisting in the scheme of villainy and reporting to his principal all the particulars of 
the conduct of the imprudent young man. Reports were industriously propagated that 
the youth was heir to an immense fortune; and, by a variety of stratagems, effects to a 
considerable amount were obtained from different tradesmen, the greater part of 
which were deposited in Bolland's house, by way of security to him for the bail he had 
procured. When payment for the furniture and other effects was demanded, the 
creditors were for some time amused by a variety of plausible pretences; but at length 
they became exceedingly importunate for their money, and Bolland, now concluding 
that the young man could no longer be made subservient to his villainous stratagems, 
surrendered him in discharge of his bail, and caused him to be conveyed to Newgate.
	The persons whom he had been seduced to defraud were no sooner acquainted 
with the imprisonment of the young adventurer than they lodged detainers against 
him. His unfortunate connections having greatly exasperated his relations and friends, 
they refused to afford him any kind of assistance, and his situation became truly 
deplorable. His present distress, and the upbraidings, of conscience for the 
impropriety of his conduct, overwhelmed him with affliction, which soon put a period 
to his life.
	Bolland, regarding the wreck he had occasioned with apathy, went on in his 
course of wickedness. He provided fictitious bail for persons who were under arrest, 
and when he knew that the persons whom he himself had arrested were not in 
desperate circumstances he frequently released them, after exacting money from 
them, and the promise to surrender if they could not settle matters with their creditors. 
He applied to these people to become bail for others, who paid him in proportion to 
the sums for which they were arrested; and, circumstanced as they were, it was 
seldom that he met with a refusal, for, upon their making the least hesitation, he 
threatened to take them into custody and convey them instantly to prison.
	He provided genteel apparel for Jews, and other men in desperate 
circumstances, and encouraged them to commit perjury, by bribing them to swear 
themselves housekeepers and men of property, in order that their bail might be 
admitted.
	Having supplied two men of most profligate character with genteel clothes, 
they attended him to Westminster Hall, and there justified bail for sums to a 
considerable amount, though they were not possessed of property to the value of 
twenty shillings. After the business these three infamous associates adjourned to a 
tavern in Covent Garden, and, while they were regaling themselves, some of Sir John 
Fielding's officers took the two men who had justified bail into custody, on a charge 
of highway robbery. They were convicted at the ensuing sessions at the Old Bailey, 
and soon afterwards Bolland, being a sheriff's officer, attended them to Tyburn, where 
they were hanged in the very apparel that he himself had provided for them.
	A publican in Cecil Street in the Strand, named Wilkinson, went into 
Lancashire, in the year 1768, upon a visit to his relations, leaving the care of his house 
to a female servant. Upon the landlord's return he found that two men had taken 
possession of his household goods and stock of liquors, under a warrant of distress. 
He asked by what authority they had made a seizure of his effects; and the reply was, 
that if he presumed to dispute their authority they would knock out his brains, or put 
him to death in some other manner.
	Wilkinson made application to Justice Kynaston, and made an affidavit that 
Bolland had no legal claim upon him. A warrant was granted for the recovery of 
Wilkinson's goods, but before it could be put into execution the greater part of them 
had been moved from the premises. The following day Bolland caused Wilkinson to 
be arrested for five hundred and fifty pounds, which was falsely alleged to be a debt 
he had some time before contracted. The unfortunate Wilkinson, being unable to 
procure bail for so considerable a sum, moved himself to the King's Bench. The 
attorney employed by Wilkinson was an accomplice of Bolland, and, under the 
pretence of defending him against the machinations of that accomplished villain, he 
extorted from him his last shilling; and after the unhappy man had suffered a long 
imprisonment, in a most deplorable state of poverty, he was restored to liberty, by 
virtue of an Act of Insolvency.
	A captain in the navy going on a voyage, and leaving his wife insufficiently 
provided with money, she contracted a debt to the amount of thirty pounds, for which 
she gave a note. The note not being paid when it became due, the creditor ordered 
Bolland to serve a writ upon the unhappy woman. After she had remained some days 
a prisoner in his house he procured bail for her, on her paying him five guineas. In a 
few days she was again taken into custody, Bolland urging that, upon making inquiry 
into her affairs, the bail deemed themselves not secure, and had surrendered her from 
motives of prudence. Terrified at the idea of going to prison she paid him ten guineas 
to procure bail a second time; but he insisted on having a bond to confess judgment 
for the furniture of her house, as a collateral security. Being ignorant of the nature of 
the security proposed, she complied with the terms offered by the villain, who, on the 
following day, entered upon judgment, and took possession of her effects. When she 
discovered that she had been made a dupe to the consummate art and villainy of 
Bolland, the unfortunate woman was driven almost to distraction, and while in that 
state of mind she attempted to set fire to the house, in consequence of which a warrant 
was granted to apprehend her, and she was accordingly committed to Newgate. In a 
short time the husband returned to England, and Bolland bribed an infamous woman 
to swear a false debt against him, in consequence of which he was arrested, and being 
in confinement at the time of his wife's trial at the Old Bailey, she was deprived of 
that assistance he might have afforded her. She was convicted, and sentenced to suffer 
death; but her cause being espoused by a number of humane persons, they drew up an 
authentic state of her case, which was presented to the King, who was graciously 
pleased to grant her an unconditional pardon.
	Bolland was ordered by an attorney in the City to serve a writ on a colonel in 
his Majesty's service for one hundred pounds, and he arrested the gentleman the next 
day and was paid the debt and costs; but, instead of delivering the money for the 
plaintiff's use, he declared that he had not served the writ. The attorney, however, 
soon learned that the debt was discharged, and commenced a suit against the sheriffs; 
and the persons who had become sureties for Bolland were compelled to pay the 
hundred pounds, with full costs.
	The colonel had neglected to take Bolland's receipt, and of this circumstance 
the villain determined to avail himself. He, a second time, arrested the gentleman for 
one hundred pounds. The action was bailed, and a trial ensued, in the course of which 
a witness swore that he was present when the colonel paid Bolland one hundred 
pounds, and costs, in discharge of the writ. Thereupon the jury pronounced in favour 
of the colonel.
	Though Bolland's character was notorious throughout the kingdom, he might, 
perhaps, have continued his depredations much longer had not his infamous practices 
been exposed in the newspapers. When the sheriffs were informed of Bolland's 
villainy they were highly exasperated against him, and suspended him from acting as 
their officer, and assigned the bail bonds as security, by which the parties he had 
injured might obtain some recompense.
	The office of upper City Marshal becoming vacant by the decease of Osmond 
Cook, Esq., Bolland determined to dispose of part of his infamously acquired property 
in the purchase thereof. The place was put up for sale by auction, and he became the 
purchaser for two thousand, four hundred pounds. Having paid the deposit money, it 
was lodged in the Chamberlain's office, and he anxiously waited for the approbation 
of the Court of Aldermen, which was all that was wanted to give him that power over 
the citizens which he was predetermined to abuse.
	A letter was addressed to the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen exhibiting 
Bolland's character in all its horrid deformity, and on proper inquiries being made the 
facts appeared to be well founded; in consequence of which the Court of Aldermen 
refused him the place, and ordered the Chamberlain to return the deposit money.
	He declared that he would commence a suit at law against the Court of 
Aldermen for the recovery of damages; and when the recorder communicated to him 
the very strong reasons that had induced the Court to deem him unqualified for the 
place of City Marshal he behaved in a manner extremely reprehensible.
	His last crime was forging the endorsement of a bill of exchange for one 
hundred pounds, for which he was apprehended, and tried at the Old Bailey. His 
counsel exerted their utmost abilities to prove that he had not committed forgery, but 
the jury found him guilty of the indictment. When sentence of death had been 
pronounced against him the recorder pathetically exhorted him to employ the short 
time he had to live in preparing for eternity.
	On the morning of his execution he acknowledged that he had been guilty of 
innumerable sins, but declared that the fact for which he was to die was not 
committed with a view to defraud. He was hanged at Tyburn, and his body was taken 
to Highgate in a hearse, and in the evening carried to an undertaker's in Prince's 
Street, Drury Lane, whence it was conveyed to Bunhill Fields for interment.


JONATHAN BRITAIN 
A plausible Rascal, who was executed at Bristol, 15th of May, 1772, for 
Forgery
J
	ONATHAN BRITAIN was born near Thirsk, in the county of York. His 
parents were poor people, and not able to give him a liberal education. They sent him 
to York to an attorney, whom he was to serve as an errand-boy; but he had not been 
long in this station before his master discovered such uncommon marks of genius and 
ability in him that he articled him as a clerk, and took him into his office. But an 
impatience of restraint induced him to leave a master who had behaved to him with so 
much civility. He had not, however, been long out of a place when the master of a 
public academy employed him as a teacher of mathe- matics, for which his own 
studies had qualified him; and he was promoted to be principal usher in the school. In 
this situation he was as restless as in the former, and therefore quitted it, and entered 
as a soldier in the regiment of the 10th Dragoons.
	As he was a man of remarkably fine appearance he was taken great notice of 
by his officers, who paid such attention to him that it very much flattered his vanity; 
and, inducing him to rival his superiors in point of expense, his circumstances were 
soon greatly reduced, and he had recourse to the art of chicane and knavery to support 
his extravagance. In these reduced circumstances he committed a variety of frauds, 
most of them of such artful contrivance as to elude all possibility of detection.
	He had a custom of introducing himself into the company of persons who had 
no suspicion of deceit, and then he would so far insinuate himself into their good 
opinion as to take undue advantage of their unsuspecting honesty.
	Reduced to circumstances of great distress, he was tempted to the commission 
of forgery. Having forged several drafts, he passed them at Bristol, and then repaired 
to London, in fear of detection. On his arrival in the metropolis he wrote several 
letters to the King, intimating that he had been concerned in setting fire to the 
dockyard at Portsmouth. No regard being paid to these letters to his Majesty, he wrote 
to the Lord Mayor, declaring that he was ready to surrender himself, and make a 
discovery of his accomplices, on condition that his pardon should be promised in an 
advertisement in The London Gazette.
	At length a pardon to any accomplice was advertised in the Gazette; on which 
Britain went to Reading to meet his wife. But on the very evening of his arrival in that 
town he offered some forged drafts in payment; the consequence of which was that he 
was apprehended, and lodged in jail. Britain then wrote letters, which he caused to be 
inserted in some of the newspapers, in which he charged Lord Mansfield and the Earls 
of Halifax and Faulconbridge, together with other persons of rank, with having been 
bribed by the Court of France to "encourage the setting fire to the dockyard at 
Portsmouth."
	Improbable as this story was, many people gave a temporary attention to it, 
and some even affected to believe it; but it was too absurd to obtain credit for any 
considerable time. At the next assizes for the county of Berks a bill of indictment for 
forgery was preferred against Britain, but thrown out by the grand jury, on what they 
considered as defective evidence; and his discharge would have ensued, of course, but 
that three detainers were lodged against him, which kept him in prison at Reading till 
he was removed to Bristol by a writ of habeas corpus.
	Britain was now visited by numbers of people, who, from motives of curiosity, 
wished to inquire into the validity of the tale he had invented respecting the fire; but 
they could make no satisfactory discoveries. They saw that the whole tale was a lie, 
yet they contributed to his immediate support in a manner so liberal as to do honour to 
their humanity.
	On the commencement of the sessions he was arraigned on several indictments 
for forgery; but being put to the bar, he refused to plead, and held in his hand the 
Gazette which contained the offer of pardon, insisting that he had given information 
against his accomplices who had set fire to the dockyard at Portsmouth.
	On this he was informed by the recorder that he could take no notice of the 
proclamation inserted in the Gazette. But Britain, instead of paying attention to this 
declaration, threw the Gazette upon the table where the clerk sat, and declared that a 
scheme was formed to deprive him of life, contrary to the due course of law.
	Thereupon the recorder mentioned a late Act of Parliament by which he would 
be deemed guilty if he refused to plead to the indictment; but the magistrate did not 
choose to proceed on the trial without being in possession of the Act in question; on 
which a special messenger was sent to London to procure the Act, if it could be had in 
print, or otherwise to bring an attested copy of it from the Record Office.
	The messenger returned with the Act of Parliament in print at the end of two 
days, and Britain was again brought to his trial, when he pleaded not guilty to the 
indictment. The recorder would have allowed him counsel, but he refused all such 
kind of assistance, and was determined to plead for himself. He cross-examined the 
witnesses in a manner that gave sufficient testimony of his abilities; but the evidence 
against him was such as not to admit of a doubt of his guilt, and in consequence he 
was capitally convicted, and sentenced to die. He was executed on the 15th of May, 
1772.


JOHN ADSHEAD AND BENJAMIN ALSWORTH 
Hanged for housebreaking, 8th July, 1772

  
Adshead and Alsworth searched in St Giles's watch-house

	THE former of these malefactors was a native of Northamptonshire, and 
trained up to the business of husbandry, which he followed till he approached nearly 
to manhood, when he repaired to London, and lived in the service of different persons 
in quality of a footman.
	By an attention to the rules of frugality he became possessed of a sum of 
money, ten guineas of which he gave to a person to instruct him in the art of a 
gunsmith; and, having acquired the knowledge of the art, he for some time laboured 
industriously to support himself; but, getting into bad company, he was prevailed on 
to commence the dangerous practice of housebreaking. Becoming, at length, too well 
known in London, he was afraid of being discovered, and therefore repaired to 
Bristol, to commit his depredations in that city.
	Soon after he arrived at Bristol he broke into the house of a watchmaker, and 
carried off effects to the amount of one hundred and fifty pounds. These he conveyed 
to London, where be disposed of them, and with the produce took a public house in 
Princes Street, Drury Lane; but, no success attending him in this situation, he quitted 
business, and recommenced the practice of housebreaking, which ended in his 
destruction, as will be seen in the course of this narrative.
	Alsworth (the other criminal) was a native of Birmingham, and followed the 
profession of gunmaking. After practising his trade some time, he repaired to London, 
and, enlisting in the army, became a drummer in the 85th regiment of foot. He served 
in Portugal during the last war, in the reign of King George II. and was likewise 
present at the siege of Belleisle; but when the peace came on be returned to his 
original profession.
	During his military life his behaviour was consistent with his duty. On his 
return to England he married a young woman, who bore him two children; but, 
happening to become acquainted with Adshead, his ruin soon followed. These men 
were frequently in company; and Alsworth, observing that Adshead dressed in a style 
of gentility which he presumed to be above his circumstances, asked bow he afforded 
to make such an appearance; to which the other replied, that an uncle, who was lately 
dead, had left him several articles of considerable value.
	Their intimacy now daily increased; and Alsworth's children being indisposed, 
and himself deficient of employment, he asked the other to lend him three or four 
guineas, which he would not fail to return on a happier change in his circumstances.
	Adshead said that he was not then in possession of so much money; but, if the 
other would take his advice, he would instruct him how to 'obtain a hundred pounds in 
an hour.'
	Alsworth thought lie spoke jestingly, but begged to know his real meaning; on 
which the other confessed that he subsisted by housebreaking, and invited his 
acquaintance to come to his lodgings that evening. This invitation was complied with, 
a co-partnership in iniquity was agreed on, and they committed several burglaries; but 
that, of which we are now about to relate the particulars, brought them to their fatal 
end.
	About one o'clock in the morning of the 18th of May, 1772, they broke into 
the house of Mrs. Bellamy, a widow lady, in Newman Street, Oxford Road, whence 
they carried off silk, wearing apparel, and other effects, to a considerable amount.
	They packed the goods in two parcels, and proceeded towards Tottenham 
Court Road, where they were observed by two watchmen, who followed them 
towards Russell Street, Bloomsbury, where they were noticed by another watchman, 
belonging to the parish of St. Giles, who seized on Alsworth; on which the other 
threw down his parcel and ran off, but was soon taken into custody.
	Being conveyed to the watch-house, they were searched by the constable of 
the night, who likewise examined the parcels of stolen goods. On the following 
morning they were carried before Justice Cox, to whom they asserted that the things 
were their own property, and that they were removing them from their lodgings, to 
prevent their landlord seizing on them for rent.
	This story did not seem to be at all plausible; and, as they refused to give an 
account of their place of residence, a well-grounded suspicion arose that they were 
thieves; on which they were committed for re-examination, when the persons who had 
been robbed could be found.
	When Mrs. Bellamy's family arose in the morning, the servants discovered 
that the house had been robbed, as above mentioned. Hereupon hand-bills were 
instantly printed, and circulated through London; the consequence of which was that 
Justice Cox sent for Mrs. Bellamy and her servants, and, the prisoners being brought 
to a re-examination, the stolen effects were identified, and the two men were 
committed to Newgate for trial.
	(Note: The immediate circulation of hand-bills is the readiest method of 
detecting thieves. This has been proved in a thousand instances that have occurred at 
the public office in Bow Street, Thieves generally carry stolen goods immediately to 
the pawnbrokers; but, when they do not, the bills frequently fall into the hands of 
peace-officers, and a discovery follows of course.)
	At the sessions held at the Old Bailey in the month of June, 1772, the 
prisoners were indicted for breaking and entering the dwelling-house of Mary 
Bellamy, widow, and stealing a gauze sack and petticoat, with silk and gold flowers, 
three silk sacks and petticoats, a brocaded silk night-gown, a chased gold outside 
watchcase, and a variety of other valuable articles, the property of Mrs. Bellamy and 
her daughter.
	Adshead pleaded guilty to the indictment, begging for mercy on account of his 
youth; and the evidence against his accomplice was so conclusive, that the jury could 
not hesitate to convict him; in consequence of which they both received sentence of 
death.
	After conviction their behaviour was very various. On some occasions they 
appeared hardened in a very high degree, and at others were free to confess the crime 
of which they bad been guilty; but, when they found that their names were included in 
the warrant for execution, their behaviour was more regular, consistent, and penitent; 
and the Ordinary of Newgate, forming a favourable opinion of their sincerity, 
administered the sacrament to them, and gave them such advice as he deemed proper 
in their unhappy situation; he cautioned them not to trust to their own penitence, but 
to rely on the merits of Christ for eternal salvation.
	On the day appointed for their execution the Ordinary attended them early in 
the morning, renewed his good advice, and besought them to fix their minds on a 
better world than that to which they were so soon to bid a final adieu. On being put 
into the cart they shed many tears, and lifted up their eyes to heaven in the hope of 
that mercy whence alone, in their situation, it could be expected.
	At the fatal tree they confessed that they were guilty of the crime of which 
they had been convicted, and cautioned their auditors never to be guilty of a similar 
violation of the laws of justice. An immense concourse of people attended this 
execution; and, when the bodies had hung the usual time, they were delivered to the 
friends of the deceased, in order for interment.
	John Adshead and Benjamin Alsworth suffered at Tyburn on the 8th of July, 
1772.
	The reflections arising from the case of these men can but little deviate from 
those we have made on that of former housebreakers; but we see that a co-partnership 
in iniquity is no bar to the inevitable consequences of guilt. Adshead's confession of 
his crime amounted to little less than an accusation of his accomplice, since they were 
both taken into custody almost immediately after the commission of the fact.
	Upon consideration of the whole matter, it will appear evident that nothing can 
so effectually secure our peace of mind as a strict adherence to the laws of honesty, 
and a regular and constant attendance on the duties of religion.


SAMUEL ROBERTS and THOMAS BACCHUS 
Hanged for High Treason, in counterfeiting the current Coin of this Realm.

	THE first mentioned of these malefactors was a native of Shrewsbury. He was 
descended of parents of very fair character, but in circumstances rather contracted; 
however, they gave him what education was in their power, and then apprenticed him 
to a baker.
	After the expiration of the term of his apprenticeship, he repaired to the 
metropolis, and laboured as a journeyman with different masters for a considerable 
time, still supporting the character of an industrious and honest man. Some friends, 
observing the goodness of his disposition, advanced him money, with which he took a 
shop in Graysinn-lane, and met with such success in business as rewarded his 
assiduity.
	At length, very unhappily for himself, he became acquainted with the father of 
Bacchus, from the casual meeting him at a public house. Soon after their acquaintance 
the old man advised him to remove into Southwark, where he said an excellent house 
and shop offered for his accommodation. Roberts being married, and having four 
children, listened to this advice, in the hope of making a better provision for his 
family.
	A very short time after his residence in Southwark, the elder Bacchus and his 
son, with some other people who were coiners, told Roberts that they would be ready 
to assist him with money on any emergency. It happened that, some little time 
afterwards, Roberts wanted some money to make up a bill due for flour, on which he 
mentioned the affair to the elder Bacchus, and he was immediately furnished with the 
requisite sum.
	This circumstance had not long taken place, when the younger Bacchus 
informed Roberts that his father was out of town, and begged his assistance in 
coining, on the condition of which he should be amply supplied with such money as 
he might want.
	Roberts hesitated for a while to comply with a scheme big with such evident 
destruction; but the prospect of gain becoming at length too strong for his more 
virtuous resolutions, he fatally consented, and ruin was the consequence. The nature 
of the partnership, for such it may be deemed, was this: Bacchus was generally the 
immediate coiner of the counterfeit money, which Roberts put off to unsuspecting 
people. They had imitated a variety of gold and silver coin, which was so well 
executed that it could hardly be distinguished from the real money made at the Tower; 
yet the adulteration was so great, that, in many pieces, the intrinsic value was not a 
fourth of the nominal.
	A great part of this counterfeit money was put off at country fairs, where the 
agents employed to dispose of it (for there were others besides Roberts) appeared as 
horse-dealers, and found several country tradesmen ready enough to traffic with them 
for this false coin.
	The coiners used to sell this money by weight to the countrymen, who 
circulated it in the course of their connexions; so that the evil spread wide, to the 
injury of many an unfortunate individual.
	In the interim Bacchus and Roberts lived in a very handsome manner on the 
profits of their iniquitous trade. Their neighbours could not conceive how they 
procured a subsistence; and it is possible that they might have continued their 
practices a considerable time longer, but that one of their accomplices gave such hints 
as led to the ready means of detecting them.
	Some constables being employed to search the house, they found Bacchus, 
with all the implements proper for coining, in the act of making counterfeit money, 
while Roberts was assisting him in this unlawful transaction; on which both the 
parties were taken into custody, and being carried before Sir John Fielding, that 
magistrate committed them to Newgate.
	It may be now proper to mention that Bacchus was a native of the town of 
Stafford, and was, at a very early age, initiated into the art of coining by his father, 
who seems purposely to have trained him to the gallows. The younger Bacchus never 
followed any business but coining, except occasionally dealing in smuggled goods 
when he happened to have a considerable sum of money in his possession.
	The prisoners remained in Newgate several months before they were brought 
to trial; but at length they were convicted on the clearest evidence, and sentenced to 
die.
	The behaviour of Roberts after conviction was exceedingly well adapted to his 
unhappy situation. He was regular and devout in his attendance on religious duties, 
employed much time in reading books of devotion, and was regardful of the 
instructions given him by the ordinary of Newgate. On learning that the warrant for 
his execution was arrived, his seriousness and penitence appeared to be augmented, 
and he looked forward to eternity in the humble hope of the divine pardon.
	Nor was the behaviour of Bacehus less regular, penitent, and devout. He made 
a decent preparation for his approach ing death. The father of Bacchus had retired into 
the country, whence he sent his son a letter after condemnation, of which the 
following is a copy:
	'My dear Child, 
	'I send you these few lines to comfort you; I should have sent you some money 
before, but I hope, my dear child, you will forgive me, as you hope to be forgiven in 
heaven. There you will find a better father than you have found in me. Be as happy as 
you can;–you are going to happiness, and leave me behind to be miserable. I hope you 
will die happy, because you know you are innocent. Thou art now going, I shall soon 
follow thee. I hope you will meet your dear mother in heaven. As we shall soon part 
in this world, may my prayers be heard for you in heaven! 
	'From your loving father till death, 
	'WILLIAM BACCHUS' 
	'P.S. My dear love to Roberts; and tell him, if it should be in my power to 
serve his family, I will, I shall think it a pleasure. May heaven receive you both!'
	The unhappy convicts received the holy sacrament on the morning of 
execution, and behaved in a manner suitable to their calamitous circumstances. They 
were drawn to the gallows on a sledge, as is usual in the case of coiners. They warned 
the multitude not to follow their evil example, and acknowledged the justice of that 
sentence by which they had been condemned to an ignominious death.
	After the customary exercises of devotion, the prisoners underwent the final 
sentence of the law; and when the bodies had hung the usual time, they were delivered 
to their relations, in order that the bodies might be deposited with the parent earth.
	Samuel Roberts and Thomas Bacchus were hanged at Tyburn on the 21st of 
May, 1772.
	There is something singular in the affair before us. We see that the counterfeit 
money was sold by weight to people in the country, who could be mean enough to 
make such purchases from avaricious motives, though they must know that their 
neighbours would be ultimately defrauded.
	The young Bacchus, though a professed coiner, appears to have been in some 
measure an object of pity. His father had trained him to the business from his early 
youth: but surely that father ought to be the general object of execration. It is difficult 
to form an idea of the aggravated guilt of that man who can wilfully train his own 
child to destruction. The paternal and the filial duty ought to be mutual: a failure on 
either side is usually fatal to the happiness of one of the parties.


WILLIAM GRIFFITHS 
Executed at Tyburn, 20th of January, 1773, for a Highway Robbery

	THE person robbed in this case was the celebrated and unfortunate Dr Dodd, 
whom, a few years afterwards, Fate decreed to be hanged at the very spot where 
Griffiths suffered.
	William Griffiths was a native of Shropshire, and followed the business of 
husbandry till he had attained his eighteenth year, when he engaged in a naval life, 
and remained nearly three years in the East Indies. The ship was paid off on his return 
to England, and Griffiths, receiving a considerable sum for wages, spent his money, as 
sailors too generally do, in no very reputable company, at public-houses in Wapping 
and adjacent parts.
	By his connection with men and women of abandoned character his money 
was soon spent, and he began to think of going to sea for a supply–and happy might it 
have been for him if he had done so–but David Evans and Timothy Johnson, two of 
his newly acquired associates, and men of very abandoned character, advised him to 
be concerned with them in committing robberies on the highway; and this triple 
association of thieves did actually commit a variety of depredations on the public, 
treating those they attacked with great inhumanity, but never obtaining anything 
considerable by their lawless pursuits.
	The Rev. Dr Dodd and his lady were returning from a visit they had been 
making to a gentleman at St Albans, but were detained on the way at Barnet, because 
a post-chaise could not be immediately procured. Night was hastily approaching when 
they left Barnet, but they proceeded unmolested till they came near the turnpike at the 
extremity of Tottenham Court Road, when three men called to the driver of the 
carriage, and threatened his instant destruction if he did not stop. The post-boy did not 
hesitate to obey such summons; but no sooner was the carriage stopped than a pistol 
was fired, the ball from which went through the front glass of the chaise, but did not 
take any effect to the injury of the parties in it, though it terrified them in a very high 
degree, as they apprehended that the most fatal consequences might ensue. While the 
Doctor was waiting at Barnet for the chaise it occurred to him that there might be 
danger on the road, whereupon he concealed all his money except two guineas, which 
he put in his purse, with a bill of exchange.
	Soon after the pistol was fired, Griffiths opened the door of the chaise; on 
which the Doctor begged him to behave with civility, on account of the presence of 
the lady. He then delivered the purse, with its contents, and likewise gave the robber 
some loose silver. Griffiths, having received the booty, decamped with the utmost 
precipitation.
	Dr Dodd lost no time in repairing to Sir John Fielding's office, where he and 
his lad gave so full a description of the person of the principal robber that it was easily 
conjectured Griffiths must have been the party; but who had been his associates in the 
business never yet transpired.
	In consequence of this information, Griffiths was soon taken into custody. On 
his examination before Sir John Fielding, Dr Dodd hesitated to swear positively to his 
person; but Mrs Dodd, who had regarded him with more attention, positively declared 
on oath that he was the person who had committed the robbery.
	Thereupon the magistrate committed Griffiths to Newgate. A bill of 
indictment was found against him by the grand jury, and he was called down to trial at 
the next sessions at the Old Bailey, when the jury did not hesitate to find him guilty; 
in consequence of which he received sentence of death.


GEORGE BARRINGTON 
A Well-Dressed Pickpocket who "worked" in Churches and the Houses of 
Parliament, and was convicted on 15th of March, 1773

	BARRINGTON was convicted of stealing a watch from a lady in the pit of 
one of the theatres, and sentenced to labour three years on the Thames. When about a 
year of the time had expired he procured a petition to be presented to the Court, 
praying that the remaining part of his sentence might be remitted; and the officers of 
the Justitia hulk made so favourable a report of his behaviour that, some time after, an 
order was sent to Mr Campbell for his release.
	A few days after Barrington's release he went to St Sepulchre's Church, where 
Doctor Mylne was to preach a sermon for the benefit of the Society for the Recovery 
of Persons apparently Drowned. William Payne, a constable, saw him put his hand 
into a lady's pocket, in the south aisle, and presently after followed him out of the 
church and took him into custody, near the end of Cock Lane, upon Snow Hill. 
Having taken the prisoner to St Sepulchre's watch house, and found a gold watch and 
some other articles in his possession, Payne returned to the church and spoke to the 
lady whom he had seen the prisoner attempt to rob; and she informed him that she had 
lost nothing, for, expecting the church to be much crowded, she had taken the 
precaution of emptying her pockets before leaving her house.
	Upon Payne's return to the watch-house a gentleman advised that the prisoner 
should be more strictly searched. He was desired to take off his hat, and, raising his 
left arm, he cautiously removed his hat from his head, when a metal watch dropped 
upon the floor, He was now obliged to pull off the greatest part of his clothes. He 
wore three pairs of breeches, in one of the pockets of which was found a purse, 
containing thirteen guineas and a bank-note for ten pounds made payable to himself.
	In consequence of an advertisement inserted the next day in the newspapers a 
Mrs Ironmonger came to Payne's house and described a watch she had lost, and it 
proved to be that which had been concealed in Barrington's hair and had dropped on 
the floor when he took off his hat. She attended the examination of the prisoner, and, 
having sworn that the watch produced by Payne was her property, was bound over to 
prosecute.
	Upon his trial Barrington made a long, artful and plausible defence. He said 
that, upon leaving the church, he perceived the watch mentioned in the indictment 
lying upon the ground, and picked it up, intending to advertise it the next day; that he 
was followed to Snow Hill by Payne and another constable, who apprehended him, 
and had in all probability seen him pick up the watch. "I reflected," said he, "that how 
innocently soever I might have obtained the article in question, yet it might cause 
some censure; and no man would wonder, considering the unhappy predicament I 
stood in, [alluding to a former conviction] that I should conceal it as much as 
possible."
	The jury having pronounced the prisoner guilty, he addressed the Court, and 
earnestly supplicated that he might be permitted to enter into his Majesty's service, 
and promised to discharge his trust with fidelity and attention; or, if he could not be 
indulged in that request, that his sentence might be banishment for life from his 
Majesty's dominions. The Court informed him that by an application to the Throne he 
might obtain a mitigation of his sentence, if his case was attended by such 
circumstances of extenuation as would justify him in humbly petitioning to be 
considered as an object of the Royal favour. He requested that the money and bank-
note be returned. Thereupon the Court observed that, in consequence of his 
conviction, the property found on him when he was apprehended became vested in the 
hands of the sheriffs of the City of London, who had discretionary power either to 
comply with or reject his request.
	He was convicted to labour on the Thames for the space of five years, on 
Tuesday, the 5th of April, 1778. He was by profession a surgeon; and his education, 
abilities and address were such as, had they been properly employed, would certainly 
have introduced him to a genteel competency, and a reputable station in life. He 
seems to have had a natural taste for dress, in which particular he was never beneath 
gentility, but frequently bordering upon elegance. His appearance gained him ready 
admission to the most respectable public assemblies; and he was a frequent visitor in 
the galleries of both Houses of Parliament.
	Count Orlow, the Russian Minister, when in one of the boxes of Drury Lane 
playhouse, was robbed of a gold snuff box set with diamonds, estimated to be worth 
an immense sum; and one of the Count's attendants, suspecting Barrington, seized 
him, and found the snuff-box in his possession. He was examined by Sir John 
Fielding; but the Count, being in a foreign country, was influenced by motives of 
delicacy to decline a prosecution.
	Some time after the above circumstance a gentleman observed Barrington in 
the House of Lords, and pointed him out to Philip Quarme, Esq., Deputy Usher of the 
Black Rod, who insisted upon his immediately quitting the House, assuring him that 
his attendance in Parliament would, for the future, be dispensed with.


JOHN LENNARD 
Executed for Rape, 11th August, 1773

	A PAIR of such finished villains as Bolland and Lennard can hardly be 
paralleled. The long course of iniquity of the former we have already exposed; yet, 
though on the same pursuit, there will be found some variety in the crimes of the 
latter.
	Bolland was a principal in hunting down the miserable–Lennard a follower; 
and hence their appetites in knavery differed widely in an honest master and his man. 
Bolland plundered by stratagem–Lennard by force.
	Vere, a sheriff's officer, having put an execution into a house of Mr. 
Brailsford, in Petty France, West minster, he placed Lennard, Graves, and Gay, three 
of his followers, in possession. On the second floor of this house lodged Miss Boss, a 
young lady, whom Lennard robbed of that which constitutes the fairest part of the 
female sex–her chastity and peace of mind.
	To enter into the particulars of the evidence given in Court, in proof of the 
guilt of this umnanly and most atrocious offence, would not meet every eye in its 
proper sense: we shall, therefore, let the outlines suffice.
	On the 15th of June these three ruffians were in possession of the house for the 
cause above named; and the family were all out, in different pursuits of the means to 
raise money to redeem their goods, save Miss Boss, who was at work in her own 
apartment; when Lennard opened the door, and began in a familiar manner to speak to 
her. At first terror deprived her of utterance; but, finding him proceed to take those 
liberties which female virtue can never suffer, she resisted, screamed out, seized the 
villain by the throat, struggled until she was exhausted, and then sunk down, deprived 
of reason. In this situation, which would have raised the compassion of a brute, he 
used her in the way that constituted the offence for which he was justly executed.
	A neighbour, hearing the cries of the distressed female, and suspecting some 
foul deed, knocked at the street door, and inquired the cause of the noise; to which 
Lennard, opening the window, replied that it was only a drunken woman: upon which 
the inquirer retired.
	The three villains, Lennard, Graves, and Gay, were indicted for this cruel 
outrage; Lennard as the principal, and the others as accessories to the fact; and upon 
their trial they were all found guilty. Graves and Gay were burnt in the hand and 
imprisoned; but sentence of death was immediately passed upon Lennard.
	Although convicted upon the clearest evidence, this obdurate man denied that 
he was guilty; and, on the Sunday before h suffered, he received the sacrament from 
the hands of the Rev. Mr. Temple, and then, in the most solemn manner, declared to 
that gentleman that he was entirely innocent of the fact for which he was to die; that 
he hd been repeatedly intimate with Miss Boss, with her own consent; and that all the 
reason he could conjecture for her prosecuting him was, that he had communicated 
this matter to Graves, one of the other followers, who availed himself of the secret, 
and found means to get into the young lady's room, and who really perpetrated the 
fact with which she had falsely accused Lennard.
	In this story he persisted all the time be remained in Newgate; but Mr. Temple, 
suspecting his veracity, delivered a paper to Mr. Toll, another gentleman who usually 
administered spiritual comfort to the malefactors in their last moments, in which be 
requested him to ask Lennard about those two assertions before he was turned off.
	This request Mr. Toll and his colleague punctually complied with, and the 
unhappy man then acknowledged that he had taken the sacrament to an absolute 
falsehood; that there was not a word of truth in his impeaching Miss Boss, but that he 
alone abused her; that he was taught in Newgate to believe that the falsehood might 
do him service; that be found his mistake too late, and all the atonement he could 
make was to acknowledge the truth before he left the world, and to beg pardon of God 
for having acted in so atrocious a manner.
	All the charity which can be accorded to the fate of this most wretched man is 
to hope that his last confession and repentance were sincere, and that they might reach 
the throne of grace.
	With Lennard, on the 11th of August, 1713, suffered the following malefactors 
at Tyburn–William Eames, for uttering a bank-note of forty pounds, knowing it to be 
forged; Thomas Younger and Thomas Green, for a burglary in the house of Mrs. 
Mortimer, milliner, in Gravel Lane, Ratcliffe Highway; Joseph Holmes and Maurice 
Murry, for a burglary in the house of John Wiley, in Crown Court, Whitecross Street; 
and Thomas Plunket, for robbing Mr. Dudley on the highway.


WILLIAM FIELD ALIAS GREEN 
Executed on Kennington Common, 1st of September, 1773, for Highway 
Robbery

  
Field sold as a slave in North America

	WILLIAM FIELD had been a gentleman's livery servant, and had been turned 
out of several places for his irregularities. At length the badness of his character 
prevented any gentleman from taking him into his house. The highway being the 
general recourse of discharged footmen, Field commenced as a highwayman.
	To the pert insolence of a footman he added the daring impulse of desperation 
as a highwayman. While in service he had made a large acquaintance with ostlers, 
jockeys and post-boys. He therefore found no difficulty in borrowing horses to carry 
him through his depredations, and he gained information of travellers of property 
from the gang who had long been his comrades.
	One of the most daring attempts at robbery was upon the late celebrated 
Colonel Luttrell, brother to the late Duchess of Cumberland, and another gentleman, 
whom he stopped near Gunsbury House. The Colonel immediately fired a pistol, 
without effect, at the highwayman, who in return presented one at the traveller; but 
from its having been some time loaded it would not go off, upon which he rode away. 
This pistol, Field confessed, he took from Colonel West's housekeeper some time 
before, when he stopped and fired at that officer.
	The money of which he robbed travellers for some time he squandered upon 
lewd women and abandoned discarded servant-men. He was, however, at length 
apprehended, and convicted of a robbery; but, through the lenity of his prosecutor, the 
sentence of death was remitted to seven years' transportation to America. Thither he 
was sent, and sold as a slave; but soon finding means to escape, with others, from 
bondage, he fled to New York, and there embarked on board a vessel bound for Poole, 
in Dorsetshire. Being again in London, Field frequently committed four or five 
robberies a night, sometimes on Finchley Common, and often on Shooter's Hill, 
Blackheath, and other places in that neighbourhood; and once, being closely pursued, 
he effected a difficult escape to town. After this he frequented Putney Common and 
its adjacencies, whence he brought considerable booty into London. Notice having 
been given at Sir John Fielding's office, persons were sent out on different roads, and 
Field was conveyed, handcuffed to Tothill Fields Bridewell. Though he had returned 
from transportation, it was thought proper to indict him at the Surrey Assizes for the 
subsequent robberies, when he would have pleaded guilty, but Lord Chief Baron 
Smythe advised him to put himself on his trial; and the jury having given a verdict 
against him, the judge pronounced sentence, after addressing him in the most pathetic 
manner; and he was executed accordingly.


WILLIAM COX 
Who played Marbles and kept a Pet Sparrow to aid him in the Commission 
of Robberies. Executed at Tyburn, 27th of October, 1773

	COX'S father having been transported–first initiating his son in the art of 
robbery–young Cox was left to act on his own account, and as usual, with other 
wicked habits, he began by picking pockets; but he was soon apprehended and 
committed to Bridewell, where he was reduced to a most miserable degree of poverty. 
He no sooner obtained his liberty than he procured decent apparel, and was from that 
time remarkably clean and neat in his appearance. He lived some years at the house of 
his uncle, West, in Feather's Court, High Holborn, who encouraged him to pursue 
those illegal courses which led to his destruction.
	He got unperceived into a grocer's, at the corner of Long Lane, in Aldersgate 
Street, and stole a silver-hilted sword from a room on the first floor. Returning 
through the shop with his booty, he was asked some questions; on which he said he 
had been playing with Master Billy, which, he had informed himself, was the name of 
the grocer's son. But on going out of the shop the sword struck against the steps, and 
he was taken into custody and brought to trial; but it was his fortune to escape 
conviction.
	Being provided with a tame sparrow, he let the bird fly into a window of a 
house in Hanover Street, and the door happening to be open he went in, and concealed 
plate to a considerable amount. Hearing some person walking toward the room he 
sought refuge in the area, where, being perceived by an elderly gentlewoman, who 
was the only person in the house, he burst into tears, and saying his sparrow had 
flown into the window begged he might be allowed to catch it. The old lady complied; 
and he soon found an opportunity of decamping with his booty.
	It was the common practice of Cox to play at marbles, and other games, with 
young gentlemen before the doors of their parents, and he seldom suffered an 
opportunity to escape of getting into and robbing the houses. He had a very 
remarkable boyish appearance; and on a variety of occasions that circumstance greatly 
assisted him in the pursuit of his felonious designs. So childish, in fact, was his 
appearance–for he was very short and slender for his years–that sometimes he 
provided himself with marbles, and, dressing himself like young master, would ask to 
play with any gentleman's children whom he might observe in the environs of London 
amusing themselves in their father's courtyard. Thus he would insidiously get every 
information from the innocent and unsuspicious boys, and repay their little acts of 
hospitality by plundering the houses of their parents.
	Cox was connected with a notorious thief, who called himself Captain Davis; 
and by means of the most artful stratagems that could be suggested these accomplices 
perpetrated a surprising number of robberies. Davis was at length apprehended, and 
sentenced to suffer death; but he was reprieved on condition of transportation.
	About the middle of the summer, 1773, the apartments of Mr Kendrick, in 
Oxford Street, were privately entered, and a bureau was opened and three bank-notes 
of one hundred pounds each, a hundred and thirty guineas, and a silver watch were 
stolen thereout, to the amount of four hundred and forty pounds. Soon after Mr 
Kendrick's robbery Cox and William Claxton went together to Reading, in Berkshire, 
and there purchased three horses, for which Claxton paid with one of the notes stolen 
from Mr Kendrick, receiving in part of the change a fifty-pound bank-note, which he 
afterwards changed at the bank for notes of smaller value, two of which were found in 
the possession of West, Cox's uncle.
	On the first examination of these offenders at the public office in Bow Street, 
which was on Wednesday, the 11th of August, West said he received the notes from 
his wife on the day preceding that of her decease, which was about the time of Mr 
Kendrick's robbery; but on the following Wednesday he assured the magistrates that 
the notes had been in his possession three years. In contradiction to this it was proved 
that the notes had not been many days issued from the bank.
	Mr Knapp and Mr White, of Reading, appeared, and the fifty-pound note, 
given in part change of that of a hundred, was regularly traced from the hands of 
Claxton to the bank, where he had changed it for others of smaller value. West was 
discharged, and Claxton was admitted an evidence against Cox, who was committed 
for trial at the ensuing sessions at the Old Bailey.
	The evidence against Cox was chiefly circumstantial; but it was of such a 
nature as to be almost as strong as positive proof, and on that evidence he was 
convicted.
	Finding the end of his career fast approaching, Cox began to prepare himself 
for eternity. He was executed along with four more unhappy men, who excited much 
commiseration from the spectators.


ELIZABETH HARRIET GREEVE 
A clever Swindler, transported for Felony, in the Year 1773

	ELIZABETH HARRIET GREEVE was one of those specious swindlers who, 
pretending to great patronage, cheated the credulous by promises of preferment.
	With one of the dupes of her artifice she was first cousin to Lord North; with 
another, second cousin to the Duke of Grafton; to a third, nearly related to Lady 
Fitzroy: on some occasions she affected great intimacy with Lord Guilford; and had 
the young Premier then ruled the State she would, without much doubt, have boasted 
the patronage of Mr Pitt.
	On Wednesday, the 3rd of November, 1773, this female sharper and 
consummate impostor was brought to the bar of the public office, Bow Street, under 
various charges of fraud.
	William Kidwell, a coach-carver, swore that the woman at the bar, who called 
herself the Honourable Elizabeth Harriet Greeve, had defrauded him of thirty-six 
pounds, under a promise of procuring him the place of clerk to the stores in the 
Victualling Office. He said that, the fashion of carving coaches being on the decline, 
he wished to invest the little sum he had by dint of frugality and hard labour saved in 
the purchase of some place, and for this purpose advertised for such a situation. This 
pretended honourable lady answered, and soon lured him out of the sum above 
mentioned.
	William Kent, of Streatly, in Berkshire, charged her with defrauding him of 
thirty pounds in cash and obtaining from him his conditional bond for two hundred 
and fifty pounds more, which, together, was the price of the place of a coast-waiter.
	This deluded man, upon the promises of Mrs Greeve, quitted his business in 
the country, and with his wife and children came to London, and remained there some 
time in the most anxious expectation before he discovered the imposition.
	Elizabeth Cooper next appeared before the magistrates and charged the 
prisoner with defrauding her late husband of sixty-two pounds on a similar pretence to 
the last case, the loss of which, and his disappointment, the poor afflicted widow said, 
broke his heart.
	The sum of her villainy was proved by another witness, whom the rest had, 
through some industry, found out: this was her factotum, agent, clerk and friend, an 
occasional esquire, of the name of Francis Crook. This man swore that when he first 
acted as her agent he did not know she was an impostor; that he had agreed with a 
number of persons for the sale of places, whom he took to his mistress, but she always 
took the money paid in advance.
	This artful female was soon recognised as one who had been transported two 
years before, but had returned before the expiration of the term of her service. She 
was again disposed of in a similar manner.


JOHN RANN 
Commonly called "Sixteen-String Jack." Executed at Tyburn, 30th of 
November, 1774, for Highway Robbery

  
Rann on his trial before Judge Henry Fielding

	THIS fellow was entitled to be classed among the impudent and arrogant self-
created gentlemen who levied arbitrary contributions on the highway: he was also of 
considerable notoriety in acts of such species of depredations, having been regularly 
initiated, from the humble pickpocket.
	John Rann was born at a village a few miles from Bath, of honest parents, who 
were in low circumstances, and incapable of giving him any kind of education. For 
some time he obtained a livelihood by vending goods, which he drove around the city 
and adjacent country on an ass.
	A lady of distinction, who happened to be at Bath, took Rann into her service 
when he was about twelve years of age; and his behaviour was such, that he became 
the favorite of his mistress and fellow servants.
	At length he came to London, and got employment as a helper in the stables at 
Brooke's Mews, in which station he bore a good character. He then became the driver 
of a postchaise, after which he was servant to an officer, and in both these stations he 
was well spoken of.
	About four years before his execution he was coachman to a gentleman of 
fortune near Portman Square, and it was at this period that he dressed in the manner 
which gave rise to the appellation of "Sixteen-string Jack," by wearing breeches with 
eight strings at each knee.
	After living in the service of several noblemen he lost his character, and turned 
pickpocket, in company with three fellows, named Jones, Clayton, and Colledge, the 
latter of whom, a mere boy, obtained the name of "Eight-stringed Jack."
	At the sessions held at the Old Bailey in April, 1775, Rann, Clayton, and one 
Shcpherd, were tried for robbing Mr. William Somers on the highway, and acquitted 
for want of evidence. They were again tried for robbing Mr. Langford, but acquitted 
for the same reason.
	For some time past Rann had kept company with a young woman named 
Roche, who, having been apprenticed to a milliner, and being seduced by an officer of 
the guards, was reduced to obtain bread by the casual wages of prostitution; and, at 
length associating with highwaymen, received such valuable effects as they took on 
the road.
"A woman's honour is a woman's all, 
You're lost for ever if perchance you fall; 
In this, wit, beauty, fortune, form, and mind, 
You give like atoms to the whistling wind; 
All worth, all pleasure, is with honour lost, 
A truth which thousands witness to their cost. 
The fate of woman deeply we deplore, 
They fall like stars that set to rise no more."
	On the 30th of May Rann was taken into custody, and, being brought to Bow 
Street on the following Wednesday, was charged with robbing John Devall, Esq., near 
the nine-mile stone on the Hounslow road, of his watch and money. This watch he had 
given to Miss Roche, who had delivered it to Catherine Smith, by whom it was 
offered in pledge to Mr. Hallam, a pawnbroker, who, suspecting that it was not 
honestly obtained, caused all the parties to be taken into custody.
	Miss Roche was now charged with receiving the watch, knowing it to have 
been stolen; and Miss Smith, being sworn, deposed that on the day Mr. Devall was 
robbed, Roche told her that "she expected Rann to bring her some money in the 
evening"; that he accordingly came about ten at night, and, having retired some time 
with Miss Roche, she, on her return, owned that she had received a watch and five 
guineas from him, which he said he had taken from a gentleman on the highway; and 
that she, Miss Smith, carried the watch to pawn to Mr. Hallam, at the request of Miss 
Roche.
	Sir John Fielding asked Rann if he would offer anything in his defence; on 
which the latter said, "I know no more of the matter than you do, nor half so much 
neither." On this occasion Rann was dressed in a manner above his style of life and 
his circumstances. He had a bundle of flowers in the breast of his coat almost as large 
as a broom; and his irons were tied up with a number of blue ribands.
	For this offence Rann was tried at the sessions held at the Old Bailey, in July, 
1774, and acquitted.
	Two or three days after this acquittal Rann engaged to sup with a girl at her 
lodgings in Bow Street; but, not being punctual to his appointment, the girl went to 
bed, and Rann, not being able to obtain admittance at the door, attempted to get in at 
the window on the first floor, and had nearly accomplished his purpose, when he was 
taken into custody by the watchman.
	For this burglarious attempt he was examined at Bow Street on the 27th of 
July, when the girl, whose apartments he had attempted to break open, declared that 
he could not have had any felonious intention, as he knew that he would have been a 
welcome guest, and have been readily admitted, if she had not fallen asleep. On this 
he was dismissed, after Sir John Fielding had cautioned him to leave his dangerous 
profession, and seek for some more honest means of support.
	On the Sunday following Rann appeared at Bagnidge Wells, dressed in a 
scarlet coat, tambour waistcoat, white silk stockings, laced hat, &c., and publicly 
declared himself to be a highwayman. Having indulged pretty freely, he became 
extremely quarrelsome, and several scuffles ensued, in one of which he lost a ring 
from his finger, and when he discovered his loss, he said it was but a hundred guineas 
gone, which one evening's work would replace. He be came at length so troublesome 
that part of the company agreed to turn him out of the house; but they met with so 
obstinate a resistance that they were obliged to give up their design; when a number of 
young fellows, possessed of more spirit than discretion, attacked this magnanimous 
hero, and actually forced him through the window into the road. Rann was not much 
injured by this severe treatment; but he complained bitterly against those who could 
so affront a gentleman of his character.
	Rann, being arrested for a debt of fifty pounds, which he was unable to pay, 
was confined in the Marshalsea prison, where he was visited by a number of men and 
women of bad character, some of whom paid his debt, and produced his discharge.
	At another time, Rann being with two companions at an alehouse in 
Tottenham Court Road, two sheriff's officers arrested Rann, who, not having money 
to pay the debt, deposited his watch in the hands of the bailiffs, and his associates 
advanced three guineas, which together made more than the amount of the debt; and, 
as a balance was to be returned to Rann when the watch should be redeemed, he told 
the bailiffs that, if they would lend him five shil lings, he would treat them with a 
crown bowl of punch. This they readily did; and, while they were drinking, Rann said 
to the officers, "You have not treated me like a gentleman. When Sir John Fielding's 
people come after me they use me genteelly; they only hold up a finger, beckon me, 
and I follow them as quietly as a lamb."
	When the bailiffs were gone, Rann and his companions rode off; but our hero, 
soon returning, stopped at the turnpike, and asked if he had been wanted. "No," said 
the tollman. "Why," replied the other, "I am Sixteen-string Jack, the famous 
highwayman–have any of Sir John Fielding's people been this way?" "Yes," said the 
man, "some of them are but just gone through." Rann replied, "If you see them again, 
tell them I am gone towards London"; and then rode off with the utmost unconcern.
	Soon afterwards Rann appeared at Barnet races, dressed in a most elegant 
sporting style, his waistcoat being blue satin, trimmed with silver; and he was 
followed by hundreds of people, who were eager to gratify their curiosity by the sight 
of a man who had been so much the subject of public conversation.
	A very short time before Rann was capitally convicted he attended a public 
execution at Tyburn, and, getting within the ring formed by the constables around the 
gal lows, desired that he might be permitted to stand there, "for," said he, "perhaps it 
is very proper that I should be a spectator on this occasion."
	On the 26th of September, 1774, Rann and William Collier went on the 
Uxbridge road, with a view to commit robberies on the highway; and on the 
Wednesday following they were examined at the public office in Bow Street, when 
Dr. William Bell, chaplain to the Princess Amelia, deposed that, between three and 
four o'clock in the afternoon of Monday, the 26th of September, as he was riding near 
Ealing, he observed two men of rather mean appearance, who rode past him; and that 
he remarked they had suspicious looks; yet neither at that time, nor for some little 
time afterwards, had he any idea of being robbed: that soon afterwards one of them, 
which he believed was Rann, crossed the head of his horse, and, demanding his 
money, said "Give it to me, and take no notice, or I'll blow your brains out." On this 
the doctor gave him one shilling and sixpence, which was all the silver he had, and 
likewise a common watch in a tortoise-shell case.
	On the evening of the day on which the robbery was committed Eleanor 
Roche, who was kept by Rann, and her maid-servant, carried a watch to pledge with 
Mr. Cordy, pawnbroker, in Oxford Road, who, suspecting that it had not been 
honestly acquired, stopped it, and applied to Mr. Gregnion, watchmaker, in Russell 
Street, Covent Garden, who had made the watch for Dr. Bell.
	Mr. Clark swore that, on going to Miss Roche's lodgings on the Monday night, 
he found two pair of boots wet and dirty, which had evidently been worn that day; and 
Mr. Haliburton swore that he waited at Miss Roche's lodgings till Rann and Collier 
came thither; in consequence of which they were taken into custody.
	On the 5th of October, John Rann, William Collier, Eleanor Roche, and 
Christian Stewart (servant to Roche), were brought to Bow Street; when Dr. Bell 
deposed in substance as he had done the proceeding week: and William Hills, servant 
to the Princess Amelia, swore that he saw Rann, whom he well knew, ascend the hill 
at Acton about twenty minutes before the robbery was committed–a circumstance 
which perfectly agreed with Dr. Bell's account of the time he was robbed.
	John Rann and William Collier were therefore committed to Newgate, to take 
their trials for the highway robbery; Miss Roche was sent to Clerkenwell Bridewell, 
and Christian Stewart, her servant, to Tothill Fields' Bridewell, to be tried as 
accessories after the fact.
	The evidence given on this trial was, in substance, the same as that which had 
been given at Bow Street; but, some favorable circumstances appearing in behalf of 
Collier, he was recommended to mercy, and afterwards respited during the king's 
pleasure. Miss Roche was sentenced to be transported for fourteen years; her servant 
was acquitted; and Rann was left for execution.
	When Rann was brought down to take his trial he was dressed in a new suit of 
pea-green clothes; his hat was bound round with silver strings; he wore a ruffled shirt; 
and his behaviour evinced the utmost unconcern.
	Rann was so confident of being acquitted that he had ordered a genteel supper 
to be provided for the entertainment of his particular friends and associates on the 
joyful occasion; but their intended mirth was turned into mourning, and the madness 
of guilty joy gave way to the sullen melancholy of equally guilty grief.
	When Rann received his sentence he attempted to force a smile, but it was 
evident that his mind was racked with pains that no language can express.
	After conviction the behaviour of this malefactor was, for some time, very 
improper for one in his unhappy circumstances. On Sunday, the 23rd of October, he 
had seven girls to dine with him. The company were remarkably cheerful; nor was 
Rann less joyous than his companions. His conduct was expressive of great unconcern 
till the time that the warrant for his execution arrived; after which he began to be 
somewhat serious in his preparation for a future state.
	On the morning of execution he received the sacrament in the chapel of the 
prison, and at the fatal tree behaved with great decency, but did not appear so much 
affected by his approaching fate as some printed accounts have represented him. 
When he came near the gallows he turned round, and looked at it as an object which 
he had long expected to see, but not as one that he dreaded, as might reasonably have 
been expected.
	He was turned off November the 30th, 1774, and having hung the usual time, 
his body was delivered to his friends for interment.


AMOS MERRITT 
Having saved an Innocent Man from the Gallows, he himself was executed 
at Tyburn, 10th of January, 1775, for Burglary

	PATRICK MADEN, convicted of a foot robbery on the highway, and William 
Waine and Levi Barnet, for burglary, were, on the 19th of August, 1774, carried to 
Tyburn, for execution, pursuant to their sentence.
	When the cart was drawn under the gallows a man among the crowd of 
spectators called out for the others to make way for him, as he had something to 
communicate to the sheriff respecting one of the malefactors. This being effected, the 
man, who proved to be Amos Merritt, addressed Mr Reynolds, the under-sheriff, and 
declared that Patrick Maden was innocent of the crime for which he was about to 
suffer. Mr Reynolds desired he would look upon the prisoner and speak aloud what he 
had represented to him. He did so, and declared that he was not guilty, but declined 
accusing himself. The sheriffs, hearing this declaration, dispatched Mr Reynolds with 
the information to the Secretary of State, and to request his further orders, of whom he 
obtained a respite for Maden, who was carried back to Newgate, amid the 
acclamations of the people.
	During Mr Reynolds's absence, which was almost an hour, the other culprits 
remained with the ropes round their necks, and were then executed.
	Merritt was taken into custody, and at the public office in Bow Street, before 
Mr Justice Addington, confessed that he himself was the person who had committed 
the robbery of which Maden had been convicted. The latter was pardoned. Though no 
doubt remained of Merritt's guilt, yet, as no proof could be adduced to that effect, he, 
for a while, escaped justice.
	At the sessions held at the Old Bailey in the month of December, 1774, Merritt 
was indicted for feloniously breaking and entering the dwelling-house of Edward 
Ellicott, early on the morning of the 26th of October, and robbing it of plate, a gold 
watch, and other valuable articles to a large amount. The evidence was deemed so 
satisfactory that the jury did not hesitate to find Merritt guilty: in consequence of 
which he received sentence of death.
	He confessed that he had committed the burglary and robbery, and he suffered 
at the same place, within a single year, where he had been the means of saving the life 
of Maden.


JOHN BOLTON 
Convicted of murdering a girl he had seduced and made pregnant, but 
cheated justice by committing suicide, 29th March, 1775

	This unhappy man was reputably descended, and well educated. He served for 
some time in the army during the late war, and was distinguished by his gallant 
behaviour; but was dismissed from the military line of life in consequence of the 
peace of 1763.
	While he was in the army, and on a recruiting party in Yorkshire, he became 
acquainted with a young lady, who possessing a moderate estate in her own right, he 
married her after he quitted the service, and turned farmer.
	By this marriage he had six children, some of whom were living at the time of 
his death. In this station he continued happily for about ten years, when the event took 
place which ended in his destruction.
	Near Mr. Bolton's place of residence was the village of Ackworth, in which 
was a house where the poor of several parishes were maintained by contract. From 
this house, in the year 1768, he took, as apprentices, a boy, named Emanuel Bowes, 
and a girl of ten years old, called Elizabeth Rainbow. The girl grew up in his service, 
and was remarkable for her beauty; a circumstance very unfortunate for herself, as it 
induced Mr. Bolton to seduce her, the consequence of which was that her pregnancy 
ensued.
	When Bolton was assured that the girl was with child, he went to York, and 
purchased a medicine, in order to procure an abortion; which medicine being 
administered to the young woman, she was thrown into violent convulsions; but, the 
strength of her constitution effectually combating the potion, she advanced in her 
pregnancy without any appearance of having received the least injury.
	Bolton, alarmed lest his intercourse with the girl should be known to his wife 
and family, formed the shocking resolution of murdering her who had fallen a victim 
to his seductive artifices; but no opportunity offered of perpetrating the horrid deed till 
Sunday, the 21st of August, 1774.
	On this day Mrs. Bolton took one of her children on a visit to a lady who lived 
at two miles distance; and there being no persons in the house but Emanuel Bowes, 
the young girl who had been seduced, and a child of six years old, who was sick in 
bed, Bolton considered this as the proper time for perpetrating the crime on which he 
had previously resolved. He therefore sent the boy to fetch a cow-doctor, to look at a 
beast that was presumed to be disordered. The boy returning in about two hours, and 
finding the door fast, went to an adjoining field, and put a horse to grass; after which 
he knocked at the door, and his master, letting him in, told him that 'Elizabeth 
Rainbow had run away, and left most of her clothes behind her.'
	The boy was surprised at this intelligence, and some near neighbours said that 
the girl had not left the house that day; and a woman, who had been to the house to 
pay for milk, declared that she had given the money to Rainbow, on account of the 
absence of her mistress.
	Mrs. Bolton, returning at seven at night, observed that her husband appeared to 
be very uneasy, and inquired into the cause of it; to which he only answered that the 
girl had gone away, and left her clothes on the table in the dining-room. Whether Mrs. 
Bolton was, or was not, suspicions of her husband's criminal connexion with 
Rainbow, is a matter of doubt; but it seems probable that she was, as a violent quarrel 
ensued on this occasion.
	About ten days after this affair happened, the neighbours being suspicious that 
murder had been committed, one of them, who was a constable, went to a magistrate, 
who granted a warrant for the apprehension of Bolton. The latter, having heard that a 
warrant was issued, went to the justice, and told him that the report intended to 
prejudice him was circulated with a malicious view to injure his character. On this the 
justice told Bolton to attend him in the afternoon, when the constable would be 
present; instead of which Bolton went home, and, packing up some plate, set off for 
York, whither he was followed by the constable, who apprehended him, and, carrying 
him before a justice of the peace, he was lodged in prison.
	On the trial, which came on at the ensuing assizes, the following 
circumstances were discovered, viz. when Bolton had sent the boy for the cow-doctor, 
he took the girl into the cellar, and strangled her with a cord which he drew round her 
neck, placing a fife within the cord, so as to twist it to a proper tightness.
	On the Monday after this affair he directed Emanuel Bowes to wheel several 
barrows filled with rubbish into the cellar, as it had been overflowed with water, 
which furnished him with a very plausible pretence for the concealment of his guilt, 
which he presumed would now remain undiscovered.
	At length the body of the deceased was found under the rubbish in the cellar; 
and the coroner's inquest, being summoned on the occasion, gave a verdict of wilful 
murder; on which Mr. Bolton was committed to the castle of York.
	The evidence on his trial was deemed so conclusive, that the jury did not 
hesitate to find him guilty, in consequence of which he received sentence of death. 
During his trial he behaved with uncommon effrontery; and, when the judge had 
passed sentence on him, be turned to the Court, and declared his innocence.
	On the following day a clergyman went to him, with a charitable view to 
prepare his mind to enable him to support himself with decency in the arduous trial be 
had to undergo, and to fortify it for the awful event that was so soon to await him.
	Still, however, he persisted that he was innocent of the alleged crime; and, 
when the officers of justice went the next morning to convey him to the place of 
execution, they found that, by hanging himself, he had put a period to his existence.
	This event of self-murder happened in the castle of York, on the 29th of 
March, 1775.
	There is no language in which to express our proper sense of the crimes of this 
unhappy man. He was first guilty of seducing a young woman from the path of virtue; 
he then murdered her in the fear of detection; and at length laid violent bands on 
himself. Such a complication of guilt must make the heart shudder; and, we trust, it 
cannot be necessary to write a single word to deter our readers from the commission 
of any of these offences.


LAMBERT READING 
Hackney-Coachman and Leader of a Gang of Robbers, executed at 
Chelmsford, 10th of August, 1775, for Burglary

	LAMBERT READING was the principal of a desperate gang of hackney-
coachmen who robbed Copped Hall, in Essex, not far from London. He had a 
hackney-coachman in confederacy, who waited for him at Stratford. A magistrate of 
the county, happening to pass by the coach, was struck at its being there at an unusual 
hour of the night, from which circumstance he was induced to observe its number.
	Hearing, the next day, of the robbery at Copped Hall, he wrote to Sir John 
Fielding his suspicions, and named the number of the coach. From this information 
the thief-takers traced Reading to a house in Brick Lane, where they found him in bed 
with a woman who passed as his wife.
	He was surrounded with pistols, hangers, picklock keys, dark lanterns and 
other apparatus of a housebreaker. He had an opportunity of using some of these arms 
in his defence, but he was so greatly intimidated that he quietly surrendered himself. 
The material result of the search was the recovery of the plate stolen from Copped 
Hall, which was found hidden in Reading's apartment, in three sacks.
	On evidence to this effect, added to other corroborating circumstances, he was 
convicted and executed.
	The other hackney-coachman, whose name was Chapman, and who drove for 
one Conyers, the owner, was taken on the day of Reading's trial; and, being found 
guilty as an accessory, also received sentence of death, which was afterwards 
commuted for transportation.


JANE BUTTERFIELD,  
Tried for murder but acquitted, 19th August, 1775

	IN pursuance of our promise to the public, of inserting trials in extraordinary 
cases, in consequence of which the parties had been acquitted, we give the following, 
which is very remarkable, as the presumption of guilt is the least that could possibly 
be imagined.
	At the assizes at Croydon, for the county of Surrey, on the 19th of August, 
1775, Jane Butterfield was indicted for the wilful murder of William Scawen, Esq.
	The short story of this unhappy affair is as follows: Miss Butterfield was, at 
fourteen years of age, seduced from her father by a woman employed by Mr. Scawen, 
who too soon brought the young lady to a compliance with his wishes. The seduction 
was followed by very disagreeable consequences: the father reprobated his daughter; 
and his death was hastened, as she herself acknowledged, by the grief he felt for her 
unhappy departure from the paths of virtue.
	Mr. Scawen did not appear less affected than herself at this deplorable event: 
he did every thing in his power to calm the mind of the young lady; promised to 
supply to her the place of her late parent; and faithfully discharged that duty, by 
taking the utmost care of her education, and studying to oblige her in every possible 
instance. He even, as she says, 'faithfully supplied a parent's duty: be was by nature 
generous, and that generosity, with regard to herself, was unbounded.'
	Impelled by notions of gratitude, Miss Butterfield presumed that she could not 
be thought to have acted ungratefully by her benefactor.–Her attachment to the 
deceased was faithful, and her care of him unremitted: she administered to his wants 
and infirmities, and in all respects fulfilled the tender offices of a wife as much as if 
she had owed them to him under that sacred tie; and so diligent was her attendance, 
that her life was repeatedly endangered from excessive fatigue.
	Mr. Scawen had been for a long time in a debilitated habit, and for the last six 
years could not arise or sit down without assistance; and such was the vitiated state of 
his body, 'that he was obliged to have the assistance of Mr. Caesar Hawkins, the 
surgeon, who applied caustics to his head, which was swelled to a degree almost 
incredible.'
	At this time Mr. Scawen reposed such confidence in Miss Butterfield that he 
would not permit any person but herself to apply the proper dressings. So violent was 
his disorder, that he remained blind near two years, but at length recovered his sight; 
and his other infirmities were greatly relieved: yet his habit of body became weaker, 
and those who visited him foresaw that he could not exist for any considerable time.
	Mr. Scawen had consulted regular physicians till he was tired, out of the hope 
of that relief which could not be obtained. He then had recourse to quackery, and had 
a perfect laboratory in his house, filled with a variety of medicines, to which he had 
frequent recourse for the relief of his real or imaginary complaints. His closet was 
stocked with Ward's and Maredant's Drops, and other medicines advertised for the 
cure of all complaints.
	Miss Butterfield constantly advised Mr. Scawen against quackery, nor ever 
administered any thing to him that she conceived prejudicial to his health, or that he 
was disinclined to take.
	In the course of the trial the strength of the evidence against Miss Butterfield 
rested with Mr. Edmund Sanxay, a surgeon, who deposed that he had been acquainted 
with the deceased about fifty years; that he put himself under his care; that he was 
much emaciated; that he said he was but just recovered from a salivation, which he 
had been thrown into by taking quack medicines for the rheumatism; that Mr. Sanxay 
recommended a regimen, which was observed for two days only; when Mr. Scawen 
came to him, and told him that in a decoction of sarsaparilla, which had been given 
him, he found a brassy taste, and that it made him very sick; that he had been 
frequently feverish and sick at stomach; that his mouth began to be sore; and that he 
apprehended be was going into another salivation.
	After this Mr. Scawen was removed to Mr. Sanxay's house on the 20th of 
June, 1775, and died there on the 8th of July following. Mr. Sanxay declared his 
opinion that Mr. Scawen did not die a natural death; but that a salivation produced by 
mercury was the cause of this event.
	On the contrary, several surgeons, and other persons of respectable character, 
gave such evidence as would induce a candid mind to believe that Mr. Scawen did not 
die by poison, but in consequence of his debilitated habit of body, and his 
preposterous attachment to quack medicines, in search of that relief which was not to 
be reasonably expected from them.
	The consequence was, that the jury, after retiring about ten minutes, brought in 
a verdict of 'Not Guilty;' and Miss Butterfield immediately set out for London in a 
postchaise that had been previously provided.
	We have been the shorter in our narrative of this affair, because there did not 
appear to he any just ground of suspicion of the alleged crime. What were the motives 
of this prosecution it would not be decent in us to say. It has been intimated that Mr. 
Scawen had made a will greatly in favour of Miss Butterfield, and that this urged the 
suit against her. Be this as it may, the generous public will congratulate her, as her 
friends did, on her honourable acquittal.
	The fatal consequences of seduction will appear evident on a consideration of 
this case. Miss Butterfield's father lost his life in consequence of his daughter's being 
drawn aside from the paths of virtue. Let this furnish a lesson of caution to men, never 
to be guilty of a crime, with respect to the other sex, for which all their future 
tenderness can make no adequate compensation.


THOMAS AIKNEY AND ELIZABETH BROADINGHAM 
Executed for the murder of Broadingham's husband, 20th March, 1776

	THOUGH a more wicked and premeditated murder has not presented itself in 
the course of our researches than that we are about to report, yet we can find no 
connected narrative, in any legal form, of the horrid case: from detached 
communications, however, we have gleaned the following particulars:-- 
	John Broadingham was a smuggler, and had been a prisoner in York Castle for 
offences against the excise laws.
	During his confinement his wife, Elizabeth Broadingham, basely cohabited 
with Thomas Aikney; and, soon after the husband's release, she went off with her 
paramour, and continued to live with him, in open adultery, upwards of three months.
	During this time she proposed the murder of her husband to Aikney, who, 
struck with horror at her words, declared he never would imbrue his hands in innocent 
blood. Upon this, for a time, she refrained from naming the subject: yet the horrid 
purpose remained fixed in her mind; and so powerfully did her evil genius work upon 
her, that she could no longer rest without again mentioning her determination to 
Aikney, and which she took an opportunity to do after supplying him with liquor until 
he was nearly intoxicated. When his brain was thus heated, he heard her without 
interruption; and she urged him, at every future opportunity, to assist her in the 
murder of her husband.
	To effect this she returned to the unsuspicious and too-forgiving man, who 
received her rather with kindness than upbraidings.
	Aikney lodging hard by, she still pressed him to fix a time for executing the 
horrible deed; but he endeavoured to persuade her once more to elope with him: 
nothing, however, but the blood of her husband would satisfy this wicked woman; 
and, finding no cessation from her importunity, he at length gave a reluctant consent, 
and the woman planned the dreadful work.
	On the 13th of February, eight days only after her husband had taken her back 
to his little home, and while yet enjoying the hope of the partner of his heart being 
fully reclaimed, and that she had returned from a sense of duty alone, she, in the dead 
hour of the night, awoke her slumbering husband, and told him there was a knocking 
at the door. The unsuspecting man, conjecturing that some acquaintance, perhaps 
pressed by custom-house officers, required a temporary hiding-place, opened the 
door, when the villain Aikney, who was waiting his coming, rushed upon him, 
stabbed him first in the thigh, and then cut him across the belly, leaving the knife 
which gave the wounds in his body.
	Broadingham made to the street, crying out 'Murder!' Some neighbours came 
to his assistance, who found in one hand the bloody instrument which be had just 
drawn out of his body, and the other supporting his bowels, which were dropping to 
the ground.
	This miserable man languished until next day, and then expired.
	On the trial the principal proof against the murderers was the bloody knife, 
which was proved to have been the property of Aikney. But can conscience long 
permit such heinous offenders to conceal their crimes? Oh no! awhile they may evade 
justice, at the expense of torment of mind; but murder will he discovered.
	Under these irresistible impulses both these wretches made a full confession, 
not only of the crime itself, but they also related the above particulars.
	The woman was first strangled, and then her body was burnt to ashes. The 
man was hanged, and his body sent to the surgeons of the infirmary at Leeds for 
dissection.
	These malefactors suffered March the 20th, 1776, at York.


DANIEL AND ROBERT PERREAU  
Twin Brothers, who, though popularly believed to be innocent, were 
executed at Tyburn, 17th of January, 1776, for Forgery

	IN order to preserve, as near as possible, the chronological disposition of this 
work, we insert the following in this place, though the brothers Perreau were not 
executed till a considerable time after conviction, nor till after the acquittal of Mrs 
Rudd; but it is necessary that their trials should precede that of Mrs Rudd, as the 
former were in some measure productive of the latter.
	On the 10th of March, 1775, discovery was made of a series of forgeries, said 
to have been carried on for a length of time by Robert and Daniel Perreau, twin 
brothers; the one an apothecary of great practice, and the other living in the style of a 
gentleman.
	The above parties, together with Mrs Margaret Caroline Rudd, who lived with 
Daniel Perreau as his wife, and who was deemed to have been a principal agent in the 
forgeries, were taken into custody, and carried before the bench of magistrates in Bow 
Street, where the crowd attending to hear their examination was so great, that it 
became necessary to adjourn to the Guildhall, Westminster.
	The evidence there adduced tended to prove that the parties had raised 
considerable sums by bonds forged in the name of the well-known agent, William 
Adair, Esquire, which they imposed on several gentlemen of fortune, as collateral 
securities with their own notes, for the payment of the said sums.
	This transaction was discovered by the following means. Robert Perreau, 
whose character had been hitherto unimpeachable, applied to Mr Drummond, the 
banker, to lend him L5,000 and offered a bond for L.7,500 which he said Mr Adair 
had given to his brother, as a security for the payment.
	It will now be proper to remark, that, in order to give colour to the validity of 
these bonds, it had been artfully suggested that Mrs Rudd had near connexions with 
Mr Adair; and it was even insinuated, that she was his natural daughter: but Mr 
Drummond, to whom Mr Adair's writing was familiar, had no sooner looked at the 
signature, than he doubted its authenticity and very politely asked Robert Perreau, if 
he had seen Mr Adair sign it? The latter said he had not, but had no doubt but it was 
authentic, from the nature of the connexion that subsisted.
	To this Mr Drummond said, that he could not advance such a sum without 
consulting his brother, and desired Perreau to leave the bond, promising to return it 
the next morning, or advance on it the sum required.
	Mr Perreau made no scruple to leave the bond, and call in the morning. In the 
interim Mr Drummond examined the bond with greater attention; and Mr Stephens, 
secretary of the Admiralty, happening to call, his opinion was demanded; when 
comparing the signature of the bond with letters he had lately received from Mr Adair, 
he was firmly convinced that it was forged.
	When Perreau came, Mr Drummond spoke more freely than he had done 
before, and told him that he imagined he had been imposed on; but begged that, to 
remove all doubt, he would go with him to Mr Adair, and get that gentleman to 
acknowledge the validity of the bond; on which the money should be advanced.
	Perreau made not the least objection. They went together; and Mr Adair was 
asked if the bond was his. He declared it was not; but Perreau smiled, and said he 
jested.
	Mr Adair told him that it was no jesting matter, and that it was his duty to 
clear up the affair. Perreau said, 'if that was the case, he had been sent on a fine 
errand!' He desired to have the bond, and said he would make the necessary enquiries: 
but this was refused, and it was thought a point of prudence to watch the motions of 
Robert Perreau, till Daniel and his pretended wife were produced.
	Soon after he returned home, the three parties went into a coach; and, if Mrs 
Rudd's testimony may be credited, she took with her what money and valuables she 
could conveniently carry; and said, that the brothers had taken her money, gold watch, 
and jewels, into their possession; but no reason was assigned for their doing so.
	Their escape, however, if such was intended, was prevented; for an 
information being laid against them, they were apprehended, carried before Sir John 
Fielding, and examined at the Guildhall, Westminster, as above-mentioned. The facts 
already mentioned were attested by Mr Adair, Mr Drummond, and other persons; and 
Sir Thomas Frankland charged them with obtaining from him L.4,000 on the first 
application, which they honestly repaid before the money became due; afterwards 
L.6,000 and then L.4,000 on similar bonds, all signed with the name of Mr Adair.
	Mr Watson, a money-scrivener, said that he had drawn eight bonds, all of 
them ordered by one or other of the brothers; but he hesitated to fix on either, on 
account of their great personal resemblance; but being pressed to make a positive 
declaration, he fixed on Daniel as his employer.
	Dr Brooke charged the brothers with obtaining from him fifteen bonds of the 
bank of Air, each of the value of L.100 upon the security of a forged bond for 
L.3,100.
	On the strength of this evidence the brothers were committed, the one to New 
Prison, and the other to Clerkenwell Bridewell; and Mrs Rudd was admitted an 
evidence for the crown.
	On her future examination she declared that she was the daughter of a 
nobleman in Scotland; that, when young, she married an officer in the army, named 
Rudd, against the consent of her friends; that her fortune was considerable; that, on a 
disagreement with her husband, they resolved to part; that she made a reserve of 
money, jewels, and effects, to the amount of L.13,000 all of which she gave to Daniel 
Perreau, whom she said she loved with the tenderness of a wife; that she had three 
children by him; that he had returned her kindness in every respect till lately, when 
having been unfortunate in gaming in the alley, he had become uneasy, peevish; and 
much altered to her; that he cruelly constrained her to sign the bond now in question, 
by holding a knife to her throat, and swearing that he would murder her if she did not 
comply; that, being struck with remorse, she had acquainted Mr Adair with what she 
had done, and that she was now willing to declare every transaction with which she 
was acquainted, whenever she should be called upon by law so to do.
	At the sessions held at the Old Bailey in June, 1775, Robert Perreau, Esquire, 
was indicted for forging a bond for the payment of L.7,500 in the name of William 
Adair, Esquire, and also for feloniously uttering and publishing the said bond, 
knowing it to be forged, with intention to defraud Robert and Henry Drummond, 
Esquires.
	After what we have mentioned above respecting this transaction, we shall be 
as concise as possible in the recital of the evidence. Henry Drummond, Esquire, 
deposed, that Robert Perreau requested the loan of L.1,400 having made a purchase in 
Suffolk or Norfolk to the amount of L.12,000. He said he had a house in Harley 
Street, Cavcndish-square, which cost L.4,000 the deeds of which house he would 
leave as a security. These he did leave, and promising to return in ten days, the money 
was paid him. He came some time afterwards, and apologized for not having kept his 
appointment; and said he then came to borrow L.5,000 on the bond, out of which he 
would pay the L.1,400 abovementioned.
	Mr Drummond and his brother doubting the validity of the bond, Perreau said 
there were family-connexions between him and Mr Adair, who had money of his in 
his hands, for which he paid interest.
	A great part of what Mr Drummond delivered in evidence has been already 
given in the former part of this narrative. Mr Drummond going with the prisoner to 
Mr Adair's, Mrs Daniel Perreau (Mrs Rudd) was sent for, when Robert asked her, if 
she had not given the bond to him. She owned that she had, took the whole on herself, 
and acknowledged that she had forged the bond.
	The counsel for the prisoner asking Mr Drummond if he was certain that the 
prisoner said it was his money that Mr Adair paid interest for, he answered in the 
affirmative. He declared likewise, that Mr Perreau did not make the least objection to 
leaving the bond with him, nor shewed any reluctance in going with him to Mr Adair's 
house.
	He likewise said that Mrs Rudd took the whole on herself, begged them, 'for 
God's sake to have mercy on an innocent man;' and that she said no injury was 
intended to any person, and that all would be paid; and that she acknowledged 
delivering the bond to the prisoner.
	The counsel demanding if Mr Drummond and Mr Adair, after hearing what 
Mrs Rudd said, had not expressed themselves as considering the prisoner as her dupe; 
the answer was, 'We both expressed ourselves to that effect. A constable had been 
sent for, and we discharged him.'
	The identity of the bond was proved by Mr Wheatley, Clerk to Messieurs 
Drummond. The evidence of Mr Robert Drummond was not, in any very essential 
point, different from that of his brother. He deposed, that when Mrs Rudd had 
acknowledged that she forged the bond, he expressed his doubt, the hand-writing 
being so different from that of a woman, and said nothing would convince him of it 
but her shewing, on a piece of paper, that she could write that sort of hand. He said he 
did not mean to ensnare her, and would immediately throw the writing into the fire. 
Mrs Rudd instantly wrote William Adair, or part of the name, so very like the 
signature of the bond, that it satisfied him, and he burnt the paper. Robert Perreau then 
said, that 'he hoped that the information she had given sufficiently acquitted him;' but 
he was told that he had better not inquire into that; and on this occasion he shewed the 
first sign of anxiety.
	Sir Thomas Frankland deposed, that the prisoner brought him two bonds at 
different times, one to Daniel Perreau for L.6,000 and the other to himself (Robert) for 
L.5,300; that for L.5,300 on which he lent him L.4,000 was to be repaid on the 26th of 
March, with the three days grace; the other was due on the 8th of March.'
	Mr Wilson declared that he filled up the bond at the desire of the prisoner; and 
produced his instructions for so doing. He likewise acknowledged that he had filled 
up other bonds for the prisoner.
	That the handwriting at the bottom of the bond was not the handwriting of 
William Adair was proved by Scroope Ogilvie and James Adair, esquires. Mr James 
Adair was now questioned by counsel respecting a private interview he had with Mrs 
Rudd, but the court doubted if this might be allowed as evidence. After some 
observations made by the counsel for the prisoner, a letter was read, which he 
presumed had been sent him by William Adair, esquire, but which appeared to have 
been written by Mrs Rudd, but it was scarcely intelligible.
	The prisoner now proceeded to make his defence in the following terms:--
	'My Lords, and gentlemen of the jury; If I had been wanting in that fortitude 
which is the result of innocence, or had found any hesitation in submitting my 
proceedings to the strictest scrutiny, I need not at this day have stood before my 
country, or set my life upon the issue of a legal trial. Supported by the consciousness 
of my integrity, I have forced that transaction to light, which might else have been 
suppressed, and I have voluntarily sought that imprisonment which guilt never invites, 
and even innocence has been known to fly from; ardently looking forward to this 
hour; as the sure, though painful, means of vindicating a character, not distinguished, 
indeed, for its importance, but hitherto maintained without a blemish. There are many 
respectable witnesses at hand (and many more, I persuade myself, would be found if it 
had been necessary to summon them upon a point of such notoriety), who will inform 
your Lordships and the court, how I have appeared to them to act; what trust has been 
reposed in me, and what credit I had in their opinions, for my diligence, honesty, and 
punctuality. In truth, my Lords, I am bold to say that few men, in my line of life, have 
carried on their business with a fairer character, not many with better success. I have 
followed no pleasures, nor launched into any expences: there is not a man living who 
can charge me with neglect or dissipation. The honest profits of my trade have 
afforded me a comfortable support, and furnished me with the means of maintaining, 
in a decent sort, a worthy wife, and three promising children, upon whom I was 
labouring to bestow the properest education in my power: in short, we were as happy 
as affluence and innocence could make us, till this affliction came upon us by 
surprize, and I was made the dupe of a transaction from whose criminality, I call God, 
the searcher of all human hearts, to witness, I am now as free as I was at the day of 
my birth.
	'My Lords, and gentlemen of the jury, men who are unpractised in deceit will 
be apt to credit others for a sincerity which they themselves possess. The most 
undesigning characters have at all times been the dupe of craft and subtilty. A plain 
story, with the indulgence of the court, I will relate, which will furnish strong 
instances of credulity on one part, and at the same time will exhibit a train of such 
consummate artifices on the other, as are not to be equalled in the annals of iniquity, 
and which might have extorted an equal confidence from a much more enlightened 
understanding than I can claim.'
	Having said thus much, the unhappy man proceeded to relate a variety of 
circumstances relative to the imposition practised on him by Mrs Rudd, of which the 
following are the most remarkable.
	He said that she was constantly conversing about the Interest she had with Mr 
W. Adair; and that Mr Adair had, by his interest with the king, obtained the promise 
of a baronetage for Daniel Perreau, and was about procuring him a seat in parliament. 
That Mr Adair had promised to open a bank, and take the brothers Perreau into 
partnership with him: that the prisoner received many letters signed William Adair, 
which he had no doubt came from that gentleman; in which were promises of giving 
them a considerable part of his fortune during his life, and that he was to allow Daniel 
Perreau L.2,400 a year for his houshold expences, and L.600 a year for Mrs Rudd's 
pin-money. That Mr Daniel Perreau purchased a house in Harley Street for L.4,000, 
which money Mr William Adair was to give them. That, when Daniel Perreau was 
pressed by the person he bought the house of for the money, the prisoner understood 
that they applied to Mr William Adair, and that his answer was that he had lent the 
king L.70,000, and had purchased a house in Pall Mall at L.7,000, in which to carry 
on the banking business, and therefore could not spare the L.4,000 at that time.
	The prisoner now related a variety of circumstances, which would tempt an 
ingenuous mind to suppose him innocent, and that the guilt of the transaction rested 
with Mrs Rudd. The unfortunate man then proceeded in his defence in the following 
terms:
	'My lords, and gentlemen of the jury, I have now faithfully laid before you 
such circumstances as have occurred to my memory, as necessary for your 
information, in order as they happened during my acquaintance with Mrs Rudd, under 
the character of my brother's wife. Many have been the sufferers by artifices and 
impostors, but never man appeared, I believe, in this, or any other tribunal, upon 
whom so many engines were set at work to interest his credulity. It will not escape the 
notice of this splendid court, that my compassion was first engaged by the story of 
Mrs Rudd's sufferings, before my belief was invited to her representations. Let me 
have credit with you for yielding up by pity in the first instance, and you cannot 
wonder I did not withhold my credulity afterwards. It is in this natural, this necessary 
consequence, I rest my defence. I was led from error to error by such insensible 
degrees, that every step I took strengthened my infatuation. When Mr Drummond first 
hesitated at the hand-writing at the foot of the bond, if it did not so alarm me as to 
shake my belief in this artful woman, let it be considered that I had been prevailed 
upon to negotiate other bonds of hers, depositing them in the hands of bankers who 
had never spied any defect, or raised the least objection. These bonds have been 
regularly and punctually paid in due time. The letters sent to me, as if from William 
Adair, critically agreed with the hand-writing of the bond. Mr Adair did not keep 
money at Mr Drummond's; opportunities of comparing his handwriting for many 
years had not occurred, and the hesitation upon his part appeared to me no more than 
the exceptions and minute precautions of a banker, which could not so suddenly 
overturn the explicit belief that I had annexed to all that was told me in Harley Street. 
Can any greater proof be given than my own proposal to Mr Drummond of leaving 
the bond in his hands till he had satisfied his credulity? Can your lordships, or 
gentlemen of the jury, for a moment suspect, that any man would be guilty of such a 
crime, whose proceedings were so fair and open? that single circumstance, I am 
satisfied, will afford my total exculpation. The resort to Mr Adair was as easy to Mr 
Drummond, as to the books in his counting-house; it does not come within the bounds 
of common sense, much less does it fall within the possibility of guilt, that any man 
living should voluntarily, with his eyes open, take a step so directly and absolutely 
centering in his certain destruction. But this circumstance, strong as it is, is not all my 
ease. I bless God, the protector of innocence, that, in my defence, proofs arise upon 
proofs: the least of them, I trust, will be thought incompatible with guilt. It should 
seem impossible that a guilty person would propose to Mr Drummond to retain the 
bond for the satisfaction of his scruples; but that the same person should, after so long 
a time for consideration had passed after my leaving the bond, which was full twenty-
four hours, openly, and in the face of day, enter the shop of Mr Drummond, and 
demand if he had satisfied all his scruples, unless a man from mere desperation had 
been weary of his life, and sought a dissolution; this, I humbly apprehend, would be 
an absolute impossibility: but, my lords, and gentlemen of the jury, I had neither in 
my breast the principle of guilt, nor had I that desperate loathing of existence as 
should bring a shameful condemnation on my head. It is true I have invited this trial; 
hut it is equally true I have done it in the consciousness of my integrity, because I 
could not otherwise go through the remainder of my days with comfort and 
satisfaction, unless I had the verdict of my countrymen for my acquittal, and rested 
my innocence upon the purest testimony I could have on this side the grave. It is plain 
I had an opportunity of withdrawing myself. How many men are there, with the 
clearest intentions, yet from the apprehension of being made the talk of the public, 
and, above all, the dread of imprisonment, and the terror of a trial, would have thought 
themselves happy to have caught at any opportunity of saving themselves from such a 
series of distress? greater confidence can no man be in, of the integrity of his case, 
and the justice of his country. When it was found necessary to the designs of Mrs 
Rudd, that I and my family should be made the dupes of her connexions with the 
house of Adair, it may well be believed that nothing but the strongest interdictions 
could prevent my endeavours to obtain an interview. In fact, this point was laboured 
with consummate artifice, and nothing less than ruin to my brother and his affairs was 
denounced upon my breaking this injunction. It was part of the same error to believe 
her in this also. A respectable witness has told you, and I do not controvert his 
evidence, that my confidence in her assertion, and in the testimonials that she 
exhibited under the hand, as I believed, of Mr Adair, were such, in my mistaken 
judgement, as to be equal to the evidence of my own senses, pressed by the forms of 
business to say to Mr Drummond that I had seen Mr Adair myself; but I neither went 
to Mr Adair, nor disclosed those pressing motives which prevented me. No less free to 
confess my faults, than I am confident to assert my innocence, I seek no palliation for 
this circumstance, except my temptation and my failings; and I trust it will rather be a 
matter of surprize, that, in the course of a negotiation, through the whole of which I 
was acted upon by the most artful of impostors, that this only deviation was to be 
found: and yet this very circumstance carries with it a clearer conviction of my being 
the dupe of Mrs Rudd's intrigues, than any I have to offer in my defence; and if my 
subsequent proceedings, and the alacrity I shewed in going with Mr Drummond to Mr 
Adair, together with my conduct before this gentleman, is, as I apprehend it is, 
absolutely irreconcileable with a consciousness of guilt, the circumstances 
abovementioned will serve to shew with what a degree of credulity the artifices of 
Mrs Rudd had furnished me.
	'Upon the whole, if, in the above detail, no circumstances are discovered in 
which an innocent man, under the like delusion with myself, might not have acted as I 
have acted, and, at the same time, if there be very many particulars in which no guilty 
man would have conducted himself as I have conducted myself; I should be wanting 
in respect to your Lordships and the jury, if I doubted the justice of their verdict, and 
which is inseparable from it, my honourable accquittal.'
	The prisoner now proceeded to call his witnesses, the substance of whose 
evidence we shall give in the most concise manner. George Kinder deposed, that Mrs 
Perreau told him 'that she was a near relation of Mr James Adair; that he looked upon 
her as his child, had promised to make her fortune, and with that view had 
recommended her to Mr William Adair, a near relation, and intimate friend of his, 
who had promised to set her husband and the prisoner up in the banking business.' He 
likewise deposed, that the said Mr Daniel Perreau was to he made a baronet, and 
described how she would act when she became a lady. This witness deposed, that Mrs 
Rudd often pretended that Mr William Adair had called to see her, but that he never 
had seen that gentleman on any visit.
	John Moody, a livery-servant of Daniel Perreau, deposed, that his mistress 
wrote two very different hands, in one of which she wrote letters to his master, as 
from Mr William Adair, and in the other the ordinary business of the family; that the 
letters written in the name of William Adair were pretended to have been left in his 
master's absence; that his mistress ordered him to give them to his master, and pretend 
that Mr Adair had been with his mistress for a longer or shorter time, as circumstances 
required. This witness likewise proved that the hand at the foot of the bond and that of 
his mistress's fictitious writing were precisely the same: that she used different pens, 
ink, and paper, in writing her common and fictitious letters; and that she sometimes 
gave the witness half a crown, when he had delivered a letter to her satisfaction. He 
said he had seen her go two or three times to Mr J. Adair's, but never to William's; and 
that Mr J. Adair once visited his mistress on her lying in.
	Susanna Perreau (the prisoner's sister) deposed to the having seen a note 
delivered to Daniel Perreau, by Mrs Rudd, for L.9,000 drawn as by William Adair, on 
Mr Croft, the banker, in favour of Daniel Perreau.
	Elizabeth Perkins swore that, a week before the forgery was discovered, her 
mistress gave her a letter to bring back to her in a quarter of an hour, and say it was 
brought by Mr Coverley, who had been servant to Daniel Perreau: that she gave her 
mistress this letter, and her master instantly broke the seal.
	Daniel Perreau declared that the purport of this letter was 'that Mr Adair 
desired her to apply to his brother, the prisoner, to procure him L.5,000 upon his 
(Adair's) bond, in the same manner as he had done before; that Mr Adair was 
unwilling to have it appear that the money was raised for him, and therefore desired to 
have the bond lodged with some confidential friend, that would not require an 
assignment of it; that his brother, on being made acquainted with his request, shewed 
a vast deal of reluctancy, and said it was a very unpleasant work; but undertook it with 
a view of obliging Mr William Adair.'
	The counsel for the prosecution demanding, 'if he did not disclaim all 
knowledge of the affair before Mr Adair,' he said, he denied ever having seen the 
bond before, nor had he a perfect knowledge of it till he saw it in the hands of Mr 
Adair.
	David Caffady, who assisted Mr R. Perreau as an apothecary, deposed, that he 
lived much within the profits of his profession, and that it was reported he was going 
into the banking business.
	John Leigh, clerk to Sir John Fielding, swore to the prisoner's coming 
voluntarily to the office, and giving information that a forgery had been committed, 
on which Mrs Rudd was apprehended. Mr Leigh was asked, if she 'ever charged the 
prisoner with any knowledge of the transaction till the justices were hearing evidence 
to prove her confession of the fact.' Mr Leigh answered, that he did not recollect that 
circumstance, but that on her first examination she did not accuse the prisoner.
	Mr Perreau now called several persons of rank to his character. Lady Lyttleton 
being asked, if she thought him capable of such a crime, supposed she could have 
done it as soon herself. Sir John Moore, Sir John Chapman, General Rebow, Capt. 
Ellis, Capt. Burgoyne, and other gentlemen, spoke most highly to the character of the 
prisoner; yet the jury found him guilty.
	After this copious account of the trial of Robert, a very short abstract of that of 
the other brother may suffice, especially as that of Mrs Rudd is to follow.
	Daniel Perreau was indicted for forging and counterfeiting a bond, in the name 
of William Adair, for L.3,300, to defraud the said William Adair; and for uttering the 
same, knowing it to be forged, with intent to defraud Thomas Brooke, doctor of 
physic. Mr Scroope Ogilvie, who had been clerk to Mr William Adair nine or ten 
years, proved the forgery; and Dr Brooke proved the uttering of the forged bond.
	By way of defence, the prisoner declared that Mrs Rudd had given him the 
bond as a true one; that he believed it genuine, authentic and valid; and protested, by 
all his hopes of happiness in this life and in a future, that he had never conceived an 
idea of any thing so base as the defrauding any man of his property. He added, 'I 
adjure the Almighty so to assist me in my present dangerous situation, as I speak here 
before you.'
	Mr Daniel Perreau called several persons to prove the artifices which Mrs 
Rudd had practised to deceive him. Many persons of fortune and credit appeared to 
his character; and spoke of his conduct previous to the fatal event in terms of the 
highest approbation; but the jury hrought in a verdict of guilty; and the unfortunate 
brothers received sentence of death, but were not executed till January, 1776, because 
though Mrs Rudd had been admitted an evidence, yet the judges committed her as a 
principal, as will be seen more at large in the account of the subsequent trial.
	After conviction, the behaviour of the brothers was in every respect, proper for 
their unhappy situation. Great interest was made to obtain a pardon for them, 
particularly for Robert, in whose favour 78 bankers and merchants of London signed a 
petition to the king; the newspapers were filled with paragraphs, evidently written by 
disinterested persons, in favour of men whom they thought dupes to the designs of an 
artful woman: but all this availed nothing.
	On the day of execution the brothers were favoured with a mourning coach, 
and it was thought that 30,000 people attended. They were both dressed in mourning, 
and behaved with the most christian resolution. When they quitted the coach and got 
into the cart, they bowed respectfully to the sheriffs, who waved their hands as a final 
adieu.
	After the customary devotions, they crossed their hands, joining the four 
together, and in this manner were launched into eternity. They had not hung more 
than half a minute when their hands dropped asunder, and they appeared to die 
without pain.
	Each of them delivered a paper to the ordinary ot Newgate, which declared 
their innocence, and ascribed the blame of the whole transaction to the artifices of Mrs 
Rudd; and, indeed, thousands of people gave credit to their assertions, and a great 
majority of the public thought Robert wholly innocent.
	Daniel Perreau and Robert Perreau were executed at Tyburn on the 7th of 
January, 1776.
	On the Sunday following the bodies were carried from the house of Robert in 
Golden-square, and, after the usual solemnities, deposited in the vault of Saint 
Martin's Church. The coffins were covered with black cloth and nails, and a black 
plate on each, inscribing their names, the day of their death, and their ages (42), being 
twin brothers. They were carried in separate hearses, their friends attending in 
mourning coaches. The croud was so great, that the company could with difficulty get 
into the church; but at length the ceremony was decently performed, and the mob 
dispersed.
	A few reflections naturally arise on this occasion. There was great guilt 
somewhere, but where it lay the public will determine. One would imagine that, if 
Robert Perreau had been guilty, he would not have returned to Drummond's, nor went 
to Adair's, after being suspected. Charity will suppose that he fell a victim to his 
friendship for his brother, and lost his life through the telling of a lie; a strong 
argument for a strict adherence to truth in all we say.
	A very ingenious writer on this subject says, 'Upon a dispassionate review of 
the above trial, is it not possible that the plausible promises of an artful impostor, 
aided by the vain hope of being made rich and great by her pretended connexions, 
may have operated on a credulous, though otherwise sensible, mind; like as a gypsy's 
tale is frequently found to do on weak and unsuspecting women? If so, it will 
naturally account for the absurdity of the prisoner's pretending an acquaintance with 
Mr William Adair, whom he had never seen, and was strictly enjoined not to see, and 
for all the fallacious pretences that followed.'
	After this quotation, we shall say no more on this business, but proceed to the 
trial of Mrs Rudd.


MARGARET CAROLINE RUDD  
Tried for Forgery and acquitted

	On the 8th of December, 1775, Margaret Caroline Rudd was indicted for 
feloniously forging a bond, purporting to be signed by William Adair, and for 
feloniously uttering and publishing the same.
	Having been brought to the bar in September sessions, to plead to the said 
indictment, and her counsel contending that she ought not to be tried, as she had 
acknowledged herself an accomplice, and had been admitted an evidence by the 
magistrates; and the judges 'differing in opinion on the point of law: reference was 
had to the opinion of all the judges, that the matter might be finally settled, how far, 
under what circumstances, and in what manner, an accomplice, received as a witness, 
ought to be entitled to favour and mercy.'
	Mr justice Aston now addressed the prisoner, informing her that eleven of the 
judges had met (the chief justice of the Common Pleas being indisposed), 'and were 
unanimous in opinion, that, in cases not within any statute, an accomplice, who fully 
discloses the joint guilt of himself and his companions, and is admitted by justices of 
the peace as a witness, and who appears to have acted a fair and ingenuous part in the 
disclosure of all the circumstances of the cases in which he has been concerned, ought 
not to be prosecuted for the offences so by him confessed, but cannot by law plead 
this in bar of any indictment, but merely as an equitable claim to mercy from the 
crown: and nine of the judges were of opinion, that all the circumstances relative to 
this claim ought to be laid before the court, to enable the judges to exercise their 
discretion, whether the trial should proceed or not. With respect to the case before 
them, the same nine judges were of opinion, that if the matter stood singly upon the 
two informations of the prisoner, compared with the indictments against her, she 
ought to have been tried upon all, or any of them, for from her informations she is no 
accomplice: she exhibits a charge against Robert and Daniel Perreau, the first 
soliciting her to imitate the hand-writing of William Adair, the other forcing her to 
execute the forgery under the threat of death. Her two informations are contradictory: 
if she has suppressed the truth, she has no equitable claim to favour; and if she has 
told the truth, and the whole truth, she cannot be convicted. As to the indictments 
preferred against her by Sir Thomas Frankland, as her informations before the justices 
have no relation to his charges, she can claim no sort of advantage from these 
informations.'
	The trial was now proceeded on. The principal evidences were, the wife of 
Robert Perreau, and John Moody, a servant to Daniel. The first endeavoured to prove 
that the bond was published, the latter that it was forged. Sir Thomas Frankland 
proved that he had lent money on the bond. It was objected by the counsel for the 
prisoner, that Mrs Perreau was an incompetent witness, as she would be interested in 
the event; but the court over-ruled this objection.
	Mrs Perreau deposed, that, on the 24th of December, she saw Mrs Rudd 
deliver a bond to her husband, which he laid on the table while he brushed his coat; 
that it was for L.5,300 payable to Robert Perreau, and signed William Adair; and that 
it was witnessed in the names of Arthur Jones and Thomas Start, or Hart. Mrs Perreau 
being asked when she again saw the bond, said it was brought to her on the 8th of 
March (the day after her husband was convicted), when she selected it from other 
bonds delivered to him on the 24th of December. She made her mark on it and 
deposed that, when it was delivered to Mr Perreau, Mrs Rudd said, 'Mr Adair would 
be very much obliged to Mr Perreau to try to raise upon that bond the sum of L.4,000 
of Sir Thomas Frankland.'
	Serjeant Davy cross-examined Mrs Perreau. She acknowledged that till the 
24th of December she had never seen a bond in her life, and that, on her first sight of 
that in question, she had no suspicion 'that anything was wrong.' Being asked how she 
could recollect, at the distance of three months, the names, the sum, and the several 
circumstances respecting the bond, she said, 'I have the happiness to have a good 
memory.' Being asked if she had not examined the other bonds at the same time, she 
said, she had. It was demanded if her memory had retained the date or sum in any 
other paper produced to her. She replied, 'I do not remember.'
	John Moody, who had been servant with Mrs Rudd, deposed that his mistress 
wrote two different hands, a common and a feigned one; that in her common hand she 
noted the usual business of the house; but that, when she wrote letters as coming from 
William Adair, she wrote her feigned hand. A bond signed William Adair was now 
shewn him; and he said, 'the name appears to be the same hand the letters were wrote 
in, which I gave to Daniel Perreau, as coming from Mr William Adair, and which I 
saw Mrs Rudd write the directions of.' He was asked if he thought Mr Adair's name 
was of the prisoner's writing. He replied, 'I believe it is her hand-writing.' On his 
cross-examination he owned that he had never seen Mrs Rudd write Mr Adair's name.
	Thus stood the evidence. Sir Thomas Frankland proved the lending Robert 
Perreau L.4,000 on the bond in question, and that he had given him a draught for 
L.3,890, deducting the discount of L.5,000 formerly lent, with the discount of the 
money then borrowed, and L.15 10s. for a lottery ticket: that he had since received, 
among other things, jewels to the value of L.2,800, with women's wearing-apparel, 
&c., which might, for what he knew, be the prisoner's, but were sold to him by the 
two Perreaus by a bill of sale.
	Christian Hart deposed, that she had received a paper from the prisoner, 
tending to prove that there was a combination against her life to have been concerted 
at the house of this witness, by Sir Thomas Frankland and the friends of the Perreaus. 
Our readers will give what credit they please to this evidence.
	It was now demanded of Mrs Rudd, what she would say in her defence. She 
addressed the jury in a short, but sensible speech, and concluded in these words, 
'Gentlemen, ye are honest men, and I am safe in your hands.'
	The jury, after a short consultation, gave their verdict in the following 
singular, and perhaps unprecedented words: 'According to the evidence before us, 
NOT GUILTY.'
	The verdict was no sooner given, than Mrs Rudd quitted the court, and retired 
to the house of a friend at the west end of the town.
	There is a mystery in the story of the brothers Perreau, and Mrs Rudd, that no 
person but the latter can clear up. We are told that she is yet living; but we hope that, 
before she quits this world, she will discover the secrets of a transaction concerning 
which the public opinion has been so much divided. The Perreaus were guilty, or they 
were not; and it is only from Mrs Rudd the truth can be known. A declaration of the 
fact, if she was guilty, could not now affect her, as she was acquitted by the laws of 
her country.


PETER LE MAITRE  
Convicted, 7th of March, 1777, of robbing the Ashmolean Museum at 
Oxford

	WHEN Lord Thurlow was Chancellor of England some villains broke into his 
house, in Great Ormond Street, and stole thereout the Great Seal of England, which 
was never recovered, nor were the thieves known. We have heard also of a valuable 
diamond being stolen from the late Duke of Cumberland while going into the theatre 
in the Haymarket to see the bubble of the bottle-conjurer. It is also a fact that the 
Duke of Beaufort was robbed of his diamond Order of St George as he went to Court 
on a Royal birthday; but we have yet to tell that a museum was robbed of its curious 
medals.
	Peter Le Maitre was a French teacher at Oxford, and, being supposed a man of 
industry and good morals, he was indulged with free admission to the Ashmolean 
Museum. Thither he frequently went, and appeared very studious over the rare books 
and other valuable curiosities there deposited. He was left alone to his researches. At 
one of such times he stole two medals, and at another he secreted himself until the 
doors (without the keeper's suspecting anyone was there) were locked for the night. 
When all had retired he came from his lurking-place and broke open the cabinet 
where the medals were locked up, and possessed himself of its contents; then he 
wrenched a bar from a window and, unsuspected, made his escape.
	The college was thrown into the utmost consternation on finding their museum 
thus plundered. Some were suspected, but least of all Le Maitre, until it was 
discovered that he had privately left the city in a post-chaise, and that he had pledged 
two of the stolen medals to pay the post-boys. This left little doubt but that he was the 
ungrateful thief. He was advertised and described, and by this means apprehended in 
Ireland. He had first fled to Norwich, where he sold a variety of gold chains and 
various valuable coins. He was conveyed back to Oxford, in order to take his trial; and 
thereon it appeared that two of the stolen medals were found in a bureau in his 
lodgings of which he had the use, and two more were traced to the persons to whom 
he had sold them.
	He had little to offer in his defence and, on the clearest evidence, the jury 
found him guilty. Upon argument it was found that no punishment adequate to the 
crime could be inflicted; and Monsieur Le Maitre paid the penalty of his offence by 
five years' hard labour at ballast-heaving on the River Thames.


JAMES HILL  
Commonly called "John the Painter," an Incendiary, who aimed at the 
Destruction of the Nation. Executed at Portsmouth, 10th of March, 1777

  
Hill setting fire to the rope-house in Portsmouth Dockyard

	SO dangerous an individual to the kingdom as this man perhaps never existed, 
and whose confession and repentence can hardly soften the abhorrence felt on the 
contemplation of the extent of his crimes.
	James Hill, that universally detested character, during thc progress of his 
public ruin and desolation, had gone by several names–a plan generally adopted in a 
long course of villainy.
	He was once a journeyman to Mr Golden, a painter, at Titchfield, whence he 
procured the familiar title of "John the Painter." During a residence of some years in 
America he imbibed principals destructive to the interests of this country. Transported 
with party zeal, he formed the desperate resolution of committing a most atrocious 
crime, which he, in some degree, effected. About four o'clock in the afternoon of the 
7th of December, 1776, a fire broke out in the roundhouse of Portsmouth Dock, which 
entirely consumed that building. The fire was wholly attributed to accident; but on the 
5th of January three men, who were employed in the hemp-house, found a tin 
machine, somewhat resembling a tea-canister, and near the same spot a wooden box 
containing various kinds of com- bustibles. This circumstance being communicated to 
the commissioner of the dock, and circulated among the public, several vague and 
indefinite suspicions fell upon Hill, who had been lurking about the dockyard, whose 
surname was not known, but who had been distinguished by the appellation of "John 
the Painter."
	In consequence of advertisements in the newspapers, offering a reward of fifty 
pounds for apprehending him, he was secured at Odiham. On the 17th of February the 
prisoner was examined at Sir John Fielding's office, Bow Street, where John Baldwin, 
who exercised the trade of a painter in different parts of America, attended, by the 
direction of Lord Temple. The prisoner's discourse with Baldwin operated very 
materially towards his conviction, as it was brought in corroboration of a variety of 
evidence on the trial. He said he had taken a view of most of the dockyards and 
fortifications about England, with the number of ships in the navy, and observed their 
weight of metal and their number of men, and had been to France two or three times 
to inform Silas Dean, the American, of his discoveries; and that Dean gave him bills 
to the amount of three hundred pounds and letters of recommendation to a merchant 
in the City, which he had burned, lest they should lead to a discovery. He informed 
Baldwin that he had instructed a tinman's apprentice at Canterbury to make him a tin 
canister, which he carried to Portsmouth, where he hired a lodging at one Mrs 
Boxall's, and tried his preparations for setting fire to the dockyard.
	After recounting the manner of preparing matches and combustibles he said 
that on the 6th of the preceding December he got into the hemp-house, and having 
placed a candle in a wooden box, and a tin canister over it, and sprinkled turpentine 
over some of the hemp, he proceeded to the rope-house, where he placed a bottle of 
turpentine among a quantity of loose hemp, which he sprinkled with turpentine, and 
having laid matches, made of paper painted over with powdered charcoal and 
gunpowder diluted with water, and other combustibles about the place, he returned to 
his lodgings. These matches were so contrived as to continue burning for twenty-four 
hours, so that by cutting them into proper lengths he provided for his escape, knowing 
the precise time when the fire would reach the combustibles. He had hired lodgings in 
other two houses, to which he intended to set fire, that the engines might not be all 
employed together in quenching the conflagration at the dock.
	On the 7th he again went to the hemp-house, intending to set it on fire, which 
he, however, was unable to effect, owing to a halfpennyworth of common house 
matches that he had bought not being sufficiently dry. This disappointment, he said, 
rendered him exceedingly uneasy, and he went from the hemp-house to the rope-
house and set fire to the matches he had placed there. He said his uneasiness was 
increased because he could not return to his lodging, where he had left a bundle 
containing an "Ovid's Metamorphoses," a treatise on war and making fireworks, a 
"Justin," a pistol and a French passport, in which his real name was inserted.
	When he had set fire to the rope-house he proceeded toward London, deeply 
regretting his failure in attempting to fire the other building, and was strongly inclined 
to fire into the windows of the woman who had sold him the bad matches. He jumped 
into a cart, and gave the woman who drove it sixpence, to induce her to drive quickly, 
and when he had passed the sentinels observed the fire to have made so rapid a 
progress that the elements seemed in a blaze. He might have added, with Chaos to the 
Devil,
	"Havoc, and spoil, and ruin, are my gain."
	About ten the next morning he arrived at Kingston, where he remained until 
the dusk of the evening, and proceeded to London in the stage. Soon after his arrival 
he waited upon the gentleman in the city, and informed him of having been under the 
necessity of burning the bills upon, and letters to, him from Silas Dean. The 
gentleman behaved to him with shyness, but appointed to meet him at a coffee-house. 
At the coffee-house the gentleman seemed to be doubtful as to the story told by Hill, 
who therefore went away displeased, and as soon as he reached Hammersmith wrote 
to the merchant, saying he was going to Bristol, and that the "handy works he meant 
to perform there would be soon known to the public." A short time after his arrival at 
Bristol he set fire to several houses, which were all burning with great rapidity at one 
time, and the flames were not extingruished till damage was sustained to the amount 
of fifteen thousand pounds. He also set fire to combustibles that he had placed among 
a number of oil barrels upon the quay, but, happily, without effect. He related to 
Baldwin a great number of other circumstances, which were confirmed by a variety of 
evidence on his trial, which came on on Thursday, 6th of March, 1777, at Winchester 
Castle, when witnesses were produced from different parts of the country, who proved 
the whole of his confession to Baldwin to be true.
	When called upon for his defence, he complained of the newspapers and 
reports circulated to his prejudice; and observed that it was easy for such a man as 
Baldwin to feign the story he had told, and for a number of witnesses to be collected 
to give it support.
	He declared that God alone knew whether he was, or was not, the person who 
set fire to the dock-yard of his Britannic Majesty at Portsmouth; and begged it might 
be attended to, how far Baldwin ought to be credited: that if he had art enough, by 
lies, to insinuate anything out of him, his giving it to the knowledge of others was a 
breach of confidence; and if he would speak falsely to deceive him, he might also 
impose upon a jury. Upon this head the prisoner, with some ingenuity, dwelt for some 
time, and concluded by begging the judge to repeat his defence in proper terms to the 
jury, as he was not endowed with the gift of oratory, which they might easily 
perceive.
	The prisoner had no counsel.
	The jury, after a clear and impartial charge from Baron Hotham, in an instant 
agreed upon their verdict–Guilty.
	The learned judge then proceeded to pass the sentence of the law upon the 
prisoner. He told him that he had a long and fair trial; that he had been found guilty on 
the fullest and clearest evidence; that he could not have any thing to complain of in 
the candour of the Court, and that his crime was of a nature so enormous, that it was 
not in the power of words to aggravate it.
	The judge then said that he would not increase the prisoner's present unhappy 
moments, nor add to his distress, by dwelling upon the horrors attending the crime of 
which he was convicted; but was sorry to say that he felt, he feared, much more for 
him than his appearances bespoke him feeling for himself: yet would he earnestly 
recommend him to consider his case, and prepare to meet his God; for that he was 
bound–and it was by much the most disagreeable part of his duty–to pass the sentence 
of the law upon him; and he accordingly adjudged him to be hanged by the neck until 
he was dead. Further, he said, he thought it right to advise him, that, as his offence 
was of such a nature as might not only have proved fatal to every person present, but 
have involved the whole British nation in universal ruin, there was not any probability 
of his receiving mercy; and concluded by strongly urging the prisoner to repentance, 
and preparation for that pardon in the world to come which upon earth could not he 
granted to him.
	He was allowed for this purpose four days, and suffered at Portsmouth on 
March 10, 1777, in sight of the ruins which he had occasioned.
	His body, for several years, hung in chains on Blockhouse Point, on the 
opposite side of the harbour to the town.
	To these particulars we shall present his confession. On the morning after his 
condemnation he informed the turnkey, of his own spontaneous accord, that he felt an 
earnest desire of confessing his crime, and laying the history of his life before the 
public; and that, by discovering the whole of his unaccountable plots and treasonable 
practices, he might make some atonement for the wrongs he had done, of which he 
was now truly sensible and a repentant sinner.
	This request being made known to the Earl of Sandwich, then first Lord of the 
Admiralty, that nobleman directed Sir John Fielding to send down the proper persons 
to take and attest his confession.
	He began by saying that he was by birth a Scotchman, and had left Scotland in 
order to embark for America, where he resided the greater part of his life. The 
diabolical scheme of setting fire to the dock-yards and the shipping, he said, 
originated in his own wicked mind, on the very breaking out of the rebellion in 
America; and he had no peace until he proceeded to put it in practice. The more he 
thought of it, the more practicable it appeared; and with this wicked intent he crossed 
again the great Atlantic.
	He had no sooner landed than he began to take surveys of the different dock-
yards; which done, he went to Paris, and had several conferences with Silas Dean, the 
rebel minister to the court of France.
	Dean (as well indeed he might) was astonished at Hill's proposals, which 
embraced the destruction of the English dock-yards and the shipping.
	Finding the projector an enthusiast in the cause of America, and a man of 
daring spirit, he gradually listened to his schemes; and such was the enmity of the first 
Congress to the mother country, that Dean supplied this traitor with money, to enable 
him to carry them into execution; procured him a French passport; and gave him a 
letter of credit on a merchant in London, who, as we have already observed, escaped 
detection.
	He then confirmed the evidence given against him, and in particular his 
confessions to Baldwin. He was, he further declared, to have been rewarded by a 
commission in the American army for setting fire to the dock-yard at Plymouth; and 
fully admitted the justice of his sentence for a crime so heinous.


JOSEPH ARMSTRONG  
Convicted of Murder, but cheated the Gallows by hanging himself, 17th of 
March, 1777

	CAPTAIN A'COURT, a gentleman of fortune, intending to take his family on 
a visit to Cheltenham, hired Joseph Armstrong to attend them on such excursion, in 
the capacity of footman. It appears that his pertness and neglect soon disgusted Mrs 
A'Court, who requested her husband to discharge him. In revenge, he determined to 
poison her; in doing which he had the barbarity to keep her lingering in misery ten 
days, This he effected by putting arsenic, at different times, into her tea, of which, in 
that time, she expired in excruciating torment.
	This being fully proved on his trial, he was sentenced to death; but when the 
jailer went to his cell, to summon him to his fate, it appeared that he had contrived to 
hang himself but a short time before, thus robbing the gallows of its deserved due, and 
preventing the wholesome example of the public execution of such a villain.


DAVID BROWN DIGNUM  
Convicted, 5th of April, 1777, of fraudulently pretending to sell Places 
under Government, and sentenced to Hard Labour on the Thames

	THE first public complaint made against David Brown Dignum was at the 
public office in Bow Street, by Mr John Clarke, who deposed that between the 18th of 
June and the 8th of July, 1776, he paid Dignum one hundred pounds, two shillings 
and tenpence, for investing him with the office of Clerk of the Minutes in his 
Majesty's custom-house in Dublin; that the above-mentioned sum was paid at 
different times in cash and drafts, and that the drafts were duly honoured by the 
parties on whom they were drawn.
	Mr Clarke produced a stamped paper bearing the signature of Lord 
Weymouth, and countersigned Thomas Daw, which he deposed to have received from 
the prisoner as a legal warrant appointing him to the office in question. Mr Daw 
proved that the signature of Lord Weymouth and his own name were counterfeited; 
and it was evident that the seals had been taken from some instrument and affixed to 
the pretended warrant.
	Dignum was charged with a similar offence by Mr Brown, from whom he 
obtained one thousand pounds under pretence of causing him to be appointed writer in 
The London Gazette.
	Mr Brown produced a warrant bearing the similar marks of imposition with 
those exhibited in the former charge. On the 5th of April, 1777, Dignum was indicted 
at the Guildhall, Westminster, for defrauding Mr Clarke by means of a forged 
warrant. The jury found him guilty, without leaving the court. The magistrates 
hesitated a long time on what punishment should be inflicted on so atrocious an 
offender, and at length sentenced him to work five years on the River Thames.
	No time was now lost in conveying Dignum on board the ballast-lighter. 
Being possessed of plenty of money, and having high notions of gentility, he went to 
Woolwich in a post-chaise, with his negro servant behind, expecting that his money 
would procure every indulgence in his favour, and that his servant would still be 
admitted to attend him. But in this he was egregiously mistaken: the keepers of the 
lighter would not permit the negro to come on board, and Dignum was immediately 
put to the duty of the wheelbarrow.
	On Monday, the 5th of May, Dignum sent a forged draft for five hundred 
pounds for acceptance to Mr Drummond, banker, at Charing Cross, who, discovering 
the imposition, carried the publishers before Sir John Fielding; but they were 
discharged. It was then intended to procure a habeas corpus to remove Dignum to 
London for examination. This plan, however, was soon seen through; for on 
consideration it seemed evident that Dignum, by sending the forged draft from on 
board the lighter, preferred death to his situation; so that no further steps were taken in 
the affair, and Dignum remained a victim to the equitable laws of his country.


ANN MARROW  
Pilloried at Charing Cross, 22nd of July, 1777, for marrying three Women

	ANN MARROW was convicted at the Quarter Sessions for the city and liberty 
of Westminster, on the 5th of July, 177, of going in men's clothes and personating a 
man in marriage, with three different women (Mary Hamilton, the reader will 
remember, played off this trick fourteen times), and defrauding them of their money 
and effects. She was sentenced to be imprisoned three months, and during that time to 
stand once in and upon the pillory, at Charing Cross.
	Agreeably to the pillorying part of her sentence she was on the 22nd of the 
same month, placed in the pillory; and so great was the resentment of the spectators, 
particularly the female part, that they pelted her to such a degree that she lost the sight 
of both her eyes.


DR WILLIAM DODD 
Doctor of Divinity, Prebendary of Brecon, Chaplain-in-Ordinary to his 
Majesty, and Minister to the Magdalen Hospital. Executed at Tyburn, 27th 
of June, 1777, for Forgery

  
Dr Dodd at the place of execution

	THE character and the offence of this unfortunate divine are too well known to 
render it necessary that any introduction to the recital of the circumstances of his case 
should be attempted.
	Dr Dodd was the eldest son of a clergyman who held the vicarage of Bourne in 
the county of Lincoln, and was born at Bourne on the 29th of May, 1729; and after 
finishing his school education, was admitted a sizar of Clare Hall, Cambridge, in the 
year 1745, under the tuition of Mr John Courtail, afterwards Archdeacon of Lewes. At 
the University he acquired the approbation of his superiors by his close attention to 
his studies; and at the close of the year 1749 he took his first degree of bachelor of 
arts with considerable reputation, his name being included in the list of wranglers. It 
was not only in his academical pursuits, however, that he was emulous of distinction. 
Having a pleasing manner, a genteel address, and a lively imagination, he was equally 
celebrated for his accomplishments and his learning. In particular he was fond of the 
elegances of dress, and became, as he ludicrously expressed it, "a zealous votary of 
the god of Dancing," to whose service he dedicated much of that time which he could 
borrow from his more important avocations.
	The talent which he possessed was very early displayed to the public; and by 
the time he had attained the age of eighteen years, prompted by the desire of fame, 
and perhaps also to increase his income, he commenced author, in which character he 
began to obtain some degree of reputation. At this period of his life, young, 
thoughtless, volatile and inexperienced, he precipitately quitted the University, and, 
relying entirely upon his pen, removed to the metropolis, where he entered largely 
into the gaieties of the town, and followed every species of amusement with the most 
dangerous avidity. In this course, however, he did not continue long. To the surprise 
of his friends, who least suspected him of taking such a step, without fortune, and 
destitute of all means of supporting a family, he hastily united himself, on the 15th of 
April, 1751, in marriage with Miss Mary Perkins, daughter of one of the domestics of 
Sir John Dolben, a young lady then residing in Frith-street, Soho, who, though 
endowed with personal attractions, was deficient in those of birth and fortune. To a 
person circumstanced as Mr Dodd then was, no measure could be more imprudent, or 
apparently more ruinous and destructive to his future prospects in life. He did not, 
however, seem to view it in that light, but, with a degree of thoughtlessness natural to 
him, he immediately took and furnished a house in Wardour-street. His friends now 
began to be alarmed at his situation, and his father came to town in great distress upon 
the occasion; and in consequence of the advice which he gave him, his son quitted the 
house before the commencement of winter, and, urged by the same preceptor, he was 
induced to adopt a new plan for his future subsistence. On the 19th of October in the 
same year, he was ordained a deacon by the Bishop of Ely, at Caius College, 
Cambridge; And, with more prudence than he had ever shown before, he now devoted 
himself with great assiduity to the study and duties of his profession. In these pursuits 
he appeared so sincere, that he even renounced all his attention to his favourite 
objects–polite letters. At the end of his preface to the "Beauties of Shakspeare," 
published in this year, he says, "For my own part, better and more important things 
henceforth demand my attention; and I here with no small pleasure take leave of 
Shakspeare and the critics. As this work was begun and finished before I entered upon 
the sacred function in which I am now happily employed, let me trust this juvenile 
performance will prove no objection, since graver, and some very eminent, members 
of the Church have thought it no improper employ to comment upon, explain, and 
publish the works of their own country poets."
	The first service in which he was engaged as a clergyman was to assist the Rev 
Mr Wyatt, vicar of West Ham, as his curate thither he removed, and there he spent the 
happiest and more honourable moments of his life. His behaviour was proper, decent, 
and exemplary. It acquired for him the respect and secured for him the favour of his 
parishioners so far, that on the death of their lecturer, in 1752, he was chosen to 
succeed him. His abilities had at this time every opportunity of being shown to 
advantage; and his exertions were so properly directed, that he soon became a 
favourite and popular preacher. Those who were at this period of his life acquainted 
with his character and his talents, bear testimony to the indefatigable zeal which he 
exhibited in his ministry, and the success with which his efforts were crowned. The 
follies of his youth seemed entirely past, and his friends viewed the alteration in his 
conduct with the greatest satisfaction; while the world promised itself an example to 
hold out for the imitation of others. At this early season of his life, he entertained 
sentiments favourable towards the opinions of Mr Hutchinson, and he was suspected 
to incline towards Methodism; but subsequent consideration confirmed his belief in 
the doctrines of the Established Church. In 1752 he was selected lecturer of St James, 
Garlick-hill, which, two years afterwards, he exchanged for the same post at St Olave, 
Hartstreet; and about the same time he was appointed to preach Lady Moyer's lectures 
at St Paul's, where, from the visit of the three angels to Abraham, and other similar 
passages in the Old Testament, he endeavoured to prove the commonly-received 
doctrine of the Trinity. On the establishment of the Magdalen House in 1758, he was 
amongst the first and most active promoters of that excellent charitable institution, 
which derived great advantage from his zeal for its prosperity, and which, even up to 
the unhappy termination of his life, continued to be materially benefited by the 
exercise of his talents in its behalf. His exertions, however, were not confined to this 
hospital, but he was also one of the promoters of the Society for the Relief of Poor 
Debtors, and of the Humane Society for the recovery of persons apparently drowned.
	From the time he entered upon the service of the Church, Dr Dodd had resided 
at West Ham, and made up the deficiency in his income by superintending the 
education of a few young gentlemen who were placed under his care; an occupation 
for which he was well fitted. In 1759 he took the degree of Master of Arts, and in 
1763 he was appointed chaplain in ordinary to the King; and about the same time he 
became acquainted with Dr Squire, the bishop of St David's, who received him into 
his patronage, presented him to the prebend of Brecon, and recommended him to the 
Earl of Chesterfield as a proper person to be intrusted with the tuition of his successor 
in the title. The following year saw him chaplain to the King; and in 1766 he took the 
degree of Doctor of Laws at Cambridge.
	The expectations which he had long entertained of succeeding to the rectory of 
West Ham now appeared hopeless; and having given up all prospect of their being 
realised, after having been twice disappointed, he resigned his lectureship both there 
and in the City, and quitted the place–"a place," said he to Lord Chesterfield in a 
dedication to a sermon entitled "Popery inconsistent with the natural Rights of Men in 
general, and Englishmen in particular," published in 1768, "ever dear, and ever 
regretted by me, the loss of which, truly affecting to my mind (for there I was useful, 
and there I trust I was loved), nothing but your lordship's friendship and connection 
could have counterbalanced." The "Thoughts in Prison" of the unfortunate gentleman 
contain a passage of a similar tendency, from which it maybe inferred that he was 
compelled to quit this, his favourite residence; a circumstance which he pathetically 
laments, and probably with great reason, as the first step to that change in his situation 
which led him insensibly to his last fatal catastrophe.
	On his quitting West Ham, he removed to a house in Southampton-row; and at 
the same time he launched out into scenes of expense, which his income, although 
now by no means a small one, was inadequate to support. He provided himself with a 
country-house at Ealing, and exchanged his chariot for a coach, in order to 
accommodate his pupils, who, besides his noble charge, were in general persons of 
family and fortune. About the same time it was his misfortune to obtain a prize of 
1000l. in the state lottery; and elated with this success, he engaged with a builder in a 
plan to erect a chapel near the palace of the Queen, from whom it took its name. He 
entered also into a like partnership at Charlotte Chapel, Bloomsbury, and both these 
schemes were for some time very beneficial to him, though their proceeds were much 
inferior to his expensive habits of living. His expectations from the former of these 
undertakings were extremely sanguine. It is reported that in fitting up his chapel near 
the palace, he flattered himself with the hopes of having some young royal auditors, 
and in that expectation assigned a particular pew or gallery for the heir-apparent. But 
in this, as in many other of his views, he was disappointed.
	In the year 1772 he obtained the rectory of Hockliffe, in Bedfordshire, the first 
cure of souls he ever had. With this also he held time vicarage of Chalgrove; and the 
two were soon after consolidated An accident happened about this time, from which 
he narrowly escaped with his life. Re turning from Barnet, he was stopped near St 
Pancras by a highwayman, who discharged a pistol into the carriage, which, happily, 
only broke the glass. For this fact the delinquent was tried, and, on Mrs Dodd's 
evidence, convicted and hanged. Early in the next year Lord Chesterfield died, and 
was succeeded by Dr Dodd's pupil, who appointed his preceptor to be his chaplain.
	At this period Dr Dodd appears to have been in the zenith of his popularity and 
reputation. Beloved and respected by all orders of people, he would have reached, in 
all probability, the situation which was the object of his wishes, had he possessed 
patience enough to have waited for it, and prudence sufficient to keep himself out of 
those difficulties which might prove fatal to his integrity. But the habits of dissipation 
and expense had acquired too great an influence over him; and he had by their means 
involved himself in considerable debts. To extricate himself from them, he was 
tempted to an act which entirely cut off every hope which he could entertain of rising 
in his profession, and totally ruined him in the opinion of the world. On the. 
translation of Bishop Moss, in February, 1774, to the see of Bath and Wells, the 
valuable rectory of St George, Hanover-square, fell to the disposal of the Crown, by 
virtue of the King's prerogative. Whether from the suggestion of his own mind, or 
from the persuasion of some friend, is uncertain; but on this occasion he took a step of 
all others the most wild and extravagant, and the least likely to be attended with 
success. He caused an anonymous letter to be sent to Lady Apsley, offering the sum 
of three thousand pounds if by her means he could be presented to the living. The 
letter was immediately communicated to the chancellor, and, after being traced to the 
writer, was laid before his majesty. The insult offered to so high an officer by the 
proposal was followed by instant punishment. Dr Dodd's name was ordered to be 
struck out of the list of chaplains. The press teemed with satire and invective; he was 
abused and ridiculed in time papers of the day; and to crown the whole, the 
transaction became a subject of entertainment in one of Mr Foote's pieces at the 
Haymarket.
	As no explanation could justify so absurd a measure, so no apology could 
palliate it. An evasive letter in the newspapers, promising a justification at a future 
day, was treated with universal contempt; and stung with remorse, and feelingly alive 
to the disgrace he had brought on himself, he hastily quitted the place where neglect 
and insult only attended him, and going to Geneva to his late pupil, he was presented 
by him with the living of Winge in Buckinghamshire, which he held with that of 
Hockliffe, by virtue of a dispensation. Though encumbered with debts, he might still 
have retrieved his circumstances, if not his character, had he attended to the dictates 
of prudence; but his extravagance continued undiminished, and drove him to pursue 
schemes which overwhelmed him with additional infamy. He became the editor of a 
newspaper; and it is said that he even attempted, by means of a commission of 
bankruptcy, to clear himself from his debts; an attempt in which, how ever, he failed. 
From this period it would appear that every step which he took led to complete his 
ruin. In the summer of 1776 he went to France, and there, with little regard to decency 
or the observances proper to be maintained by a minister of religion, he paraded 
himself in a phaeton at the races on the plains of Sablons, dressed in all the foppery of 
the kingdom in which he was temporarily resident. At the beginning of winter he 
returned to London, and continued there to exercise the duties of his profession until 
the very moment of his committing the offence for which his life was subsequently 
forfeited to the offended laws of his country. On the 2nd of February, 1777, he 
preached his last sermon at the Magdalen Chapel, where he was still heard with 
approbation and pleasure; and on the 4th of the same month he forged a bond, 
purporting to be that of his late pupil, the Earl of Chesterfield, for 4200l. Pressed by 
creditors, and unable any longer to meet their demands or soothe their importunities, 
he was driven to commit this crime, as the only expedient to which he could have 
recourse to aid him in his escape from his difficulties. The method which he adopted 
in completing the forgery was very remarkable. He pretended that the noble earl had 
urgent occasion to borrow 4000l., but that he did not choose to be his own agent. and 
he begged that the matter therefore might be secretly and expeditiously conducted. A 
person named Lewis Robertson was the person whom he employed as broker to 
negotiate the transaction and he presented to him a bond, not filled up or signed, that 
he might find a person ready to advance the sum required, as he directed him to say, 
to a young nobleman who had lately come of age. Several applications were made by 
Robertson without success, the persons refusing because they were not to be present 
when the bond was executed; but at length the agent, confiding in the honour and 
integrity of his employer, went to Messrs Fletcher and Peach, who agreed to advance 
the money. Mr Robertson then carried the bond back to the doctor, in order that it 
might be filled up and executed; and on the following day it was returned, bearing the 
signature of the Earl of Chesterfield, and attested by the doctor himself. Mr 
Robertson, knowing that Mr Fletcher was a man who required all legal observances to 
be attended to, and that he would therefore object to the bond as bearing the name of 
one witness only, put his name under that of Dr Dodd, and in that state he carried the 
bond to him, and received from him the sum of 4000l. in return, which he paid over to 
his employer.
	The bond was subsequently produced to the Earl of Chesterfield; but 
immediately on his seeing it, he disowned it, and expressed himself at a loss to know 
by whom such a forgery upon him could have been committed. It was evident, 
however, that the supposed attesting witnesses must, if. their signatures were genuine, 
he acquainted with its author; and Mr Manly, his lordship's agent, went directly to 
consult Mr Fletcher upon the best course to be taken; and after some deliberation, Mr 
Fletcher, a Mr Innis, and Mr Manly proceeded to Guildhall to prefer an information 
with regard to the forgery against Dr Dodd and Mr Robertson. Mr Robertson was 
without difficulty secured; and then Fletcher, Innis, and Manly, accompanied by two 
of the lord mayor's officers, went to the house of Dr Dodd in Argyle-street, whither he 
had recently removed.
	Upon their explaining the nature of their business to him, he appeared much 
struck and affected, and declared his willingness to make any reparation in his power. 
Mr Manly told him that his instantly returning the money was the only mode which 
remained for him to save himself; and he immediately gave up six notes of 500l. each, 
making 3000l. and he drew on his hanker for 500l. more. The broker then returned 
100l. and the doctor gave a second draft on his banker for 200l., and a judgment on 
his goods for the remaining 400l. All this was done by the doctor in full reliance on 
the honour of the parties that the bond should be returned to him cancelled; but, 
notwithstanding this restitution, he was taken before the lord mayor, and charged with 
the forgery. The doctor declared that he had no intention to defraud Lord Chesterfield 
or the gentlemen who advanced the money, and hoped that the satisfaction he had 
made in returning it would atone for his offence. He was pressed, he said, exceedingly 
for 300l. to pay some bills due to tradesmen, and took this step as a temporary 
resource, and would have repaid the money in half a year. "My Lord Chesterfield," 
added he, cannot but have some tenderness for me as my pupil. I love him, and he 
knows it. There is no body wishes to prosecute. I am sure my Lord Chesterfield don't 
want my life,–I hope he will show clemency to me, Mercy should triumph over 
justice." Clemency, however, was denied; and the doctor was committed to the 
Compter in preparation for his trial. On the 19th of February, Dr Dodd, being put to 
the bar at the Old Bailey, addressed the Court in the following. words:--
	"My. lords,-- I am informed that the bill of indictment against me has been 
found on the evidence of Mr Robertson, who was taken out of Newgate, without any 
authority or leave from your lordships, for the purpose of procuring the bill to be 
found. Mr Robertson is a subscribing witness to the bond, and, as I conceive, would 
he swearing to exculpate himself if he should be admitted as a witness against me; and 
as the bill has been found upon his evidence, which was surreptitiously obtained, I 
submit to your lordships that I ought not to be compelled to plead on this indictment; 
and upon this question I beg to he heard by my counsel. I beg leave also further to 
observe to your lordships, that the gentlemen on the other side of the question are 
bound over to prosecute Mr Robertson."
	Previously to the arguments of the counsel, an order which had been 
surreptitiously obtained from an officer of the court, dated Wednesday, February 19, 
and directed to the keeper of Newgate, commanding him to carry Lewis Robertson to 
Hicks's Hall, in order to his giving evidence before the grand inquest on the present 
bill of indictment–as well as a resolution of the Court, reprobating the said order–and 
also the recognizance entered into by Mr Manly, Mr Peach, Mr Tunis, and the Right 
Hon. the Earl of Chesterfield to prosecute and give evidence against Dr Dodd and 
Lewis Robertson for forgery–were ordered to he read; and the clerk of the arraigns 
was directed to inform the Court whether the name "Lewis Robertson" was indorsed 
as a witness on the back of the indictment, which was answered in the affirmative.
	The counsel now proceeded in their arguments for and against the prisoner. Mr 
Howarth, one of Dr Dodd's advocates, contended that no person ought to plead or 
answer to an indictment, if it appeared upon the face of that indictment that the 
evidence upon which the bill was found was not legal, or competent to have been 
adduced before the grand jury.
	Mr Cooper and Mr Bailer, on the same side pursued the same line of argument 
with equal ingenuity, and expressed a hope that Dr Dodd would not be called upon to 
plead to an indictment found upon such evidence as had been pointed out but that the 
indictment would be ordered to be quashed.
	The counsel for the prosecution advanced various arguments in opposition to 
those employed on the other side, and the learned judge having taken note of the 
objection, it was agreed that the trial should proceed, the question of the competency 
of Mr Robertson as a witness being reserved for the consideration of the twelve 
judges.
	The doctor was then arraigned upon the indictment which charged him in the 
usual terms with the forgery upon the Earl of Chesterfield; and the evidence in proof 
of the facts above stated having been given, the Court called upon the prisoner for his 
defence. He addressed the Court and jury in the following terms
	"My lords and gentlemen of the jury,–Upon the evidence which has this day 
been produced against me, I find it very difficult to address your lordships. There is 
no man in the world who has a deeper sense of the heinous nature of the crime for 
which I stand indicted than myself: I view it, my lords, in all its extent of malignancy 
towards a commercial state like ours; but, my lords, I humbly apprehend, though no 
lawyer, that the moral turpitude and malignancy of the crime always, both in the eye 
of the law and of religion, consists in the intention. I am informed, my lords, that the 
act of parliament on this head runs perpetually in this style, with an intention to 
defraud. Such an intention, my lords and gentlemen of the jury, I believe, has not been 
attempted to be proved upon me, and the consequences that have happened, which 
have appeared before you, sufficiently prove that a perfect and ample restitution has 
been made. I leave it, my lords, to you and the gentlemen of the jury to consider, that 
if an unhappy man ever deviates from the law of right, yet if in the single first 
moment of recollection he does all that he can to make a full and perfect amends, 
what, my lords and gentlemen of the jury, can God and man desire further? My lords, 
there are a variety of little circumstances too tedious to trouble you with, with respect 
to this matter. Were I to give loose to my feelings, I have many things to say which I 
am sure you would feel with respect to me; but as it appears on all hands, that no 
injury, intentional or real, has been done to any man living, I hope that you will 
consider the case in its true state of clemency. I must observe to your lordships, that 
though I have met with all candour in this court, yet I have been pursued with 
excessive cruelty; I have been prosecuted after the most express engagements, after 
the most solemn assurances, after the most delusive, soothing arguments of Mr 
Manly; I have been prosecuted with a cruelty scarcely to be paralleled. A person 
avowedly criminal in the same indictment as myself has been brought forth as a 
capital witness against me; a fact, I believe, totally unexampled. My lords, oppressed 
as I am with infamy, loaded as I am with distress, sunk under this cruel prosecution, 
your lordships and the gentlemen of the jury cannot think life a matter of any value to 
me. No, my lords, I solemnly protest, that death of all blessings would be the most 
pleasant to me after this pain. I have yet, my lords, ties which call upon me–ties which 
render me desirous even to continue this miserable existence. I have a wife, my lords, 
who, for twenty-seven years, has lived an unparalleled example of conjugal 
attachment and fidelity, and whose behaviour during this trying scene would draw 
tears of approbation, I am sure, even from the most inhuman. My lords, I have 
creditors, honest men, who will lose much by my death. I hope, for the sake of justice 
towards them, some mercy will be shown to me. If, upon the whole, these 
considerations at all avail with you–if, upon the most impartial survey of matters, not 
the slightest intention of injury can appear to any one–(and I solemnly declare it was 
in my power to replace it in three months–of this I assured Mr Robertson frequently, 
and had his solemn assurances that no man should be privy to it but Mr Fletcher and 
himself)–and if no injury was done to any man upon earth, I then hope, I trust, I fully 
confide myself in the tenderness, humanity, and protection, of my country."
	The jury retired for about ten minutes, and then returned with a verdict that 
"the prisoner was guilty;" but at the same time presented a petition, humbly 
recommending the doctor to the royal mercy.
	It was afterwards declared that upon the reserved point, the opinion of the 
judges was, that he had been legally convicted. On the last day of the sessions Dr 
Dodd was again put to the bar to receive judgment. The clerk of the arraigns then 
addressed him, saying,
	"Dr William Dodd, you stand convicted of forgery, what have you to say why 
this court should not give you judgment to die, according to law?"
	In reply Dr Dodd addressed the court as follows:--
	"My lord,–I now stand before you a dreadful example of human infirmity. I 
entered upon public life with the expectations common to young men whose 
education has been liberal, and whose abilities have been flattered; and, when I 
became a clergyman, I considered myself as not impairing the dignity of the order. I 
was not an idle, nor, I hope, a useless minister: I taught the truths of Christianity with 
the zeal of conviction and the authority of innocence.
	"My labours were approved, my pulpit became popular, and I have reason to 
believe that, of those who heard me, some have been preserved from sin, and some 
have been reclaimed. Condescend, my lord, to think, if these considerations aggravate 
my crime, how much they must embitter my punishment! Being distinguished and 
elevated by the confidence of mankind, I had too much confidence in myself; and, 
thinking my integrity–what others thought it–established in sincerity, and fortified by 
religion, I did not consider the danger of vanity, nor suspect the deceitfulness of mine 
own heart. The day of conflict came, in which temptation seized and overwhelmed 
me! I committed the crime, which I entreat your lordship to believe that my 
conscience hourly represents to me in its full bulk of mischief and malignity. Many 
have been overpowered by temptation, who are now among the penitent in heaven! 
To an act now waiting the decision of vindictive justice I will now presume to oppose 
the counterbalance of almost thirty years (a great part of the life of man) passed in 
exciting and exercising charity–in relieving such distresses as I now feel–in 
administering those consolations which I now want. I will not otherwise extenuate my 
offence than by declaring, what I hope will appear to many, and what many 
circumstances make probable, that I did not intend finally to defraud: nor will it 
become me to apportion my own punishment, by alleging that my sufferings have 
been not much less than my guilt; I have fallen from reputation which ought to have 
made me cautious, and from a fortune which ought to have given me content. I am 
sunk at once into poverty and scorn; my name and my crime fill the ballads in the 
streets; the sport of the thoughtless, and the triumph of the wicked! It may seem 
strange, my lord, that, remembering what I have lately been, I should still wish to 
continue what I am! but contempt of death, how speciously soever it may mingle with 
human virtues, has nothing in it suitable to Christian penitence. Many motives impel 
me to beg earnestly for life. I feel the natural horror of a violent death, the universal 
dread of untimely dissolution. I am desirous to recompense the injury I have done to 
the clergy, to the world, and to religion, and to efface the scandal of my crime, by the 
example of my repentance: but, above all, I wish to die with thoughts more composed, 
and calmer preparation. The gloom and confusion of a prison, the anxiety of a trial, 
the horrors of suspense, and the inevitable vicissitudes of passion, leave not the mind 
in a due disposition for the holy exercises of prayer and self-examination. Let not a 
little life be denied me, in which I may, by meditation and contrition, prepare myself 
to stand at the tribunal of Omnipotence, and support the presence of that Judge, who 
shall distribute to all according to their works: who will receive and pardon the 
repenting sinner, and from whom the merciful shall obtain mercy! For these reasons, 
my lords, amidst shame and misery, I yet wish to live; and most humbly implore, that 
I may be recommended by your lordship to the clemency of his majesty."
	Here he sunk down overcome with mental agony, and some time elapsed 
before he was sufficiently recovered to hear the dreadful sentence of the law, which 
the Recorder pronounced upon him in the following words:
	"Dr William Dodd, 
"You have been convicted of the offence of publishing a forged and countefeit bond, 
knowing it to be forged and counterfeited; and you have had the advantage which the 
laws of this country afford to every man in your situation, a fair, an impartial, and an 
attentive trial. The jury, to whose justice you appealed, have found you guilty; their 
verdict has undergone the consideration of the learned judges, and they found no 
ground to impeach the justice of that verdict; you yourself have admitted the justice of 
it; and now the very painful duty that the necessity of the law imposes upon the court, 
to pronounce the sentence of that law against you, remains only to be performed. You 
appear to entertain a very proper sense of the enormity of the offence which you have 
committed; you appear, too, in a state of contrition of mind, and I, doubt not, have 
duly reflected how far the dangerous tendency of the offence you have been guilty of 
is increased by the influence of example, in being committed by a person of your 
character, and of the sacred function of which you are a member. These sentiments 
seem to be yours; I would wish to cultivate such sentiments; but I would not wish to 
add to the anguish of your mind by dwelling upon your situation. Your application for 
mercy must be made elsewhere; it would be cruel in the court to flatter you; there is a 
power of dispensing mercy, where you may apply. Your own good sense, and the 
contrition you express, will induce you to lessen the influence of the example by 
publishing your hearty and sincere detestation of the offence of which you are 
convicted; and will show you that to attempt to palliate or extenuate it, would indeed 
add to the influence of a crime of this kind being committed by a person of your 
character and known abilities. I would therefore warn you against any thing of that 
kind. Now, having said this, I am obliged to pronounce the sentence of the law, which 
is–That you, Doctor William Dodd, be carried from hence to the place from whence 
you came; that from thence you be carried to the place of execution, and that there 
you be hanged by the neck until you are dead." To this Dr Dodd replied, " Lord Jesus, 
receive my soul I " and was immediately conveyed from the bar.
	Great exertions were now made to save Dr Dodd. The newspapers were filled 
with letters and paragraphs in his favour; individuals of all ranks exerted themselves 
in his behalf; the members of several charities which had been benefited by him 
joined in application to the throne for mercy; parish officers went in mourning from 
house to house, to procure subscriptions to a petition to the king; and this petition, 
which, with the names of nearly thirty thousand persons, filled twenty-three sheets of 
parchment. was actually presented. Even the lord mayor and common council went in 
a body to St James's, to solicit mercy for the convict. These were, however, of no 
avail. On the 15th of June the privy council assembled, and deliberated on the cases of 
the several prisoners then under condemnation; and in the end a warrant was ordered 
to be made out for the execution of Dr Dodd, with two others (one of whom was 
afterwards reprieved), on the 27th of the same month.
	Having been flattered with the hopes of a pardon, he appeared to be much 
shocked at the intimation of his approaching destiny; but resumed in a short time a 
degree of fortitude sufficient to enable him to pass through the last scene of his life 
with firmness and decency. On the 26th he took leave of his wife and some friends, 
and he afterwards declared himself ready to atone for the offence he had given to the 
world. His deportment was meek, humble, and devout, expressive of resignation and 
contrition, and calculated to inspire sentiments of respect for his person, and concern 
for his unhappy fate.
	He was attended to the fatal spot, in a mourning-coach, by the Rev Mr Villette, 
Ordinary of Newgate, and the Rev Mr Dobey. Another criminal, named John Harris, 
was executed at the same time. It is impossible to give an idea of the immense crowds 
of people that thronged the streets from Newgate to Tyburn. When the prisoners 
arrived at the fatal tree, and were placed in the cart, Dr Dodd exhorted his fellow 
sufferer in so generous a manner, as testified that he had not forgotten his duty as a 
clergyman; and he was also very fervent in the exercise of his own devotions. Just 
before he was turned off, he was observed to whisper to the executioner; and, 
although we have not the means of ascertaining the precise purport of his remark, it is 
pretty obvious from the fact, that as soon as the cart had been drawn away from the 
gibbet, he ran immediately under the scaffold and took hold of the doctor's legs as if 
to steady his body, and the unfortunate gentleman appeared to die without pain.
	Of his behaviour before execution a particular account was given by Mr 
Villette, Ordinary of Newgate, in the following terms:--
	"On the morning of his death I went to him, with the Rev Mr Dobey, Chaplain 
of the Magdalen, whom he desired to attend him to the place of execution. He 
appeared composed; and when I asked him how he had been supported, he said that 
he had had some comfortable sleep, by which he should be the better enabled to 
perform his duty, 
	"As we went from his room, in our way to the chapel, we were joined by his 
friend, who had spent the foregoing evening with him, and also by another clergyman. 
When we were in the vestry adjoining the chapel, he exhorted his fellow-sufferer, who 
had attempted to destroy himself, but had been prevented by the vigilance of the 
keeper. He spoke to him with great tenderness and emotion of heart, entreating him to 
consider that he had but a short time to live, and that it was highly necessary that he, 
as well as himself, made good use of their time, implored pardon of God under a deep 
sense of sin, and looked to that Lord by Whose merits alone sinners can he saved. He 
desired me to call in the other gentlemen, who likewise assisted him to move the heart 
of the poor youth; but the Doctor's words were the most pathetic and effectual. He 
lifted up his hands, and cried out 'Oh I Lord Jesus, have mercy upon us! and give, oh! 
give unto him, my fellow sinner, that, as we suffer together, we may go together to 
Heaven!' His conversation to this poor youth was so moving, that tears flowed from 
the eyes of all present.
	"When we went into the chapel to prayer and the holy communion, true 
contrition and warmth of devotion appeared evident in him throughout the whole 
service. After it was ended, he again addressed himself to Harris in the most moving 
and persuasive manner, and not without effect; for he declared that he was glad that 
he had not made away with himself, and said he was easier, and hoped he should now 
go to Heaven. The Doctor told him how Christ had suffered for them; and that he 
himself was a greater sinner than he, as he had sinned against light and conviction, 
and there fore his guilt was greater; and that as he was confident that mercy was 
shown to his soul, so he should look to Christ and trust in His merits.
	"He prayed God to bless his friends who were present with him, and to give 
his blessing to all his brethren the clergy; that he would pour out His spirit upon them, 
and make them true ministers of Jesus Christ, and that they might follow the divine 
precepts of their heavenly Master. Turning to one who stood near him, he stretched 
out his hand, and said, 'Now, my dear friend, speculation is at an end; all must be real! 
What poor ignorant beings we are!' He prayed for the Magdalens, and wished they 
were there, to sing for him the 23d Psalm.
	"After he had waited some time for the officers, he asked what o'clock it was; 
and, being told that it was half an hour after eight, he said 'I wish they were ready, for 
I long to be gone.' He requested of his friends, who were in tears about him, to pray 
for him; to which he was answered, by two of them, 'We pray more than language can 
utter.' He replied, ' I believe it.'
	"At length he was summoned to go down into a part of the yard which is 
enclosed from the rest of the gaol, where the two unhappy convicts and the friends of 
the doctor were alone. On his seeing two prisoners looking out of the windows, he 
went to them, and exhorted them so pathetically, that they both wept abundantly. He 
said once, 'I am now a spectacle to men, and shall soon he a spectacle to angels.'
	"Just before the sheriff's officers came with the halters, one who was walking 
with him told him that there was yet a little ceremony he must pass through before he 
went out. He asked 'What is that?'–'You will be bound.' He looked up, and said, 'Yet I 
am free; my freedom is there,' pointing upwards. He bore it with Christian patience, 
and beyond what might have been expected; and, when the men offered to excuse 
tying his hands, he desired them to do their duty, and thanked them for their kindness. 
After he was bound, I offered to assist him with my arm in conducting him through 
the yard, where several people were assembled to see him; but he replied, with 
seeming pleasure,' No, I am as firm as a rock.' As he passed along the yard, the 
spectators and prisoners wept and bemoaned him; and he, in return, prayed God to 
bless them.
	"On the way to execution he consoled himself in reflecting and speaking on 
what Christ had suffered for him; lamented the depravity of human nature, which 
made sanguinary laws necessary; and said he could gladly have died in the prison-
yard, as being led out to public execution tended greatly to distress him. He desired 
me to read to him the 51st Psalm, and also pointed out an admirable penitential prayer 
from ' Rossell's Prisoner's Director.' He prayed again for the king, and likewise for the 
people.
	"When he came near the street where he formerly dwelt he was much affected, 
and wept. He said, probably his tears would seem to be the effect of cowardice, but it 
was a weakness he could not well help; and added, he hoped he was going to a better 
home.
	"When he arrived at the gallows he ascended the cart, and spoke to his fellow-
sufferer. He then prayed, not only for himself, but also for his wife, and the 
unfortunate youth that suffered with him; and, declaring that he died in the true faith 
of the Gospel of Christ, in perfect love and charity with all mankind, and with 
thankfulness to his friends, he was launched into eternity, imploring mercy for his 
soul for the sake of his blessed Redeemer."
	A paper, of which the following is a copy, had been delivered by Dr Dodd to 
Mr Villette to be read at the place of execution, but was omitted as it seemed 
impossible to make all present aware of its contents.
	"To the words of dying men regard has always been paid. I am brought hither 
to suffer for an act of fraud, of which I confess myself guilty with shame, such as my 
former state of life naturally produces, and I hope with such sorrow as He, to Whom 
the heart is known, will not disregard. I repent that I have violated the laws by which 
peace and confidence are established among men; I repent that I have attempted to 
injure my fellow creatures; and I repent that I have brought disgrace upon my order, 
and discredit upon religion: but my offences against God are without number, and can 
admit only of general confession and general repentance.. Grant, Almighty God, for 
the sake of Jesus Christ, that my repentance, however late, however imperfect, may 
not be in vain !
	"The little good that now remains in my power is to warn others against those 
temptations by which I have been seduced. I have always sinned against conviction; 
my principles have never been shaken; I have always considered the Christian religion 
as a revelation from God, and its Divine Author as the Saviour of the world; but the 
laws of God, though never disowned by me, have often been forgotten. I was led 
astray from religious strictness by the delusion of show and the delights of 
voluptuousness. I never knew or attended to the calls of frugality, or the needful 
minuteness of painful economy. Vanity and pleasure, into which I plunged, required 
expense disproportionate to my income; expense brought distress upon me; and 
distress, importunate distress, urged me to temporary fraud.
	"For this fraud I am to die; and I die declaring, in the most solemn manner, 
that, however I have deviated from my own precepts, I have taught others, to the best 
of my knowledge, and with all sincerity, the true way to eternal happiness. My life, 
for some few unhappy years past, has been dreadfully erroneous; but my ministry has 
been always sincere. I have constantly believed; and I now leave the world solemnly 
avowing my conviction, that there is no other name under Heaven by which we can be 
saved but only the name of the Lord Jesus; and I entreat all who are here to join with 
me in my last petition, that, for the sake of that Lord Jesus Christ, my sins may be 
forgiven, and my soul received into His everlasting kingdom. 
	"June 27, 1777." "WILLIAM DODD,"
	The body of the Doctor was on the Monday following carried to Cowley, in 
Buckinghamshire, and deposited in the church there.
	During the doctor's confinement in Newgate (a period of several months) he 
chiefly employed him self in writing various pieces, which show at once his piety and 
talent. The principal of these were his "Thoughts in Prison," in five parts, from which 
we cannot doubt but that our readers, in finishing our life of so eminent, yet 
unfortunate, a man, will be gratified by the insertion of a few short extracts.
	"I began these Thoughts," says the unhappy man, writing in Newgate, under 
date of the 23d of April, 1777, after his condemnation, "merely from the impression in 
my mind, without plan, purpose, or motive, more than the situation of my soul.
	"I continued thence on a thoughtful and regular plan; and I have been enabled 
wonderfully, in a state which in better days I should have supposed would have 
destroyed all power of reflection, to bring them nearly to a conclusion. I dedicate 
them to God, and the reflecting serious among my fellow-creatures; and I bless the 
Almighty for the ability to go through them amidst the terrors of this dire place 
(Newgate), and the bitter anguish of my disconsolate mind. The thinking will easily 
pardon all inaccuracies, as I am neither able nor willing to read over these melancholy 
lines with a curious or critical eye. They are imperfect, but in the language of the 
heart; and, had I time and inclination, might, and should be, improved.–But -- 
	(Signed) "W. D."
	The unfortunate author's Thoughts on his Imprisonment are thus introduced:--
"My friends are gone! harsh on its sullen hinge 
Grates the dread door: the massy bolts respond 
Tremendous to the surly keeper's touch: 
The dire keys clang, with movement dull and slow, 
While their behest the ponderous locks perform: 
And, fasten'd firm, the object of their care 
Is left to solitude–to sorrow left.
"But wherefore fasten'd? Oh! still stronger bonds 
Than bolts or locks, or doors of molten brass, 
To solitude and sorrow could consign 
His anguish'd soul, and prison him, though free 
For whither should he fly, or where produce 
In open day, and to the golden sun, 
His hapless head! whence every laurel torn, 
On his bald brow sits grinning infamy: 
And all in sportive triumph twines around 
The keen, the stinging arrows of disgrace"
	After dwelling on the miseries of that dreary confinement, at sight of which he 
formerly started back with horror, he adds
O dismal change! now not in friendly sort 
A Christian visitor, to pour the balm 
Of Christian comfort in some wretch's ear– 
I am that wretch myself! and want, much want, 
That Christian consolation I bestow'd; 
So cheerfully bestow'd! Want, want, my God, 
From Thee the mercy, which, Thou know'st my gladsome soul 
Ever sprang forth with transport to impart.
"Why then, mysterious Providence, pursued 
With such unfeeling ardour? Why pursued 
To death's dread bourn, by men to me unknown! 
Why–stop the deep question; it o'erwhelms my soul: 
It reels, it staggers! Earth turns round! My brain 
Whirls in confusion! My impetuous heart 
Throbs with pulsation not to be restrain'd; 
Why?–Where?–O Chesterfield, my son, my son!"
	The unfortunate divine afterwards thus proceeds:–
"Nay, talk not of composure! I had thought 
In older time, that my weak heart was soft,  
And pity's self might break it. I had thought 
That marble-eyed Severity would crack 
The slender nerves which guide my reins of sense, 
And give me up to madness! 'Tis not so; 
My heart is callous, and my nerves are tough; 
It will not break; they will not crack; or else 
What more, just heaven! was wanting to the deed, 
Than to behold–Oh! that eternal night 
Had in that moment screened from myself! 
My Stanhope to behold! Ah! piercing sight! 
Forget it; 'tis distraction speak who can! 
But I am lost! a criminal adjudged!"
	It is not a little singular that Dr Dodd, a few years before his death, published a 
sermon, intitled, "The frequency of capital punishments inconsistent with justice, 
sound policy, and religion." This, he says, was intended to have been preached at the 
Chapel Royal, at St James's; but omitted on account of the absence of the court, 
during the author's month of waiting.
	The following extract will show the unfortunate man's opinion on this subject, 
although there is no reason to suppose that he then contemplated the commission of 
the crime for which he suffered. He says:-- "It would be easy to show the injustice of 
those laws which demand blood for the slightest offences; the superior justice and 
propriety of inflicting perpetual and laborious servitude; the greater utility hereof to 
the sufferer, as well as to the state, especially wherein we have a variety of necessary 
occupations, peculiarly noxious and prejudicial to the lives of the honest and 
industrious, and in which they might be employed, who had forfeited their lives and 
their liberties to society."
	Surely this tale will be a lesson against extravagance, and will teach us t9 be 
content in the station of life in which Providence hath placed us. The fate of this 
unhappy man furnishes, likewise, the strongest argument against the crime of forgery; 
for if all the interest that was exerted to save Dr Dodd could have no weight, no one 
hereafter guilty of it ought to expect a pardon. If, then, any one should be tempted to 
the commission of it, let him reflect on this case; let him, moral and religious 
considerations apart, stay the hasty hand, and let him retract the rash resolution.
	We shall conclude this narrative with an extract from an address which Dr 
Dodd wrote, after conviction, to his fellow prisoners; because we deem it well worthy 
the public attention.–'There is always,' says the doctor, 'a danger lest men, fresh from 
a trial in which life has been lost, should remember with resentment and malignity the 
prosecutor, the witnesses, or the judges. It is indeed scarcely possible, with all the 
prejudices of an interest so weighty, and so affecting, that the convict should think 
otherwise than that he has been treated, in some part of the process, with unnecessary 
severity. In this opinion he is perhaps singular, and therefore probably mistaken: but 
there is no time for disquisition; we must try to find the shortest way to peace. It is 
easier to forgive than to reason right. He that has been injuriously or unnecessarily 
harrassed, has one opportunity more of proving his sincerity, by forgiving the wrong, 
and praying for his enemy.
	'It is the duty of a penitent to repair, as far as he has the power, the injury he 
has done. What we can do is commonly nothing more than to leave the world an 
example of contrition. On the dreadful day, when the sentence of the law has its full 
force, some will be found to have affected a shameless bravery, or negligent 
intrepidity. Such is not the proper behaviour of a convicted criminal. To rejoice in 
tortures is the privilege of a martyr; to meet death with intrepidity is the right only of 
innocence, if in any human being innocence could be found. Of him whose life is 
shortened by his crimes, the last duties are humility and self-abasement. We owe to 
God sincere repentance; we owe to man the appearance of repentance. Men have died 
with a steadfast denial of crimes, of which it is very difficult to suppose them 
innocent. By what equivocation or reserve they may have reconciled their consciences 
to falsehood it is impossible to know: but if they thought that, when they were to die, 
they paid their legal forfeit, and that the world had no farther demand upon them; that 
there fore they might, by keeping their own secrets, try to leave behind them a 
disputable reputation; and that the falsehood was harmless because none were injured; 
they had very little considered the nature of society. One of the principal parts of 
national felicity arises from a wise and impartial administration of justice. Every man 
reposes upon the tribunals of his country the stability of possession, and the serenity 
of life. He therefore who unjustly exposes the courts of judicature to suspicion, either 
of partiality or error, not only does an injury to those who dispense the laws, but 
diminishes the public confidence in the laws them selves, and shakes the foundation 
of public tranquillity.
	'For my own part, I confess, with deepest compunction, the crime which has 
brought me to this place; and admit the justice of my sentence, while I am sinking 
under its severity.'


JOHN HARRISON  
An Assurance Corporation Accountant, who was convicted of Forgery in 
1777, but afterwards received his Majesty's Pardon

	MR HARRISON was accountant to the London Assurance Corporation, and it 
was his peculiar misfortune to be acquainted with a Mr Angus Mackey, a merchant in 
the city in an extensive way of trade, who, by urgent solicitations, prevailed upon the 
unsuspecting and good-natured man to lend him several sums belonging to the 
company, solemnly promising to return the money before he would have occasion to 
make up his accounts.
	When the time appointed for the first payment arrived, instead of returning 
what he had already got into his possession, Mackey urged Harrison for a further 
supply, assuring him that he was in daily expectation of remittances, on the receipt of 
which he would return the whole sum that Harrison was deficient in his account with 
the company; adding that, if he met with a refusal, he must inevitably stop payment, 
which would necessarily occasion an exposure of Harrison's violation of the trust 
reposed in him by the company.
	In this manner was the unfortunate man pacified for several months, during 
which time he supplied Mackey with different sums, amounting in the whole to seven 
thousand, five hundred and fifty pounds; and, to prevent detection, he inserted figures 
in the book containing the account between the Bank of England and the London 
Assurance Company, so that the bank appeared to be debtor for seven thousand, five 
hundred and fifty pounds more than had been paid there.
	He sent a clerk with two hundred and ten pounds to the bank, and when the 
book was returned to him he put a figure 3 before the 2, which made the sum appear 
three thousand pounds more than was really paid; and similar alterations were made in 
other parts of the book.
	A committee of the company being appointed to meet on Wednesday, the 9th 
of July, 1777, Mr Harrison mentioned the circumstance to Mackey, and told him that 
he would be utterly ruined unless the deficiency in the company's cash was made 
good before that day: but, notwithstanding the life and reputation of his generous and 
imprudent friend were at stake, he neglected to return the money.
	About eleven in the forenoon of the day on which the committee was to be 
held, Harrison placed several account-books on the table of the committee-room, and 
had some conversation with Alexander Aubert, Esq., the deputy governor. When the 
committee was about to be opened Harrison absconded; and about ten minutes after 
the following letter was received by Mr George Hall, secretary to the company:--
	DEAR SIR,  
I am distressed beyond expression, having forfeited everything that is dear to me, by 
an act of kindness to a friend who has deceived me. Enclosed is a state of my account 
with the company, which tortures my very soul to think of it. I know the Treasury will 
not forgive me, therefore don't care what becomes of me, as I dare not see them any 
more. God Almighty knows what will become of me, or where I shall fly for succour. 
Indeed, Mr Hall, I am one of the most miserable wretches living, but I have betrayed 
my trust, for which I never can forgive myself. When I parted with the money, it was 
but for a few days, or I would sooner have died than have parted with it; but, alas I I 
shall now severely pay for suffering myself to be drawn in to serve a friend who knew 
it was not my own, and saw the distress of mind it cost me when I did it. Please to 
present my humble duty to the gentlemen: tell them I can meet any death after this 
sooner than I can see them again, and am determined not to survive the shame. I am, 
dear sir, a lost, unhappy being. I am so bewildered that I scarce know what I am 
doing, but believe the enclosed account is not right, as I don't recollect that I am any 
way short of cash; but in truth I am not myself.
	J. H.
	When Harrison absconded he left upwards of one thousand, nine hundred 
pounds in his desk, and among his papers were found securities on behalf of the 
company to a great amount, besides a bond given to him by Mackey for seven 
thousand, five hundred and fifty pounds.
	Notice being given at the office that Harrison was at a friend's house at 
Wapping, Mr Aubert went there in the evening, and found him in a state of mind little 
short of distraction. Mackey's bond was produced by Mr Aubert, and Harrison 
assigned it over to him as a security on behalf of the company. He accompanied Mr 
Aubert to the office, where two persons were ordered to attend him and prevent his 
putting an end to his life, which there was sufficient reason to suppose he would 
attempt; and the next morning he was taken before Sir John Fielding, who committed 
him to Tothill Fields Bridewell. He was re-examined the following Wednesday, and 
committed to Newgate in preparation for his trial.
	He was tried at the Old Bailey in the September sessions, 1777, on an 
indictment for forgery, consisting of twenty-four counts; on twelve of which the jury 
pronounced him guilty. The prisoner's counsel objected to judgment being passed, on 
account of a supposed inaccuracy in the indictment and the matter was left to be 
argued by the judges.
	Having remained in Newgate some months after his trial, Mr Harrison 
petitioned for the judges to meet, and that he might be heard by counsel. He was 
advised by an illustrious personage to waive the plea on which his petition was 
founded, and in consequence thereof the petition was immediately withdrawn. In a 
few days a messenger came to Newgate and delivered to Mr Harrison the agreeable 
news that his Majesty had been graciously pleased to grant him an unconditional 
pardon; and the same evening an order was delivered to Mr Akerman for his 
immediate enlargement.
	Mr Harrison was brought up in a merchant's counting- house, and soon after 
the expiration of his apprenticeship he began business on his own account, and had a 
lime and coal wharf at Limehouse, where he carried on an extensive trade; but failing 
in that business, he engaged himself as a clerk to Mr Smithen, previous to that 
gentleman's undertaking to construct the Eddystone Lighthouse, and was entrusted 
with the care and management of all the money employed in that important work. His 
conduct under Mr Smithen was in every respect unexceptionable; and that gentleman 
and many other respectable persons used their interest to procure him the office of 
accountant to the London Assurance Company, in whose service he would in all 
probability have continued till his death but for his unhappy connection with Mackey.
	Harrison had been accountant to the London Assurance Company nineteen 
years and a half when it was discovered that he had betrayed the confidence reposed 
in him; and till that period his character was without a blemish, and he was held in the 
highest esteem by all of his acquaintances.


FRANCIS MERCIER OTHERWISE LOUIS DE BUTTE  
Executed in Prince's Street, opposite Swallow Street, in the City of 
Westminster, 8th of December, 1777, for Murder

	THIS malefactor was a Frenchman, and was convicted at the sessions held at 
the Old Bailey on the 6th of December, 1777, of the murder of Monsieur Jaques 
Mondroyte, his countryman, attended by singular circumstances of treachery and 
premeditated cruelty.
	Jaques Mondroyte was a jeweller and watchmaker of Paris, and had made a 
journey to London in order to find a market for different articles of his manufacture. 
His stock consisted of curious and costly articles, worth, as was computed, a few 
thousand pounds. He took lodgings in Prince's Street, and engaged Mercier, who had 
resided some time in London, as his interpreter, on a liberal gratuity, and treated him 
as a friend.
	It appeared that the ungrateful villain had long determined upon murdering his 
employer, in order effectually to possess himself of the whole his valuable property.
	To this diabolical end he gave orders for an instrument to be made of a 
singular construction. It was shaped somewhat like an Indian tomahawk, and this 
instrument of death he concealed until an opportunity offered to complete his 
detestable purpose.
	One day his employer, Mondroyte, invited him to spend the evening; they 
played at cards, sang some French songs, and took a cheerful glass, but with that 
moderation from which Frenchmen seldom depart. Thus the time passed until it grew 
late, when the interpreter was asked to stay the night. The ungrateful villain pretended 
to hesitate, but at length assented.
	As soon as all the inhabitants were wrapped in sleep, Mercier took from the 
lining of his coat, where he constantly carried it, the fatal weapon, with which he 
struck the unconscious victim repeatedly on the head until he was killed. He thrust the 
body into one of the trunks in which the owner had brought over his merchandise, and 
plundered the apartments. He then locked the doors and made his escape.
	Next day he had the effrontery to return to the house and inquire whether 
Monsieur Mondroyte had set off, pretending that he had proposed a journey into the 
country; and the people of the house, concluding that he had let himself out before 
they had risen, and which accounted for their finding the street door on the latch, 
replied that he must have departed, giving that circumstance as a reason for such 
belief. This audacious farce was acted by the murderer for some days, during which 
time he frequently called to know whether his friend had returned.
	The family, however, beginning to entertain suspicions of some foul play, 
procured a ladder, entered the chamber window, and soon discovered the body, which 
had been crammed into the trunk, and was beginning to putrefy. A warrant was 
granted to apprehend Mercier, whom they took just as he was alighting from a post-
chaise, in which he had been jaunting with a woman of the town. In his lodgings and 
on his person were found sixteen gold watches, some of great value, a great number of 
brilliant diamond and other rings, a variety of gold trinkets and seventy-five guineas.
	On his examination he confessed the fact, which added to the proof that the 
manufactured articles had been the property of Mondroyte. He was convicted, and 
sentenced to be hanged on the following Monday.
	He was accordingly carried to execution, opposite the place where he 
committed the murder.


JOHN HOLMES AND PETER WILLIAMS  
Publicly whipped, by the Sentence of the Middlesex Court of Quarter 
Sessions, for December, 1777, for stealing Dead Bodies

	THE sum of all our long list of thieves, and their different deceptions and 
modes of plunder, surely were those detested monsters of depravity who broke into 
the sacred deposit of the dead and robbed the graves of the bodies of our departed 
fellow-creatures, for the sole purpose of selling them to surgeons for dissection.
	The impious robbers were vulgarly called, in London, "Resurrection Men," but 
rather should have been called "Sacrilegious Robbers of our Holy Church," not even 
confining the unnatural crime to men alone. The gentler sex were connected in this 
horrid traffic, whose business it was to strip off the shroud, or whatever garments in 
which the body might have been wrapped, and sell them, while the men, through the 
darkness of night, dragged the naked bodies to be anatomised.
	When Hunter, the famous anatomist, was in full practice, he had a surgical 
theatre behind his house, in Windmill Street, where he gave lectures to a very 
numerous class of pupils. To this place such numbers of dead bodies were brought 
during the winter season that the mob rose several times, and were upon the point of 
pulling down his house. He had a well dug in the back part of his premises, wherein 
was thrown the putrid flesh, and with it alkalines, in order to hasten the consumption 
thereof.
	Numberless were the instances of dead bodies seized to be carried to the 
surgeons. Hackney-coachmen, for an extra fare, and porters with hampers, were often 
employed by these resurrection men for this purpose.
	A monthly publication, in March, 1776, says: "The remains of more than 
twenty bodies were discovered in a shed in Tottenham Court Road, supposed to have 
been deposited there by traders to the surgeons; of whom there is one, it is said, in the 
borough, who makes an open profession of dealing in dead bodies, and is well known 
by the name of 'The Resurrectionist.' "
	Still more shocking was it to be told that men who were paid for protecting the 
sacred deposit of the mortal remains of their fellow-parishioners were often 
confederates with those carcass stealers, as the present case will demonstrate.
	Holmes, the principal villain in this case, was grave- digger of St George's, 
Bloomsbury; Williams was his assistant, and a woman, named Esther Donaldson, an 
accomplice. They were all indicted for stealing the dead body of Mrs Jane Sainsbury, 
who departed this life on the 9th of October, then last past, and the corpse was 
interred in the burying-ground of St George's on the Monday following. They were 
detected before they could secure their booty; and the widower determined, however 
unpleasant, to prosecute them. In order to their conviction he had to undergo the 
mental pain of viewing and identifying the remains of his wife!
	The gravedigger and his deputy were convicted on the fullest evidence; and it 
was regretted that it did not reach the woman, though no doubt remained of her equal 
guilt. She therefore was released, but Holmes and Williams were sentenced to six 
months' imprisonment, and to be whipped twice on their bare backs, from the end of 
Kingsgate Street, Holborn, to Diot Street, St Giles's, being half-a-mile, and which was 
inflicted with the severity due to so detestable an offence, through crowds of exulting 
spectators.


THE REVEREND BENJAMIN RUSSEN,  
Executed for rape, 12th December, 1777

	THIS man was master of the subscription charity-school at Bethnal Green, in 
which had been bred up a poor girl named Anne Mayne.
	At the sessions held at the Old Bailey in October, 1777, Benjamin Russen, 
clerk, was indicted for having committed a rape on the said Anne Mayne, on the 18th 
of June preceding. The girl deposed that, when Mrs. Russen lay in, the prisoner 
desired that she (Mayne) might stay below stairs with him, while he went to sleep 
after dinner, lest he should fall into the fire; and that he took this opportunity to 
perpetrate the fact with which he was charged; and, after it was committed, said that, 
if she told her mother, sister, or any body of it, be would flog her severely.
	She proved a second commission of a similar fact, during which he looked out 
at the door, in apprehension that somebody was coming; but this did not happen to be 
the case. It appeared, likewise, that the crime was committed a third time; but it would 
be indelicate in the highest degree to recount the particulars of a fact of this nature.
	A surgeon, who was present when Mr. Russen was carried before Justice 
Wilmot, deposed that, on examination of the girl, he did not discover that any absolute 
violence had been committed.
	There were three other indictments against Russen of a similar nature, but he 
was acquitted of them all. He now proceeded to call several persons to his character, 
who spoke well of him as far as they knew.
	In his defence he denied the fact, and pleaded the malice of his enemies, who, 
he said, had charged him with those offences to deprive him of his place. He urged the 
favourable representation of the surgeon, who had sworn that the child had not been 
materially injured; and insisted that, at the time the fact was charged to have been 
committed, be was so ill as to keep his chamber.
	By endeavouring to prove this he proved too much; for the witness swore that 
he kept his chamber two months successively, contrary to the tenor of all the other 
witnesses; so that the jury were induced to think that he had not kept his chamber 
even one month.
	The counsel for the prisoner laboured hard to adduce some proofs of his 
innocence; but the jury brought in a verdict that the prisoner was guilty; in 
consequence of which he received sentence of death.
	After conviction the behaviour of Mr. Russen was exceedingly proper for a 
man in his unhappy situation. No very extraordinary exertions were made to obtain a 
pardon for him, because it was presumed it would not have been granted.
	On the morning of execution Mr. Russen was taken from Newgate to Tyburn 
in a mourning-coach. Just before he left the prison, seeing a number of people about 
him, he made use of this emphatical expression, 'Stand clear! look to yourselves! I am 
the first hypocrite in Sion!' The parting scene between himself and his son was 
extremely affecting.
	He was attended in the coach by the Ordinary of Newgate (the Reverend Mr. 
Hughes), a sheriff's officer, and an undertaker, who bad engaged to conduct the 
funeral.
	At the place of execution Russen seemed to have a proper sense of his past 
wicked life; but, in regard to the crime for which be suffered, he thought himself ill 
treated, as he always asserted that he had never been guilty of a rape, though he 
acknowledged, a day or two before his death, that he had taken liberties with the child 
which were highly unbecoming. Previous to the prayers commonly used at the place 
of execution he made a long extempore prayer, and earnestly exhorted the 
surrounding multitude to take warning by his fate. He likewise censured the indecency 
of the people, who stood near the gallows with their hats on, and with apparent 
unconcern, during the time of prayer; and observed that the place where unhappy 
victims are to suffer the sentence of the law should be held as sacred as a church. He 
therefore requested the spectators to be uncovered, and to join in their supplications 
for him to Almighty God, which accordingly several of them complied with; and, 
after having prayed for his wife and helpless children, he once more recommended his 
soul to the mercy of God, and was then launched into eternity.
	On the way to execution the mob insulted Russen but the propriety of his 
behaviour at the fatal tree had an evident effect on the spectators; and, when his body 
was out down, it was put into a hearse, and delivered to his friends for interment.
	Benjamin Russen was executed at Tyburn on the 12th of December, 1777.
	It is with pain that the pen of delicacy touches a subject of this nature; and this 
pain is increased when we consider that the object of our remarks was in a line of life 
that ought to have induced him to set the best example to others. A clergyman who is 
a school master is bound by a double tie to exhibit every mark of his attention to the 
duties of religion and morality; and, when he fails of this duty, his example is 
presumed to have a worse influence than that of a man differently situated.
	Mr. Russen had a wife and six children, which was no slight aggravation of his 
crime.


JAMES ELLIOT  
Executed at Maidstone, in March, 1778, for a Forgery on the Bank of 
England, attended with Circumstances which were left to the Twelve Judges 
for determination

	JAMES ELLIOT had committed forgeries on the Bank of England; but, some 
intricacy appearing in the case, the solicitor laid five different counts in his 
indictment, and, though convicted, his case went before the twelve judges, as is 
customary whenever a doubt arises in the breast of the judge who may try the 
prisoner.
	The following is a sketch of the evidence given upon his trial, which came on 
at Maidstone, the 24th of July, 1777.
	The prisoner had applied to a mould-maker for a pair of fine moulds, in the 
manner of bills of exchange or notes of hand. He brought three copper-plates, 
purporting to be notes of the Governor and Company of the Bank of England–one for 
one hundred pounds, one for fifty pounds, and one for twenty pounds–and he gave ten 
guineas for the three.
	A copper-plate printer, of the name of Ryland, swore that he had printed off 
twenty-five fifty-pound notes and twenty-five of the twenty-pound plate, for which 
Elliot gave him three guineas, though the usual price was no more than one shilling 
and sixpence per hundred. These notes were produced in court, and Ryland swore 
they were the same which he printed, and one in particular of the fifty pounds which 
was filled up, and upon which the indictment was founded.
	This note was very defective, and, among other faults, the word pounds was 
even left out after the word fifty. Upon this, Elliot's counsel started a point of law on 
this question: whether that could be called a counterfeit where so essential a part was 
omitted, without which no specific value could be fixed.
	The prisoner was, however, found guilty, but his case was reserved for the 
opinion of the twelve judges. Sentence was accordingly deferred.
	On the 5th of March, 1778, he was again called to the bar, and informed that 
the judges had overruled his motion; and sentence of death was immediately passed 
upon him.


JOHN PIERCE, VINCENT PIERCE AND ELIZABETH 
LUKER  
Sentenced to Imprisonment for a Riot at Sadler's Wells Theatre which 
occasioned the Death of Eighteen of the Audience

	THE true cause of this very shocking circumstance, so fatal in its 
consequences, is known to but few. If it had been occasioned wilfully, for the sake of 
plunder, the very worst of deaths should have overtaken the offenders.
	As it was, the injured proprietors of the theatre, who alone were entitled to 
prosecute, could only reach the promoters in a conviction of a riot–unattended with 
proof which would lead to capital punishment.
	It appeared that a noisy, intoxicated party, among whom were those convicted, 
sat in the pit, and were observed during the evening to disturb the audience. At length 
they so greatly annoyed the peaceable part near them that a quarrel arose, and the 
woman, Elizabeth Luker, cried out to her debauched male associates: "Fight! Fight!" 
This was, unhappily, by distant parts of the house, supposed to be the cry of "Fire! 
Fire!" So dread an alarm in such a place–hundreds crowded together–will readily be 
conceived. Each seeking safety in flight, the avenues of the theatre were soon choked 
up, and the weakest trampled underfoot.
	In vain did the performers from the stage call upon them to return; in vain did 
they assure them that there could be no danger of fire in a theatre filled with water–
even a speaking-trumpet, proclaiming to that effect, was not heard.
	Eighteen unhappy mortals thus perished. They were mostly females and boys. 
The men thus numbered with the dead were small, and apparently of weak habits of 
body.
	From the turbulent part, the three above named, who were, however 
unintentionally, the cause of this havoc, were identified, seized, tried, and convicted 
of a riot.
	Mr Mainwaring, the chairman at the Quarter Sessions at Hicks's Hall, where 
they were tried, addressed them in a very impressive and solemn manner, to the 
following effect:--
	"John Pierce, Vincent Pierce and Elizabeth Luker, you have been severally 
convicted on an indictment which charged you with being riotously and tumultuously 
assembled for the purpose of disturbing the King's peace, and of having resisted the 
legal authority to suppress your dangerous conduct in a theatre legally authorised, 
called Sadler's Wells.
	"It has appeared that you obtained admission into that theatre; and it has also 
appeared from the evidence that you repeatedly interrupted the performance, grossly 
insulted the audience, and obstructed the officers, duly, authorised, in the performance 
and execution of their duty, when interposing to prevent your rioting. It is necessary, 
to preserve the public peace, that propriety of demeanour should be observed, from 
the highest to the lowest, in persons assembled at places of public amusement. The 
mischievous and fatal effects which have ensued for want of a due observance of the 
principles of decorum are too numerous to make it necessary for me to recount, and it 
is to be lamented that hardly a week passes but those disturbances do arise in one or 
other of the theatres. But the calamitous and dreadful events which happened in 
consequence of your outrageous conduct are distressing in the extreme. Not less than 
eighteen lives were lost! Whole families were plunged into irremediable ruin by the 
loss of the protection of those who were their natural protectors and guardians. When 
informed of the mischief you had occasioned, instead of exhibiting horror and dismay, 
and showing symptoms of sorrow and compunction, you most unfeelingly replied: 
'Well, we don't care; we can't be hanged for it!' But surely, if you are not worse than 
brutes or savages, and void of the feelings which in general govern human nature, you 
will hereafter feel compunctions of remorse for the misery you have entailed upon the 
relatives of the deceased. The sentence which the Court is about to pronounce is slight 
in comparison with your crimes, and affords no atonement for your offence, but it is 
to be hoped that the punishment will have the effect of calling you to a proper 
repentance and contrition, and induce you to conduct yourselves, for the future, at all 
times, and in all places, with decency. Eighteen of your fellow-creatures by your 
improper conduct have been deprived of their lives. Wives of their husbands. Fathers 
of their children. And children of their parents. And whole families brought to utter 
ruin by your outrageous conduct. The sentence, therefore, of the Court upon you, John 
Pierce, is, that you be imprisoned for the space of six months; and that you, Vincent 
Pierce, be imprisoned for the space of four months; and that you, Elizabeth Luker, be 
imprisoned only for the space of fourteen days."


GEORGE ROACH, ROBERT ELLIOT AND JONAS 
PARKER  
Who were convicted, the first two of stealing, and the other of receiving Part 
of a Lead Coffin from Aldermanbury Church, in 1778

	AT the sessions held at the Old Bailey in April, 1778, these men were 
indicted, the first two for stealing a lead coffin, of three hundred pounds' weight, 
value five pounds, the property of William Thornton Aston, Esq., and Parker for 
receiving fifty pounds' weight of the lead, value five shillings, knowing the same to 
have been stolen. The second count in the indictment laid the lead to be the property 
of the parishioners of Aldermanbury, and stolen by Roach and Elliot; and the third 
count charged Jonas Parker with receiving it, being the property of the parishioners of 
Aldermanbury, well knowing it to have been stolen.
	William Thornton Aston, Esq., deposed that, on the 1st of January preceding, 
his brother was interred in a leaden coffin, in the church of Aldermanbury; that the 
coffin was stolen out of the church, and was missed on the 7th of March.
	James Gould, who had been admitted an evidence, deposed that Roach, Elliot 
and himself were journeymen carpenters, working under Mr Augurs in the repair of 
the church. He said that on Friday, the 6th of March, he and Roach went into the vault 
and unscrewed all the screws of Mr Thornton's coffin except two, after which they 
returned to their work; and that afterwards they and Elliot agreed to work again on the 
coffin.
	On the Saturday morning they went to the church, and about five o'clock a 
watchman followed them in and desired a board to be planed, which was done by 
Gould. The accomplices then loosened the other screws and turned the coffins bottom 
upwards, taking off the outside coffin, and leaving only the shell. They then cut the 
leaden coffin in pieces, and, replacing the other coffin on the shelf?, screwed it down 
again. These transactions lasted them till nearly eight in the morning, when they took 
the pieces of the coffin and, having concealed them under the children's gallery, 
conferred about selling what they had stolen, when Elliot mentioned Parker, in Grub 
Street, as a likely purchaser.
	The lead being in two pieces, Gould put one of them in a bag and took it away, 
and the other was put in a basket and carried by one of the accomplices. When they 
got to London Wall, Elliot beckoned Gould, and they went to a shop, where they 
offered the lead for sale to a person, who refused to be the purchaser. They then went 
to Parker's, who weighed the lead without asking them any questions, said it was 
forty-two pounds, and paid them three shillings and sixpence for it, being at the rate of 
a penny a pound. When they were going away with the empty bag Mr Augurs's 
apprentice came in and seized Gould, and desired Parker, who was a constable, to 
assist in conveying him and Elliot to Mr Augurs. Parker said: "You had better go to 
your master and try to make the matter up." They went, and were all charged with the 
felony. Parker said: "Give them a trevalle for it."
	Gould, being asked what was meant by that term, said he did not know 
exactly, but supposed it was a hint to attempt making their escape; on which they 
made a run for it (to use his own words), and Parker likewise ran away; but they were 
stopped and taken into custody before they got any considerable distance.
	All the prisoners called persons who gave them good characters; but the jury, 
having fully considered the nature of the evidence, gave a verdict that they were 
guilty: in consequence of which, at the close of the sessions, Roach and Elliot were 
sentenced to labour three years on the Thames, and Parker to be imprisoned for a like 
term of time.


ALEXANDER SCOTT  
City of London hoaxed by a False Proclamation of War, April, 1778

	AT the sessions held at the Old Bailey in June, 1778, Alexander Scott was 
indicted for that he, on the 23rd of April last, unlawfully, wickedly and maliciously 
did publish false news, whereby discord, or occasion of discord, might grow between 
our Lord the King and his people, or the great men of the realm, by publishing a 
certain printed paper containing such false news; which said printed paper is of the 
tenor following: --
	"In pursuance of his Majesty's Order in Council to me directed, these are to 
give public notice that war with France will be proclaimed on Friday next, the 24th 
instant, at the Palace Royal, St James's, at one of the clock, of which all heralds and 
pursuivants-at-arms are to take notice, and give their attendance accordingly. Given 
under my hand this 22nd day of April, 1778. 
	"EFFINGHAM, D.M."
	In this case the prisoner was imposed on by the artifices of some man who 
wished to take advantage of the credulity of the good people of England.
	Scott was a bill-sticker. Between ten and eleven o'clock on the night of the 
22nd of April, 1778, a person muffled up in a greatcoat, and having his hat strapped, 
went to the prisoner, and told him he came from Mr Strahan, the King's printer, 
saying, "You stick up bills for him?" Scott answered in the affirmative. The man said 
he wanted him to stick up some bills in the morning, saying he must stick some round 
the Exchange, and one at Wood Street, where war was to be proclaimed; and he 
demanded what Scott wanted for his trouble. The latter inquired how many bills he 
had, and the stranger said only a dozen. Scott said he would not charge Mr Strahan 
anything; but the other said he desired he should be paid, and asked if five shillings 
would do. Scott said it was too much; but his employer insisted on his taking the 
money, saying it was a thing that did not happen every day.
	In the morning Scott stuck up nine of the bills about the Royal Exchange, and 
one at the end of Wood Street; and as he is an engine-keeper, as well as a bill-sticker, 
he went afterwards before justice Girdler to make affidavit respecting a fire that had 
happened.
	Meanwhile the town was alarmed by the supposed extraordinary news: stocks 
fell one per cent; and the circumstance coming to the knowledge of the Lord Mayor 
he sent to the west end of the town to inquire into the truth of the affair, and found it 
was all an imposition.
	In the meantime Richard Willis having seen Scott stick up some bills at the 
Royal Exchange, and Thomas Thorn, one of the Exchange keepers, having taken them 
down, by order of the Lord Mayor, Joseph Gates, an officer, traced Scott to the 
Golden Cross, a public-house opposite Justice Girdler's, and told him he must go 
before the Lord Mayor, for he had been guilty of high treason. Scott said: "I hope not; 
I have a family of children." Scott said, on his trial, that he had read the proclamation, 
and did not know but that it was true; but he had never seen his employer since that 
time.
	On the trial, the Earl of Effingham, Deputy Marshal of England, under the 
Duke of Norfolk, deposed that the paper was not printed by his direction; that he 
knew nothing of it till after it was stuck up, nor gave any authority to any person to 
print or publish such a paper.
	The jury did not hesitate, to give a verdict that the prisoner was not guilty.


THOMAS HORNER AND JAMES FRYER  
Executed for Burglary and Robbery under Threats of Violence, 24th of June, 
1778

	THE trial of these prisoners took place at the Old Bailey sessions in April, 
1778. It appeared that on the evening of the 1st of March the prisoners, with three 
other men, were seen at Finchley together, and that while drinking in a public-house 
they made many inquiries of the persons present with regard to the house and family 
of a Mr Clewen, a gentleman of respectability who resided in the neighbourhood. The 
same night, between twelve and one o'clock, Mr Clewen's house was entered by five 
persons, whose faces were disguised, and the noise created by their rushing upstairs 
was heard by Miss Clewen and her servant, who immediately ran out of their 
bedchambers to see what was the matter. They were forced to return, however, for 
three of the men entered their room, and compelled them to cover their heads with the 
bedclothes, uttering loud threats of violence if they offered any resistance. The men-
servants, who slept at the top of the house, being now alarmed, the thieves proceeded 
to their apartment, and one of them, named Quick, having got up, received a severe 
blow with an iron bar, and, like his mistress, was compelled, with his fellows, to cover 
himself up with the bedclothes. Two fellows then remained to watch them, while the 
rest went to Mr Clewen's room and treated him in the same manner, and then they 
proceeded to the bedchamber of his son, whom they forced to go to his father's bed, 
holding his hands before his eyes so that he should not distinguish who were his 
assailants. They then ransacked the house, and in about half-an-hour returned, and 
said that if young Clewen would tell them where the money was they would give him 
his watch, which they had taken from under his pillow. This being refused they went 
away, saying that they were only going for some victuals and would return.
	The house was then immediately examined by Mr Clewen, when it was found 
that the thieves had effected an entrance by means of the back door, and that they had 
fastened up that as well as the front entrance by nailing staples over the locks. It was 
afterwards discovered that they had carried off twenty-two guineas, fifty pounds in 
bank-notes, a quantity of plate, several gold rings, a silver watch, and other property 
to a considerable amount. Information of the robbery was immediately conveyed to 
Sir John Fielding, whose officers, recognising the offenders from the description 
given of their persons, succeeded in securing the prisoners–Fryer at a small house 
which he occupied in the City Road, where were found a number of picklock keys and 
a hanger; and Horner at his lodgings in Perkins' Rents, Westminster, a cutlass being 
concealed under his bed. Two supposed accomplices, named Condon and Jordan, 
were also apprehended, but nothing distinct was proved against them, so they escaped. 
Jordan, however, was afterwards convicted for a second burglary in Copenhagen 
House, for which he received sentence of death.
	Conviction having followed the production of this evidence, sentence of death 
was passed. Upon the Sacrament being administered to Horner and Fryer they 
admitted their guilt, and were executed at Tyburn, on the 24th of June, 1778. The 
other offenders were subsequently also apprehended and executed.


FRANCIS LEWIS OTHERWISE GRIMISON  
Cobweb as a Clue to a Bogus Burglary committed by a Butler, who was 
executed at Tyburn, 24th of June, 1778

	AT the sessions held at the Old Bailey in April, 1778, Francis Lewis otherwise 
Grimison was indicted for breaking and entering the dwelling-house of Thomas 
Edmondes, Esq., on the night of the 14th of March preceding, and stealing a gold ring 
set with diamonds, valued at forty pounds, and a variety of plate and other valuable 
articles, to a very large amount.
	The facts are these. The prisoner was butler in the family; his master was out 
of town, and had discharged the footman before he went. Grimison and three maids 
were all the servants that were left in the house with Mrs Edmondes. The prisoner, 
who was a married man, had asked for permission to go to see his wife. He returned 
about ten at night. Mary Giles, the cook, fastened the door of the area a little before 
one in the morning. The prisoner slept in the pantry; so that she went to bed and left 
him in the kitchen.
	About three in the morning, as the watchman was passing, he heard a pistol 
fired in Mr Edmondes's house, on which he rattled with his stick against the iron bars 
of the area near which the prisoner lay; but receiving no answer he cried the hour, and 
at half-past three, as he was going his rounds, he heard the prisoner cry out: "O Lord! 
I shall be dead!" The watchman called out to know what was the matter; and the 
prisoner answered there were rogues and villains in the house, and he should be dead. 
The watchman then asked why he did not open the door. He said he could not, for he 
was tied.
	On this the watchman knocked till two servant-maids came down, who found 
the prisoner tied in his bed, both his hands being tied to his ankles. He said that the 
house had been broken open; that three men came in; that the age of two of them was 
from thirty to six-and-thirty, and the other from twenty to four-and-twenty; that they 
had greatcoats on, and flapped hats; that one held a knife to him, and stood over him 
all the time, while the other two robbed the house.
	Mary Robson, one of the above-mentioned servant-maids, deposed that the 
prisoner said three men came in, and he fired a pistol at one; and then they tied his 
hands and legs, and asked where his mistress's jewels were, and where his mistress 
lay; that then they took the plate out of the closet. She further deposed that he said that 
the plate was all carried away; that they insisted on having the key, and he gave it to 
them out of his pocket; that they doubled a silver tea-board together, tied it up in a 
tablecloth, and carried it away.
	Information of this transaction having been given at Bow Street, three persons 
were apprehended, supposed to be those that the prisoner had described; but they were 
discharged on his saying they were not the men who had robbed his master.
	The day after the robbery was committed Mr Clarke went from Sir John 
Fielding's office to examine how the burglary had been committed. When he came to 
Mr Edmondes's house he saw the prisoner sitting by the fire, who had two marks, as if 
cut with a knife. Mr Clarke took him to the area, on the outside of which was a brick a 
little broken, on which the robbers were supposed to have stepped. Clarke desired the 
cook to put up the shutters as they were on the preceding night. She did so. He asked 
if they were bolted or barred. She said both. He demanded if she would swear before a 
magistrate that they were bolted and barred. She said she would not swear that she 
bolted the place, but would swear that she barred it.
	Clarke observed that the bar was a little broken, and that it went into a 
tenterhook, which would have been wrenched if the place had been forced open, But 
the most remarkable circumstance was this: a pane of glass was broken on the inside 
of which was a cobweb, which was in such a direction that it would have been carried 
away if anyone had come through the window.
	Clarke now examined the door, and finding that all the force which had been 
used was on the inside he had no doubt but that the robbery had been committed by 
some person within the house; on which he told Mr and Mrs Edmondes his opinion of 
the affair. But the latter seemed very unwilling to admit even a suspicion to the 
prejudice of the prisoner.
	Mr Clarke then showed the lady the place, and asked her if she had given the 
prisoner leave to go out on the preceding night. She said she had permitted him to go 
to see his wife. Clarke, finding that he was married, said: "Depend on it,the things are 
at his wife's" and, having obtained a direction where she lodged, he dispatched 
Charles Jealous and another person to the house of a grocer in Goswell Street. There 
they learned that she had removed to Holywell Street, Clare Market, where they found 
her, having in her possession a large trunk, with a quantity of plate and clothes in it.
	The woman, being taken before Sir John Fielding, acknowledged that she was 
wife to the prisoner, that they were his lodgings, and that he himself had taken them.
	In the interim the husband was taken into custody by Clarke, who desired him 
to acquaint him where the rest of the plate was, that no imputation might lie against 
the characters of the other servants. On this he acknowledged that he had thrown it 
into the cistern of his master's house. Thereupon Clarke went to the house and found 
the plate at the bottom of the cistern; and among other articles a large waiter bent 
double.
	This and many other pieces of plate were produced in court, and sworn to by 
the prosecutor: on which the jury gave a verdict that the prisoner was guilty of 
stealing the goods in the dwelling-house; and at the close of the sessions he received 
sentence of death.
	Of the behaviour of this malefactor after conviction no particular account is 
transmitted to us. Nor were endeavours exerted to save him, because it was justly 
presumed that he was unworthy of the Royal mercy.
	Francis Lewis otherwise Grimison was executed at Tyburn, on the 24th of 
June, 1778.


MARY KNIGHT  
Executed for the murder of her child, 24th August, 1778

	THOUGH we have before had the painful task of relating instances of women 
murdering their offspring, yet the commission of such unnatural barbarity has 
generally happened with such unfortunate females as have been seduced and betrayed, 
and, in that wretched situation, vainly hoped to conceal their shame. But the case of 
Mary Knight seems without any motive; on the contrary, nothing short of wanton 
brutality appears to have led her on; and, to add to the horror of the tale, she was 
convicted chiefly on the evidence of her younger son, a child not nine years old.
	The story of the child was credible. He said that his mother sent his brother 
into the stubble-fields to glean; that when he came home his mother beat him in a 
most cruel manner with a great stick, for not bringing more corn; that he cried sadly, 
and she shut him up in the pantry; that some time after the witness called to him to 
come and play, but he made no answer; that he opened the pantry door, took hold of 
his hand, and it felt cold.
	Then the child further said that be went to his mother, and told her that Roger 
(the deceased) felt cold, and begged her to let him come to the fire. His mother then 
went into the pantry, and brought Roger wrapped up in her apron, and carried him out 
of doors: she shut the door after her, but be looked under it, and saw her throw him 
into the well; that, when she came in again, she put the stick she had beat him with 
into the fire; that, before it was entirely consumed, the neighbours came in, who 
immediately took the deceased out of the well, and the stick out of the fire.
	The latter part of the child's evidence, respecting the dead body and the stick 
with which his brother had been beaten, was corroborated by the neighbours, and the 
burnt stick was produced in court. On this evidence she was convicted, and executed 
at Warwick on the 24th of August, 1778.


JOSEPH RELPH  
Who was indicted for Murder, and found guilty of Manslaughter.

  
Relph being burned in the hand

	AT the sessions held at the Old Bailey, in December, 1778, Joseph Relph, 
mariner, was indicted for the wilful murder of Andrew Schultz on the 26th of 
November preceding; and he likewise stood charged on the coroner's inquisition, for 
feloniously killing and slaying the said Andrew. The prisoner was employed in the 
impress service, and the following is the state of the evidence adduced on the trial.
	John Clear swore, that he was a beadle of Wapping; that Mr James Stewart, a 
tallow-chandler, called him from the Mason's lodge, and told him a man was 
murdered: that he went to the sign of the Gibraltar, where he found the prisoner 
leaning down in a box, having the fingers of his left hand, which were bloody, tied in 
a handkerchief: that on this deponent's asking what was the matter, Relph said he had 
been used ill, and cut to pieces; that he went with him quietly to the Round-house, and 
the next day before a magistrate, who committed him to New prison.
	John Hageman deposed, that he was a servant to Mr Compton, sugar-baker, in 
Brewer's-lane; there were five of his companions, all of whom were going home to 
Mr Compton's; that they were all on the foot-pavement, and the deceased was running 
before him: that he saw a woman with a lantern in her hand crossing the way, and a 
girl about eight years old with her; and that Hardwicke (one of the company) lifted up 
the woman's peticoats behind.
	The counsel now interposed, and said he should prove that the woman and 
child were the wife and daughter of the prisoner.
	Hageman proceeded, and said that the woman having walked a hundred yards, 
the prisoner overtook them; on which his wife pointed to Hardwicke, and said 'This is 
the young man that laid hold of my gown.' The prisoner crossed to Hardwicke, and 
asked him what business he had to meddle with the woman's gown. Hardwicke made 
no reply; and one Kello coming up at the juncture, said to the lieutenant, (Relph) 'Sir, 
I am your prisoner, and will go with you where you like.' This evidence farther 
deposed, that the lieutenant took Hardwicke by the neck, and pulled his hat off.
	John Kello was now sworn; but not being perfect in the English language, an 
interpreter was sworn to deliver his evidence, which was to the following effect: that 
Andrew Schultz was one of the party, returning with his fellowservants to Mr 
Compton's; that he himself was sober, but doubted if Hardwicke was not somewhat in 
liquor: that he did not see the prisoner till he came and put a hanger to his breast; on 
which this deponent acknowledged himself his prisoner, and consented to go where he 
pleased; but that he thrust the hanger through his clothes, and slightly wounded him in 
the breast.
	When this deponent felt the sword hurt him, he jumped aside; and then Schultz 
said 'You had better put your sword by.' After some struggling Kello took the hanger 
from the lieutenant, but did not observe whether Schultz was wounded or not; that the 
prisoner went to a publichouse, and afterwards heard that Schultz was wounded; and 
that the lieutenant was cut in the hand.
	Frederick Hardwicke, being sworn, acknowledged that he had touched the 
bottom of the woman's gown as he was passing her; owned he was a little disguised in 
liquor, and that, after he had touched the woman's gown, he received a blow from 
behind on his neck, and his hat fell off; but he could not tell by whom the blow was 
given. When he recovered himself, and got to his companions, be observed that 
Schultz was wounded, and that the lieutenant was going to the public house with a 
drawn hanger in his hand; he followed him, and stayed there two minutes: he 
observed that the lieutenant's hand was bloody, and immediately went home to his 
own lodgings.
	Sarah Hoskins, an oyster woman, wife of William Hoskins of Bell-dock, saw 
four young men in the highway, and observed the lieutenant collar Hardwicke, and 
likewise saw a woman on the other side of the way, whom she heard say 'you dirty 
fellow, how dare you meddle with my gown?' or petticoat, the deponent could not be 
sure which. Her husband, the lieutenant, then came up, and said 'My dear, what is the 
matter?' to which she replied, 'the dirty fellow has been pulling my gown,' or words to 
that purpose.
	Mrs Hoskins then saw the lieutenant collar Frederick Hardwicke, and say 'If 
you don't go along with me, I will draw my sword and stab you.' They then struggled 
from the Bell ale-house door, till they got between a brazier's and tin-shop, at the 
distance of nine or ten yards. In the mean time one of the men, who had a stick, hit the 
lieutenant on the back while Hardwicke and he were struggling. During this 
commotion the lieutenant's wife was hanging round his neck in the highway; but this 
deponent did not see the sword drawn, only heard the threat that it should be done: nor 
did she know whether the sword was drawn before or after the lieutenant was struck.
	About five or six minutes after the lieutenant was struck with the stick, she 
heard somebody cry out, 'Stop him, stop him, the young man is dead in the tin-shop.' 
The lieutenant then went into the ale-house.
	This was the substance of the evidence; and the judge then said to the counsel 
for the prisoner, 'Do you mean to make this less than manslaughter?' To which the 
counsel replied in the following words: 'No, my lord, we cannot make it less than 
manslaughter. The lieutenant was used very ill while his wife was hanging round his 
neck to prevent any further fighting. She was cut a-cross her neck, and the lieutenant 
had his hand and his coat cut in two places, and was beat all over his arm and 
shoulders.'
	The court now observing that, if the jury were satisfied, nothing farther need 
be heard, but if not they would proceed; the jury said, 'My lord, we are all satisfied;' 
and soon afterwards they gave a verdict that the prisoner was 'Not guilty of the 
murder, but guilty of manslaughter only;' on which he was branded and discharged.
	We see that, in the instance before us, a life had been lost, yet the party 
accused could not be convicted of murder; and we have the rather inserted this trial, to 
caution people to avoid occasional quarrels in the streets, which can never be attended 
with any good consequences, and are frequently productive of the most fatal.
	In the present case we find that the accused party was what is called a 
lieutenant of a press-gang; that is, the principal savage among savages. The custom of 
impressing, let counsellors plead, and senators debate till they are hoarse, is 
incompatible with every idea we can frame of the natural right to that freedom which 
God has bestowed equally on us all; and which, from the very nature of the donation, 
it appears to be every man's duty to support.
	There is nothing very particular in the case before us which tends to prove any 
insolence on the part of the lieutenant; but these volumes are growing to a conclusion, 
and we could not think of putting a period to them, without entering our protest 
against a practice which opposes every sentiment of humanity, and militates against 
all the finer feelings of the soul.
	What! because a man has served his country faithfully for a series of years by 
sea, and has at length retired in the fond hope of enjoying the sweets of domestic 
felicity, shall he be dragged from the fond wife, and the helpless innocents, when he 
wishes not again to tempt the danger of the seas? Honour, common honesty, plain 
sense, humanity, and even law, reprobate the idea!
	We have had of late two or three instances of freemen of London being 
impressed; but they have been discharged: the hardiest, the most callous of our 
lawyers dare not bring the matter to a legal issue: they know that sound sense and the 
laws of the realm are against the practice; they therefore fly from the subject, and, like 
the Parthians, conquer in retreat.
	Setting aside all moral considerations, and permitting even humanity to sleep 
on this subject, sound policy forbids this infernal practice. The British tars are full free 
to serve their country. Let proper bounties be offered, let proper encouragements be 
held forth, and the navy will never want a man. It will be said that the giving high 
bounties to sailors will occasion an increase of those taxes which are already nearly 
insupportable. No doubt but our taxes are very burthensome; but let our pensioners be 
reduced in number and in pay, and we shall not want a sum to reward our daring 
sailors. Besides, the bounties given to these men, politically considered, cost nothing. 
Every man knows that a seaman carries nothing abroad with him but his jacket, his 
trowsers, and his valour. He spends his bounty-money where he receives it; and the 
cash circulates among those who gave it.
	Let BRITISH GENEROSITY vie with BRITISH VALOUR, and we may bid 
DEFIANCE to the WORLD!


JAMES DONALLY  
A Blackmailer, who was convicted of Highway Robbery, 22nd of February, 
1779

	JAMES DONALLY was examined at Bow Street on a charge of having 
extorted money, by the vilest of all insinuations, from the Honourable Charles 
Fielding, second son of the Earl of Denbigh; and the magistrates, deeming that the 
offence amounted to a robbery on the highway, committed him for trial; and Lord 
Denbigh was bound to prosecute on behalf of his son, who was under age.
	James Donally alias Patrick Donally was indictedat the sessions held at the 
Old Bailey in February, 1779, for "that he, on the King's highway, in and upon the 
Honourable Charles Fielding, did make an assault, putting him in corporal fear and 
danger of his life, and stealing from his person, and against his will, half-a-guinea, on 
the 18th of January "; and there was a second count in the indictment for robbing the 
same gentleman of a guinea on the 20th of the same month.
	Between six and seven in the evening of the 18th of January, Mr Charles 
Fielding was going from the house of a lady with whom he had dined to Covent 
Garden Theatre, when he was accosted in Soho Square by Donally, who desired he 
would give him some money. Mr Fielding, astonished at this address, asked him for 
what. Donally said he had better comply, or he would take him before a magistrate 
and swear that he had made an attempt to commit a most foul crime.
	Terrified by this insinuation the young gentleman gave him half-a-guinea, 
which was all the money he had about him; and returned to the house where he had 
dined and borrowed half-a-guinea of the servant, with an intention of going to the 
play.
	Two days afterwards he again met the prisoner in Oxford Road, when he 
repeated his threats of carrying him before a magistrate, and to prison; saying that he 
knew very well what had passed in Soho Square the other night, and that unless he 
would give him some more money he would take him before a magistrate and accuse 
him of the same attempt at crime which he had threatened the other night. He added 
that it would go hard with him unless he could prove an alibi.
	Terrified by these threatenings, Mr Fielding went to Mr Waters, a grocer in 
Bond Street, to whom, under the immediate impressions of his fear, he gave a guinea 
to give to the prisoner.
	It happened, providentially, that on Saturday, the 12th of February, Lord 
Fielding was going up Hay Hill, when Donally, owing to the great personal likeness 
to his brother, accosted him in words which he did not rightly understand. His 
lordship said he believed he had mistaken him for some other person, for he did not 
know his face. Donally said he believed he must know him, and asked if he did not 
remember giving him half-a-guinea in Soho Square. He likewise mentioned the 
money given him at the grocer's–a knowledge of which his lordship, as well he might, 
utterly denied.
	The prisoner again asked if he did not recollect having given him any money, 
when his lordship asked him what was his present demand; and when requested to 
explain himself, some further altercation ensued; on which Lord Fielding desired the 
prisoner to go before a magistrate, with which he seemed to comply, but at length 
stopped and said he would not go. During this contest his lordship was somewhat 
terrified; and, scarcely knowing what kind of charge to make against the prisoner, he 
was, as he owned on the trial, "weak enough to loose his collar and let him go." 
Donally then turned about, addressed him by the title of "My Lord," and said he 
should hear from him again.
	On the Tuesday following, as Lord Fielding was walking near the same spot, 
he heard a voice over his shoulder saying: "Sir, I have met you again," or some such 
expression. His lordship, recollecting the voice, turned round and seized him by the 
collar. Donally complained that he had used him very ill the last time he saw him. The 
other replied that he used him too well, for he had let him go, but he would take care 
to do better this time.
	Donally now desired to be treated like a gentleman,saying he would not be 
dragged, but would go quietly. Lord Fielding, not seeing any person who was likely to 
assist him, and apprehending a rescue, told him that if he would walk along quietly to 
the next coffee-house he would not drag him. They walked down Dover Street 
together; but the prisoner increased his pace, so Lord Fielding followed, and seized 
him. He fell down twice, but was again seized as soon as he rose.
	By this time a crowd had assembled: and Major Hartley and two other 
gentlemen happening to come by, the prisoner was seized and conveyed to Bow 
Street, where the magistrates, on hearing the evidence, thought that the crime 
amounted to a highway robbery, and committed the prisoner for trial accordingly.
	Donally, in his defence, acknowledged that he had met Lord Fielding twice; 
that he had addressed him with decency, and desired him to hear something respecting 
his brother; and that Sir John Fielding had made the Honourable Charles Fielding 
carry on the prosecution. He did not deny the receipt of a guinea at the grocer's in 
Bond Street; but averred that he did not deserve death on account of the charge 
against him.
	Mr Fielding swore that he had given the same account at Bow Street as on the 
trial, and the jury, having considered the whole evidence, brought in a verdict of 
guilty; but Mr Justice Buller, before whom the offender was tried, reserved the case 
for the opinion of the judges, on a point of law.
	On the 29th of April following, the judges met and gave their opinion on this 
case, pronouncing it a new species of robbery to evade the law, but which was not to 
be evaded. He therefore underwent its sentence, which he had, with most abominable 
wickedness, brought upon his own head. [139]


MORGAN PHILLIPS  
Executed for murder, robbery and arson, 5th April 1778

	THE crime for which this man most justly suffered was attended with 
extraordinary acts of cruelty, and such as we have not often had occasion to describe.
	The inhabitants of Narbeth, a small village in the county of Pembroke, were, 
in the middle of the night, alarmed with the appearance of fire, bursting from a farm-
house near the turnpike. Before they could render assistance the house was nearly 
reduced to the ground, and the family were missing. On examining the ruins the 
remains of the owner, Mr. Thomas, an old and respectable farmer, were found on a 
bench, in a leaning posture; but so much burnt that it was impossible to determine 
whether he had been first murdered, or had perished by the merciless flames.
	Proceeding in the search, the next unhappy victim found was his niece, a fine 
woman of about thirty years of age, whose body lay across the feet of a half-burnt 
bedstead, with a thigh broken, and an arm missing.
	Among the ruins of another room was the body of a labouring man, much 
burnt, but with a large wound on the back of his head, from which much blood had 
issued. Mr. Thomas's servant-woman, who was very robust, was found dead at the 
entrance into one of the rooms, with several deep wounds in her head, and her hair 
clotted with blood. Her body was not so much burnt as the others; and near her was 
found the large kitchen spit, half bent, with which it was conjectured she had opposed 
the murderers.
	It was now evident that the house had been broke open, the inhabitants 
murdered, and then set on fire. Some money was found in a drawer, which it is 
supposed the villains overlooked; but considerable property appeared to have been 
stolen.
	So horrible a deed, in so peaceable a country as Wales, alarmed the whole 
nation, and every search was made after the murderers.
	A man of the name of John Morris, a lazy suspicious character, and who had 
already been charged with different offences, was apprehended, under great cause of 
suspicion; and, while carrying him to gaol, he suddenly sprang from the constables, 
and threw himself into a coal-pit, and was killed.
	At length suspicion fell on one Morgan Phillips, who, finding himself 
generally thought guilty, and apprehensive that full proof would be brought against 
him, confessed that he, in company with the above mentioned John Morris, broke into 
the house of Farmer Thomas, murdered the family, robbed it, as they conceived, of all 
the cash, and different portable articles, and afterwards set it on fire.
	On his trial this confession being read, and by the prisoner himself 
acknowledged to be true, and a variety of corroborating proofs being likewise brought 
forward, the jury had very little hesitation in finding him guilty; and Morgan Phillips 
was accordingly executed at Haverfordwest on the 5th of April, 1779, amid the 
execrations of every honest Welchman.


THE REV. JAMES HACKMAN  
Executed at Tyburn, 19th of April, 1779, for murdering Miss Reay outside 
Covent Garden Theatre

  
Double portrait of Rev Hackman and Miss Reay

	THIS shocking and truly lamentable case interested all ranks of people, who 
pitied the murderer's fate, conceived him stimulated to commit the horrid crime 
through love and madness. Pamphlets and poems were written on the occasion, and 
the crime was long the common topic of conversation.
	The object of Mr. Hackman's love renders his case still more singular.
	Miss Reay had been the Mistress of Lord Sandwich near twenty years, was the 
mother of nine children, and nearly double the age of Mr. Hackman.
	This murder affords a melancholy proof that there is no act so contrary to 
reason that men will not commit when under dominion of their passions. In short it is 
impossible to convey an idea of the impression it made; and the manner in which it 
was done created horror arid pity in every feeling mind.
	It is probable that Mr. Hackman imagined that there was a mutual passion–that 
Miss Reay had the same regard for him as he had for her. Love and madness are often 
little better than synonymous terms; for, had Mr Hackman not been blinded by a 
bewitching passion, he could never have imagined that Miss Reay would have left the 
family of a noble lord at the head of one of the highest departments of the state, in 
order to live in an humble station. Those who have been long accustomed to 
affluence, and even profusion, seldom choose to lower their flags. However, he was 
still tormented by this unhappy, irregular, and ungovernable passion, which, in an 
unhappy moment, led him to commit the crime for which he suffered.
	MR JAMES HACKMAN was born at Gosport, in Hampshire, and originally 
designed for trade; but he was too volatile in disposition to submit to the drudgery of 
the shop or counting-house. His parents, willing to promote his interest as far as lay in 
their power, purchased him an ensign's commission in the 68th Regiment of Foot. He 
had not been long in the army when he was sent to command a recruiting party, and 
being at Huntingdon he was frequently invited to dine with Lord Sandwich, who had a 
seat in that neighbourhood. There it was that he first became acquainted with Miss 
Reay, who lived under the protection of that nobleman.
	This lady was the daughter of a staymaker in Covent Garden, and served her 
apprenticeship to a mantua-maker in George's Court, St John's Lane, Clerkenwell. She 
was bound when only thirteen, and during her apprenticeship was taken notice of by 
the nobleman above mentioned, who took her under his protection, and treated her 
with every mark of tenderness. No sooner had Mr Hackman seen her than he became 
enamoured of her, though she had then lived for nineteen years with his lordship. 
Finding he could not obtain preferment in the army, he turned his thoughts to the 
Church, and entered into orders. Soon after he obtained the living of Wiverton, in 
Norfolk, which was only about Christmas preceding the shocking deed which cost 
him his life, so that it may be said he never enjoyed it.

  
Rev Hackman shooting Miss Reay and himself

	Miss Reay was extremely fond of music, and as her noble protector was in a 
high rank we need not be surprised to find that frequent concerts were performed both 
in London and at Hinchinbrook. At the latter place Mr Hackman was generally of the 
party, and his attention to her at those times was very great. How long he had been in 
London previous to this affair is not certainly known, but at that time he lodged in 
Duke's Court, St Martin's Lane. On the morning of the 7th of April, 1779, he sat some 
time in his closet, reading Dr Blair's Sermons; but in the evening he took a walk to the 
Admiralty, where he saw Miss Reay go into the coach along with Signora Galli, who 
attended her. The coach drove to Covent Garden Theatre, where she stayed to see the 
performance of Love in a Village. Mr Hackman went into the theatre at the same time, 
but, not being able to contain the violence of his passion, returned to his lodgings, and 
having loaded two pistols again went to the playhouse, where he waited till the play 
was over. As Miss Reay was ready to step into the coach he took a pistol in each 
hand, one of which he discharged against her, which killed her on the spot, and the 
other at himself, which, however, did not take effect.
	He then beat himself on his head with the butt-end, in order to destroy himself, 
so fully bent was he on the destruction of both. After some struggle he was secured, 
and his wounds dressed. He was then carried before Sir John Fielding, who committed 
him to Tothill Fields Bridewell, and next to Newgate, where a person was appointed 
to attend him, lest he should lay violent hands on himself. In Newgate, as he knew he 
had no favour to expect, he prepared himself for the awful change he was about to 
make. He had dined with his sister on the day the murder was committed, and in the 
afternoon had written a letter to her husband, Mr Booth, an eminent attorney, 
acquainting him with his resolution of destroying himself and desiring him to sell 
what effects he should leave behind him, to pay a small debt; but this letter was not 
sent, for it was found in his pocket.
	On the trial Mr. Macnamara deposed that, on Wednesday, the 7th day of April, 
on seeing Miss Reay, with whom he had some little acquaintance, in some difficulties 
in getting from the playhouse, he offered his assistance to hand her to her coach; and 
just as they were in the Piazzas, very near the carriage, he heard the report of a pistol, 
and felt an impression on his right arm, which arm she held with her left, and instantly 
dropped. He thought at first that the pistol had been fired through wantonness, and 
that she had fallen from the fright, and therefore fell upon his knees to help her up; 
but, finding his hands bloody, he then conceived an idea of what had happened, and, 
by the assistance of a link-boy, got the deceased into the Shakspeare Tavern, where he 
first saw the prisoner, after he was secured. He asked him some questions relative to 
the fact and the cause; and his answer was, that neither the time nor place were proper 
to resolve him. He asked his name and was told Hackman: he knew a Mr. Booth, in 
Craven Street, and desired he might be sent for.
	He asked to see the lady; to which he (the witness) objected, and had her 
removed to a private room. From the impression he felt, and the great quantity of 
blood about him, he grew sick, and went home; and knew nothing more about it.
	Mary Anderson, a fruit-woman, deposed that, just as the play was over, she 
saw two ladies and a gentleman coming out of the playhouse, and a gentleman in 
black following them. Lord Sandwich's coach was called. When the carriage came up 
the gentleman handed the other lady into it. The lady that was shot stood behind, 
when the gentleman in black came up, laid hold of her gown, and pulled two pistols 
out of his pockets: the one in his right hand he discharged at the lady, and the other, in 
his left, he discharged at himself. They fell feet to feet. He beat himself violently over 
the head with his pistol, and desired somebody would kill him.
	Richard Blandy, the constable, swore to the finding two letters in the prisoner's 
pocket, which he delivered to Mr. Campbell, the master of the Shakspeare Tavern, in 
Covent Garden.
	Mr. Mahon, an apothecary, corroborated the evidence of the fruit-woman: he 
wrenched the pistol out of his hand, with which he was beating himself, as he lay on 
the ground–took him to his house, dressed his wounds, and accompanied him to the 
Shakspeare.
	Denis O'Brian, a surgeon, examined the wound of the deceased, and found it 
mortal.
	Being called upon for his defence, he addressed the Court in the following 
words:-- "I should not have troubled the Court with the examination of witnesses to 
support the charge against me, had I not thought that the pleading guilty to the 
indictment gave an indication of contemning death, not suitable to my present 
condition, and was, in some measure, being accessory to a second peril of my life; and 
I likewise thought that the justice of my country ought to be satisfied by suffering my 
offence to be proved, and the fact established by evidence.
	"I stand here this day the most wretched of human beings, and confess myself 
criminal in a high degree; yet while I acknowledge, with shame and repentance, that 
my determination against my own life was formal and complete, I protest, with that 
regard to truth which becomes my situation, that the will to destroy her, who was ever 
dearer to me than my life, was never mine till a momentary frenzy overcame me, and 
induced me to commit the deed I now deplore. The letter, which I meant for my 
brother-in-law after my decease, will have its due weight, as to this point, with good 
men.
	"Before this dreadful act, I trust nothing will be found in the tenor of my life 
which the common charity of mankind will not excuse. I have no wish to avoid the 
punishment which the laws of my country appoint for my crime; but, being already 
too unhappy to feel a punishment in death or a satisfaction in life, I submit myself 
with penitence and patience to the disposal and judgment of Almighty God, and to the 
consequences of this inquiry into my conduct and intention."
	On the trial Mr. Macnamara deposed that, on Wednes day, the 7th day of 
April, on seeing Miss Reay, with whom he had some little acquaintance, in some 
difficulties in getting from the playhouse, he offered his assistance to hand her to her 
coach; and just as they were in the Piazzas, very near the carriage, he heard the report 
of a pistol, and felt an impression on his right arm, which arm she held with her left, 
and instantly dropped. He thought at Iirst that the pistol had been fired through 
wantonness, and that she had fallen from the fright, and therefore fell upon his knees 
to help her up; but, finding his hands bloody, lie
	then conceived an idea of what had happened, and, by the assistance of a link-
boy, got the deceased into the Shakspeare Tavern, where he first saw the prisoner, 
after he was secured. He asked him some questions relative to the fact and the cause; 
and his answer was, that neither the time nor place were proper to resolve him. He 
asked his name and was told Hackman: he knew a Mr. Booth, in Craven Street, and 
desired he might be sent for.
	He asked to see the lady; to which he (the witness) objected, and had her 
removed to a private room. From the impression he felt, and the great quantity of 
blood about him, he grew sick, and went home; and knew nothing more about it.
	Mary Anderson, a fruit-woman, deposed that, just as the play was over, she 
saw two ladies and a gentleman coming out of the playhouse, and a gentleman in 
black following them. Lord Sandwich's coach was called. When the carriage came up 
the gentleman handed the other lady into it. The lady that was shot stood behind, 
when the gentleman in black came up, laid hold of her gown, and pulled two pistols 
out of his pockets: the one in his right hand he discharged at the lady, and the other, in 
his left, he discharged at himself. They fell feet to feet. He beat himself violently over 
the head with his pistol, and desired somebody would kill him.
	Richard Blandy, the constable, swore to the finding two letters in the prisoner's 
pocket, which he delivered to Mr. Campbell, the master of the Shakspeare Tavern, in 
Covent Garden.
	Mr. Mahon, an apothecary, corroborated the evidence of the fruit-woman: he 
wrenched the pistol out of his hand, with which he was beating himself, as he lay on 
the ground, took him to his house, dressed his wounds, and accompanied him to the 
Shakspeare.
	Denis O'Brian, a surgeon, examined the wound of the deceased, and found it 
mortal.
	Being called upon for his defence, he addressed the Court in the following 
words:- "I should not have troubled the Court with the examination of witnesses to 
support the charge against me, had I not thought that the pleading guilty to the 
indictment gave an indication of contemning death, not suitable to my present 
condition, and was, in some measure, being accessory to a second peril of my life; and 
I likewise thought that the justice of my country ought to be satisfied by suffering my 
offence to be proved, and the fact established by evidence.
	"I stand here this day the most wretched of human beings, and confess myself 
criminal in a high degree; yet while I acknowledge, with shame and repentance, that 
my determination against my own life was formal and com plete, I protest, with that 
regard to truth which becomes my situation, that the will to destroy her, who was ever 
dearer to me than my life, was never mine till a momentary frenzy overcame me, and 
induced me to commit the deed I now deplore. The letter, which I meant for my 
brotherin-law after my decease, will have its due weight, as to this point, with good 
men.
	"Before this dreadful act, I trust nothing will be found in the tenor of my life 
which the common charity of mankind will not excuse. I have no wish to avoid the 
punishment which the laws of my country appoint for my crime; but, being already 
too unhappy to feel a punishment in death or a satisfaction in life, I submit myself 
with penitence and patience to the disposal and judgment of Almighty God, and to the 
consequences of this inquiry into my conduct and intention."
	Then was read the following letter:--
	My DEAR FREDERIC, 
	When this reaches you I shall bhe no more; but do not let my unhappy fate 
distress you too much: I have strove against it as long as possible, but it now 
overpowers me. You well know where my affections were placed: my having by 
some means or other lost hers (an idea which I could not support) has driven me to 
madness. The world will condemn me, but your good heart will pity me. God bless 
you, my dear Frederic! Would I had a sum to leave you, to convince you of my great 
regard! You was my only friend. I have hid one circumstance from you, which gives 
me great pain. I owe Mr. Knight, of Gosport, one hundred pounds, for which he has 
the writings of my houses; but I hope in God, when they are sold, and all other matters 
collected, there will be nearly enough to settle our account. May Almighty God bless 
you and yours with cormfort and happiness; and may you ever be a stranger to the 
pangs I now feel! May Heaven protect my beloved woman, and forgive this act, 
which alone could relieve me from a world of misery I have long endured! Oh, if it 
should ever be in your power to do her an act of friendship, remember your faithful 
friend. 
	J. HACKMAN.
	The jury inimediately returned their fatal verdict. The unhappy man heard the 
sentence pronounced him with taint resignation to his fate, and employed the very 
short time allowed murderers after conviction in repentance and prayer. During the 
procession to the fatal tree at Tyburn he seemed much affected, and said but little; and 
when he arrived at Tyburn, and got out of the coach and mounted the cart, he took 
leave of Dr. Porter and the Ordinary. After some time spent in prayer, he was turned 
off, on April the 19th, 1779; and, having hung the usual time, his body was carried to 
Surgeons' Hall for dissection.
	Such was the end of a young gentleman who might have been an ornament to 
his country, the delight of his friends, and a comfort to his relations, had he not been 
led away by the influence of an unhappy passion.


JAMES MATHISON  
Who forged Bank-Notes so cleverly that they could not be distinguished 
from Genuine Ones. Executed at Tyburn, 28th of July, 1779

	JAMES MATHISON was one of the cleverest bank-note forgers ever brought 
to justice. His counterfeits deceived the greatest experts, and he succeeded in passing 
many of his notes in different parts of the country. The particular forgery here charged 
on him was for making and uttering a note for payment of twenty pounds, with intent 
to defraud Mr Mann, of Coventry, and the Bank of England. The note was produced 
in court, and witnesses were brought to prove its having been negotiated by him.
	This fact being established, the next circumstance in consideration was to 
prove that the note was absolutely a counterfeit one. This his prosecutors were totally 
unable to do by any testimony they could adduce, so minutely and so dexterously had 
he feigned all the different marks. The note itself was not only so made as to render it 
altogether impossible for any human eyes to perceive a difference, but the very hands 
of the cashier and the entering clerk were also so counterfeited as entirely to preclude 
a positive discrimination even by those persons themselves. The watermark in the 
paper too–namely, "Bank of England"–which the bankers had considered as an 
infallible criterion of fair notes, a mark which could not be resembled by any possible 
means, was also hit off by this man, so as to put it out of the power of the most exact 
observer to perceive a difference. Several paper-makers were of opinion that this mark 
must have been put on in the making of the paper; but Mathison declared that he put it 
on afterwards by a peculiar method, known only to himself. The extreme similitude of 
the fair and false notes had such an effect upon the judge and jury that the prisoner 
would certainly have been discharged, for want of evidence to prove the counterfeit, if 
his own information, taken at Fielding's, had not been produced against him, which 
immediately turned the scale, and he was found guilty.
	He was executed at Tyburn, pursuant to his sentence, on 28th of July, 1779. At 
the place of execution he made a speech which took up some minutes, wherein he 
acknowledged his guilt, and hoped for forgiveness from the Almighty. He also 
warned others to avoid the crime for which he suffered, and forgave his prosecutors.


ELIZABETH BUTCHILL  
Executed for infanticide, March 17th, 1780
	THIS unfortunate young woman was a native of Saffron Walden, in Essex, 
born of honest and industrious parents, and bad lived for a considerable time with her 
aunt, who was a bed-maker belonging to Trinity College. Till the unhappy affair 
which brought her to so ignominious an end she was generally esteemed for the 
decency and modesty of her conduct; and it is to be lamented that a mistaken fear of 
shame should have induced her to commit an action at which Nature shudders–the 
destruction of her own offspring!
	The following are the particulars of the shocking murder perpetrated by this 
malefactor, as they appeared on the coroner's inquest and on the trial.
	On Friday, the 7th of January, 1780, about eleven in the morning, the body of 
a new-born female infant was found in the river near Trinity College bogs; which was 
immediately taken out, and the coroner's jury summoned to sit on the body.
	Mr. Bond, a surgeon, deposed that he examined the body, when he found the 
head swelled and bruised, the skull fractured in several places: that, on opening the 
body, the lungs appeared distended, and were on trial specifically lighter than water; 
and that he was of opinion the child was born alive, and received its death by the 
wounds in the head.
	Esther Hall, the wife of William Hall, a brewer to Trinity College, whose 
dwelling-house was within the College gates, at no great distance from the place 
where the child was found, deposed that her niece, Elizabeth Butchill, had lived about 
three years with her in the capacity of a bed-maker in the said college; that, about 
three o'clock in the morning of the 6th instant, she heard her niece groan very much, 
and, getting up to inquire into the cause, found her complaining of a violent colic; that 
she heated some peppermint-water, &c. and gave it her, with some hot flannels, which 
seemed to give her ease; that, about six in the morning, the said Esther Hall went to 
College, leaving her niece in bed, where she found her on her return about ten o'clock.
	William Hall, husband to the said witness, hearing a child had been found, 
suspected the said Elizabeth Butchill, and sent for a surgeon to examine her. In her 
voluntary confession, taken before the mayor and Dr. Ewin, and read to the jury, she 
confessed that she was delivered of a female child on Thursday morning, about half 
past six o'clock, by herself; that the child cried some little time after its birth; and that, 
in about twenty minutes after, she herself threw the said infant down one of the holes 
of the necessary into the river, and buried the placenta, &c. in the dunghill near the 
house. Upon this evidence the jury brought in their verdict Wilful Murder, but did not 
charge the said Elizabeth Butchill as the mother: she was therefore committed to the 
Castle, on her own confession, as soon as she could be removed with safety.
	On Wednesday morning she was tried before Judge Buller, when her 
voluntary confession being produced, and many corroborating circumstances 
appearing in evidence, the jury found her guilty, and the judge passed sentence on her 
in a very pathetic and affecting manner. When the unhappy culprit, in extreme agony, 
solicited mercy, his lordship told her that, as she had been deaf to the cries of the 
innocent, and, stifling the strong ties of maternal affection, had been the murderer of 
her child, it was impossible for mercy to be extended to her in this world; he therefore 
exhorted her to seek for a sincere repentance, and sentenced her to be executed the 
succeeding Friday, and her body to be anatomized.
	From the time of her commitment she was in a bad state of health; but her 
behaviour was modest, patient, and penitent. A worthy clergyman visited her daily, 
and administered the sacrament to her, when she was perfectly resigned to her fate, 
and acknowledged the justice of her sentence. In the evening before her death she 
took an affectionate leave of her friends, and passed the night tolerably composed, 
except at intervals, when she seemed to be deprived of her senses.
	In the morning of the fatal day the before-mentioned clergyman attended her 
to the place of execution, where her behaviour was firm, resigned, and exemplary. She 
joined with the minister in prayer, and sung the lamentation of a sinner with marks of 
a sincere penitent, declaring she had made her peace with God, and was reconciled to 
her fate. Desiring her example might be a warning to all thoughtless young women, 
and calling on Jesus Christ for mercy, she was launched into eternity amidst 
thousands of commiserating spectators, who, though they abhorred the crime, shed 
tears of pity for the unhappy criminal.
	She was a decent plain young woman, about twenty-two years of age; and, 
before this unfortunate affair, bore a good character for her modest behaviour.
	She was executed at Cambridge, March 17, 1780.


A. DURNFORD AND W. NEWTON  
Executed at Tyburn, 22nd of November, 1780, for a Robbery under Singular 
Circumstances

	IT was proved on their trial at the Old Bailey that these two men hired an 
empty house, No. 21 Water Lane, Fleet Street, and having a bill of exchange lying at 
the bank of Smith, Wright & Grey, they directed it for payment at this house. They 
made preparations for cleaning, in order, as they pretended, to furnish it with dispatch; 
but the landlord, not liking this extraordinary haste, or his new tenants, desired Mrs 
Boucher, the mistress of a public-house opposite, to keep an eye on their proceedings.
	Accordingly, on the day this sham bill became due, being the 5th of August, 
1780, she observed the new tenants, Durnford and Newton, enter the house and open 
the parlour windows. Soon after she saw a third man knock at the door, which was 
opened, and he entered. Watching events, she heard an uncommon noise, and, 
stepping over the way to listen, heard a cry of murder, as from a hoarse faint voice, 
succeeded by a kind of groaning, which very much alarmed her. Looking through the 
keyhole, she saw two men dragging a third down the cellar stairs, on which she cried 
out loudly: "They're murdering a man!" She knocked hard at the door, and begged the 
people in the street to break it open; but none would interfere. Being enraged at their 
not assisting her, she burst open the window, and was entering the house when 
Newton jumped out of the first pair-of- stairs window, and was running off, but on the 
cry of "Stop thief!" he was instantly taken, and the other she seized by the throat 
herself, and dragged him to her own house.
	The house was then immediately searched, and in a back cellar was found a 
man, bound and nearly choked, to prevent his calling out. He proved to be a collecting 
clerk for Smith, Wright & Grey, named James Watts. They had robbed him of his 
pocket-book, and would have murdered him had not this woman saved his life.
	Mr Watts was a young Quaker, aged eighteen, and would not, according to the 
doctrines of that sect, be sworn; which is required by the law in all cases of life and 
death; so that their conviction rested chiefly on the evidence of Mrs Boucher, though 
not a shadow of a doubt remained of their guilt.
	Both prisoners were convicted, and executed at Tyburn, on the 22nd of 
November, 1780.


LORD GEORGE GORDON  
An Account of the Riots in London in 1780

  
Portrait of Lord George Gordon

	THE origin of what are known as the Gordon Riots, in London in 1780, is 
ascribed to the passing of an Act of Parliament, about two years previously, for 
"relieving his Majesty's subjects, of the Catholic Religion, from certain penalties and 
disabilities imposed upon them during the reign of William III." A petition to 
Parliament was framed for its repeal, and a general meeting of a body of people, 
forming the Protestant Association, headed by Lord George Gordon, was held on the 
29th of May, at the Coachmakers' Hall, Noble Street, Aldersgate Street. At this 
meeting the noble lord moved the following resolutions:--
	"Whereas no hall in London can contain forty thousand persons,
	"Resolved,–That this association do meet on Friday next in St George's Fields, 
at ten o'clock in the morning, to consider the most prudent and respectful manner of 
attending their petition, which will be presented the same day to the House of 
Commons.
	Resolved,–For the sake of good order and regularity, that this association, in. 
coming to the ground, do separate themselves into four divisions–viz. the London 
division, the Westminster division, the Southwark division, and the Scotch division.
	"Resolved,–That the London division do take place of the ground towards 
Southwark; the Westminster division second; the Southwark division third; and the 
Scotch division upon the left all wearing blue cockades, to distinguish themselves 
from the Papists and those who approve of the late Act in favour of Popery.
	"Resolved,–That the magistrates of London, Westminster and Southwark are 
requested to attend, that their presence may overawe and control any riotous or evil-
minded persons who may wish to disturb the legal and peaceable deportment of his 
Majesty's subjects."
	His lordship having intimated that he would not present the petition unless 
twenty thousand persons attended the meeting, and the resolutions having been 
published and placarded through the streets, on the day apppointed a vast concourse 
of people from all parts of the City and its environs assembled in St George's Fields. 
The main body took their route over London Bridge, marching in order, six or eight in 
a rank, through the City towards Westminster, accompanied by flags bearing the 
words "No Popery." At Charing Cross the mob was increased by additional numbers 
on foot, on horseback, and in various vehicles, so that, by the time the different parties 
met together, all the avenues to both Houses of Parliament were entirely filled with 
the crowd. The rabble now took possession of all the passages leading to the House of 
Commons, from the outer doors to the very entrance for the Members, which latter 
they twice attempted to force open; and a like attempt was made at the House of 
Lords, but without success in either instance. In the meantime Lord George Gordon 
came into the House of Commons with an unembarrassed countenance, and a blue 
cockade in his hat, but finding it gave offence he took it out and put it in his pocket–
not, however, before Captain Herbert, of the navy, one of the Members, threatened to 
pull it out; while Colonel Murray, another Member, declared that, if the mob broke 
into the House, he (looking at Lord George) should instantly be the victim.

  
The burning of Newgate Prison

	The petition having been presented, the populace separated into parties and 
proceeded to demolish the Catholic chapels in Duke Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields, and 
Warwick Street, Golden Square; and all the furniture, ornaments and altars of both 
chapels were committed to the flames. After various other outrages the prison of 
Newgate was attacked. They demanded from the keeper, Mr Ackerman, the release of 
their confined associates. He refused to comply; yet, dreading the consequence, he 
went to the sheriffs to know their pleasure. On his return he found his house in flames, 
and the jail itself was soon in a similar situation. The doors and entrances were broken 
open with crowbars and sledge-hammers; and it is scarcely to be credited with what 
rapidity this strong prison was destroyed. The public office in Bow Street and Sir John 
Fielding's house, adjoining, were soon destroyed, and all their furniture and effects, 
books, papers, etc., committed to the flames. Justice Coxe's house in Great Queen 
Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields, was similarly treated; and the two prisons at Clerkenwell 
set open and the prisoners liberated. The King's Bench Prison, with some houses 
adjoining, a tavern and the New Bridewell were also set on fire, and almost entirely 
consumed.
	The mob now appeared to consider themselves as superior to all authority; 
they declared their resolution to burn all the remaining public prisons, and demolish 
the Bank, the Temple, Gray's Inn, Lincoln's Inn, the Mansion House, the Royal 
palaces, and the arsenal at Woolwich. The attempt upon the Bank of England was 
actually made twice in the course of one day; but both attacks were but feebly 
conducted and the rioters easily repulsed, several of them falling by the fire of the 
military, and many others being severely wounded.
	To form an adequate idea of the distress of the inhabitants in every part of the 
City would be impossible. Six-and-thirty fires were to be seen blazing in the 
metropolis during the night.
	A proclamation, and a reward of 500L. was offered for the discovery and 
conviction of the person or persons who demolished the houses and chapels of the 
foreign ambassadors; and military law was established.
	At length the continuous arrival of fresh troops, from all parts of the country 
within fifty or sixty miles of the metropolis, intimidated the rabble; and soon after the 
disturbances were quelled.
	The Royal Exchange, the public buildings, the squares and the principal streets 
were all occupied by troops. The shops were closed; while immense volumes of dense 
smoke were still rising from the ruins of consumed edifices.
	During the riots many persons, terrified by the alarming outrages of the mob, 
fled from London and took refuge at places at a considerable distance from town.
	The number of persons killed is variously stated. Many persons, strangers to 
the attempt, were destroyed by the necessarily indiscriminate fire of the soldiers and 
militia; and although it is impossible to calculate the precise number who lost their 
lives, from the circumstance of many being carried off by their friends, it is believed 
to be about five hundred.
	Among other death which resulted from these riots, was Mr. Robert Dillon, a 
pious man, who had officiated at the Roman Catholic chapel, in Moorfields, for thirty-
six years. The mob pulled down his house, along with the chapel, burned his books, 
which he greatly valued, and his household furniture, not even leaving him a bed, 
whereon he might rest his old bones: this barbarous treatment broke his heart. He was 
a younger branch of the ancient family of Proudston, in the county of Meath in 
Ireland; and was universally esteemed by a numerous acquaintance.
	The following is an extract of the King's Speech to both Houses of Parliament 
the 18th of June, soon after the riots were ended:
	"My Lords, and Gentlemen,
	"The outrages committed by bands of lawless and desperate men, in various 
parts of this metropolis, broke forth with such violence, into acts of felony and 
treason, had so far overborne all civil authority, and threatened directly the immediate 
subversion of all legal power, the destruction of all property, and the confusion of 
every order of the state, that I found myself obliged, by every tie of duty and affection 
to my people, to suppress, in every part, those rebellious insurrections, and to provide 
for the public safety, by the most effectual and immediate application of the force 
intrusted to me by parliament.
	"I have directed copies of the proclamations issued upon that occasion, to be 
laid before you.
	"Proper orders have been given for bringing the authors and abettors of these 
insurrections and the perpetrators of such criminal acts, to speedy trial, and to such 
condign punishment, as the laws of their country prescribe, and the vindication of 
public justice demand.
	"Though I trust it is not necessary, yet I think it right, at this time, to renew to 
you my solemn assurances that I have no other object but to make the laws of the 
realm, and the principles of our excellent constitution, in Church and State, the rule 
and measure of my conduct; and that I shall ever consider it as the first duty of my 
station, and the chief glory of my reign, to maintain and preserve the established 
religion of my kingdoms; and, as far as in me lies, to secure and to perpetuate the 
rights and liberties of my people."
	Lord George Gordon, the leader and instigator of these riots, was subsequently 
tried in the Court of King's Bench, but escaped conviction. There was little doubt that 
he was occasionally subject to aberrations of intellect. His death took place some 
years afterwards in the King's Bench Prison. He had been indicted for a libel on Marie 
Antoinette, the unfortunate French Queen, and the Count d'Adhemar, the French 
Ambassador, and, having been convicted, fled from punishment, but was afterwards 
apprehended in Birmingham, attired in the garb of a Jew, with a long beard, etc., 
where he had undergone circumcision, and had embraced the religion of the 
unbelievers. He died professing the same faith. Such was the end of a man, once, 
perhaps, the most popular idol of the mob; and, for some days the terror of all 
peaceable citizens.
	Many of the rioters were apprehended, and having been recognised were 
convicted, and suffered death in most instances opposite to the places in which the 
scenes were enacted in which they were proved to have taken a part.
	Of those brought to trial, we find, from the different court records, that,
At the Old Bailey, there were tried
85
Of whom were convicted
35
Tried at St. Margaret's Hill
50
Convicted
24
	Among those tried and convicted, were several women and boys; but not one 
individual of the smallest respectability or good fame; negroes, Jews, gypsies, and 
vagabonds of every description; the very refuse of society.
	Richard Roberts and William Lawrence, mere lads in appearance, hardly 
seventeen years of age, were among the principal leaders in these dreadful scenes of 
destruction, and were the first who were brought to trial. They were convicted of 
pulling down the house of Sir John Fielding, and hanged in Bow Street.
	Thomas Taplin, a captain-rioter, convicted of extorting money from Mr. 
Mahon. That gentleman deposed that a ragged little boy came first up to him, and 
said, "God bless your honour, some money for your poor mob!" He bid him begone. 
"Then," replied the imp of mischief, "I'll call my captain." Then came up the prisoner, 
Taplin, on horse-back, led by two boys, and attended by forty or fifty followers. Mr. 
Mahon was intimidated, so as to purchase his security with half-a-crown. Taplin was 
also hanged in Bow Street, where he had stopped Mr. Mahon.
	George Kennedy, hanged in Bunhill-row, for pulling down the house of Mr. 
M'Cartney, a baker.
	William M'Donald, a cripple, who had lost an arm, and had formerly been a 
soldier, hanged on Tower-hill for destroying the house of J. Lebarty, a publican, in St. 
Catharine's lane, near thereto.
	James Henry, for setting fire to the house of Mr. Langdon, on Holborn-hill.
	George Bawton, a poor drunken cobbler, who meeting Mr. Richard Stone, in 
High Street, Holborn, stopped him, saying, "Pray remember the Protestant religion." 
Mr. Stone offered twopence, but the cobler damned him, and swore he would have 
sixpence, which was compiled with, for this he was hanged! a punishment which at 
any other time would have borne no proportion to the crime, and an instance of 
severity which we trust could not at any other time have occurred in England.
	William Browne, for extorting money from Mr. Daking, in Bishopsgate Street, 
as for the Protestant cause, and threaten ing to rip him up, if he did not comply.
	William Bateman, executed in Coleman Street, for pulling down the house of 
Mr. Charlton.
	John Gray, Charles Kent, and Letitia Holland, hanged in Bloomsbury-square, 
for being a party to setting fire to the mansion of Lord Chief Justice Mansfield.
	Mary Roberts and Charlotte Gardener, the latter a negress, hanged on Tower-
hill for assisting to demolish the house of J. Lebarty, as before-mentioned.
	Enoch Fleming, executed in Oxford-road, for assisting in pulling down the 
house of Ferdinand Schomberg.
	George Staples, for being concerned in the riot in Moorfields, and assisting to 
pull down the Roman Catholic chapel there, and the house of James Malo.
	Samuel Solomon, a Jew hanged in Whitechapel, for joining in the demolishing 
the house of Christopher Conner.
	James Jackson, at the Old Bailey, convicted of setting fire to Newgate.
	George Staples and Jonathan Stacy, also hanged in Moorfields, for being 
concerned in the riot, and burning of houses there.
	Joseph Lovell and Robert Lovell, father and son, a pair of gypsies, hanged for 
aiding in setting fire to the house of Thomas Conolly.
	The following, convicted of setting fire to the King's Bench Prison, and houses 
near thereto, were executed in St. George's Fields, viz. Robert Loveli, Mary Cook, 
Edward Dorman, Elizabeth Collins, Henry Penny, and John Bridport.
	Among the rioters, to sum up the account of their infamy and wretchedness, 
was Jack Ketch himself. This miscreant, whose real name was Edward Dennis, was 
convicted of pulling down the house of Mr Boggis, of New Turnstile. The keeper of 
Tothill Fields Bridewell would not suffer Jack Ketch to go among the other prisoners, 
lest they should tear him to pieces. In order that he might hang up his brother rioters, 
he was granted a pardon.


JOHN DONELLAN, ESQ 
Executed for the Murder of Sir Theodosius Boughton, Bart., his Brother-in-
Law, 2nd of April, 1781

	JHN DONELLAN had been a captain in the army, and was the son of Colonel 
Donellan. He certainly distinguished himself as a good soldier, for not only had he 
been much wounded in the service, but, if his own account may be credited, he was 
singularly instrumental in the taking of Mazulapatam. Being appointed, however, one 
of the four agents for prize-money, he condescended to receive presents from some 
black merchants, to whom part of their effects had been ordered to be restored, for 
which he was tried by a court martial, and cashiered. He subsequently purchased a 
share in the Pantheon, where he figured for some time as master of ceremonies. After 
a variety of applications he at length obtained a certificate from the War Office that he 
had behaved in the East Indies "like a gallant officer"; in consequence of which he 
was put upon half-pay in the 39th Regiment. In June, 1777, he married Miss 
Boughton; and on Friday, 30th of March, 1781, he was tried at the assizes at Warwick 
for the wilful murder of Sir Theodosius Edward Allesley Boughton, Bart., his brother-
in-law.
	Mr Powell, apothecary of Rugby, deposed that on Wednesday morning, the 
27th of February, he was sent for to Lawton Hall, and on his arrival there, at a little 
before nine o'clock, Captain Donellan conducted him to the apartment of Sir 
Theodosius. On entering, he perceived that the baronet was dead; and on examining 
the body he concluded that it was about an hour since life had fled. He had some 
conversation with Captain Donellan with regard to the deceased, and he was told by 
him that he had "died in convulsions."
	Lady Boughton, the mother of the deceased, deposed that Sir Theodosius was 
twenty years old on the 3rd of August past. On his coming of age he would have been 
entitled to above two thousand pounds a year, and in the event of his dying a minor 
the greater part of his fortune was to descend to his sister, the wife of Mr Donellan. It 
was known in the family on the evening of Tuesday, the 26th that Sir Theodosius was 
to take his physic the next morning. He used to put his physic in the dressing-room. 
He happened once to omit to take it; upon which Mr Donellan said: "Why don't you 
set it in your outer room?–then you would not so soon forget it." After this he several 
times put the medicines upon his shelf over the chimney-piece in his outer room. On 
the evening of Tuesday, the 26th, about six o'clock, Sir Theodosius went out fishing 
attended only by one servant, Samuel Frost. Witness and Mrs Donellan took a walk in 
the garden, and were there over an hour. To the best of her recollection she had seen 
nothing of Mr Donellan after dinner till about seven o'clock, when he came out of the 
house door in the garden, and told them that he had been to see them fishing, and that 
he would have persuaded Sir Theodosius to come in, lest he should take cold, but he 
could not. Sir Theodosius came home a little after nine, apparently very well; he went 
up into his own room soon after, and then to bed. He requested her to call him the 
next morning and give him his physic. She accordingly went into his room about 
seven in the morning, when he appeared to be very well. She asked him where the 
bottle was, and he said: "It stands there upon the shelf." He desired her to read the 
label, which she accordingly did, and found there was written upon it: "Purging 
draught for Sir Theodosius Boughton." As he was taking it he observed that it smelled 
and tasted very nauseous; upon which she said: "I think it smells very strongly like 
bitter almonds." He then remarked that he thought he should not be able to keep the 
medicine upon his stomach.
	Here a bottle was delivered to Lady Boughton containing the genuine draught, 
which she was desired to smell, and inform the Court whether it smelled like the 
medicine Sir Theodosius took. She answered in the negative. She was then desired to 
smell another containing the draught, with the addition of laurel-water, which she said 
had a smell very much like that of the medicine she gave to Sir Theodosius. Lady 
Boughton then proceeded with her evidence. Two minutes after Sir Theodosius had 
taken the draught he struggled very much. It appeared to her as if it was to keep the 
draught down. He made a prodigious rattling in his stomach, and guggling; and these 
symptoms continued about ten minutes. He then seemed as if he were going to sleep, 
or inclined to doze; and, perceiving him a little composed, she went out of the room. 
She returned in about five minutes, and to her great surprise found him with his eyes 
fixed upwards, his teeth clenched, and foam running out of his mouth. She instantly 
desired a servant to take the first horse he could get and go for Mr Powell.
	She saw Mr Donellan less than five minutes after. He came into the room 
where Sir Theodosius lay, and said to her: "What do you want?" She answered that 
she wanted to inform him what a terrible thing had happened; that it was an 
unaccountable thing in the doctor to send such medicine, for if it had been taken by a 
dog it would have killed it; and she did not think her son would live. He inquired in 
what way Sir Theodosius then was. When told, he asked her where the physic bottle 
was; on which she showed him two draughts; when he took up one of the bottles and 
said, "Is this it?" she answered, "Yes." He then rinsed it, and emptied it into some 
dirty water that was in a washhand-basin; and on his doing so she said: " What are 
you at? You should not meddle with the bottles." Upon that he snatched up the other 
bottle and rinsed it, and then he put his finger to it and tasted it. She repeated that he 
ought not to meddle with the bottles; upon which he replied that he did it to taste it. 
Two servants, named Sarah Blundell and Catherine Amos, afterwards came into the 
room, and he desired the former to take away the basin and the bottles, and he put the 
bottles into her hands. The witness however, took the bottles from her and set them 
down, bidding her not to touch them; and the prisoner then desired that the room 
might be cleaned, and the dirty clothes thrown into the inner room. This being done, 
the witness turned her back for a moment on which the prisoner again handed the 
servant the bottles, and bade her take them away, and she accordingly removed them.
	Witness soon afterwards went into the parlour, where she found Mr and Mrs 
Donellan; and the former told his wife that her mother had been pleased to take notice 
of his washing the bottles, and that he did not know what he should have done if he 
had not thought of saying that he had put the water into them to put his finger to it to 
taste.
	Dr Rattray, of Coventry, described the external appearances of the body, and 
its appearances in the dissecting. He was asked whether, as he had heard the evidence 
of Mr Powell and Lady Boughton, he could, from that evidence, totally independent 
of the appearances he had described, form a judgment as to the cause of the death of 
Sir Theodosius. He answered that, exclusive of these appearances, he was of opinion, 
from the symptoms that followed the taking of the draught, that it was poison, and the 
certain cause of his death. Being desired to smell the bottle, and asked what was the 
noxious medicine in it, he said it was a distillation of laurel leaves, called laurel-water. 
Here he entered into a detail of several experiments on animals, tending to show the 
instantaneous and mortal effects of the laurel-water. He knew nothing in medicine that 
corresponded in smell with that mixture, which was like that of bitter almonds. He 
further said that the quantity of laurel-water contained in the bottle shown to him was 
sufficient to cause the death of any human creature; and that the appearance of the 
body confirmed him in his opinion that the deceased was poisoned, so far as, upon 
viewing a body so long after the death of the subject, one could be allowed to form a 
judgment upon such appearances.
	Mr Wilmer and Dr Parsons, professor of anatomy at Oxford, confirmed the 
evidence of Dr Rattray.
	John Darbyshire deposed that he had been a prisoner in Warwick jail for debt, 
and that Mr Donellan and he had had a bed in the same room for a month or five 
weeks. He remembered to have had a conversation with him about Sir Theodosius 
being poisoned. On his asking him whether the body was poisoned or not, he said 
there was no doubt of it. The witness said: "For God's sake, Captain, who could do 
it?" He answered it was amongst themselves; he had no hand in it. The witness asked 
whom he meant by themselves. He said: "Sir Theodosius himself, Lady Boughton, the 
footman and the apothecary." The witness replied, "Sure, Sir Theodosius could not do 
it himself!" He said he did not think he did–he could not believe he would. The 
witness answered: "The apothecary could hardly do it–he would lose a good patient; 
the footman could have no interest in it; and it is unnatural to suppose that Lady 
Boughton would do it." The Captain said how covetous Lady Boughton was: she had 
received an anonymous letter the day after Sir Theodosius's death charging her plump 
with poisoning him; that she called him and read it to him, and trembled. She desired 
he would not let his wife know of that letter, and asked him if he would give up his 
right to the personal estate, and to some estates of about two hundred pounds a year 
belonging to the family. The conversation was about a month after the Captain came 
into the jail. At other times he said that it was impossible he could do a thing that 
never was in his power.
	This being the chief evidence, the prisoner, in his defence, pleaded a total 
ignorance of the fact, and several respectable characters bore testimony to his 
integrity. The jury, however, found him guilty, and he received sentence of death.
	At seven o'clock on the next day, the 2nd of April, 1781, he was carried to the 
place of execution at Warwick, in a mourning-coach, followed by a hearse and the 
sheriff officers in deep mourning. As he went on he frequently put his head out of the 
coach, desiring the prayers of the people around him.
	On his arrival at the fatal spot he alighted from the coach and, ascending a few 
steps of the ladder, prayed for a considerable time, and then joined in the usual service 
with the. greatest appearance of devotion; he next, in an audible tone of voice, 
addressed the spectators to this effect: that as he was then going to appear before God, 
to Whom all deceit was known, he solemnly declared that he was innocent of the 
crime for which he was to suffer; that he had drawn up a vindication of himself, which 
he hoped the world would believe, for it was of more consequence to him to speak 
truth than falsehood, and he had no doubt but that time would reveal the many 
mysteries that had arisen in his trial.
	After praying fervently some time he let his handkerchief fall–a signal agreed 
upon between him and the executioner–and was launched into eternity. When the 
body had hung the usual time it was put into a black coffin and conveyed to the town 
hall to be dissected.


FRANCIS HENRY DE LA MOTTE  
A French Spy, who was executed at Tyburn, 27th of July, 1781, for High 
Treason

	HIS man lived a long time in England unsuspected as one of its greatest 
enemies. He was a Frenchman, and a spy upon the Government, in the service of 
France. He gave advice to the enemy, through the medium of one Lutterlok, of the 
strength and destination of our fleets and armies.
	Among other acts of mischief done by means of this man was the attack upon 
the British fleet, under Commodore Johnstone, in the neutral harbour, called Port 
Praya Road, on its voyage to the East Indies, where it was convoying a fleet of East 
Indiamen.
	La Motte sent intimation to the French Minister of the British commodore's 
strength and time of sailing, and the Minister sent a superior fleet in quest of him, 
under the command of Commodore Suffrien. So great was the surprise of the British 
that they were lying in harbour, taking in water and provisions, when the enemy hove 
in sight.
	"I was then absent," says Commodore Johnstone, in his dispatches to 
Government, "in a boat, giving directions for moving some ships which had driven 
too near each other. As soon as I saw the signal for so many strange ships I instantly 
returned on board the Romney" (the Commodore's broad pendant flying on board that 
ship), "and made the signal for all persons to come from the shore and repair on board 
their respective ships, having at that time not less than one thousand, five hundred 
persons absent from the fleet who were employed in watering, fishing, and embarking 
live cattle, with other occupations necessary to dispatch in refitting so many ships, 
besides a number of officers and troops who were taking recreation, with leave of 
absence, on shore."
	The French, apprised of the exact strength of the British, pressed into their 
very centre in line of battle–a mode of attack they durst not otherwise have done. 
Though thus surprised, the British beat them off.
	The returns of our killed and wounded were as follows:–
Petty officers and seamen killed
20
Marines and infantry killed
20
Officers killed
7
Seamen wounded
77 
Marines and infantry wounded
63 
Prisoners, among whom was Captain Darby, 
of the Infernal fireship
20
Total of killed, wounded and missing
207
	Other squadrons were attacked through the same means, and many more lives 
were lost, and the nation put to an enormous expense.
	This spy had elegant lodgings in Bond Street, dressed like a gentleman, kept 
the best company, and passed as a foreigner of fortune; he spoke the English tongue, 
and was well acquainted with the geography of the country. At length suspicion arose 
that he was a French spy. A watch was accordingly set upon his actions, and he was 
soon apprehended, and committed prisoner to the Tower. On his trial various acts of 
treason were fully proved against him, and the jury immediately found him guilty. 
The judge then passed upon him the following awful sentence:--
	"That he should be hanged by the neck, but not till he was dead, then to be cut 
down, and his bowels to be taken out and burned before his face; his head to be taken 
off, his body cut into four quarters and to be at his Majesty's disposal."
	He was remanded to the Tower, and at the expiration of a fortnight a warrant 
was issued from the office of the Secretary of State for his execution. The sheriffs 
demanded his body of the Lieutenant of the Tower, and carried him to Newgate; from 
thence, in about a quarter of an hour, they set out with him to the place of execution. 
La Motte was dressed in a suit of black. His deportment was manly and serious; he 
seemed to be totally abstracted from the surrounding multitude, as he scarcely ever 
took his eyes from a devotional book which he held in his hand.
	Upon his arrival at the fatal tree he was immediately removed out of the sledge 
in which he had been conveyed. He then employed some minutes in earnest devotion; 
which done, he twice bowed respectfully to the sheriffs and turned to the executioner, 
desiring him immediately to perform his office.
	After hanging fifty-seven minutes the body was cut down and laid on a block, 
when (a fire having been previously kindled) the executioner severed the head from 
the trunk, made an incision from the breast, and ripped out the heart, which, after 
being exposed to the spectators, was thrown into the flames.
	The body was then scorched, together with the head, and put into a very 
handsome coffin, which was delivered to an undertaker for interment.


WILLIAM WYNNE RYLAND  
Engraver to his Majesty. Executed at Tyburn, in August, 1783, for forging a 
Bill of Exchange

  
Ryland attempting self-destruction

	WILLIAM WYNNE RYLAND was an engraver of great ability, and received 
a pension from both the King and Queen, who held him in high estimation as an artist. 
Fortune had smiled upon Mr Ryland, even from his birth, until his evil genius 
prompted him, for gold, to debase his talents in engraving for the purpose of 
committing forgery.
	He was a native of Wales. His father had been patronised by the late Sir 
Watkin Williams Wynne, who jocosely said that if ever Mr Ryland should marry he 
would be the godfather of his first son. This soon after happened, and the unfortunate 
subject of this history, being the first-born of such marriage, was named William 
Wynne, by desire of the worthy baronet.
	Ryland gave early proof of his genius, for while in the former part of his 
apprenticeship he engraved a head of his godfather, Sir Watkin Williams Wynne, 
which was esteemed a production of singular merit for so young an artist.
	Having faithfully served his time, he visited the French and Italian schools, 
and obtained the honorary medal in Paris. On his return to England he introduced the 
admired art of engraving copper-plates to yield an impression resembling drawing in 
chalk; and soon after his Majesty ascended the throne he appointed Mr Ryland his 
engraver, with a salary of two hundred pounds a year, and the Queen added one 
hundred pounds a year more, out of her privy purse, as a testimony of her approbation 
of his extraordinary talents.
	Mr Ryland entered into partnership with a Mr Bryer, and they jointly opened a 
shop in Cornhill, where they carried on a very extensive trade in prints, the former 
stil1 continuing to exercise his abilities in the art of engraving. Though their business 
was productive of great profit, several capital losses occurred almost at the same time, 
and their pecuniary affairs became so deranged that a bankruptcy ensued.
	Some years after this failure Mr Ryland, on his own separate account, opened 
a print-shop in the Strand, where he had every prospect of success; but being fond of a 
private life, where he might have leisure to "pursue coy Science in her last retreat," he 
declined public business and retired to Pimlico, thence to Knightsbridge, where, by 
one fatal act, he entirely ruined his reputation as a man: but his name as an artist will 
ever stand in the highest estimation.
	At this time Mr Ryland had recovered his losses in trade, and had been 
bequeathed shares in the Liverpool Waterworks which were then deemed to be worth 
ten thousand pounds. His business was worth two thousand pounds a year, and his 
stock was valued at ten thousand pounds more. Such was his own statement of his 
property in his defence on his trial; and it was supposed that, in order to engross the 
remaining shares in his Liverpool concern, he committed the forgery for which he 
suffered.
	He had already obtained several sums on forgeries, Mr Nightingale, the 
banker, having advanced him, on the 19th of September, 1782, three thousand 
pounds; and such was his opinion of Mr Ryland that he declared he would have lent 
him that sum without any deposit whatever.
	The forged instruments so exactly resembled the real bills that it was scarcely 
possible to know one from the other. But at length it was discovered that two bills of 
the same tenor and date were out, consequently one of them must be a forgery.
	Suspicion now fell so strongly on Ryland that he was induced to secret 
himself; and a reward was offered for his apprehension. He went in disguise to 
Stepney, and there took an obscure lodging at the hovel of one Richard Freeman, a 
cobbler, accompanied by Mrs Ryland, the wretched partner of his misfortune, passing 
as Mr and Mrs Jackson.
	There he some time evaded the search after him, till one fatal step of the 
unfortunate woman, who was watching over his safety, caused his apprehension. She 
brought, unconscious of danger, one of her husband's shoes to the cobbler to be 
mended, with the name of "Ryland" on the inside of it. This was fatal: the cobbler, in 
order to obtain the reward, delivered up his lodger.
	When the officers of justice went to apprehend Ryland they found him in a 
corner of the room on his knees, and heard a noise like a guggling in his throat, which 
was occasioned by his having cut it. He had a razor in his hand, and a basin stood 
before him; but the wound did not prove mortal. On the 26th of July, 1783, he was 
arraigned at the bar of the Old Bailey, on an indictment charging him with "forging, 
and uttering, knowing it to be forged, a certain bill of exchange for two hundred and 
ten pounds sterling, purporting it to be a bill drawn by the gentlemen of the factory, at 
Fort Saint George, in Madras, on the Honourable East India Company, with intent to 
defraud the said Company, and divers other persons, to whom he had passed the said 
bill."
	He was found guilty, and, his crime admitting of no mercy, was executed at 
Tyburn in August, 1783.


RICHARD CARPENTER 
Convicted at the Lent Assizes, 1785, Hampshire, of forging Seamen's Wills 
and executed at Winchester

	HIS man had been for long a public character on the dramatic boards, and he 
made his final exit on a stage erected for the purpose–under the gallows.
	He was for many years the clown in the pantomime entertainments at Drury 
Lane. Unlike the major part of his brethren of the sock and buskin, Carpenter saved 
some part of his salary, with which he went to Portsmouth, took an elegant house, and 
commenced as navy agent; in which lucrative business he acquired considerable 
property. It however appears that, like many who, from hard earnings, suddenly come 
into easy receipts, Carpenter grew so impatient to become rich that he committed 
felony of the basest nature–that of forging seamen's wills and powers.
	This infamous robbery of poor widows and orphans he had for some time 
carried on with impunity, when the officers of justice went in pursuit of him. He was 
surprised in his own house, which was spacious, and elegantly furnished, and at the 
very moment when he was entertaining some friends.
	His execution attracted a vast number of spectators, by whom, from his 
penitence and resignation to his unhappy fate, he was generally much pitied.


CHARLES PRICE 
A Notorious Swindler and Bank-Note Forger, who committed Suicide in 
1786

	HIS extraordinary impostor, whose artifices enabled him to commit 
unprecedented depredations on the public, was born about the year 1730, in London. 
His father lived in Monmouth Street, and carried on the trade of a salesman in old 
clothes. Tired of the tricks and knaveries of his son Charles, the father placed him 
with a hosier in St James's Street. There he continued for a short time. He robbed his 
father of an elegant suit of clothes, in which he dressed himself, went to his master in 
this disguise, purchased about ten pounds' worth of silk stockings, left his address, 
"Benjamin Bolingbroke, Esq., Hanover Square," and ordered them to be sent to him in 
an hour's time, when he would pay the person who brought them. His master did not 
know him; so, to complete the cheat, our hero came back in half-an-hour in his usual 
dress, and was ordered to take the goods home, which he actually pretended to do. 
Thus were both master and father robbed. He was, however, soon after found out, and 
discharged.
	As his wits were never long unemployed for some deceptive ends, he issued 
the following curious advertisement in the year 1775:--
WANTED
	"A partner of character, probity, and extensive acquaintance; upon a plan 
permanent and productive, fifty per cent., without risk, may be obtained. It is not 
necessary he should have any knowledge of the business, which the advertiser 
possesses in its fullest extent; but he must possess a capital of between five hundred 
and a thousand pounds, to purchase materials, with which, to the knowledge of the 
advertiser, a large fortune must be made in a very short time. 
	"Address to P. C., Cardigan Head, Charing Cross. 
	"P.S.–None but principals, and those of liberal ideas, will be treated with."
	To this advertisement the famous comedian, Samuel Foote, paid attention. 
Eager to seize what he thought a golden opportunity, he advanced the sum of five 
hundred pounds for a brewery. The sum soon disappeared, and Foote was wrung with 
the anguish of disappointment. Price, however, had the impudence to apply to him 
again, wishing him to unite in the baking trade; the comedian archly replied: "As you 
have brewed, so you may bake but I'll be cursed if ever you bake as you have 
brewed!"
	After this unfortunate business Mr Price turned Methodist preacher, and in this 
character he defrauded several persons of large sums of money. Advertising in order 
to get gentlemen wives, he swindled a person of the name of Wigmore of fifty 
guineas, for which he was indicted; but, having refunded a part, he effected his 
escape. These and other fraudulent practices were long the objects of his ambition, 
though they were all the certain roads to infamy.
	We now arrive at that period of his life when he commenced his ravages upon 
the Bank of England, which ended in his destruction. In the year 1780 (under the 
assumed name of Brank) Mr Price engaged a servant, a plain, simple, honest fellow, 
by means of whom he passed his notes without detection. The young fellow observed 
an advertisement respecting a situation which seemed likely to suit him, so he 
answered it, but heard nothing of the advertiser for a whole week. One evening, 
however, just as it was dusk, a coachman inquired for the man who had answered the 
advertisement, saying there was a gentleman over the way, in a coach, who wanted to 
speak with him. On this the young fellow was called, and went to the coach, where he 
was desired to step in. There he saw an apparently old man, affecting the foreigner, 
seemingly very gouty, wrapped up with five or six yards of flannel about his legs, a 
camlet surtout buttoned over his chin, close to his mouth, a large patch over his left 
eye, and every part of his face so hidden that the young fellow could not see any part 
of it except his nose, his right eye and a small part of that cheek. To carry on the 
deception still better, Mr Price thought proper to place the man on his left side, on 
which the patch was, so that he could look askance at the young man with his right 
eye, and by that means discover only a small portion of his face. He appeared by his 
disguise to be between sixty and seventy years of age; and afterwards, when the man 
saw him standing, not much under six feet in height, owing to shoes or boots with 
heels very little less than three inches high. Added to this deception, he was so 
buttoned up and straitened that he appeared perfectly lank. He was in reality about 
five feet, six inches high, a compact, neat man, square-shouldered, inclined to 
corpulency. His legs were firm and well set; but by nature his features made him look 
much older than he really was, which, at that time, was nearly fifty. His nose was 
aquiline, and his eyes small and grey; his mouth stood very much inwards, with very 
thin lips; his chin pointed and prominent, with a pale complexion. But what 
contributed as much as anything to favour his disguise of speech was his loss of teeth. 
He walked exceedingly upright, was very active and quick in his walk, and was 
something above what we describe a man to be when we call him a dapper-made man.
	This simple and honest fellow Samuel, whom Mr Price had engaged, was 
employed by him to negotiate his forged bills, principally in the purchase of lottery 
tickets, at the same time never fully disclosing to him his name, person or history. 
Indeed the plan was devised and executed with uncommon ability. However, Samuel 
was at last detected, having passed bills to the amount of fourteen hundred pounds. 
But his principal eluded discovery, and retired with his booty into the deepest shades 
of obscurity. The poor servant was imprisoned for nearly a twelvemonth, terrified out 
of his wits at being the innocent instrument of such complicated villainy.
	Mr Price, having most probably exhausted his former acquisitions, sallied 
forth in the year 1782, after new game, with the most unparalleled audacity. For this 
purpose he obtained his second servant from a registry office, a smart active boy of 
the name of Power: his father was a Scots Presbyterian, and to ingratiate himself with 
him Mr Price made great pretensions to religion, expressing a hope that his son was 
well acquainted with the Lord's Prayer and the Ten Commandments. Our hero began 
his ravages upon a Mr Spilsbury, of Soho Square, ordering great quantities of his 
drops. Wilmot was his assumed name, and he introduced himself to Spilsbury as 
possessing all the symptoms of age and infirmity. He was wrapped up in a large 
camlet great-coat; he had a slouch hat on, the brim of which was large, and bent 
downwards on each side of his head; a piece of red flannel covered his chin and came 
up on each side of his face, almost as high as the cheek-bones; he had a large bush 
wig on, and his legs were wrapped over with flannel. He had also a pair of green 
spectacles on his nose, with a green silk shade hanging down from his hat, but no 
patch on his eye. It is remarkable that Mr Spilsbury knew Mr Price but not Mr 
Wilmot; nay, so complete was the deception that, sitting together in a coffee-house, 
Mr Spilsbury complained to his coffee-house acquaintance of the notes which Wilmot 
had imposed upon him. Price kept crying out now and then, "Lackaday! Good God! 
Who could suppose such knavery to exist! What, and did the bank refuse payment, 
sir?" staring through his spectacles with as much seeming surprise as an honest man 
would have done.
	Price had often been at the shop of a grocer, Mr Roberts, in Oxford Street. 
Here he now and then bought a few articles, and took many opportunities of showing 
his importance. One day he called there in a hackney-coach, disguised as an old man, 
and bought a few things. A day or two afterwards he repeated his visit; and on a third 
day, when he knew Mr Roberts was from home, he went again, with his face so 
painted that he seemed diseased with the yellow jaundice. The shopman, to whom he 
enumerated his complaints, gave him a prescription for that disorder, one that had 
cured his father of it. Price gladly accepted the recipe, promising that if it succeeded 
he would very liberally reward him for his civility. In a few days he called again, 
when he appeared perfectly free from the complaint, and acknowledged his great 
obligation to the shopman, to whom, after he had expatiated on his affluent 
circumstances, the short time he had to live in the world, and the few relations he had 
to leave anything to, he made a present of a ten-pound bank-note. The reader need not 
be told it was a counterfeit one. At the same time he said that he wanted cash for 
another, which was a fifty-pound note, and the obliging shopman got change for it 
from an opposite neighbour. The next day, in Mr Roberts's absence, he called again, 
and entreated the lad to get other five fifty-pound notes changed for small ones; and 
when he told him his master was not in the way Price begged he would take them to 
his master's banker, and there get them changed. This request the servant complied 
with. The bankers, Harley, Burchall & Co., complied with Mr Roberts's supposed 
request, and changed them without suspicion, and small notes were that day given for 
them to Mr Price.
	Upon a great many other individuals he practised frauds equally ingenious and 
successful. In his last attempt on the bank, which ended in his detection, he assumed 
the name of Palton, pretended he was an Irish linen-factor, and employed two young 
men to circulate his notes, whilst he, greatly disguised, kept back in obscurity. By 
means of a pawnbroker he was found out, with great difficulty. On his seizure he 
solemnly declared his innocence, and before the magistrate behaved with insolence. 
This detection took place on the 14th of January, 1786. He was soon sworn to by 
more persons than one, and seeing no way of escape he pretended, to his wife in 
particular, great penitence; but there was no ground for its reality. The bank fully 
intended to prosecute him, and there was no doubt of his dying by the hands of the 
executioner. He was found, however, one evening hanging against the post of the door 
of his apartments, in Tothill Fields Bridewell.
	The depredations of this villain amounted in the whole to upwards of one 
hundred thousand pounds; and yet, after his apprehension, he wrote a letter to a 
gentleman whom he had defrauded of more than two thousand pounds, 
recommending his wife and eight children to his protection.


MICHAEL WALKER, RICHARD PAYNE AND ROBERT 
COX  
Executed opposite Smart's Buildings, Holborn, London, 18th of December, 
1786, for Murder

	ICHAEL WALKER, Richard Payne and Robert Cox were members of a 
young but desperate gang of street-robbers. Cox was not quite fifteen years of age 
when he suffered. On the 17th of November, 1786, Mr Robinson was walking with 
his friend, Mr Hunt, a painter, through Smart's Buildings, Holborn, when the latter, 
feeling something at his pocket, seized a man's hand. Yet the villain was dexterous 
enough to convey what he had stolen to an accomplice, whom Mr Hunt instantly 
collared, and a general scuffle ensued. There were more of the gang than those above 
named opposed to Mr Robinson and Mr Hunt, who maintained the unequal combat 
until other people came up, when the thieves ran off.
	Mr Robinson was dreadfully wounded. He was cut across the eyes and nose 
with a knife, and had several desperate stabs in the body, and was otherwise much 
maimed. While he endured these wounds the villains called to each other, "Damn the 
rascal, cut his heart out!" and they were so intent upon this that one of the buttons on 
his breast was cut through, and his coat ripped more than eighteen inches in length. 
Mr Hunt was also wounded, though not in a degree to cause danger to his life; but Mr 
Robinson was carried home in a mangled condition, with little hope of his recovery.
	In a short time the malefactors above named were apprehended, and sworn to 
by both the sufferers. Mr Robinson soon after died of his wounds. They were 
convicted and, unpitied, suffered the sentence of the law. For this purpose a temporary 
gibbet was erected opposite Smart's Buildings.
	Walker was greatly affected at his fate, and held a book in his hand, Payne 
appeared in a state of stupidity. Cox, the boy, cried bitterly; and when he came within 
sight of the gallows he screamed, and was in a state of distraction when turned off.


JOHN ELLIOT, M.D.  
Acquitted of a Serious Crime, he killed himself, by Hunger- Striking because 
of a Vindictive Sentence for a Minor Offence

	DR ELLIOT was tried upon an indictment under the Black Act, with wilfully 
and maliciously discharging two pistols, loaded with powder and divers balls, at the 
person of Miss Mary Boydell. The second count charged him with firing one pistol, 
loaded with powder and one or more bullets, at the said Miss Boydell.
	The evidence produced for the prosecution was as follows.
	Mr George Nicol, bookseller to his Majesty, swore that, when walking up 
Prince's Street in company with Miss Boydell, he heard the loud explosion of a pistol 
close to his ear. It was so near, and the concussion of the air so strong, that it struck 
his ear like a blow. He turned round and, seeing the prisoner quite close to him with a 
pistol in his hand, which afterwards, however, turned out to be two pistols strongly 
tied together, seized him by the throat and said: "Are you the villain that fired?" The 
man said he was, and a footman who came up at the same moment either wrenched 
the pistols out of his hand or took them up as he dropped them. Then, having seen the 
lady taken into a shop, Mr Nicol went with the prisoner to Justice Hyde's. In going 
there the prisoner expressed great joy at what he had done, and, in particular, said that 
now he should die in peace, as he had sent the lady before him. Two more pistols 
were found in his pocket, apparently loaded to the muzzle, and those Mr Nicol 
delivered into the hands of Justice Hyde, and had not seen since. During the 
examination a lady came into the office and said she was happy to find that Miss 
Boydell was not dangerously wounded; upon which the prisoner, clashing his hands 
together, seemingly in an agony of disappointment, exclaimed, "Is she not dead?" and 
from this time, and during the continuance of the examination, he burst into a torrent 
of abuse against the lady, the alderman and his family.
	These facts were clearly and circumstantially corroborated by the evidence of 
the livery-servant, and of Mr Griffith, a shoemaker in Prince's Street, who saw him 
fire the pistol, and who assisted in securing him.
	Mr Nicol then swore that almost one half of the lady's cloak was burned, and 
that there were two marks on her gown, just below the shoulders, which seemed to 
correspond with the marks of the pistols as they were tied together.
	A surgeon swore that Miss Boydell had two contusions just below the 
shoulder-blades which corresponded with the marks on the gown, and which 
evidently proceeded from blows received from some hard substance. Being asked if 
pistols loaded with bullets discharged so near the body could have made such marks 
he said he did not know; but it was certain that a pistol put quite close home to any 
resisting body, and discharged so as not to have the assistance of the air, lost much of 
its force.
	Mr Silvester, on the part of the prisoner, called a Dr Symmonds to prove that 
he was insane. The doctor gave it as his opinion that he was so, and he had formed 
this opinion from a letter he had received from him in January, the purport of which 
was a philosophical hypothesis that the sun was not specifically a ball of fire, but that 
his heat proceeded from the quality of the atmosphere that surrounded his body. Some 
part of this paper was read, and, so far from betraying symptoms of insanity, it had all 
the marks of quick and cultivated parts. The hypothesis, however false, was ably 
argued; and as to the absurdity of the doctrine itself, the recorder aptly asked the 
doctor whether, if he judged of his intellect merely from a vague supposition as to the 
nature of the sun's heat, he might not equally declare Buffon and many other 
philosophers to be mad.
	Mr O'Donnell, the successor of Mr Elliot, said he had observed symptoms of 
insanity in him, although he attended his patients very regularly and very properly. 
This inconsistency drew from Mr Garrow some sharp questions, which Mr O'Donnell 
said did not, by the way in which they were put, enable him to give so clear an 
account of the case as he otherwise would do if not puzzled by the counsel.
	Two people with whom he lodged also said they remarked insanity; but he was 
a good, quiet lodger, and they saw no harm in him.
	The recorder said it was necessary that the jury should be convinced that one 
or both pistols was loaded with ball. It was evident, first from the exultation, and 
afterwards the disappointment, expressed by Elliot, as well as by his declarations, that 
his intention was to take away the life of the lady–that he had deliberated on the fact, 
and had coolly prepared the means, But it was for them to inquire whether, in the 
anxiety incident to so horrid a project, he had not either blundered in the loading, or 
had chosen the wrong pair of pistols; for if they were not convinced that one or both 
of them was loaded with ball they must acquit the prisoner. Here one of the jurymen 
said: "Surely, my Lord, nothing can be more clear than that the pistols were not 
loaded with ball." On this the recorder said that if they were all of this opinion it was 
needless for him to enumerate the evidence in defence of the prisoner.
	The jury, after some consultation, brought in a verdict of guilty of shooting, 
but they did not find that there was ball. On this the recorder directed them to acquit 
the prisoner, which they did.
	The recorder said this was no ground for exultation to the prisoner. His crime 
in the eye of Heaven was the same, and he should order him to be detained to be tried 
for the assault; and it was a duty which the prosecutors owed to society to bring him 
to his trial in that way. This officiousness of justice proved fatal to poor Elliot. He was 
a man of extreme sensibility, and being convicted of the assault, and a vindictive 
sentence passed, he adopted a determination to starve himself to death; and, in spite of 
entreaty and force, persisted in not swallowing any sustenance, till he died a victim of 
the misplaced punctilio of law.


HENRY STERNE  
Commonly called "Gentleman Harry." Convicted of stealing the Duke of 
Beaufort's Pendant, 1787

	THIS man was styled "A Gentleman Thief." He dresed well, and being of an 
easy address, and tolerably educated, got admission to the best company, where he 
could advantageously levy his contributions.
	On the King's birthday, in the year 1787, Sterne took up his post at St. James's 
Palace, where numbers resorted to see the Court dresses and the fashions. On such 
occasions courtiers pay their addresses to their sovereign in their different orders. The 
Duke of Beaufort, as a Knight of the Garter, among the other companions of that most 
dignified order, had his George pendent from its ribbon. It was set with diamonds, and 
was worth a considerable sum of money. This George was taken from him by 
Gentleman Harry, for which offence he was brought to his trial at the Old Bailey, on 
the 12th of September, 1787.
	The Duke thereon deposed that on the 4th of June, on returning from the levee 
at St James's, he found himself surrounded by a vast number of persons, the meaning 
of which did not immediately occur to his mind, but on putting down his hand to feel 
for his George he missed it. Calling out very loudly to his servants, they came up. He 
was asked to point out the thief, but his confusion was so great that he could only 
point to a man dressed in black, who stood near him. In a short time the Duke saw one 
of his servants seize a gentlemanly-looking person, whom he had not before observed, 
and on whom the George was found.
	The Duke then produced the precious article to the Court, which, he said, had 
not been out of his possession since it was taken out of the prisoner's pocket.
	On his cross-examination by the prisoner's counsel, when asked if he was sure 
that the prisoner at the bar was the man who stole the George, the Duke replied his 
suspicions chiefly rested on the man in black.
	Thomas West, servant to the Duke, swore that he seized and searched the man 
in black, and found nothing; but on seizing the prisoner, and putting his hand in his 
pocket, he pulled out the George. He admitted that he did not see the George taken 
from his Grace, but he swore positively to taking it out of the prisoner's pocket.
	Shepley, the gate-keeper at Cleveland Row, corroborated the evidence of 
West, having seen the whole transaction and this closed the case on the part of the 
prosecution. In his defence the prisoner made a short but neat speech to the Court, 
wherein he principally rested upon the hope that the passions of the jury would not be 
prejudiced on account of the many slanders against him in the newspapers. He called 
no witnesses.
	The judge, in giving his charge to the jury, so far agreed with the observations 
of the prisoner as to hope that their minds were entirely unprejudiced. He observed 
that there were two separate crimes charged in the indictment:
	First.-- That the prisoner committed a robbery on the person of his Grace the 
Duke of Beaufort, on the highway.
	Second.–For privately stealing from his person.
	It was, continued the judge, for the jury to say whether it came out in proof 
that it was the prisoner's hand that stole the George. If not, they must acquit him of 
privately stealing, which would, of course, clear him of the capital charge.
	The jury withdrew, and after a consultation of fifteen minutes brought in their 
verdict of guilty of stealing, but not privately.
	He was sentenced to be transported to Botany Bay for seven years.


THOMAS DENTON  
His Misapplied Talents led to his Downfall, and he was executed before 
Newgate, 1st of July, 1789 for making Base Coin

	THOMAS DENTON was born in the north part of Yorkshire. He was bound 
apprentice to a tinman, and served his time with much credit to himself and profit to 
his master. His genius, it appears, expanded beyond the making of kettles, for he 
evinced a taste for literature. He opened a bookseller's shop in the city of York, where 
he particularly attended to works on mechanism; and, with a superficial store of such 
arts, he gave up his few shelves of books and, on their sale, went as an adventurer to 
the great mart of genius, London.
	He had formed no settled plan of life, but determined to employ some days in 
viewing minutely the great metropolis. Passing through the parish of St James's, his 
attention was arrested by some foreigners exhibiting a speaking figure. He 
immediately paid his admission, and took a very correct examination of the 
automaton. Returning to his lodgings, he fancied that he could construct a similar 
machine equal to that of the ingenious foreigner, and he determined, without further 
delay, to set about this work. Difficulties, however, insurmountable to a man without 
genius and perseverance, presented themselves. An unknown individual as he was, he 
had to furnish himself, in a strange place, with a workshop, tools and materials. Yet 
man's industry, which, he had read, had levelled mountains, diverted the course of 
large rivers, and carried navigation into the bowels of the earth, would hardly stop at 
forming the figure of a pigmy. To set to work took time, labour and money; but once 
seated thereat, his ingenuity soon made rapid progress, and, with but one more hired 
view of the original, he completed a far superior figure to that of the vaunting 
German.
	His work having been deemed the most complete, he wisely determined 
against all opposition in London, where the milk of such a rare show had already been 
skimmed, and accordingly set off with it into the country. There he collected vast 
sums of money at each city which he pitched upon for the exhibition of his famous 
speaking figure.
	His active mind, it seems, still was discontented. He, looking upon his first 
essay in mechanism as far inferior to his expanded ideas, determined upon returning 
to London, in order to undertake a superior work. He soon found a purchaser for the 
speaking figure (a printer in the City of London, who melted it down for his types) 
and set about a writing automaton. This, too, he finished with most exquisite and 
ingenious workmanship.
	The artificial penman delighted him no longer than the speaker; and he next 
applied himself to chemistry. In pursuit of this science he met with Pinetti's book of 
deceptions, which he translated (having previously to learn the language in which it 
was written), and added to it various notes and observations.
	He also made himself master of an improvement in the art of plating coach 
harness. Conceiving this profitable branch of business united to that of a bookseller 
would make his fortune, he for some time carried on both in Holborn. Here his good 
fortune, by his own indiscretion, failed him. The art, thus self-acquired, of plating 
metal, led him into company with others professing that branch of business, and 
among them was a coiner of base shillings.
	Here, too, as with the Germans, he fancied he could far excel in this criminal 
proceeding; and the powers that assisted him to make several mathematical 
instruments, as pentagraphs, etc., enabled him to imitate the current coin of the 
kingdom in a manner that deceived the best judges, and which upon his trial at the Old 
Bailey for that offence kept the Court in doubt for seven hours. Nor could he be 
convicted of coining, but he was found guilty of having implements for coining in his 
possession, which alone proved fatal to him.
	He was condemned to die; and we are reluctant in adding to the character of 
such a man of genius as Thomas Denton that his behaviour after condemnation was 
impious in the extreme. To sum up the whole, he died a professed infidel.
	A few minutes before he was brought out of his cell for execution he requested 
pen, ink and paper; and in the most composed manner sat down and wrote the 
following letter:--
	DEAR FATHER AND MOTHER, 
When you receive this I shall be gone to that country from whence no traveller 
returns. Don't cast any reflections on my wife, the best of mothers, and the best of 
women; and if ever woman went to heaven, she will. If I had taken her advice I should 
not have been in this situation. God bless my poor Dick [his son]. The bell is tolling. 
Adieu! 
	T. DENTON.


THOMAS GORDON  
Executed at Northampton, 17th of August, 1789, for a Murder ordered by 
his Mother

	MR GORDON, the father of this wretched youth, was a surgeon and 
apothecary in London, from whence he removed his family into Northamptonshire.
	Mr Gordon continued to practise in the country, and soon became envied, and 
obnoxious to his neighbours, being considered as an intruder, from not being a native 
of the county. The consequence of this was frequent quarrels; and at length a justice's 
warrant was obtained against him, on a pretended charge of assault.
	The constable went to Mr Gordon's house, in order to apprehend him, but the 
wife and the son told the officer that he was not at home. This was not the case, and 
the constable knew he was in the house: he, however, went away, but soon returned 
with some neighbours, who tried to make a forcible entry. The mother and son 
opposed them, and the latter was armed with a gun. The populace threw stones at the 
windows, when the mother, in an unlucky moment, bade her son fire; he did so, and 
killed the constable on the spot.
	Both mother and son were tried, and found guilty of this murder; but Baron 
Thompson, who presided on the bench, observing that the mother was indicted as 
accessory before the fact, and the evidence turning out that she was a principal, had 
doubts whether she was properly con victed, and thcrefore reserved the case for the 
opinion of the twelve judges, who, upon solemn argument, confirmed the sentence 
against the son, but at the same time adjudged the indictment against the mother to be 
bad; and the poor youth received sentence of death. He was, however, three times 
reprieved; from which he hoped, and the world flattered him with an opinion, that his 
pardon would ultimately follow.
	While cheered with this idea, an order came for his execution. He was scarcely 
nineteen years of age, and died for an act which, at the time of its commission, he 
considered a defence of his father and an act of obedience to the orders of his mother.


THOMAS PHIPPS, ESQ., AND THOMAS PHIPPS, HIS 
SON  
Executed for a Forgery committed by the Younger Man, who exonerated his 
Father, 5th of September, 1789

	THESE malefactors were father and son. The father was a man of good 
property, and lived on his own estate at Llwyney Mapsis, in Shropshire; and he and 
his son were indicted for uttering a note of hand for twenty pounds, purporting to be 
that of Mr Richard Coleman, of Oswestry, knowing the same to have been forged.
	It was proved on their trial that Mr Coleman never had had transactions with 
Mr Phipps which required the signing of any note whatever; that about the previous 
Christmas Mr Coleman was served with a copy of a writ at the suit of Mr Phipps the 
elder, which action Mr Coleman defended, and for want of further proceedings on the 
part of the plaintiff a non pros. was signed, with two pounds, three shillings costs of 
suit against Phipps. Upon this an affidavit was drawn up and sworn by Phipps the 
elder, Phipps the younger, and William Thomas, their clerk, for the purpose of 
moving the Court of Exchequer to set aside the judgment of non pros., and therein 
they swore that the cause of action was a note of the said Coleman for twenty pounds, 
which was given as satisfaction for a trespass by him committed in carrying some hay 
off the land of one of Mr Phipps the elder's tenants.
	The Court thereupon granted a rule to show cause why the judgment should 
not be set aside; but Mr Coleman insisted that the note was a forgery, and the present 
prosecution was instituted against the father, son and Thomas.
	After a full hearing at the assizes at Shrewsbury the father and son were 
pronounced "guilty of uttering and publishing the note, knowing it to be forged"; and 
William Thomas was found "not guilty."
	Though convicted on the fullest evidence, the unhappy men, until the morning 
of their execution, persisted in their innocence; but when about to leave the jail young 
Phipps made the following confession: "It was I alone who committed the forgery: my 
father is entirely innocent, and was ignorant of the note being forged when he 
published it."
	They were taken in a mourning-coach to the place of execution, accompanied 
by a clergyman and a friend who had attended them daily after their condemnation.
	On their way to the fatal tree the father said to the son "Tommy, thou hast 
brought me to this shameful end, but I freely forgive thee"; to which the son made no 
reply. Being remarkably wet weather, their devotions were performed chiefly in the 
coach. When the awful moment arrived, Mr Phipps said to his son: "You have brought 
me hither; do you lead the way!" Which the youth immediately did, and in the most 
composed manner ascended the ladder to a temporary scaffold erected for the purpose 
of their execution, followed by his father.
	When their devotions were finished, and the halters tied to the gallows, this 
most wretched father and son embraced each other, and in a few moments the scaffold 
fell, and hand-in-hand they were launched into eternity, the 5th of September, 1789, 
amid a vast concourse of pitying spectators. The father was forty-eight, and the son 
just twenty years of age.


WILLIAM WARD  
A boxer, convicted of manslaughter for killing his opponent.

  
Ward boxing with Swain

	"Boxing" says a British writer, "which is the setting of the most worthless of 
the human species to batter each other to mummy, to break jaws, to knock eye-balls 
out of their sockets, to flatten the nose, beat out teeth, or to dash each other to the 
ground, with such dexterity as that they shall never rise again, if not a royal sport, is, 
at least, a princely entertainment, and manifests the exalted taste of its patrons."
	On the subject of boxing, in his own country, the American geographer, Dr. 
Morse, says, that, "When two boxers are wearied out with fighting and bruising each 
other (in which encounters they kick and bite, as well as strike), they come, as it is 
called, to close quarters, and each endeavours to twist his forefingers into the ear-
locks of his antagonist. When these are fast clenched, the thumbs are extended each 
way to the nose, and the eyes gently turned out of their sockets. The victor, for his 
expertness, receives shouts of applause from the sporting throng, while his poor 
eyeless antagonist is laughed at for his misfortune." This, in America, is called 
Gouging.
	The author of "The Stranger in America," in commenting upon the above 
passage, after adducing many instances of gouging, observes, "But let us conclude 
this odious subject, which never should have stained these pages, had not the author 
alluded to (Morse) proclaimed to the world the cruel and unnatural facts, by observing 
that these barbarities appear not to have been the genuine growth of American soil. 
No such practice would be endured by an English mob; no such disgraceful revenge 
ever entered the breast of a Creek, a Cherokee, or a Kickapoo Indian."
	The sight is not the oniy sense endangered in these brutal contests in England; 
and life itself has oftener, than in the murder now in question, been lost in prize-
fighting, as we shall show before we have done with the boxing of William Ward.
	The barbarous and unlawful practice of fisticuffs, which the fools of fashion 
dignify by the name of pugilism, since the rude days of Broughton, had, until this 
period, happily become nearly out of use. Its renewal shows that there are periodical 
returns of fashion, even in amusements of cruelty.
	The first public renewal of this species of cruelty was a battle between two 
low fellows, a Jew and a Christian, in outward form, but in heart, as Dr. Morse styles 
some of his countrymen, Nothingarians–that is, those who have not the fear of God 
before their eyes, through any medium of religion.
	The fisticuffings between Humphries and Mendoza formed a treat for such 
fellows as may be daily seen lounging in Bond Street. Peers and pickpockets, cheek 
by jowl, scampered some score miles to witness the bloody spectacles which these 
two ruffians made of each other. As at a cockfight, they made their bets, which as 
between the "grey and pile," varied in proportion to the rounds, or knockdown blows, 
the failing eye, or the quantity of blood spilt.
	The roads to this scene of inhumanity were thronged with all descriptions of 
idle fellows; some mounted upon the high-mettled racer, and others kicking and 
whipping miserable jack-asses, that they too might be in at the death, or giving it, as 
they term it, of the most exhausted of the two ruffian candidates for the gaining of 
public applause in prize-fighting.
	Even royalty, which must ever be at the head of every fashion, was often in the 
motley mob collected to witness these disgraceful exhibitions; but, bad as are our 
youth, they will become still worse by following such pernicious examples.
	His Majesty, when Prince of Wales, in one of these mortal conflicts, found one 
of the combatants made a corpse at his feet, upon the stage of pugilistic fight. The 
heir-apparent to the British crown turned pale away from the horrid sight, and made a 
vow never more to behold so savage and dangerous a contest, and to which he has 
conscientiously adhered.
	Of the worst description of vagabonds, who run from one bloody stage to the 
other, was the fellow who now comes under our notice. His origin mean, his 
understanding totally uncultivated; arrogant of his savage prowess, vicious and cruel; 
he had often fought, and was the inglorious conqueror; but, in his turn, was 
shamefully vanquished, and, to the satisfaction of all who wished the downfall of such 
a desperado, by the fighting Jew, who had been considered his inferior in this 
despicable attainment.
	William Ward, as we have already said, was once a pugilist, high in renown 
among the fashionable amateurs of that degrading pursuit. He, with several more of 
his infamous calling, had monopolized the outside stage-coach, journeying to Stilton, 
seventy-one miles from London, to attend another rencontre, between Jew Mendoza 
and Christian Humphries. They had not proceeded farther than Enfield, where, as the 
coach stopped to change horses, the bravado of Ward stimulated a drunken 
blacksmith, named Edwin Swain, to challenge him to combat.
	Now, though there is no honour in the owner of a bloodhorse, or a game cock, 
to match with a dunghill, or an animal that had toiled in harness, yet Ward inhumanly 
accepted the foolish dolt's invitation; and, for a while, they did buffet each other with 
lusty sinews; but science soon overcame brute force, for, in fact, the blacksmith could 
not hit the trained bruiser. He therefore soon yielded the palm of victory, and retired 
into the public house, before which the coach and passengers waited the event of this 
shameful contest. This professed pugilist followed, and upon his unguarded antagonist 
dealt his fists, until the object of his cruelty was actually beaten to death!
	Ward, conscious of the magnitude of his offence, hired a post-chaise, and, 
with his companions, set off to return to London, where they could best conceal 
themselves from offended justice; but they were pursued, and committed to prison.
	The coroner's jury were divided in opinion, seven finding the crime "wilful 
murder," and nine "manslaughter"; and, from the circumstances attending the horrid 
deed, Ward was not admitted to bail; though he boasted that he could find security for 
his appearance to any amount. A poor mechanic, an useful member of society, might 
linger in gaol without a friend to bail him, while such ruffians have their aiders, 
abettors, and protectors, in men of property, rank, and title!
	On the 5th of June, 1789, William Ward was arraigned at the bar of the Old 
Bailey, for the murder of Edwin Swain, and, after a long trial, found guilty of 
manslaughter, fined one shilling, and sentenced to be imprisoned three months in 
Newgate.
	The evidence did not amount to the proof of actual malice, as the deceased 
first provoked the contest.
	Mr. Justice Ashurst, who tried Ward, expressed his detestation of the inhuman 
and unlawful practice of boxing, and declared it to be a disgrace to a civilized nation.
	At the expiration of his sentence and when about to be liberated Ward had the 
unparalleled effrontery to offer a public challenge to fight at the next Newmarket 
meeting. "Is this," says a monthly publication for September, 1789, commenting on 
this subject, "the effect of the wholesome severity of the law? or are these gross 
violations of humanity to proceed till more homicides are committed?"


SAMUEL HINCHCLIFFE  
Convicted at the Westminster Sessions in January, 1790, Imprisoned and 
publicly whipped for a Fraudulent Trick

	AN Act of Parliament was passed, a short time subsequent to the conviction of 
this man, to prevent the exploiting of carriers and porters bringing packages for coach, 
wagon, etc., to London. The imposition had arrived at such a pitch that rascals, 
pretending to be porters at inns, would often put a few stones or brickbats into hand-
baskets, and other packages, and cheat the unsuspicious, to whom they had directed 
them, of a few shillings, as carriage and porterage. Other villains, actually porters to 
inns, would charge carriage though already paid in the country, as will be found in the 
present case.
	Samuel Hinchcliffe having thus imposed upon Daniel Delaney, Esq., that 
gentleman commenced a prosecution against him, on which he was tried at the 
Westminster sessions for fraudulently obtaining from Cowley, his servant, two 
shillings, under pretence of its being for the carriage of a parcel from Norwich, the 
prisoner well knowing that the carriage had been before paid.
	Cowley deposed that the prisoner brought to his master's house a parcel 
directed to Daniel Delaney, Esq. He told the witness he had brought it from the White 
Horse Inn, Fetter Lane, and demanded two shillings for the carriage, and one shilling 
for the porterage. The witness observed to him that the carriage ought to have been 
paid, and on looking at the direction he discovered that part of it had been torn off, 
and "Three Shillings" written over it.
	This created suspicion, and he several times advised the prisoner not to take 
the two shillings for the carriage, as he was persuaded it had been paid. The prisoner, 
however, persisted in his charge, and took three shillings. The next day the witness 
was sent by his master to the White Horse, and found that the parcel had not been 
brought from that inn. He then went to the Swan, in Lad Lane, to which inn he found 
that the parcel had come by the Norwich coach, and that the carriage had been paid in 
the country.
	The next witness called was a clerk at the Swan, who deposed that the prisoner 
was an assistant porter at that house, employed to deliver parcels. Upon examining the 
way-book he found the carriage of the parcel had been paid, and that the prisoner had 
accounted for only one shilling for the porterage.
	The jury immediately found him guilty.
	Mr Mainwaring, the chairman, observed that this was a case of great 
importance to the public, who were daily suffering under such impositions. As it was 
very difficult to detect this kind of fraud, it was necessary to make an example of 
those offenders against whom the charge was proved. He further added that Mr 
Delaney, by instituting this prosecution, merited the thanks of the public. He then 
sentenced the prisoner to three months' imprisonment, and to be publicly whipped 
from the Admiralty to Charing Cross, and from thence to Bridge Street, Parliament 
Street; which punishment was inflicted, to the great satisfaction of the spectators.


JOHN DYER  
A Westminster Schoolboy, executed at Newgate, 5th of August, 1790, for 
Forgery

	JOHN DYER brought great trouble and disgrace on his most respectable 
parents and connections. He received his education at Westminster School; from 
thence he was placed in a merchant's counting-house, and had not seen quite nineteen 
years when he atoned for the crime of forgery by his life.
	On the 7th of May, 1789, Dyer called at the shop of Mr Scott, wax-chandler, 
in New Bond Street, and ordered thirty-six pounds of candles, which he pretended 
were for Sir William Hamilton, and in payment tendered a bill of exchange in the 
following words:--
	L10, 10s                                                                   No. 25.  
                                                        RICHMOND, SURREY, 22nd, April 1790.
	   Fourteen days after date, please to pay Mr William Smith, or order, ten 
pounds ten shillings, value received, as advised.  
                                                         CHARLES THOMAS.  
To Messrs HANKEYS,  
   Bankers, London,  
                                                 Accepted for Self & Co.  
                                              JOSEPH CHAPMAN HANKEY.  
Endorsed, WILLIAM SMITH.  
                  WILLIAM MILLER,
	Dyer received the balance, but the candles ordered to be sent, as he directed, 
being refused, Mr Scott instantly suspected that he had been imposed upon by a 
forgery. The unfortunate youth was soon found, and committed to Newgate.
	When put on his trial every spectator's heart was filled with pity, and, being 
called on for his defence, he said that he had received the bill from Mr Kelsy, his 
employer, who ordered him to put the name of Mr Miller on the back; that he was 
ignorant of the consequence of so doing, and that he acted merely as a servant. 
Bringing no proof, he was found guilty; and though interest was made to save his life, 
he died ignominiously on the gallows, on the 5th of August, 1790.


EDWARD LOWE AND WILLIAM JOBBINS  
Young Incendiaries, who set fire to a House in order to plunder it, and were 
executed in the City, 20th of November, 1790

	THESE prisoners were indicted at the Old Bailey sessions for feloniously 
setting fire to the house of Francis Gilding, in Aldersgate Street, on the 16th of May, 
1790.
	From the evidence of the apprentice of Mr Gilding, who was an accomplice in 
the wicked deed, it appeared that he was acquainted with the two prisoners, who were 
persons of bad character; and that it was determined among them that Mr Gilding's 
house, which was the Red Lion Inn, should be set on fire, in order that they might 
plunder it. Accordingly, at about twelve o'clock on the night of Saturday, 16th of 
May, they met in the inn-yard, and Lowe got up into the hay-loft and, placing some 
combustibles there, set them alight with a pipe, which he was smoking. The fire soon 
blazed up, and the prisoners very actively carried off the goods, which they took away 
in a cart. The witness was in the act of carrying away a chest of drawers when he was 
stopped by Lucie, a constable, upon whose evidence he was convicted. He 
subsequently, however, on condition of being pardoned, consented to give evidence 
against the prisoners. This testimony being confirmed by that of other witnesses, the 
jury returned a verdict of guilty against the prisoners, and on the 2nd of November 
they were brought up to receive judgment. The learned recorder then addressed them 
in the following terms: "I hardly know how to find words to express the abhorrence 
that I feel, or that the public entertains, of the crime of which you stand convicted. 
The setting fire to houses in the dead of night, for the purpose of plunder, at the risk of 
the lives of the inhabitants of a great city, is a crime not yet to be met with upon the 
records of villainy that have been brought forward in this court. As the crime is 
singular, so the punishment must be marked. I take it that it will be so marked, and 
hope the example will be such that if there should be left any persons of the same 
wicked intentions they will take example from your fate. As your crime is singular 
and novel, I hope it will be the only one brought into this court of the same 
description. You therefore must prepare to die, and consider yourselves as men 
without hope in this world. And give me leave to assure you that it is my decided 
opinion that, for an offence so very atrocious as yours, you can never expect salvation 
in the world to come unless you make some reparation to your injured country, and to 
God, Whom you have offended, by a sincere confession of all the offences of which 
you have been guilty, and by a disclosure of the names of all persons who either have 
engaged, or are about to engage, in crimes so detestable as that of which you stand 
convicted. Nothing therefore remains but that I should pray to Almighty God, and it is 
now my earnest prayer to Him that you may all obtain forgiveness and remission of 
your sins."
	On the morning of the 20th of November these incendiaries were brought out 
of Newgate and placed on a high seat, which had been fixed in the cart to render them 
more conspicuous to the spectators. They were then conveyed, attended by the 
sheriffs and other city officers, to Aldersgate Street, where a temporary gallows was 
erected opposite the spot where stood the house of Mr Gilding, to which they had set 
fire. They arrived at the fatal tree about a quarter before nine o'clock, when Mr 
Villette, the ordinary, went into the cart and prayed with them for about twenty 
minutes, after which they were turned off. They both confessed to Mr Villette the 
facts for which they so justly suffered.
	Jobbins had been educated at St Paul's School, was bred a surgeon, and was 
only nineteen years of age when he suffered. Lowe was about twenty-three years of 
age.
	A boy named Mead was, on the 31st of August in the ensuing year, executed 
for a similar offence, in firing the house of his master, Mr Walter Cavardine, a 
publican, in Red Lion Street.


THE END


 
 
 
 
THE NEWGATE CALENDAR
-2-
-9-
VOLUME 4
-8-
