THE POEMS OF OSSIAN

by

JAMES MACPHERSON



A PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE.


 As Swift has, with some reason, affirmed that all sublunary
happiness consists in being well deceived, it may possibly be the
creed of many, that it had been wise, if after Dr. Blair's ingenious
and elegant dissertation on "the venerable Ossian," all doubts
respecting what we have been taught to call his works had forever
ceased: since there appears cause to believe, that numbers who
listened with delight to "the voice of Cona," would have been happy,
if, seeing their own good, they had been content with these poems
accompanied by Dr. Blair's judgment, and sought to know no more.
There are men, however, whose ardent love of truth rises, on all
occasions, paramount to every other consideration; and though the
first step in search of it should dissolve the charm, and turn a
fruitful Eden into a barren wild, they would pursue it. For those,
and for the idly curious in literary problems, added to the wish of
making this new edition of "The Poems of Ossian" as well-informed as
the hour would allow, we have here thought it proper to insert some
account of a renewal of the controversy relating to the genuineness
of this rich treasure of poetical excellence.

 Nearly half a century has elapsed since the Publication of the poems
ascribed by Mr. Macpherson to Ossian, which poems he then professed
to have collected in the original Gaelic, during a tour through the
Western Highlands and Isles; but a doubt of their authenticity
nevertheless obtained, and, from their first appearance to this day,
has continued in various degrees to agitate the literary world. In
the present year, "A Report," springing from an inquiry instituted
for the purpose of leaving, with regard to this matter, "no hinge or
loop to hang a doubt on," has been laid before the public. As the
committee, in this investigation, followed, in a great measure, that
line of conduct chalked out by David Hume to Dr. Blair, we shall,
previously to stating their precise mode of proceeding, make several
large and interesting extracts from the historian's two letters on
this subject.

 "I live in a place," he writes, "where I have the pleasure of
frequently hearing justice done to your dissertation, but never heard
it mentioned in a company, where some one person or other did not
express his doubts with regard to the authenticity of the poems which
are its subject; and I often hear them totally rejected with disdain
and indignation, as a palpable and most impudent forgery. This
opinion has, indeed, become very prevalent among the men of letters
in London; and I can foresee, that in a few years, the poems, if they
continue to stand on their present footing, will be thrown aside, and
will fall into final oblivion.

 "The absurd pride and caprice of Macpherson himself, who scorns, as
he pretends, to satisfy anybody that doubts his veracity, has tended
much to confirm this general skepticism; and I must own, for my part,
that though I have had many particular reasons to believe these poems
genuine, more than it is possible for any Englishman of letters to
have, yet I am not entirely without my scruples on that head. You
think, that the internal proofs in favor of the poems are very
convincing; so they are; but there are also internal reasons against
them, particularly from the manners, notwithstanding all the art with
which you have endeavored to throw a vernish 1 on that circumstance;
and the preservation of such long and such connected poems, by oral
tradition alone, during a course of fourteen centuries, is so much
out of the ordinary course of human affairs, that it requires the
strongest reasons to make us believe it. My present purpose,
therefore, is to apply to you in the name of all the men of letters
of this, and, I may say, of all other countries, to establish this
capital point, and to give us proofs that these poems are, I do not
say, so ancient as the age of Severus, but that they, were not forged
within these five years by James Macpherson. These proofs must not be
arguments, but testimonies; people's ears are fortified against the
former; the latter may yet find their way, before the poems are
consigned to total oblivion. Now the testimonies may, in my opinion,
be of two kinds. Macpherson pretends there is an ancient manuscript
of part of Fingal in the family, I think, of Clanronald. Get that
fact ascertained by more than one person of credit; let these persons
be acquainted with the Gaelic; let them compare the original and the
translation; and let them testify the fidelity of the latter.

 "But the chief point in which it will be necessary for you to exert
yourself, will be, to get positive testimony from many different
hands that such poems are vulgarly recited in the Highlands, and have
there long been the entertainment of the people. This testimony must
be as particular as it is positive. It will not be sufficient that a
Highland gentleman or clergyman say or write to you that he has heard
such poems; nobody questions that there are traditional poems of that
part of the country, where the names of Ossian and Fingal, and Oscar
and Gaul, are mentionmed in every stanza. The only doubt is, whether
these poems have any farther resemblance to the poems published by
Macpherson. I was told by Bourke, 1 a very ingenious Irish gentleman,
the author of a tract on the sublime and beautiful, that on the first
publication of Macpherson's book, all the Irish cried out, 'We know
all those poems. We have always heard them from our infancy.' But
when he asked more particular questions, he could never learn that
any one ever heard or could repeat the original of any one paragraph
of the pretended translation. This generality, then, must be
carefully guarded against, as being of no authority.

 "Your connections among your brethren of the clergy may be of great
use to you. You may easily learn the names of all ministers of that
country who understand the language of it. You may write to them,
expressing the doubts that have arisen, and desiring them to send for
such of the bards as remain, and make them rehearse their ancient
poems. Let the clergymen then have the translation in their hands,
and let them write back to you, and inform you, that they heard such
a one, (naming him,) living in such a place, rehearse the original of
such a passage, from such a page to such a page of the English
translation, which appeared exact and faithful. If you give to the
public a sufficient number of such testimonials, you may prevail. But
I venture to foretel to you, that nothing less will serve the
purpose; nothing less will so much as command the attention of the
public.

"Becket tells me, that he is to give us a new edition of your
dissertation, accompanied with some-remarks on Temora. Here is a
favorable opportunity for you to execute this purpose. You have a
just and laudable zeal for the credit of these poems. They are, if
genuine, one of the greatest curiosities, in all respects, that ever
was discovered in the commonwealth of letters; and the child is, in a
manner, become yours by adoption, as Macpherson has totally abandoned
all care of it. These motives call upon you to exert yourself: and I
think it were suitable to your candor, and most satisfactory also to
the reader, to publish all the answers to all the letters you write,
even though some of those letters should make somewhat against your
own opinion in this affair. We shall always be the more assured, that
no arguments are strained beyond their proper force, and no contrary
arguments suppressed, where such an entire communication is made to
us. Becket joins me heartily in that application; and he owns to me,
that the believers in the authenticity of the poems diminish every
day among the men of sense and reflection. Nothing less than what I
propose can throw the balance on the other side."

Lisle street, Leicester Fields,
19th Sept., 1763.

The second letter contains less matter of importance; but what there
is that is relevant deserves not to be omitted.

 "I am very glad," he writes on the 6th of October, 1763, "you have
undertaken the task which I used the freedom to recommend to you.
Nothing less than what you propose will serve the purpose. You must
expect no assistance from Macpherson, who flew into a passion when I
told him of the letter I had wrote to you. But you must not mind so
strange and heteroclite a mortal, than whom I have scarce ever known
a man more perverse and unamiable. He will probably depart for
Florida with Governor Johnstone, and I would advise him to travel
among the Chickasaws or Cherokees, in order to tame and civilize him.

*   *   *   *   *   * 

 "Since writing the above, I have been in company with Mrs. Montague,
a lady of great distinction in this place, and a zealous partisan of
Ossian. I told her of your intention, and even used the freedom to
read your letter to her. She was extremely pleased with your project;
and the rather, as the Due de Nivernois, she said, had talked to her
much on that subject last winter; and desired, if possible, to get
collected some proofs of the authenticity of these poems, which he
proposed to lay before the Academie de Belles Lettres at Paris. You
see, then, that you are upon a great stage in this inquiry, and that
many people have their eyes upon you. This is a new motive for
rendering your proofs as complete as possible. I cannot conceive any
objection which a man, even of the gravest character, could have to
your publication of his letters, which will only attest a plain fact
known to him. Such scruples, if they occur, you must endeavor to
remove, for on this trial of yours will the judgment of the public
finally depend."

 Without being acquainted with Hume's advice to Dr. Blair, the
committee, composed of chosen persons, and assisted by the best
Celtic scholars, adopted, as it will he seen, a very similar manner
of acting.

 It conceived the purpose of its nomination to be, to employ the
influence of the society, and the extensive communication which it
possesses with every part of the Highlands, in collecting what
materials or information it was still practicable to collect,
regarding the authenticity and nature of the poems ascribed to
Ossian, and particularly of that celebrated collection published by
Mr. James Macpherson.

 For the purpose above mentioned, the committee, soon after its
appointment, circulated the following set of queries, through such
parts of the Highlands and Islands, and among such persons resident
there, as seemed most likely to afford the information required.

QUERIES.

1. Have you ever heard repeated, or sung, any of the poems ascribed
to Ossian, translated and published by Mr. Macpherson? By whom have
you heard them so repeated, and at what time or times? Did you ever
commit any of them to writing? or can you remember them so well as
now to set them down? In either of these cases, be so good to send
the Gaelic original to the committee.

2. The same answer is requested concerning any other ancient poems of
the same kind, and relating to the same traditionary persons or
stories with those in Mr. Macpherson's collection.

3. Are any of the persons from whom you heard any such poems now
alive? or are there, in your part of the country, any persons who
remember and can repeat or recite such poems? If there are, be so
good as to examine them as to the manner of their getting or learning
such compositions; and set down, as accurately as possible, such as
they can now repeat or recite; and transmit such their account, and
such compositions as they repeat, to the committee.

4. If there are, in your neighborhood, any persons from whom Mr.
Macpherson received any poems, in. quire particularly what the poems
were which he so received, the manner in which he received them, and
how he wrote them down; show those persons, if you have an
opportunity, his translation of such poems, and desire them to say,
if the translation is exact and literal; or, if it differs, in what
it differs from the poems, as they repeated them to Mr. Macpherson,
and can now recollect them.

5. Be so good to procure every information you conveniently can, with
regard to the traditionary belief, in the country in which you live,
concerning, the history of Fingal and his followers, and that of
Ossian and his poems; particularly those stories and poems published
by Mr. Macpherson, and the heroes mentioned in them. Transmit any
such account, and any proverbial or traditionary expression in the
original Gaelic, relating to the subject, to the committee.

6. In all the above inquiries, or any that may occur to in
elucidation of this subject, he is requested by the committee to make
the inquiry, and to take down the answers, with as much impartiality
and precision as possible, in the same manner as if it were a legal
question, and the proof to be investigated with a legal strictness.--
See the "Report."

 It is presumed as undisputed, that a traditionary history of a great
hero or chief, called Fion, Fion na Gael, or, as it is modernized,
Fingal, exists, and has immemorially existed, in the Highlands and
Islands of Scotland, and that certain poems or ballads containing the
exploits of him and his associate heroes, were the favorite lore of
the natives of those districts. The general belief of the existence
of such heroic personages, and the great poet Ossian, the son of
Fingal, by whom their exploits were sung, is as universal in the
Highlands, as the belief of any ancient fact whatsoever. It is
recorded in proverbs, which pass through all ranks and conditions of
men, Ossian dall, blind Ossian, is a person as well known as strong
Sampson, or wise Solomon. The very boys in their sports cry out for
fair play, Cothram na feine, the equal combat o the Fingalians.
Ossian, an deigh nam fiann, Ossian, the last of his race, is
proverbial, to signify a man who has had the misfortune to survive
his kindred; and servants returning from a fair or wedding, were in
use to describe the beauty of young women they had seen there, by the
words, Tha i cho boidheach reh Agandecca, nighean ant sneachda, She 
is as beautiful as Agandecca, the daughter of the Snow.

 All this will be readily conceded, and Mr. Macpherson's being at one
period an "indifferent proficient in the Gaelic language," may seem
an argument of some weight against his having himself composed these
Ossianic Poems. Of his inaccuracy in the Gaelic, a ludicrous instance
is related in the declaration of Mr. Evan Macpherson, at Knock, in
Sleat, Sept. 11, 1800. He declares that he, "Colonel Macleod, of
Talisker, and the late Mr. Maclean of Coll, embarked with Mr.
Macpherson for Uist on the same pursuit: that they landed at
Lochmaddy, and proceeded across the Muir to Benbecula, the seat of
the younger Clanronald: that on their way thither they fell in with a
man whom they afterwards ascertained to have been Mac Codrum, the
poet: that Mr. Macpherson asked him the question, A bheil dad agad
air an Fheinn? by which he meant to inquire, whether or not he knew
any of the poems of Ossian relative to the Fingalians: but that the
term in which the question was asked, strictly imported whether or
not the Fingalians owed him any thing; and that Mac Codrum, being a
man of humor, took advantage of the incorrectness or inelegance of
the Gaelic in which the question was put, and answered, that really
if they had owed him any thing, the bonds and obligations were lost,
and he believed any attempt to recover them at that time of day would
be unavailing. Which sally of MacCodrum's wit seemed to have hurt Mr.
Macpherson, who cut short the conversation, and proceeded on towards
Benbecula. And the declarant being asked whether or not the late Mr.
James Macpherson was capable of composing such poems as those of
Ossian, declares most explicitly and positively that he is certain
Mr. Macpherson was as unequal to such compositions as the declarant
himself, who could no more make them than take wings and fly." p. 96.

 We would here observe, that the sufficiency of a man's knowledge of
such a language as the Gaelic, for all the purposes of composition,
is not to be questioned, because he does not speak it accurately or
elegantly, much less is it to be quibbled into suspicion by the
pleasantry of a double entendre. But we hold it prudent, and it shall
be our endeavor in this place, to give no decided opinion on the main
subject of dispute. For us the contention shall still remain sub
judice.

 To the queries circulated through such parts of the Highlands as the
committee imagined most likely to afford information in reply to
them, they received many answers, most of which were conceived in
nearly similar terms; that the persons themselves had never doubted
of the existence of such poems as Mr. Macpherson had translated; that
they had heard many of them repeated in their youth: that listening
to them was the favorite amusement of Highlanders, in the hours of
leisure and idleness; but that since the rebellion in 1745, the
manners of the people had undergone a change so unfavorable to the
recitation of these poems, that it was now an amusement scarcely
known, and that very few persons remained alive who were able to
recite them. That many of the poems which they had formerly heard
were similar in subject and story, as well as in the names of the
heroes mentioned in them, to those translated by Mr. Macpherson: that
his translation seemed, to such as had read it, a very able one; but
that it did not by any means come up to the force or energy of the
original to such as had read it; for his book was by no means
universally possessed, or read among the Highlanders, even accustomed
to reading, who conceived that his translation could add but little
to their amusement, and not at all to their conviction, in a matter
which they had never doubted. A few of the committee's correspondents
sent them such ancient poems as they possessed in writing, from
having formerly taken them down from the oral recitation of the old
Highlanders who were in use to recite them, or as they now took them
down from some person, whom a very advanced period of life, or a
particular connection with some reciter of the old school, enabled
still to retain them in his memory; but those, the committee's
correspondents said, were generally less perfect, and more corrupted,
than the poems which they had, formerly heard, or which might have
been obtained at an earlier period.

 Several collections came to them by presents, as well as by
purchase, and in these are numerous "shreds and patches," that bear a
strong resemblance to the materials of which "Ossian's Poems" are
composed. These are of various degrees of consequence. One of them we
are the more tempted to give, for the same reason as the committee
was the more solicitous to procure it, because it was one which some
of the opposers of the authenticity of Ossian had quoted as evidently
spurious, betraying the most convincing marks of its being a close
imitation of the address to the sun in Milton.

 "I got," says Mr. Mac Diarmid, "the copy of these poems" (Ossian's
address to the sun in Carthon, and a similar address in Carrickthura)
"about thirty years, ago, from an old man in Glenlyon. I took it, and
several other fragments, now, I fear, irrecoverably lost, from the
man's mouth. He had learnt them in his youth from people in the same
glen, which must have been long before Macpherson was born."

LITERAL TRANSLATION OF OSSIAN'S ADDRESS TO THE SUN IN CARTHON.

 "O! thou who travellest above, round as the full-orbed hard shield
of the mighty! whence is thy brightness without frown, thy light that
is lasting, O sun? Thou comest forth in thy powerful beauty, and the
stars bide their course; the moon, without strength, goes from the
sky, hiding herself under a wave in the west. Thou art in thy journey
alone; who is so bold as to come nigh thee? The oak falleth from the
high mountain; the rock and the precipice fall under old age; the
ocean ebbeth and floweth, the moon is lost above in the sky; but thou
alone forever in victory, in the rejoicing of thy own light. When the
storm darkeneth around the world, with fierce thunder, and piercing
lightnings, thou lookest in thy beauty from the noise, smiling in the
troubled sky! To me is thy light in vain, as I can never see thy
countenance; though thy yellow golden locks are spread on the face of
the clouds in the east; or when thou tremblest in the west, at thy
dusky doors in the ocean. Perhaps thou and myself are at one time
mighty, at another feeble, our years sliding down from the skies,
quickly travelling together to their end. Rejoice then, O sun! while
thou art strong, O king! in thy youth. Dark and unpleasant is old
age, like the vain and feeble light of the moon, while she looks
through a cloud on the field, and her gray mist on the sides of the
rocks; a blast from the north on the plain, a traveller in distress,
and he slow."

 The comparison may be made, by turning to the end of Mr.
Macpherson's version of "Carthon," beginning "O thou that rollest
above."

 But it must not be concealed, that after all the exertions of the
committee, it has not been able to obtain any one poem, the same in
title and tenor with the poems published by him. We therefore feel
that the reader of "Ossian's Poems," until grounds more relative be
produced, will often, in the perusal of Mr. Macpherson's
translations, be induced, with some show of justice. to exclaim with
him, when he looked over the manuscript copies found in Clanronald's
family, "D--n the scoundrel, it is he himself that now speaks, and
not Ossian!'

 To this sentiment the committee has the candor to incline, us it
will appear by their summing up. After producing or pointing to a
large body of mixed evidence, and taking for granted the existence,
at some period, of an abundance of Ossianic poetry, it comes to the
question, "How far that collection of such poetry, published by Mr.
James Macpherson, is genuine?" To answer this query decisively, is,
as they confess, difficult. This, however, is the ingenious manner in
which they treat it.

 "The committee is possessed of no documents, to show how much of his
collection Mr. Macpherson obtained in the form in which he has given
it to the world. The poems and fragments of poems which the committee
has been able to procure, contain, as will appear from the article in
the Appendix (No. 15) already mentioned, often the substance, and
sometimes almost the literal expression (the ipsissima verba) of
passages given by Mr. Macpherson, in the poems of which he has
published the translations. But the committee has not been able to
obtain any one poem the same in title or tenor with the poems
published by him. It is inclined to believe, that he was in use to
supply chasms, and to give connection, by inserting passages which he
did not find, and to add what he conceived to be dignity and delicacy
to the original Composition, by striking out passages, by softening
incidents, by refining the language -- in short, by changing what he
considered as too simple or too rude for modern ear, and elevating
what, in his opinion, was below the standard of good poetry. To what
degree, however, he exercised these liberties, it is impossible for
the committee to determine. The advantages he possessed, which the
committee began its inquiries too late to enjoy, of collecting from
the oral recitation of a number of persons, now no more, a very great
number of the same poems on the same subjects, and then collating
those different copies, or editions, if they may be so called,
rejecting what was spurious or corrupted in one copy, and adopting
from another, something more genuine and excellent in its place,
afforded him an opportunity of putting together what might fairly
enough be called an original whole, of much more beauty, and with
much fewer blemishes, than the committee believe it now possible for
any person, or combination of persons, to obtain." P. 152-3.

 Some Scotch critics, who should not be ignorant of the strongholds
and fastnesses of the advocates for the authenticity of these poems,
appear so convinced of their insufficiency, that they pronounce the
question put to rest forever. But we greatly distrust that any
literary question, possessing a single inch of debateable ground to
stand upon, will be suffered to enjoy much rest in an age like the
present. There are as many minds as men, and of wranglers there is no
end. Behold another and "another yet," and in our imagination, he

"bears a glass,
Which shows us many more."

 The first of these is Mr. Laing, who has recently published the
"Poems of Ossian, &c., containing Poetical Works of James Macpherson,
Esq., in Prose and Rhyme: with, notes and illustrations. In 2 vols. 8
vo. Edinburgh, 1805." In these "notes and illustrations," we foresee,
that Ossian is likely to share the fate of Shakspeare, that is,
ultimately to be loaded and oppressed by heavy commentators, until
his immortal spirit groan beneath vast heaps of perishable matter.
The object of Mr. Laing's commentary, after having elsewhere
endeavored to show that the poems are spurious, and of no historical
authority, "is," says he, it not merely to exhibit parallel passages,
much less instances of a fortuitous resemblance of ideas, but to
produce the precise originals from which the similes and images arc
indisputably derived." And these he pretends to find in Holy Writ,
and in the classical poets, both of ancient and modern times. Mr.
Laing, however, is one of those detectors of plagiarisms, and
discoverers of coincidences, whose exquisite penetration and
acuteness can find any thing anywhere. Dr. Johnson, who was shut
against conviction with respect to Ossian, even when he affected to
seek the truth in the heart of the Hebrides, may yet be made useful
to the Ossianites in canvassing the merits of this redoubted stickler
on the side of opposition. "Among the innumerable practices," says
the Rambler, "by which interest or envy have taught those who live
upon literary fame to disturb each other at their airy banquets, one
of the most common is the charge of plagiarism. When the excellence
of a now composition can no longer be contested, and malice is
compelled to give way to the unanimity of applause, there is yet this
one expedient to be tried, by which the author may be degraded,
though his work be reverenced; and the excellence which we cannot
obscure, may be set at such a distance as not to overpower our
fainter lustre. This accusation is dangerous, because, even when it
is false, it may be sometimes urged with probability."

 How far this just sentence applies to Mr. Laing, it does not become
us, nor is it our business, now to declare: but we must say, that
nothing can be more disingenuous or groundless than his frequent
charges of plagiarism of the following description; because, in the
War of Caros, we meet with these words, "It is like the field, when
darkness covers the hills around, and the shadow grows slowly on the
plain of the sun," we are to believe, according to Mr. Laing, that
the idea was stolen from Virgil's

Majoresque cadunt altis de montibus umbra.
For see, yon sunny hills the shade extend.--Dryden.

As well might we credit that no one ever beheld a natural phenomenon
except the Mantuan bard. The book of nature is open to all, and in
her pages there are no new readings. "Many subjects," it is were said
by Johnson, "fall under the consideration of an author, which, being
limited by nature, can admit only of slight and accidental
diversities. And definitions of the same thing must be nearly the
same; and descriptions, which are definitions of a more lax and
fanciful kind, must always have, in some degree, that resemblance to
each other, which they all have to their object." It is true,
however, if we were fully able to admit that Macpherson could not
have obtained these-ideas where he professes to have found them, Mr.
Laing has produced many instances of such remarkable coincidence as
would make it probable that Macpherson frequently translates, not the
Gaelic, but the poetical lore of antiquity. Still this is a battery
that can only be brought to play on particular points; and then with
great uncertainty. The mode of attack used by Mr. Knight, could it
have been carried on to any extent, 'would have proved much more
effectual. We shall give the instance alluded to. In his "Analytical
Enquiry into the Principles of Taste, 1805," he makes these remarks:

 "The untutored, but uncorrupted feelings of all unpolished nations,
have regulated their fictions upon the same principles, even when
most rudely exhibited. In relating the actions of their gods and
deceased heroes, they are licentiously extravagant: for their
falsehood could amuse, because it could not be detected; but in
describing the common appearances of nature, and all those objects
and effects which are exposed to habitual observation, their bards
are scrupulously exact; so that an extravagant hyperbole, in a matter
of this kind, is sufficient to mark, as counterfeit any composition
attributed to them. In the early stages of society, men are as acute
and accurate in practical observation as they are limited and
deficient in speculative science; and in proportion as, they, are
ready to give up their imaginations to delusion, they are jealously
tenacious of the evidence of their senses. James Macpherson, in the
person of his blind bard, could say, with applause in the eighteenth
century, 'Thus have I seen in Cona; but Cona I behold no more; thus
have I seen two dark hills removed from their place by the strength
of the mountain stream. They turn from side to side, and their tall
oaks meet one another on high. Then they fall together with all their
rocks and trees.'

 "But had a blind bard, or any other bard, presumed to utter such a
rhapsody of bombast in the hall of shells, amid the savage warriors
to whom Ossian is supposed to have sung, he would have needed all the
influence of royal birth, attributed to that fabulous personage, to
restrain the audience from throwing their shells at his head, and
hooting him out of their company as an impudent liar. They must have
been sufficiently acquainted with the rivulets of Cona or Glen-Coe to
know that he had seen nothing of the kind; and have known enough of
mountain torrents in general to know that no such effects are ever
produced by them, and would, therefore, have indignantly rejected
such a barefaced attempt to impose on their credulity."

The best defence that can be set up in this case will, perhaps, be to
repeat, "It is he himself that now speaks, and not Ossian."

 Mr. Laing had scarcely thrown down the gauntlet, when Mr. Archibald
M'Donald appeared

"Ready, aye, ready, for the field.

 The opinion of the color of his opposition, whether it be that of
truth or error, will depend on the eye that contemplates it. Those
who delight to feast with Mr. Laing on the limbs of a mangled poet,
will think the latter unanswered; while those who continue to indulge
the animating thought, "that Fingal lived, and that Ossian sung,"
will entertain a different sentiment. After successfully combating
several old positions, Mr. M'Donald terminates his discussion of the
point at issue with these words:

 "He (Mr. Laing) declares, 'if a single poem of Ossian in MS. of an
older date than the present century (1700,) be procured and lodged in
a public library, I (Laing) shall return among the first to our
national creed.'

 "This is reducing the point at issue to a narrow compass. Had the
proposal been made at the outset, it would have saved both him and me
a good deal of trouble: not that in regard to ancient Gaelic
manuscripts I could give any more satisfactory account than has been
done in the course of this discourse. There the reader will see, that
though some of the poems are confessedly procured from oral
tradition, yet several gentlemen of veracity attest to have seen,
among Macpherson's papers, several MSS. of a much older date than Mr.
Laing requires to be convinced. Though not more credulous than my
neighbors, I cannot resist facts so well attested; there are no
stronger for believing the best-established human transactions.

 "I understand the originals are in the press, and expected daily to
make their appearance. When they do, the public will not be carried
away by conjectures, but be able to judge on solid grounds. Till
then, let the discussion be at rest." P. 193-4. It is curious to
remark, and, in this place, not unworthy of our notice, that whilst
the controversy is imminent in the decision, whether these poems are
to be ascribed to a Highland bard long since gone "to the halls of
his fathers," or to a Lowland muse of the last century, it is in the
serious meditation of some controversialist to step in and place the
disputed wreath on the brows of Hibernia. There is no doubt that
Ireland was, in ancient times, so much connected with the adjacent
coast of Scotland, that they might almost be considered as one
country, having a community of manners and of language, as well as
the closest political connection. Their poetical language is nearly,
or rather altogether the same. These coinciding circumstances,
therefore, independent of all other ground, afford to ingenuity, in
the present state of the question, a sufficient basis for the
erection of an hypothetical superstructure of a very imposing nature.

 In a small volume published at Dusseldorf in 1787, by Edmond, Baron
de Harold, an Irishman, of endless titles, we are presented with what
are called, "Poems of Ossian lately discovered."

 "I am interested," says the baron in his preface, in no polemical
dispute or party, and give these poems such as they are found in the
mouths of the people; and do not pretend to ascertain what was the
native country of Ossian. I honor and revere equally a bard of his
exalted talents, were he born in Ireland or in Scotland. It is
certain that the Scotch and Irish were united at some early period.
That they proceed from the same origin is indisputable; nay, I
believe that it is proved beyond any possibility of negating it, that
the Scotch derive their origin from the Irish. This truth has been
brought in question but of late days; and all ancient tradition, and
the general con. sent of the Scotch nation, and of their oldest
historians, agree to confirm the certitude of this assertion. If any
man still doubts of it, he will find, in Macgeogehan's History of
Ireland, an entire conviction, established by elaborate discussion,
and most incontrovertible proofs:" pp. v. vi.

 We shall not stay to quarrel about "Sir Archy's great grandmother,"
or to contend that Fingal, the Irish giant, did not one day go "over
from Carrickfergus, and people all Scotland with his own hands," and
make these sons of the north "illegitimate;" but we may observe, that
from the inclination of the baron's opinion, added to the internal
evidence of his poems, there appears at least as much reason to
believe their author to have been a native of Ireland as of Scotland.
The success with which Macpherson's endeavors had been rewarded,
induced the baron to inquire whether any more of this kind of poetry
could be obtained. His search, he confessed, would have proved
fruitless, had he expected to find complete pieces; "for, certainly,"
says he, "none such exist. But," he adds, "in seeking with assiduity
and care, I found, by the help of my friends, several fragments of
old traditionary songs, which were very sublime, and particularly
remarkable for their simplicity and elegance." P. iv.

 "From these fragments," continues Baron de Harold, "I have composed
the following poems. They are all founded on tradition; but the dress
they now appear in is mine. It will appear singular to some, that
Ossian, at times, especially in the songs of Comfort, seems rather to
be an Hibernian than a Scotchman, and that some of these poems
formally contradict passages of great importance in those handed to
the public by Mr. Macpherson, especially that very remarkable one of
Evir-allen, where the description of her marriage with Ossian, is
essentially different in all its parts front that given in former
poems." P. v.

We refer the reader to the opening of the fourth book of Fingal,
which treats of Ossian's courtship of Evir-allen. The Evir-allen of
Baron de Harold is in these words:

EVIR-ALLEN:

A POEM.

 THOU fairest of the maids of Morven, young beam of streamy Lutha,
come to the help of the aged, come to the help of the distressed. Thy
soul is open to pity. Friendship glows in thy tender breast. Ah come
and sooth away my wo. Thy words are music to my soul.

Bring me my once-loved harp. It hangs long neglected in my hall. The
stream of years has borne me away in its course, and rolled away all
my bliss. Dim and faded are my eyes; thin-strewed with hairs my head.
Weak is that nervous arm, once the terror of foes. Scarce can I grasp
my staff, the prop of my trembling limbs.

 Lead me to yonder craggy steep. The murmur of the falling streams;
the whistling winds rushing through the woods of my hills; the
welcome rays of the bounteous sun, will soon awake the voice of song
in my breast. The thoughts of former years glide over my soul like
swift-shooting meteors o'er Ardven's gloomy vales.

 Come, ye friends of my youth, ye soft-sounding voices of Cona, bend
from your gold-tinged clouds, and join me in my song. A mighty blaze
is kindled in my soul. I hear a powerful voice. It says, "Seize thy
beam of glory, O bard! for thou shalt soon depart. Soon shall the
light of song be faded. Soon thy tuneful voice forgotten."--"Yes, I
obey, O Powerful voice, for thou art pleasing to mine ear."

 O Evir-allen! thou boast of Erin's maids, thy thoughts come
streaming on my soul. Hear, O Malvina! a tale of my youth, the
actions of my former days.

 Peace reigned over Morven's hills. The shell of joy resounded in our
halls. Round the blaze of the oak sported in festive dance the maids
of Morven. They shone like the radiant bow of heaven, when the fiery
rays, of the setting sun brightens its varied sides. They wooed me to
their love, but my heart was silent, cold. Indifference, like a
brazen shield, covered my frozen heart.

 Fingal saw, he smiled, and mildly spoke: My son, the down of youth
grows on thy check. Thy arm has wielded the spear of war. Foes have
felt thy force. Morven's maids are fair, but fairer are the daughters
of Erin. Go to that happy isle; to Branno's grass-covered fields. The
daughter of my friend deserves thy love. Majestic beauty flows around
her as a robe, and innocence, as a precious veil, heightens her
youthful charms. Go, take thy arms, and win the lovely fair.

 Straight I obeyed. A chosen band followed my steps. O We mounted the
dark-bosomed ship of the king, spread its white sails to the winds,
and ploughed through the foam of ocean. Pleasant shone the fine-eyed
Ull-Erin. 1 With joyal songs we cut the liquid way. The moon, regent
of the silent night, gleamed majestic in the blue vault of heaven,
and seemed pleased to bathe her side in the trembling wave. My soul
was full of my father's words. A thousand thoughts divided my
wavering mind,

 Soon as the early beam of morn appeared we saw the green-skirted
sides of Erin advancing in the bosom of the sea. White broke the 
tumbling surges on the Coast.

 Deep in Larmor's woody bay we drove our keel to the shore, and
gained the lofty beach. I inquired after the generous Branno. A son
of Erin led us to his halls, to the banks of the Sounding Lego. He
said, "Many warlike youths are assembled to gain the dark-haired
maid, the beauteous Evir-allen. Branno will give her to the brave.
The conqueror shall bear away the fair. Erin's chiefs dispute the
maid, for she is destined for the strong in arms."

 These words inflamed my breast, and roused courage in my heart. I
clad my limbs in steel. I grasped a shining spear in my hand. Branno
saw our approach. He sent the gray-haired Snivan to invite us to his
feast, and know the intent of our course. He came with the solemn
steps of age, and gravely spoke the words of the Chief.

 "Whence are these arms of steel? If friends ye come, Branno invites
you to his halls; for this day the lovely Evir-allen shall bless the
warrior's arms whose lance shall shine victorious in the combat of
valor."

 "O venerable bard!" I said, "peace guides my steps to Branno. My arm
is young, and few are my deeds in war, but valor inflames my soul; I
am of the race of the brave."

 The bard departed. We followed the steps of age, and soon arrived to
Branno's halls.

 The hero came to meet us. Manly serenity adorned his brow. His open
front showed the kindness of his heart. "Welcome," he said, "ye sons
of strangers; welcome to Branno's friendly halls; partake his shell
of joy. Share, in the combat of spears. Not unworthy is the prize of
valor, the lovely dark-haired maid of Erin; but strong must be that
warrior's hand that conquers Erin's chiefs; matchless his strength in
fight."

 "Chief," I replied, "the light of my father's deeds blazes in my
soul. Though young, I seek my beam of glory foremost in the ranks of
foes. Warrior, I can fair, but I shall fill with renown."

 "Happy is thy father, O generous youth! more happy the maid of thy
love. Thy glory shall surround her with praise; thy valor raise her
charms. O were my Evir-allen thy spouse, my years would pass away in
. joy. Pleased I would descend into the grave: contented see the end
of my days."

 The feast was spread; stately and slow camp Evir-allen. A snow-white
veil. covered her blushing face. Her large blue eyes were bent on
earth. Dignity flowed round her graceful steps. A shining tear fell
glittering on her cheek. She appeared lovely as the mountain flower
when the ruddy beams of the rising sun gleam on its dew-covered
aides. Decent she sate. High beat my fluttering heart. Swift through
my veins flew my thrilling blood. An unusual weight oppressed my
breast. I stood, darkened in my place. The image of the maid wandered
over my troubled soul.

 The sprightly harp's melodious voice arose from the string of the
bards. My soul melted away in the sounds, for my heart, like a
stream, flowed gently away in song. Murmurs soon broke upon our joy.
Half-unsheathed daggers gleamed. Many a voice was heard abrupt.
"Shall the son of the strangers be preferred? Soon shall he be rolled
away, like mist by rushing breath of the tempest." Sedate I rose, for
I despised the boaster's threats. The fair one's eye followed my
departure. I heard a smothered sigh from her breast.

 The horn's harsh sound summoned us to the doubtful strife of spears.
Lothmar, fierce hunter of the woody Galmal, first opposed his might.
He vainly insulted my youth, but my sword cleft his brazen shield,
and cut his ashen lance in twain. Straight I withheld my descending
blade. Lothmar retired confused.

 Then rose the red-haired strength of Sulin. Fierce rolled his deep-
sunk eye. His shaggy brows stood erect. His face was contracted with
scorn. Thrice his spear pierced my buckler. Thrice his sword struck
on my helm. Swift flashes gleamed from our circling blades. The pride
of my rage arose. Furious I rushed on the chief, and stretched his
bulk on the plain. Groaning he fell to earth. Lego's shores re-echoed
from his fall.

 Then advanced Cormac, graceful in glittering arms. No fairer youth
was seen on Erin's grassy hills. His age was equal to mine; his port
majestic; his stature tall and slender, like the young shooting
poplar in Lutha's streamy vales; but sorrow sate upon his brow;
languor reigned on his cheek. My heart inclined to the youth. My
sword oft avoided to wound; often sought to save his days: but he
rushed eager on death. He fell. Blood gushed from his panting breast.
Tears flowed streaming from mine eyes. I stretched forth my hand to
the chief. I proffered gentle words of peace. Faintly he seized my
hand. "Stranger," he said, "I willingly die, for my days were
oppressed with wo. Evir-allen rejected my love. She slighted my
tender suit. Thou alone deservest the maid, for pity reigns in thy
soul, and thou art generous and brave. Tell her, I forgive her scorn.
Tell her, I descend with joy into the grave; but raise the stone of
my praise. Let the maid throw a flower on my tomb, and mingle one
tear with my dust; this is my sole request. This she can grant to my
shade."

 I would have spoken, but broken sighs issuing from my breast,
interrupted my faltering words. I threw my spear aside. I clasped the
youth in my arms: but, alas! his soul was already departed to the
cloudy mansions of his; fathers.

 Then thrice I raised my voice, and called the chiefs to combat.
Thrice I brandished my spear, and wielded my glittering sword. No
warrior appeared. They dreaded the force of my arm, and yielded the
blue-eyed maid.

 Three days I remained in Branno's halls. On the fourth he led me to
the chambers of the fair. She came forth attended by her maids,
graceful in lovely majesty, like the moon, when all the stars confess
her sway, and retire respectful and abashed. I laid my sword at her
feet. Words of love flowed faltering from my tongue. Gently she gave
her hand. Joy seized my enraptured soul. Branno was touched at the
sight. He closed me in his aged arms.

 "O wert thou," said he, "the son of my friend, the son of the mighty
Fingal, then were my happiness complete!"

 "I am, I am the son of thy friend," I replied, "Ossian, the son of
Fingal;" then sunk upon his aged breast. Our flowing tears mingled
together. We remained long clasped in each other's arms.

 Such was my youth, O Malvina! but alas! I am now forlorn. Darkness
covers my soul. Yet the light of song beams at times on my mind. It
solaces awhile my we. Bards, prepare my tomb. Lay me by the fair
Evir-allen. When the revolving years bring back the mild season of
spring to our hills, sing the praise of Cona's bard, of Ossian, the
friend of the distressed.

 The difference, in many material circumstances, between these two
descriptions of, as it would seem, the same thing, must be very
apparent. "I will submit," says the baron, "the solution of this
problem to the public." We shall follow his example.

 The Honorable Henry Grattan, to whom the baron dedicates his work,
has said, that the poems: which it contains are calculated to inspire
"valor, wisdom, and virtue." It is true, that they are adorned with
numerous beauties both of poetry and morality. They are still farther
distinguished and illumined by noble allusions to the Omnipotent,
which cannot fail to strike the reader as a particular in which they
remarkably vary from those of Mr. Macpherson. "In his," says our
author," there is no mention of the Divinity. In these, the chief
characteristic is the many solemn descriptions of the Almighty Being,
which give a degree of elevation to them unattainable by any other
method. It is worthy of observation how the bard gains in sublimity
by his magnificent, display of the power, bounty, eternity, and
justice of God: and every reader must rejoice to find the venerable
old warrior occupied in descriptions so worthy his great and
comprehensive genius, and to see him freed from the imputation of
atheism, with which he had been branded by many sagacious and
impartial men." P. vi.

 We could willingly transcribe more of these. poems, but we have
already quoted enough to show the style of them, and can spare space
for no additions. "Lamor, a poem," is, the baron thinks, of a more
ancient date than that of Ossian, and "the model, perhaps, of his
compositions." Another, called "Sitric," king of Dublin, which throws
some light on the history of those times, he places in the ninth
century. What faith, however, is to be put in the genuineness of the
"Fragments,"  which Baron de Harold assures us furnished him with the
ground-work of these poems, we leave it to others to ascertain. Our
investigation is confined within far narrower limits.

 It has, without doubt, been observed that in noticing what has
transpired on this subject since our last edition, we have carefully
avoided any dogmatism on the question collectedly; and having simply
displayed a torch to show the paths which lead to the labyrinth,
those who wish to venture more deeply into its intricacies, may, when
they please, pursue them.

 We must acknowledge, before we depart, that we cannot see without
indignation, or rather pity, the belief of some persons that these
poems are the offspring of Macpherson's genius, so operating on their
minds as to turn their admiration of the ancient poet into contempt
of the modern. We ourselves love antiquity, not merely however, on
account of its antiquity, but because it deserves to be loved. No: we
honestly own with Quintilian, in quibusdam antiquorum, vix risum, in
quibusdam autem vix somnum tenere. The songs of other times, when
they are, as they frequently are, supremely beautiful, merit every
praise, but we must not therefore despise all novelty. In the days of
the Theban bard, it would seem to have been otherwise, for he appears
to give the preference to old wine, but new songs--

a??e? de pa?a???
e? o????, a??ea d' ????
?e?te???.-- Pind. Ol. Od. ix

(ainei de palaion
men oinon, anthea d'ymnon
neoteron)

 With respect to age in wine we are tolerably agreed, but we differ
widely in regard to novelty in verse. Though warranted in some
measure, yet all inordinate prepossessions should be moderated, and
it would be well if we were occasionally to reflect on this question,
if the ancients had been so inimicable to novelty as we are, what
would now be old?

 We shall not presume to affirm that these poems were originally
produced by Macpherson, but admitting it, for the sake of argument,
it would then, perhaps, be just to ascribe all the mystery that has
hung about them to the often ungenerous dislike of novelty, or, it
may be more truly, the efforts of contemporaries, which influences
the present day. This might have stimulated him to seek in the garb
of "th' olden time," that respect which is sometimes despitefully
denied to drapery of a later date. Such a motive doubtlessly swayed
the designs both of Chatterton and Ireland, whose names we cannot
mention together without Dryden's comment on Spenser and Flecknoe,
"that is, from the top to the bottom of all poetry." In ushering into
the world the hapless, but beautiful muse of Chatterton, as well as
the contemptible compositions of Ireland, it was alike thought
necessary, to secure public attention, to have recourse to "quaint
Inglis," or an antique dress. And to the eternal disgrace, of
prejudice, the latter, merely in consequence of their disguise, found
men blind enough to advocate their claims to that admiration which,
on their eyes being opened, they could no longer see, and from the
support of which they shrunk abashed.

 But we desist. It is useless to draw conclusions, as it is vain to
reason with certain people who act unreasonably, since, if they were,
in these particular cases, capable of reason, they would need no
reasoning with. By some, the poems here published will be esteemed in
proportion as the argument for their antiquity prevails, but with
regard to the general reader, and the unaffected lovers of "heaven-
descended poesy," let the question take either way, still

The harp in Selma was not idly
And long shall last the themes our poet

Berrathon.





PREFACE.

 WITHOUT increasing his genius, the author may have improved his
language, in the eleven years that the following poems have been in
the hands of the public. Errors in diction might have been committed
at twenty-four, which the experience of a riper age may remove; and
some exuberances in imagery may be restrained with advantage, by a
degree of judgment acquired in the progress of time. Impressed with
this opinion, he ran over the whole with attention and accuracy; and
he hopes he has brought the work to a state of correctness which will
preclude all future improvements.

 The eagerness with which these poems have been received abroad, is a
recompense for the coldness with which a few have affected to treat
them at home. All the polite nations of Europe have transferred them
into their respective languages; and they speak of him who brought
them to light, in terms that might flatter the vanity of one fond of
flame. In a convenient indifference for a literary reputation, the
author hears praise without being elevated, and ribaldry without
being depressed. He has frequently seen the first bestowed too
precipitately; and the latter is so faithless to its purpose, that it
is often the only index to merit in the present age.

 Though the taste which defines genius by the points of the compass,
is a subject fit for mirth in itself, it is often a serious matter in
the sale of the work. When rivers define the limits of abilities, as
well as the boundaries of countries, a writer may measure his success
by the latitude under which he was born. It was to avoid a part of
this inconvenience, that the author is said by some, who speak
without any authority, to nave ascribed his own productions to
another name. If this was the case, he was but young in the art of
deception. When he placed the poet in antiquity, the translator
should have been born on this side of the Tweed.

 These observations regard only the frivolous in matters of
literature; these, however, form a majority of every age and nation.
In this countrymen of genuine taste abound; but their still voice is
drowned in the clamors of a multitude, who judge by fashion of
poetry, as of dress. The truth is, to judge aright, requires almost
as much genius as to write well; and good critics are as rare as
great poets. Though two hundred thousand Romans stood up when Virgil
came into the theatre, Varius only could correct the neid. He that
obtains fame must receive it through mere fashion; and gratify his
vanity with the applause of men, of whose judgment he cannot approve.

 The following poems, it must be confessed, are more calculated to
please persons of exquisite feelings of heart, than those who receive
all their impressions by the car. The novelty of cadence, in what is
called a prose version, thou h not destitute of harmony, will not, to
common readers, supply the absence of the frequent returns of rhyme.
This was the opinion of the writer himself, though he yielded to the
judgment of others, in a mode, which presented freedom and dignity of
expression, instead of fetters, which cramp the thought, whilst the
harmony of language is preserved. His attention was to publish
inverse.--The making of poetry, like any other handicraft, may be
learned by industry; and he had served his apprenticeship, though in
secret, to the Muses.

 It is, however, doubtful, whether the harmony which these poems
might derive from rhyme, even in much better hands than those of the
translator, could atone for the simplicity and energy which they
would lose. The determination of this point shall be left to the
readers of this preface. The following is the beginning of a poem,
translated from the Norse to the Gaelic language; and, from the
latter, transferred into English. The verse took little more time to
the writer than the prose; and he himself is doubtful (if he has
succeeded in either) which of them is the most literal version.

 FRAGMENT OF A NORTHERN TALE.

 WHERE Harold, with golden hair, spread o'er Lochlinn his high
commands; where, with justice, he ruled the tribes, who sunk,
subdued, beneath his sword; abrupt rises Gormal in snow! the tempests
roll dark on his sides, but calm, above, his vast forehead appears.
White-issuing from the skirt of his storms, the troubled torrents
pour down his sides. Joining, as they roar along, they bear the
Torno, in foam, to the main.

 Gray on the bank, and far from men, half-covered, by ancient pines,
from the wind, a lonely pile exalts its head, long shaken by the
storms of the north. To this fled Sigurd, fierce in fight, from
Harold the leader of armies, when fate had brightened his spear with
renown: when he conquered in that rude field, where Lulan's warriors
fell in blood, or rose in terror on the waves of the main. Darkly sat
the gray-haired chief; yet sorrow dwelt not in his soul. But when the
warrior thought on the past, his proud heart heaved against his side:
forth flew his sword from its place: he wounded Harold in all the
winds.

 One daughter, and only one, but bright in form and mild of soul, the
last beam of the setting line, remained to Sigurd of all his race.
His son, in Lulan's battle slain, beheld not his father's flight from
his foes. Nor finished seemed the ancient line! The splendid beauty
of bright-eyed Fithon covered still the fallen king with renown. Her
arm was white like Gormal's snow; her bosom whiter than the foam of
the main, when roll the waves beneath the wrath of the winds. Like
two stars were her radiant eyes, like two stars that rise on the
deep, when dark tumult embroils the night. Pleasant are their beams
aloft, as stately they ascend the skies.

 Nor Odin forgot, in aught, the maid. Her form scarce equalled her
lofty mind. Awe moved around her stately steps. Heroes loved-but
shrunk away in their fears. Yet, midst the pride of all her charms,
her heart was soft and her soul was kind. She saw the mournful with
tearful eyes. Transient darkness arose in her breast. Her joy was in
the chase. Each morning, when doubtful light wandered dimly on
Lulan's waves, she roused the resounding woods to Gormal's head of
snow. Nor moved the maid alone, &c.

The same versified.

Where fair-hair'd Harold, o'er Scandinia reign'd,
And held with justice what his valor gain'd ,
Sevo, in snow, his rugged forehead rears,
A o'er the warfare of his storms, appears
Abrupt and vast.--White wandering down his side
A thousand torrents, gleaming as they glide,
Unite below, and, pouring through the plain,
flurry the troubled Torno to the main.
Gray, on the bank, remote from human kind,
By aged pines half-shelter'd from the wind,
A homely mansion rose, of antique form,
For ages batter'd by the polar storm.
To this, fierce Sigurd fled from Norway's lord,
When fortune settled on the warrior's sword,
In that rude field, where Suecia's chiefs were slain,
Or forc'd to wander o'er the Bothnic main.
Dark was his life, yet undisturb'd with woes,
But when the memory of defeat arose,
His proud heart struck his side; he grasp'd the spear,
And wounded Harold in the vacant air.
One daughter only, but of form divine,
The last fair beam of the departing line,
Remain'd of Sigurd's race. His warlike son
Fell in the shock which overturn'd the throne.
Nor desolate the house! Fionia's charms
Sustain'd the glory which they lost in arms.
White was her arm as Sevo's lofty snow,
Her bosom fairer than the waves below
When heaving to the winds. Her radiant eyes
Like two bright stars, exulting as they rise,
O'er the dark tumult of a stormy night,
And gladd'ning heaven with their majestic light.
In nought is Odin to the maid unkind,
Her form scarce equals her exalted mind;
Awe leads her sacred steps where'er they move,
And mankind worship where they dare not love.
But mix'd with softness was the virgin's pride,
Her heart bad feeling, which her eyes denied;
Her bright tears started at another's woes,
While transient darkness on her soul arose.
The chase she lov'd; when morn with doubtful beam
Came dimly wand'ring o'er the Bothnic stream.
On Sevo's sounding sides she bent the bow,
And rous'd his forests to his head of snow.
Nor moved the maid alone, &c.

One of the chief improvements, in this edition, is the care taken in
arranging the poems in the order of time; so as to form a kind of
regular history of the age to which they relate. The writer has now
resigned them forever to their fate. That they have been well
received by the public appears from an extensive sale; that they
shall continue to be well received, he may venture to prophesy,
without the gift of that inspiration to which poets lay claim.
Through the medium of version upon version, they retain, in foreign
languages, their native character of simplicity and energy. Genuine
poetry, like gold, loses little, when properly transfused; but when a
composition cannot bear the test of a literal version, it is a
counterfeit which ought not to pass current. The operation must,
however, be performed with skilful hands. A translator who cannot
equal his original, is incapable of expressing its beauties.

 London,
Aug. 15,1773.





A DISSERTATION CONCERNING THE RA OF OSSIAN.

 INQUIRIES into the antiquities of nations afford more pleasure than
any real advantage to mankind. The ingenious may form systems of
history on probabilities and a few facts; but, at a great distance of
time, their accounts must be vague and uncertain. The infancy of
states and kingdoms is as destitute of great events, as of the means
of transmitting them to posterity. The arts of polished life, by
which alone facts can be preserved with certainty, are the production
of a well. formed community. It is then historians begin to write,
and public transactions to be worthy remembrance. The actions of
former times are left in obscurity, or magnified by uncertain
traditions. Hence it is that we find so much of the marvellous in the
origin of every nation; posterity being always ready to believe any
thing, however fabulous, that reflects honor on their ancestors.

 The Greeks and Romans were remarkable for this weakness. They
swallowed the most absurd fables concerning the high antiquities of
their respective nations. Good historians, however, rose very early
amongst them, and transmitted, with lustre, their great actions to
posterity. It is to them that they owe that unrivalled fame they now
enjoy; while the great actions of other nations are involved in
fables, or lost in obscurity. The Celtic nations afford a striking
instance of this kind. They, though once the masters of Europe, from
the mouth of the river Oby, in Russia, to Cape Finisterre, the
western point of Gallicia, in Spain, are very little mentioned in
history. They trusted their fame to tradition and the songs of their
bards, which, by the vicissitude of human affairs, are long since
lost. Their ancient language is the only monument that remains of
them; and the traces of it being found in places so widely distant
from each other, serves only to show the extent of their ancient
power, but throws very little light on their history.

 Of all the Celtic nations, that which possessed old Gaul is the most
renowned: not perhaps on account of worth superior to the rest, but
for their wars with a people who had historians to transmit the fame
of their enemies, as well as their own, to posterity. Britain was
first peopled by them, according to the testimony of the best
authors; its situation in respect to Gaul makes the opinion probable;
but what puts it beyond all dispute, is, that the same customs and
language prevailed among the inhabitants of both in the days of
Julius Csar.

 The colony from Gaul possessed themselves, at first, of that part of
Britain which was next to their own country; and spreading northward
by degrees, as they increased in numbers, peopled the whole island.
Some adventurers passing over from those parts of Britain that are
within sight of Ireland, were the founders of the Irish nation: which
is a more probable story than the idle fables of Milesian and
Gallician colonies. Diodorus Siculus mentions it as a thing well k-
town in his time, that the inhabitants of Ireland were originally
Britons; and his testimony is unquestionable, when we consider that,
for many ages, the language and customs of both nations were the
same.

 Tacitus was of opinion that the ancient Caledonians were of German
extract; but even the ancient Ger. mans themselves were Gauls. The
present Germans, properly so called, were not the same with the
ancient Celt. The manners and customs of the two nations were
similar; but their language different. The Germans are the genuine
descendants of the ancient Scandinavians, who crossed, at an early
period, the Baltic. The Celt, anciently, sent many colonies into
Germany, all of whom retained their own laws, language, and customs,
till they were dissipated, in the Roman empire; and it is of them, if
any colonies came from Germany into Scotland, that the ancient
Caledonians were descended.

 But whether the ancient Caledonians were a colony of the Celtic
Germans,, or the same with the Gauls that first possessed themselves
of Britain, is a matter of no moment at this distance of time.
Whatever their origin was, we find them very numerous in the time of
Julius Agricola, which is a presumption that they were long before
settled in the country. The form of their government was a mixture of
aristocracy and monarchy, as it was in all the countries where the
Druids bore the chief sway. This order of men seems to have been
formed on the same principles with the Dactyli, Id, and Curetes of
the ancients. Their pretended intercourse with heaven, their magic
and divination, were the same. The knowledge of the Druids in natural
causes, and the properties of certain things, the fruits of the
experiments of ages, gained them a mighty reputation among the
people. The esteem of the populace soon increased into a veneration
for the order; which these cunning and ambitious priests took care to
improve, to such a degree, that they, in a manner, engrossed the
management of civil, as well as religious matters. It is generally
allowed, that they did not abuse this extraordinary power; the
preserving the character of sanctity was so essential to their
influence, that they never broke out into violence or oppression. The
chiefs were allowed to execute the laws, but the legislative power
was entirely in the hands of the Druids. It Was by their authority
that the tribes were united, in times of the greatest danger, under
one head. This temporary king, or Vergobretus, was chosen by them,
and generally laid down his office at the end of the war. These
priests enjoyed long this extraordinary privilege among the Celtic
nations who lay beyond the pale of the Roman empire. It was in the
beginning of the second century that their power among the
Caledonians began to decline. The traditions concerning Trathal and
Cormac, ancestors to Fingal, are full of the particulars of the fall
of the Druids: a singular fate it must be owned, of priests who had
once established their superstition.

 The continual wars of the Caledonians against the Romans, hindered
the bettor sort from initiating themselves, as the custom formerly
was, into the order of the Druids. The precepts of their religion
were con. fined to a few, and were not much attended to by a people
inured to war. He Vergobretus, or chief magistrate, was chosen
without the concurrence of the hierarchy, or continued in his office
against their will. Continual power strengthened his interest among
the tribes, and enabled him to send down, as hereditary to his
posterity, the office he had only received himself by election.

 On occasion of a new war against the "king of the world," as
tradition emphatically calls the Roman emperor, the Druids, to
vindicate the honor of the order, began to resume their ancient
privilege of choosing the Vergobretus. Garmal, the son of Tarno,
being deputed by them, came to the grandfather of the celebrated
Fingal, who was then Vergobretus, and commanded him, in the name of
the whole order, to lay down his office. Upon his refusal, a civil
war commenced, which soon ended in almost the total extinction of the
religious order of the Druids. A few that remained, retired to the
dark recesses of their groves, and the caves they had formerly used
for their meditations. It is then we find them in the circle of
stones, and unheeded by the world. A total disregard for the order,
and utter abhorrence of the Druidical rites ensued. Under this cloud
of public hate, all that had any knowledge of the religion of the
Druids became extinct, and the nation fell into the last degree of
ignorance of their rites and ceremonies.

 It is no matter of wonder, then, that Fingal and his son Ossian
disliked the Druids, who were the declared enemies to their
succession in the supreme magistracy. It is a singular case, it must
be allowed, that there are no traces of religion in the poems
ascribed to Ossian, as the poetical compositions of other nations are
so closely connected with their mythology. But gods are not
necessary, when the poet has genius. It is hard to account for it to
those who are not made acquainted with the manner of the old Scottish
bards. That race of men carried their notions of martial honor to an
extravagant pitch. Any aid given their heroes in battle, was thought
to derogate from their fame; and the bards immediately transferred
the glory of the action to him who had given that aid.

 Had the poet brought down gods, as often as Homer has done, to
assist his heroes, his work had not consisted of eulogiums on men,
but of hymns to superior beings. Those who write in the Gaelic
language seldom mention religion in their profane poetry; and when
they professedly write of religion, they never mix, with their
compositions, the actions of their heroes. This custom alone, even
though the religion of the Druids had not been previously
extinguished, may, in some measure, excuse the author's silence
concerning the religion of ancient times.

 To allege that a nation is void of all religion, betrays ignorance
of the history of mankind. The traditions of their fathers, and their
own observations on the works of nature, together with that
superstition which is inherent in the human frame, have, in all ages,
raised in the minds of men some idea of a superior being. Hence it
is, that in the darkest times, and amongst the most barbarous
nations, the very populace themselves hid some faint notion, at
least, of a divinity. The Indians, who worship no God, believe that
he exists. It would be doing injustice to the author of these poems,
to think that he had not opened his conceptions to that primitive and
greatest of all truths. But let his religion be what it will, it is
certain that he has not alluded to Christianity or any of its rites,
in his poems; which ought to fix his opinions, at least; to an era
prior to that religion. Conjectures, on this subject, must supply the
place of proof. The persecution begun by Dioclesian, in the year 303,
is the most probable time in which the first dawning of Christianity
in the north of Britain can be fixed. The humane and mild character
of Constantius Chlorus, who commanded then in Britain, induced the
persecuted Christians to take refuge under him. Some of them, through
a zeal to propagate their tenets, or through fear, went beyond the
pale of the Roman empire, and settled among the Caledonians; who
were, ready to hearken to their doctrines, if the religion of the
Druids was exploded long before. These missionaries, either through
choice or to give more weight to the doctrine they advanced, took
possession of the cells and groves of the Druids; and it was from
this retired life they had the name of Culdees, which, in the
language of the country, signified "the sequestered persons." It was
with one of the Culdees that Ossian, in his extreme old age, is said
to have disputed concerning the Christian religion. This dispute they
say, is extant, and is couched in verse, according to the custom of
the times. The extreme ignorance on the part of Ossian of the
Christian tenets, shows that that religion had only lately been
introduced, as it is not easy to conceive how one of the first rank
could be totally unacquainted with a religion that had been known for
any time in the country. The dispute bears the genuine marks of
antiquity. The obsolete phrases and expressions, peculiar to the
time, prove it to be no forgery. If Ossian, then, lived at the
introduction of Christianity, as by all appearance he did, his epoch
will be the, latter end of the third, and beginning of the fourth
century. Tradition here steps in with a kind of proof.

 The exploits of Fingal against Caracul, the son of the "king of the
world," are among the first brave actions of his youth. A complete:
poem, which relates to this subject, is printed in this collection.

 In the year 210, the Emperor Severus, after returning from his
expedition against the Caledonians at York, fell into the tedious
illness of which he afterward died. The Caledonians and Maiat,
resuming courage from his indisposition, took arms in order to
recover the possessions they had lost. The enraged emperor commanded
his army to march into their country, and to destroy it with fire and
sword. His orders were but ill executed; for his son Caracalla was at
the head of the army, and his thoughts were entirely taken up with
the hopes of his father's death, and with schemes to supplant his
brother Geta. He scarcely had entered into the enemy's country, when
news was brought him that Severus was dead, A sudden peace is patched
up with the Caledonians, and, as it appears from Dion Cassius, the
country they had lost to Severus was restored to them.

 The Caracul of Fingal is no other than Caracalla, who as the son of
Severus, the emperor of Rome, whose dominions were extended almost
over the known world, was not without reason called the "son of the
king of the world." The space, of time between 211, the year Severus
, died, and the beginning of the fourth century is not so great, but
Ossian, the son of Fingal, might have seen the Christians whom the
persecution under Dioclesian had driven beyond the pale of the Roman
empire.

 In one of the many lamentations of the death of Oscar, a battle
which he fought, against Caros, king of ships, on the banks of the
winding Carun, is mentioned among his great actions. It is more than
probable, that the Caros mentioned here, is the same with the noted
usurper Carausius, who assumed the purple in the year 287, and
seizing on Britain, defeated the Emperor Maximinian Herculius in
several naval engagements, which gives propriety to his being called
the "king of ships." "The winding Carun," is that small river
retaining still the name of Carron, and runs in the neighborhood of
Agricola's wall, which Carausius repaired, to obstruct the incursions
of the Caledonians. Several other passages in traditions allude to
the wars of the Romans; but the two just mentioned clearly fix the
epocha of Fingal to the third century; and this account agrees
exactly with the Irish histories, which place the death of Fingal,
the son of Comhal, in the year 283, and that of Oscar and their own
celebrated Cairbre, in the year 296.

 Some people may imagine, that the allusions to the Roman history
might have been derived by tradition, from learned men, more than
from ancient poems. This must then have happened at least three
hundred years ago, as these allusions are mentioned often in the
compositions of those times.

 Every one knows what a cloud of ignorance and barbarism overspread
the north of Europe three hundred years ago. The minds of men,
addicted to superstition, contracted a narrowness that destroyed
genius. Accordingly we find the compositions of those times trivial
and puerile to the last degree. But, let it be allowed; that, amidst
all the untoward circumstances of the age, a genius might arise; it
is not easy to determine what could induce him to allude to the Roman
times. We find no fact to favor any designs which could be
entertained by any man who lived in the fifteenth century.

 The strongest objection to the antiquity of the poems now given to
the public under the name of Ossian, is the improbability of their
being handed down by tradition through so many centuries. Ages of
barbarism some will say, could not produce poems abounding with the
disinterested and generous sentiments so conspicuous in the
compositions of Ossian; and could these ages produce them, it is
impossible but they must be lost, or altogether corrupted, in a long
succession of barbarous generations.

 Those objections naturally suggest themselves to men unacquainted
with the ancient state of the northern parts of Britain. The bards,
who were an inferior order of the Druids, did not share their bad
fortune. They were spared by the victorious king, as it was through
their means only he could hope for immortality to his fame. They
attended him in the camp, and contributed to establish his power by
their songs. His great actions were magnified, and the populace, who
had no ability to examine into his character narrowly, were dazzled
with his fame in the rhymes of the bards. In the mean time, men
assumed sentiments that are rarely to be met with in an age of
barbarism. The bards, who were originally the disciples of the
Druids, hid their minds opened, and their ideas enlarged, by being
initiated into the learning of that celebrated order. They could form
a perfect hero in their own minds, and ascribe that character to
their prince. The inferior chiefs made this ideal character the model
of their conduct; and, by degrees, brought their minds to that
generous spirit which breathes in all the poetry of the times. The
prince, flattered by his bards, and rivalled by his own heroes, who
imitated his character as described in the eulogies of his poets,
endeavored to excel his people in merit, as he was above them in
station. This emulation continuing, formed at last the general
character of the nation, happily compounded of what is noble in
barbarity, and virtuous and generous in a polished people.

 When virtue in peace, and bravery in war, are the characteristics of
a nation, their actions become interesting, and their fame worthy of
immortality. A generous spirit is warmed with noble actions, and
becomes ambitious of perpetuating them. This is the true source of
that divine inspiration, to which the poets of all ages pretended.
When they found their themes inadequate to the warmth of their
imaginations, they varnished them over with fables supplied with
their own fancy, or furnished by absurd traditions. These fables,
however ridiculous, had their abettors; posterity either implicitly
believed them, or through a vanity natural to mankind, pretended that
they did. They loved to place the founders of their families in the
days of fable, when poetry, without the fear of contradiction, could
give what character she pleased of her heroes. It is to this vanity
that we owe the preservation of what remain of the more ancient
poems. Their poetical merit made their heroes famous in a country
where heroism was much esteemed and admired. The posterity of these
heroes or those who pretended to be descended from them, heard with
pleasure the eulogiums of their ancestors; bards were employed to
repeat the poems, and to record the connection of their patrons with
chiefs so renowned. Every chief, in process of time, had a bard in
his family, and the office became at last hereditary. By the
succession of these bards, the poems concerning the ancestors of the
family were handed down from generation to generation; they were
repeated to the whole clan on solemn occasions, and always alluded to
in the new compositions of the bards. The custom came down to near
our own times; and after the bards were discontinued, a great number
in a clan retained by memory, or committed to writing, their
compositions, and founded the antiquity of their families on the
authority of their poems.

 The use of letters was not known in the north of Europe till long
after the institution of the bards: the records of the families of
their patrons, their own, and more ancient poems, were handed down by
tradition. Their poetical compositions were admirably contrived for
that purpose. They were adapted to music; and the most perfect
harmony was observed. Each verse was so connected with those which
preceded or followed it, that if one line, had been remembered in a
stanza, it was almost impossible to forget the rest. The cadences
followed so natural a gradation, and the words were so adapted to the
common turn of the voice, after it is raised to a certain key, that
it was almost impossible, from a similarity of sound, to substitute
one word for another. This excellence is peculiar to the Celtic
tongue, and is perhaps to be met with in no other language. Nor does
this choice of words clog the sense, or weaken the expression. The
numerous flexions of consonants, and variation in declension, make
the language very copious.

 The descendants of the Celt, who inhabited Britain and its isles,
were not singular in this method of preserving the most precious
monuments of their nation. The ancient laws of the Greeks were
couched in verse, and handed down by tradition. The Spartans, through
a long habit, became so fond of this custom, that they would never
allow their laws to be committed to writing. The actions of great
men, and eulogiums of kings and heroes, were preserved in the same
manner. All the historical monuments of the old Germans were
comprehended in their ancient songs; which were either hymns to their
gods, or elegies in praise of their heroes, and were intended to
perpetuate the great events in their nation, which were carefully
interwoven with them. This species of composition was not committed
to writing, but delivered by oral tradition. The care they took to
have the poems taught to their children, the uninterrupted custom of
repeating them upon certain occasions, and the happy measure of the
verse, served to preserve them for a long time uncorrupted. This oral
chronicle of the Germans was not forgot in the eighth century; and it
probably would have remained to this day, had not learning, which
thinks every thing that is not committed to writing, fabulous, been
introduced. It was from poetical traditions that Garcilasso composed
his account of the Incas of Peru. The Peruvians had lost all other
monuments of their history, and it was from ancient poems, which his
mother, a princess of the blood of the Incas, taught him in his
youth, that he, collected the materials of his history. If other
nations, then, that had often been overrun by enemies, and hath sent
abroad and received colonies, could for many ages preserve, by oral
tradition, their laws and histories uncorrupted, it is much more
probable that the ancient Scots, a people so free of intermixture
with foreigners, and so strongly attached to the memory of their
ancestors, had the works of their bards handed down with great
purity.

 What is advanced in s short dissertation, it must be confessed, is
mere conjecture. Beyond the reach of' records is settled a gloom
which no ingenuity can penetrate. The manners described in these
poems suit the ancient Celtic times, and no other period that is
known in history. We must, therefore, place the heroes far back in
antiquity; and it matters little, who were their contemporaries in
other parts of the world. If we have placed Fingal in his proper
period, we do honor to the manners of barbarous times. He exercised
every manly virtue in Caledonia, while Heliogabalus disgraced human
nature at Rome.





A DISSERTATION CONCERNING THE POEMS OF OSSIAN.

 THE history of those nations who originally possessed the north of
Europe, is less known than their manners. Destitute of the use of
letters, they them. selves had not the means of transmitting their
great actions to remote posterity. Foreign writers saw them only at a
distance, and described them as they found them. The vanity of the
Romans induced them to consider the nations beyond the pale of their
empire as barbarians; and, consequently, their history unworthy of
being investigated. Their manners and singular character were matters
of curiosity, as they committed them to record. Some men otherwise of
great merit, among ourselves, give into confined ideas on this
subject. Having early imbibed their idea of exalted manners from the
Greek and Roman writers, they scarcely ever afterward have the
fortitude to allow any dignity of character to any nation destitute
of the use of letters.

 Without derogating from the fame of Greece and Rome, we may consider
antiquity beyond the pale of their empire worthy of some attention.
The nobler passions of the mind never shoot forth more free and
unrestrained than in the times we call barbarous. That irregular
manner of life, and those manly pursuits, from which barbarity takes
it name, are highly favorable to a strength of mind unknown in
polished times. In advanced society, the characters of men are more
uniform and disguised. The human passions lie in some degree
concealed behind forms and artificial manners; and the powers of the
soul, without an opportunity of exerting them, lose their vigor. The
times of regular government, and polished manners, are therefore to
be wished for by the feeble and weak in mind. An unsettled state, and
those convulsions which attend it, is the proper field for an exalted
character, and the exertion of great parts. Merit there rises always
superior; no fortuitous event can raise the timid and mean into
power. To those who look upon antiquity in this light, it is an
agreeable prospect; and they alone can have real pleasure in tracing
nations to their source. The establishment of the Celtic states, in
the north of Europe, is beyond the reach of written annals. The
traditions and songs to which they trusted their history, were lost,
or altogether corrupted, in their revolutions and migrations, which
were so frequent and universal, that no kingdom in Europe is now
possessed by its original inhabitants. Societies were formed, and
kingdoms erected, from a mixture of nations, who, in process of time,
lost all knowledge of their own origin. If tradition could be
depended upon, it is only among a people, from all time, free from
intermixture with foreigners. We are to look for these among the
mountains and inaccessible parts of a country: places, on account of
their barrenness, uninviting to an enemy, or whose natural strength
enabled the natives to repel invasions. Such are the inhabitants of
the mountains of Scotland. We, accordingly find that they differ
materially from those who possess the low and more fertile parts of,
the kingdom. Their language is pure and original, and their manners
are those of an ancient and unmixed race of men. Conscious of their
own antiquity, they long despised others, as a new and mixed people.
As they lived in a country only fit for pasture, they were free from
that toil and business which engross the attention of a commercial
people. Their amusement consisted in hearing or repeating their songs
and traditions, and these entirely turned on the antiquity of their
nation, and the exploits of their forefathers. It is no wonder,
therefore, that there are more remains among them, than among any
other people in Europe. Traditions, however, concerning remote
periods are only to be regarded, in so far as they coincide with
contemporary writers of undoubted credit and veracity.

 No writers began their accounts for a more early period than the
historians of the Scots nation. Without records, or even tradition
itself, they gave a long list of ancient kings, and a detail of their
transactions, with a scrupulous exactness. One might naturally
suppose, that when they had no authentic annals, they should, at
least, have recourse to the traditions of their country, and have
reduced them into a regular system of history. Of both they seem to
have been equally destitute. Born in the low country, and strangers
to the ancient language of their nation, they contented themselves
with copying from one another, and retailing the same fictions in a
new color and dress.

 John Fordun was the first who collected those fragments of the Scots
history which had escaped the brutal policy of Edward I., and reduced
them into order. His accounts, in so far as they concerned recent
transactions, deserved credit: beyond a certain period, they were
fabulous and unsatisfactory. Sometime before Fordun wrote, the king
of England, in a letter to the pope, had run up the antiquity of his
nation to a very remote ra. Fordun, possessed of all the national
prejudice of the age, was unwilling that his country should yield, in
point of antiquity, to a people then its rivals and enemies.
Destitute of annals in Scotland, he had recourse to Ireland, which,
according to the vulgar error of the times, was reckoned the first
habitation of the Scots. He found there, that the Irish bards had
carried their pretensions to antiquity as high, if not beyond any
nation in Europe. It was from them he took those improbable fictions
which form the first part of his history.

 The writers that succeeded Fordun implicitly followed his system,
though they sometimes varied from him in their relations of
particular transactions and the order of succession of their kings.
As they had no new lights, and were equally with him unacquainted
with the traditions of their country, their histories contain little
information concerning the origin of the Scots. Even Buchanan
himself, except the elegance and vigor of his style, has very little
to recommend him. Blinded with political prejudices, he seemed more
anxious to turn the fictions of his predecessors to his own purposes,
than to detect their misrepresentations, or investigate truth amidst
the darkness which they had thrown round it. It therefore appears,
that little can be collected from their own historians concerning the
first migrations of the Scots into Britain.

 That this island was peopled from Gaul admits of no doubt. Whether
colonies came afterward from the north of Europe, is a matter of mere
speculation. When South Britain yielded to the power of the Romans,
the unconquered nations to the north of the province were
distinguished by the name of Caledonians. From their very name, it
appears that they were of those Gauls who possessed themselves
originally of Britain. It is compounded of two Celtic words, Cael
signifying Celts, or Gauls, and Dun or Don, a hill; so that Caeldon,
or Caledonians, is as much as to say, the "Celts of the hill
country." The Highlanders, to this day, call themselves Cael, and
their language Caelic, or Galic, and their country Caeldock, which
the Romans softened into Caledonia. This, of itself, is sufficient to
demonstrate that they are the genuine descendants of the ancient
Caledonians, and not a pretended colony of Scots, who settled first
in the north, in the third or fourth century.

 From the double meaning of' the word Cael, which signifies
"strangers," as well as Gauls, or Celts, some have imagined, that the
ancestors of the Caledonians were of a different race from the rest
of the Britons, and that they received their name upon that account.
This opinion, say they, is supported by Tacitus, who, from several
circumstances, concludes that the Caledonians were of German
extraction. A discussion of a point so intricate, at this distance of
time, could neither be satisfactory nor important.

 Towards the later end of the third, and beginning of the fourth
century, we find the Scots in the north. Porphirius makes the first
mention of them about that time. As the Scots were not heard of
before that period, most writers supposed them to have been a colony,
newly come to Britain, and that the Picts were the only genuine
descendants of the ancient Caledonians. This mistake is easily
removed. The Caledonians, in process of time, became naturally
divided into two distinct nations, as possessing parts of the country
entirely different in their nature and soil. The western coast of
Scotland is hilly and barren; towards the east, the country is plain,
and fit for tillage. The inhabitants of the mountains, a roving and
uncontrolled race of men, lived by feeding of cattle, and what they
killed in hunting. Their employment did not fix them to one place.
They removed from one heath to another, as suited best with their
convenience or inclination. They were not, therefore, improperly
called, by their neighbors, Scuite, or "the wandering nation;" which
is evidently the origin of the Roman name of Scoti.

 On the other hand, the Caledonians, who possessed the east coast of
Scotland, as this division of the country was plain and fertile,
applied themselves to agriculture, and raising of corn. It was from
this that the Galic name of the Picts proceeded; for they are called
in that language, Cruithnich, i. e. "the wheat or corn eaters." As
the Picts lived in a country so different in its nature from that
possessed by the Scots so their national character suffered a
material change. Unobstructed by mountains or lakes, their
communication with one another was free and frequent. Society,
therefore, became sooner established among them than among the Scots,
and, consequently, they were much sooner governed by civil
magistrates and laws. This, at last, produced so great a difference
in the manners of the two nations, that they began to forget their
common origin, and almost continual quarrels and animosities
subsisted between them. These animosities, after some ages, ended in
the subversion of the Pictish kingdom, but not in the total
extirpation of the nation according to most of the Scots writers, who
seem to think it more for the honor of their countrymen to annihilate
than reduce a rival people under their obedience. It is certain,
however, that the very name of the Picts was lost, and that those
that remained were so completely incorporated with their conquerors,
that they soon lost all memory of their own origin.

 The end of the Pictish government is placed so near that period to
which authentic annals reach, that it is matter of wonder that we
have no monuments of their language or history remaining. This favors
the system I have laid down. Had they originally been of a different
race from the Scots, their language of course would be different. The
contrary is the case. The names of places in the Pictish dominions,
and the very names of their kings, which are handed down to us, are
of Galic original, which is a convincing proof that the two nations
were, of old, one and the same, and only divided into two governments
by the effect which their situation had upon the genius of the
people.

 The name of Picts is said to have been given by the Romans to the
Caledonians who possessed the east coast of Scotland from their
painting their bodies. The story is silly, and the argument absurd.
But let us revere antiquity in her very follies. This circumstance
made some imagine, that the Picts were of British extract, and a
different race of men from the Scots. That more of the Britons, who
fled northward from the tyranny of the Romans, settled in the low
country of Scotland, than among the Scots of the mountains, may be
easily imagined, from the very nature of the country. It was they who
introduced painting among the Picts. From this circumstance, affirm
some antiquaries, proceeded the name of the latter, to distinguish
them from the Scots, who never had that art among them, and from the
Britons, who discontinued it after the Roman conquest.

 The Caledonians, most certainly, acquired a considerable knowledge
in navigation by their living on a coast intersected with many arms
of the sea, and in islands, divided one from another by wide and
dangerous firths. It is, therefore, highly probable, that they very
early found their way to the north of Ireland, which is within sight
of their own country. That Ireland was first peopled from Britain,
is, at length, a matter that admits of no doubt. The vicinity of the
two islands; the exact correspondence of the ancient inhabitants of
both, in point of manners and language, are sufficient proofs, even
if we had not the testimonies of authors of undoubted veracity to
confirm it. The abettors of the most romantic systems of Irish
antiquities allow it; but they place the colony from Britain in an
improbable and remote ra. I shall easily admit that the colony of
the Firbolg, confessedly the Belg of Britain, settled in the south
of Ireland, before the Cael, or Caledonians discovered the north; but
it is not at all likely that the migration of the Firbolg to Ireland
happened many centuries before the Christian ra.

 The poem of Temora throws considerable light on this subject. The
accounts given in it agree so well with what the ancients have
delivered concerning the first population and inhabitants of Ireland,
that every unbiased person will confess them more probable than the
legends handed down, by tradition, in that country. It appears that,
in the days of Trathal, grandfather to Fingal, Ireland was possessed
by two nations; the Firbolg or Belg of Britain, who inhabited the
south, and the Cael, who passed over from Caledonia and the Hebrides
to Ulster. The two nations, as is usual among an unpolished and
lately settled people, were divided into small dynasties, subject to
petty kings or chiefs, independent of one another. In this situation,
it is probable, they continued long, without any material revolution
in the state of the island, until Crothar, lord of Atha, a country in
Connaught, the most potent chief of the Firbolg, carried away
Conlama, the daughter of Cathmin, a chief of the Cael, who possessed
Ulster.

 Conlama had been betrothed, some time before, to Turloch, a chief of
their own nation. Turloch resented the affront offered him by
Crothar, made an irruption. into Connaught, and killed Cormul, the
brother of Crothar, who came to oppose his progress. Crothar himself
then took arms, and either killed or expelled Turloch. The war, upon
this, became general between the two nations, and the Cael were
reduced to the last extremity. In this situation, they applied for
aid to Trathal, king of Morven, who sent his brother Conar, already
famous for his great exploits, to their relief.

 Conar, upon his arrival in Ulster, was chosen king by the unanimous
consent of the Caledonian tribes who possessed that country. The war
was renewed with vigor and success; but the Firbolg appear to have
been rather repelled than subdued. In succeeding reigns, we learn,
from episodes in the same poem, that the chiefs of Atha made several
efforts to become monarchs of Ireland, and to expel the race of
Conar.

 To Conar succeeded his son Cormac, who appears to have reigned long.
In his latter days he seems to have been driven to the last extremity
by an insurrection of the Firbolg, who supported the pretensions of
the chiefs of Atha to the Irish throne. Fingal, who was then very
young, came to the aid of Cormac, totally defeated Colculla, chief of
Atha, and re-established Cormac in the sole possession of all
Ireland. It was then he fell in love with, and took to wife,
Roscrana, the daughter of Cormac, who was the mother of Ossian.

 Cormac was succeeded in the Irish throne by his son Cairbre; Cairbre
by Artho, his son, who was the father of that Cormac, in whose
minority the invasion of Swaran happened, which is the subject of the
poem of Fingal. The family of Atha, who had not relinquished their
pretensions to the Irish throne, rebelled in the minority of Cormac,
defeated his adherents, and murdered him in the palace of Ternora.
Cairbar, lord of of Atha, upon this mounted the throne. His
usurpation soon ended with his life; for Fingal made an expedition
into Ireland, and restored, after various vicissitudes of fortune,
the family of Conar to the possession of the kingdom. This war is the
subject of Temora; the events, though certainly heightened and
embellished by poetry, seem, notwithstanding, to have their
foundation in true history.

 Temora contains not only the history of the first migration of the
Caledonians into Ireland; it also preserves some important facts
concerning the first settlement of the Firbolg, or Belg of Britain,
in that kingdom, under their leader Larthon, who was ancestor to
Cairbar and Cathmor, who successively mounted the Irish throne, after
the death of Cormac, the son of Artho. I forbear to transcribe the
passage on account of its length. It is the song of Fonar, the bard;
towards the latter end of the seventh book of Temora. As the
generations from Larthon to Cathmor, to whom the episode is
addressed, are not marked, as are those of the family of Conar, the
first king of Ireland, we can form no judgment of the time of the
settlement of the Firbolg. It is, however, probable it was some time
before the Cael, or Caledonians, settled in Ulster. One important
fact may, be gathered from this history, that the Irish had no king
before the latter end of the first century. Fingal lived, it is
supposed, in the third century; so Conar, the first monarch of the
Irish, who was his grand-uncle, cannot be placed farther back than
the close of the first, To establish this fact, is to lay, at once,
aside the pretended antiquities of the Scots and Irish, and to get
quit of the long list of kings which the latter give us for a
millenium before.

 Of the affairs of Scotland, it is certain, nothing can be depended
upon prior to the reign of Fergus, the son of Erc, who lived in the
fifth century. The true history of Ireland begins somewhat later than 
that period. Sir James Ware, who was indefatigable in his researches
after the antiquities of his country, rejects, as mere fiction and
idle romance, all that is related of the ancient Irish before the
time of St. Patrick, and the reign of Leogaire. It is from this
consideration that he begins his history at the introduction of
Christianity, remarking, that all that is delivered down concerning
the times of paganism were tales of late invention, strangely mixed
with anachronisms and inconsistencies. Such being the opinion of
Ware, who had collected, with uncommon industry and zeal, all the
real and pretundedly ancient manuscripts concerning the history of
his country, we may, on his authority, reject the improbable and
self-condemned tales of Keating and O'Flaherty. Credulous and puerile
to the last degree, they have disgraced the antiquities they meant to
establish. It is to be wished that some able Irishman, who
understands the language and records of his country, may redeem, ere
too late, the genuine and antiquities of Ireland from the hands of
these idle fabulists.

 By comparing the history in these poems with the legends of the
Scots and Irish writers, and by afterward examining both by the test
of the Roman authors, it is easy to discover which is the most
probable. Probability is all that can be established on the authority
of tradition, ever dubious and uncertain. But when it favors the
hypothesis laid down by contemporary writers of undoubted veracity,
and, as it were, finishes which they only drew the outlines, it
ought, in the judgment of sober reason, to be preferred to accounts
framed in dark and distant periods, with little judgement, and upon
no authority.

 Concerning the period of more than a century which intervenes
between Fingal and the reign of Fergus, the sons of Erc or Arcath,
tradition is dark and contradictory. Some trace up the family of
Fergus to a son of Fingal of that name, who makes a considerable
figure in Ossian's Poems. The three elder sons of Fingal, Ossian,
Fillan, and Ryno, dying without issue, the succession, of course,
devolved upon Fergus, the fourth son, and his posterity. This Fergus,
say some traditions, was the father of Congal, whose son was Arcath,
the father of Fergus, properly called the first king of Scots, as it
was in his time the Cael, who possessed the western coast of
Scotland, began to be distinguished by foreigners by the name of
Scots. From thenceforward, the Scots and Picts, as distinct nations,
became objects of attention to the historians of other countries. The
internal state of the two Caledonian kingdoms has always continued,
and ever must remain, in obscurity and fable.

 It is in this epoch we must fix the beginning of the decay of that
species of heroism which subsisted in the days of Fingal. There are
three stages in human society. The first is the result of
consanguinity, and the natural affection of the members of a family
to one another. The second begins when property is established, and
men enter into associations for mutual defence, against the invasions
and injustice of neighbors. Mankind submit, in the third, to certain
laws and subordinations of government, to which they trust the safety
of their persons and property. As the first is formed on nature, so,
of course, it is the most disinterested and noble. Men, in the last,
have leisure to cultivate the mind, and to restore it, with
reflection, to a primeval dignity of sentiment. The middle state is
the region of complete barbarism and ignorance. About the beginning
of the fifth century, the Scots and Picts were advanced into the
second stage, and consequently, into those circumscribed sentiments
which always distinguish barbarity. The events which soon after
happened did not at all contribute to enlarge their ideas, or mend
their national character.

 About the year 426, the Romans, on account of domestic commotions,
entirely forsook Britain, finding it impossible to defend so distant
a frontier. The Picts and Scots, seizing this favorable opportunity,
made incursions into the deserted province. The Britons, enervated by
the slavery of several centuries, and those vices which are
inseparable from an advanced state of civility, were not able to
withstand the impetuous, though irregular, attacks of a barbarous
enemy. In the utmost distress, they applied to their old masters, the
Romans, and (after the unfortunate state of the empire could not
spare aid) to the Saxons, a nation equally barbarous and brave with
the enemies of whom they were so much afraid. Though the bravery of
the Saxons repelled the Caledonian nations for a time, yet the latter
found means to extend themselves considerably towards the south. It
is in this period we must place the origin of the arts of civil life
among the Scots. The seat of government was removed from the
mountains to the plain and more fertile provinces of the south, to be
near the common enemy in case of sudden incursions. Instead of roving
through unfrequented wilds in search of subsistence by means of
hunting, men applied to agriculture, and raising of corn. This manner
of life was the first means of changing the national character. The
next thing which contributed to it was their mixture with strangers.

 In the countries which the Scots had conquered from the Britons, it
is probable that most of the old inhabitants remained. These
incorporating with the conquerors, taught them agriculture and other
arts which they themselves had received from the Romans. The however,
in number as well as power, being the most predominant, retained
still their language, and as many of the customs of their ancestors
as suited-with the nature of the country they possessed. Even the
union of the two Caledonian kingdoms did not much affect the national
character. Being originally descended from the same stock, the
manners of the Picts and Scots were as similar as the different
natures of the countries they possessed permitted.

 What brought about a total change in the genius of the Scots nation
was their wars and other transactions with the Saxons. Several
counties in the south of Scotland were alternately possessed by the
two nations. They were ceded, in the ninth age, to the Scots, and it
is probable that most of the Saxon inhabitants remained in possession
of their lands. During the several conquests and revolutions in
England, many fled for refuge into Scotland, to avoid the oppression
of foreigners, or the tyranny of domestic usurpers; insomuch, that
the Saxon race formed, perhaps, near one half of the Scottish
kingdom. The Saxon manners and language daily gained ground on the
tongue and customs of the ancient Caledonians, till, at last, the
latter were entirely relegated to the inhabitants of the mountains,
who were still unmixed with strangers.

 It was after the accession of territory which the Scots received
upon the retreat of the Romans from Britain, that the inhabitants of
the Highlands were divided into clans. The king, when he kept his
court in the mountains, was considered by the whole nation as the
chief of their blood. The small number, as well as the presence of
their prince, prevented those divisions which, afterward, sprung
forth into so many separate tribes. When the seat of government
was removed to the south, those who remained in the Highlands were,
of course, neglected. They naturally formed themselves into small
societies independent of one another. Each society had its own
regulus, who either was, or, in the succession of a few generations,
was regarded as chief of their blood. The nature of the country
favored an institution of this sort. A few valleys, divided from one
another by extensive heaths and impassable mountains, form the face
of the Highlands. In those valleys the chiefs fixed their residence.
Round them, and almost within sight of their dwellings, were the
habitations of their relations and dependants.

 The seats of the Highland chiefs were neither disagreeable nor
inconvenient. Surrounded with mountains and hanging woods, they were
covered from the inclemency of the weather. Near them generally ran a
pretty large river, which, discharging itself not far off into an arm
of the sea or extensive lake, swarmed with variety of fish. The woods
were stocked with wild-fowl; and the heaths and mountains behind them
were the natural seat of the red-deer and roe. If we make allowance
for the backward state of agriculture, the valleys were not
unfertile; affording, if not all the conveniences, at least the
necessaries of life. Here the chief lived, the supreme judge and
lawgiver of his own people; but his sway was neither severe nor
unjust. As the populace regarded him as the chief of their blood, so
he, in return, considered them as members of his family. His
commands, therefore, though absolute and decisive, partook more of
the authority of a father than of the rigor of a judge. Though the
whole territory of the tribe was considered as the property of the
thief, yet his vassals made him no other consideration for their
lands than services, neither burdensome nor frequent. As he seldom
went from home, he was at no expense. His table was supplied by his
own herds and what his numerous attendants killed in hunting.

 In this rural kind of magnificence the Highland chiefs lived for
many ages. At a distance from the seat of government, and secured by
the inaccessibleness of their country, they were free and
independent. As they had little communication with strangers, the
customs of their ancestors remained among them, and their language
retained its original purity, Naturally fond of military fame, and
remarkably attached to the memory of their ancestors, they delighted
in traditions and songs concerning the exploits of their nation, and
especially of their own particular families. A succession of bards
was retained in every clan to hand down the memorable actions of
their forefathers. As Fingal and his chiefs were the most renowned
names in tradition, the bards took care to place them in the
genealogy of every great family. They became famous among the people,
and an object of fiction and poetry to the bard.

 The bards erected their immediate patrons into heroes and celebrated
them in their songs. As the circle of their knowledge was narrow,
their ideas were confined in proportion. A few happy expressions, and
the manners they represent, may please those who understand the
language; their obscurity and inaccuracy would disgust in a
translation. It was chiefly for this reason that I have rejected
wholly the works of the bards in my publications. Ossian acted in a
more extensive sphere, and his ideas ought to be more noble and
universal; neither gives he, I presume, so many of their
peculiarities, which are only understood in a certain period or
country. The other bards have their beauties, but not in this species
of composition. Their rhymes, only calculated to kindle a martial
spirit among the vulgar, afford very little pleasure to genuine
taste. This observation only regards their poems of the heroic kind;
in every inferior species of poetry they are more successful. They
express the tender melancholy of desponding love with simplicity and
nature. So well adapted are the sounds of the words to the
sentiments, that, even without any knowledge of the language, they
pierce and dissolve the heart. Successful love is expressed with
peculiar tenderness and elegance. In all their compositions, except
the heroic, which was solely calculated to animate the vulgar, they
gave us the genuine language of the heart, without any of those
affected ornaments of phraseology, which, though intended to beautify
sentiments, divest them of their natural force. The ideas, it is
confessed, are too local to be admired in another language; to those
who are acquainted with the manners they represent, and the scenes
they describe, they must afford pleasure and satisfaction.

 It was the locality of their description and sentiment that,
probably, has kept them in the obscurity of an almost lost language.
The ideas of an unpolished period are so contrary to the present
advanced state of society, that more than a common mediocrity of
taste is required to relish them as they deserve. Those who alone are
capable of transferring ancient poetry into a modern language, might
be better employed in giving originals of their own, were it not for
that wretched envy and meanness which affects to despise contemporary
genius. My first publication was merely accidental; had I then met
with less approbation my after pursuits would have been more
profitable; at least, I might have continued to be stupid without
being branded with dulness.

 These poems may furnish light to antiquaries, as well as some
pleasure to the lovers of poetry. The first population of Ireland,
its first kings, and several circumstances, which regard its
connection of old with the south and north of Britain, am presented
in several episodes. The subject and catastrophe of the poem are
founded upon facts which regarded the first peopling of that country,
and the contests between the two British nations, who originally
inhabited that island. In a preceding part of this dissertation I
have shown how superior the probability of this system is to the
undigested fictions of the Irish bards, and the more recent and
regular legends of both Irish and Scottish historians. I mean not to
give offence to the abettors of the high antiquities of the two
nations, though I have all along expressed my doubts concerning the
veracity and abilities of those who deliver down their ancient
history. For my own part, I prefer the national fame arising from a
few certain facts, to the legendary and uncertain annals of ages of
remote and obscure antiquity. No kingdom now established in Europe
can pretend to equal antiquity with that of the Scots, inconsiderable
as it may appear in other respects, even according to my system; so
that it is altogether needless to fix its origin a fictitious
millenium before.

 Since the first publication of these poems, many insinuations have
been made, and doubts arisen, concerning their authenticity. Whether
these suspicions are suggested by prejudice, or are only the effects
of malice, I neither know nor care. Those who have doubted my
veracity have paid a compliment to my genius; and were even the
allegation true, my self-denial might have atoned for my fault.
Without vanity I say it, I think I could write tolerable poetry, and
I assume my antagonists, that I should not translate what I could not
imitate.

 As prejudice is the effect of ignorance, I am not surprised at its
being general. An age that produces few marks of genius ought to be
sparing of admiration. The truth is, the bulk of mankind have ever
been led by reputation more than taste, in articles of literature. If 
all the Romans who admired Virgil understood his beauties, he would
have scarce deserved to have come down to us through so many
centuries. Unless genius were in fashion, Homer himself might have
written in vain. He that wishes to come with weight on the
superficial, must skim the surface, in their own shallow way. Were my
aim to gain the many, I would write a madrigal sooner than an heroic
poem. Laberius himself would be always sure of more followers than
Sophocles.

 Some who doubt the authenticity of this work, with peculiar
acuteness appropriate them to the Irish nation. Though it is not easy
to conceive how these poems can belong to Ireland and to me at once,
I shall examine the subject without farther animadversion on the
blunder.

 Of all the nations descended from the ancient Celt, the Scots and
Irish are the most similar in language, customs, and manners. This
argues a more intimate connection between them than a remote descent
from the great Celtic stock. It is evident, in short, that, at some
period or other, they formed one society, were subject to the same
government, and were, in all respects, one and the same people. How
they became divided, which the colony, or which the mother-nation, I
have in another work amply discussed. The first circumstance that
induced me to disregard the vulgarly. received opinion of the
Hibernian extraction of the Scottish nation was my observations on
their ancient language. The dialect of the Celtic tongue, spoken in
the north of Scotland, is much more pure, more agreeable to its
mother-language, and more abounding with primitives, than that now
spoken, or even that which has been written for some centuries back,
amongst the most unmixed part of the Irish nation. A Scotchman,
tolerably conversant in his own language, understands an Irish
composition from that derivative analogy which it has to the Gaelic
of North Britain. An Irishman, on the other hand, without the aid of
study, can never understand a composition in the Gaelic tongue. This
affords a proof that the Scotch Gaelic is the most original, and,
consequently, the language of a more ancient and unmixed people. The
Irish, however backward they may be to allow any thing to the
prejudice of their antiquity, seem inadvertently to acknowledge it,
by the very appellation they give to the dialect they speak. They
call their own language Caelic Eirinarch, i. e. Caledonian Irish,
when, on the contrary, they call the dialect of North Britain a
Chaelic, or the Caledonian tongue, emphatically. As circumstance of
this nature tends more to decide which is the most ancient nation
than the united testimonies of a whole legion of ignorant bards and
senachies, who, perhaps, never dreamed of bringing the Scots from
Spain to Ireland, till some one of them, more learned than the rest,
discovered that the Romans called the first Iberia, and the latter
Hibernia. On such a slight foundation were probably built the
romantic fictions concerning the Milesians of Ireland.

 From internal proofs it sufficiently appears that the poems
published under the name of Ossian are not of Irish composition. The
favorite chimera, that Ireland is the mother-country of the Scots, is
totally subverted and ruined. The fictions concerning the antiquities
of that country, which were formed for ages, and growing as they came
down on the hands of successive senachies and fileas, are found, at
last, to be the spurious brood of modern and ignorant ages, To those
who know how tenacious the Irish are of their pretended Iberian
descent, this alone is proof sufficient, that poems, so subversive of
their system, could never be produced by an Hibernian bard. But when
we look to the language, it is so different from the Irish dialect,
that it would be as ridiculous to think that Milton's Paradise Lost
could be wrote by a Scottish peasant, as to suppose that the poems
ascribed to Ossian were writ in Ireland.

 The pretensions of Ireland to Ossian proceed from another quarter.
There are handed down in that country traditional poems concerning
the Fiona, or the heroes of Fion Mae Comnal. This Fion, say the Irish
annalists, was general of the militia of Ireland in the reign of
Cormac, in the third century. Where Keating and O'Flaherty learned
that Ireland had an embodied militia so early, is not so easy for me
to determine. Their information certainly did not come from the Irish
poems concerning Fion. I have just now in my hands all that remain of
those compositions; but, unluckily for the antiquities of Ireland,
they appear to be the work of a very modern period. Every stanza,
nay, almost every line, affords striking proofs that they cannot be
three centuries old. Their allusions to the manners and customs of
the fifteenth century are so many, that it is a matter of wonder to
me how any one could dream of their antiquity. They are entirely writ
in that romantic taste which prevailed two ages ago. Giants,
enchanted castles, dwarfs, palfreys, witches, and magicians, form the
whole circle of the poet's invention. The celebrated Fion could
scarcely move from one hillock to another without encountering a
giant, or being entangled in the circles of a magician. Witches, on
broomsticks, were continually hovering round him like crows; and he
had freed enchanted virgins in every valley in Ireland. In short,
Fion, great as he was, passed a disagreeable life. Not only had he to
engage all the mischiefs in his own country, foreign armies invaded
him, assisted by magicians and witches, and headed by kings as tall
as the mainmast of a first-rate. It must be owned, however, that Fion
was not inferior to them in height.

A chos air Cromleach, draim-ard,
Chos eile air Crom-meal dubh,
Thoga Fion le lamh mhoir
An d'uisge o Lubhair na fruth.

With one foot on Cromleach his brow,
The other on Crommal the dark
Fion took with his large hand
The water from Lubar of the streams.

 Cromleach and Crommal were two mountains in the neighborhood of one
another, in Ulster, and the river of Lubar ran through the
intermediate valley. The property of such a monster as this Fion I
should never have disputed with any nation; but the bard himself, in
the poem from which the above quotation is taken, cedes him to
Scotland:

Fion o Albin, siol nan laoich!
Fion from Albion, race of heroes!

 Were it allowable to contradict the authority of a bard, at this
distance of time, I should have given as my opinion, that this 
enormous Fion was of the race of the Hibernian giants, of Ruanus, or
some other celebrated name, rather than a native of Caledonia, whose
inhabitants, now at least, are not remarkable for their stature. As
for the poetry, I leave it to the reader. 

 If Fion was so remarkable for his stature, his heroes had also other
extraordinary properties. "In weight all the sons of strangers
yielded to the celebrated Toniosal; and for hardness of skull, and,
perhaps, for thickness too, the valiant Oscar stood 'unrivalled and
alone.'" Ossian himself had many singular and less delicate
qualifications than playing on the harp; and the brave Cuthullin was
of so diminutive a size, as to be taken for a child of two years of
age by the gigantic Swaran. To illustrate this subject, I shall here
lay before the reader the history of some of the Irish poems
concerning Fion Mae Comnal. A translation of these pieces, if well
executed, might afford satisfaction, in an uncommon way, to the
public. But this ought to be the work of a native of Ireland. To draw
forth from obscurity the poems of my own country has wasted all the
time I had allotted for the Muses; besides, I am too diffident of my
own abilities to undertake such a work. A gentleman in Dublin accused
me to the public of committing blunders and absurdities in
translating the language of my own country, and that before any
translation of mine appeared. How the gentleman came to see my
blunders before I committed them, is not easy to determine, if he did
not conclude that, as a Scotsman, and, of course, descended of the
Milesian race, I might have committed some of those oversights,
which, perhaps very unjustly, are said to be peculiar to them.

 From the whole tenor of the Irish poems concerning the Fiona, it
appears that Fion Mae Comnal flourished in the reign of Cormac, which
is placed, by the universal consent of the senachies, in the third
century. They even fix the death of Fingal in the year 268, yet his
son Ossian is made contemporary with St. Patrick, who preached the
gospel in Ireland about the middle of the fifth age. Ossian, though
at that time he must have been two hundred and fifty years of age,
had a daughter young enough to become wife to the Saint. On account
of this family connection, "Patrick of the Psalms," for so the
apostle of Ireland is emphatically called in the poems, took great
delight in the company of Ossian, and in hearing the great actions of
his family. The saint sometimes threw off the austerity of his
profession, drank freely, and had his soul properly warmed with wine,
to receive with becoming enthusiasm the poems of his father-in-law.
One of the poems begins with this useful piece of information:

Lo don rabh Padric us mhr,
Gun Sailm air uidh, ach a gol,
Ghluais  thigh Ossian mhic Fhion,
O san leis bhinn a ghloir.

 The title of this poem is "Teantach mor na Fiona." It appears to
have been founded on the same story with the "Battle of Lora." The
circumstances and catastrophe in both are much the same: but the
Irish Ossian discovers the age in which he lived by an unlucky
anachronism. After describing the total rout of Erragon, he very
gravely concludes with this remarkable anecdote, that none of the foe
escaped, but a few, who were permitted to go on a pilgrimage to the
Holy Land. This circumstance fixes the date of the composition of the
piece some centuries after the famous croisade: for it is evident
that the poet thought the time of the croisade so ancient, that he
confounds it with the age of Fingal. Erragon, in the course of this
poem, is often called,

Rhoigh Lochlin an do shloigh,
King of Denmark of two nations--

which alludes to the union of the kingdom of Norway and Denmark, a
circumstance which happened under Margaret de Waldemar, in the close
of the fourteenth age. Modern, however, as this pretended Ossian was,
it is certain he lived before the Irish had dreamed of appropriating
Fion, or Fingal, to themselves. He concludes the poem with this
reflection:

Na fagha se comhthrm nan n arm,
Erragon Mac Annir nan lann glas
'San n'Albin ni n' abairtair Triath
Agus ghlaoite an n'Fhiona as.

"Had Erragon, son of Annir of gleaming swords, avoided the equal
contest of arms, (single combat,) no chief should have afterward been
numbered in Albion, and the heroes of Fion should no more be named."

 The next poem that falls Under our observation is "Cath-cabhra," or
"The Death of Oscar." This piece is founded on the same story which
we have in the first book of Temora. So little thought the author of
Cath-cabhra of making Oscar his countryman, that in the course of two
hundred lines, of which the poem consists, he puts the following
expression thrice in the mouth of the hero:

Albin an sa d'roina m'arch.--
Albion, where I was born and bred.

The poem contains almost all the incidents in the first book of
Temora. In one circumstance the bard differs materially from Ossian.
Oscar, after he was mortally wounded by Cairbar, was carried by his
people to a neighboring hill which commanded a prospect of the sea. A
fleet appeared at a distance, and the hero exclaims with joy,

Loingeas mo shean-athair at' an
'S iad a tichd le cabhair chugain,
O Albin na n'ioma stuagh.

"It is the fleet of my grandfather coming with aid to our field, from
Albion of many waves!" The testimony of this bard is sufficient to
confute the idle fictions of Keating and O'Flaherty, for, though he
is far from being ancient, it is probable he flourished a full
century before these historians. He appears, however, to have been a
much better Christian than chronologer; for Fion, though he is placed
two centuries before St. Patrick, very devoutly recommends the soul
of his grandson to his Redeemer.

 "Duan a Gharibh Mac-Starn" is another Irish poem in great repute.
The grandeur of its images, and its propriety of sentiment, might
have induced me to give a translation of it, had I not some
expectations, which are now over, of seeing it in the collection of
the Irish Ossian's Poems, promised twelve years since to the public.
The author descends sometimes from the region of the sublime to low
and indecent description; the last of which, the Irish translator, no
doubt, will choose to leave in the obscurity of the original. In this
piece Cuthullin is used with very little ceremony, for he is oft
called the "dog of Tara," in the county of Meath. This severe title
of the redoubtable Cuthullin, the most renowned of Irish champions,
proceeded from the poet's ignorance of etymology. Cu, "voice" or
commander, signifies also a dog. The poet chose the last, as. the
most noble appellation for his hero.

 The subject of the poem is the same with that of the epic poem of
Fingal. Caribh Mac-Starn is the same with Ossian's Swaran, the son of
Starno. His single combats with, and his victory over, all the heroes
of Ireland, excepting the "celebrated dog of Tara," i. e. Cuthullin,
afford matter for two hundred lines of tolerable poetry. Cribh's
progress in search of Cuthullin, and his intrigue with the gigantic
Emir-bragal, that hero's wife, enables the poet to extend his piece
to four hundred lines. This author, it is true, makes Cuthullin a
native of Ireland: the gigantic Emir-bragal he calls the "guiding-
star of the women of Ireland." The property of this enormous lady I
shall not dispute, with him or any other. But as he speaks with great
tenderness of the "daughters of the convent," and throws out some
hints against the English nation, it is probable he lived in too
modern a period to be intimately acquainted with the genealogy of
Cuthullin.

 Another Irish Ossian, for there were many, as appears from their
difference in language and sentiment, speaks very dogmatically of
Fion Mac Comnal, as an Irishman. Little can be said for the judgment
of this poet, and less for his delicacy of sentiment. The history of
one of his episodes may, at once, stand as a specimen of his want of
both. Ireland, in the days of Fion, happened to be threatened with an
invasion by three great potentates, the kings of Lochlin, Sweden, and
France. It is needless to insist upon the impropriety of a French
invasion of Ireland; it is sufficient to me to be faithful to the
language of my author. Fion, upon receiving intelligence of the
intended invasion, sent Ca-olt, Ossian, and Oscar, to watch the bay
in which it was apprehended the enemy was to land. Oscar was the
worst choice of a scout that could be made; for, brave as he was, he
had the bad property of very often falling asleep on his post, nor
was it possible to awake him, without cutting off one of his fingers,
or dashing a large stone against his head. When the enemy appeared,
Oscar, very unfortunately, was asleep. Ossian and Ca-olt consulted
about the method of wakening him, and they at last fixed on the stone
as the less dangerous expedient--

Gun thog Caoilte a chlach, nach gan,
Agus a n' aighai' chiean gun bhuail;
Tri mil an tulloch gun chri', &c.

 "Ca-olt took up a heavy stone, and struck it against the hero's
head. The hill shook for three miles, as the stone rebounded and
rolled away." Oscar rose in wrath, and his father gravely desired him
to spend his rage on his enemies, which he did to so good purpose,
that he singly routed a whole wing of their army. The confederate
kings advanced, notwithstanding, till they came to a narrow pass
possessed by the celebrated Ton-iosal. This name is very significant
of the singular property of the hero who bore it. Toniosal, though
brave, was so heavy and unwieldy, that when he sat down it took the
whole force of a hundred men to set him upright on his feet again.
Luckily for the preservation of Ireland, the hero happened to be
standing when the enemy appeared, and he gave so good an amount of
them, that Fion, upon his arrival, found little to do but to divide
the spoil among his soldiers.

 All these extraordinary heroes, Fion, Ossian, Oscar, and Ca-olt,
says the poet, were

Siol Erin na gorm lnn.
The sons of Erin of blue steel.

Neither shall I much dispute the matter with him; he has my consent
also to appropriate to Ireland the celebrated Ton-iosal. I shall only
say that they are different persons from those of the same name in
the Scots Poems; and that, though the stupendous valor of the first
is so remarkable, they have not been equally lucky with the latter,
in their poet. It is somewhat extraordinary that Fion, who lived some
ages before St. Patrick, swears like a very good Christian.

Air an Dia do chum gach case.
By God who shaped every case.

 It is worthy of being remarked, that, in the line quoted, Ossian,
who lived in St. Patrick's days, seems to have understood something
of the English, a language not then subsisting. A person more
sanguine for the honor of his country than I am, might argue from
this circumstance, that this pretendedly Irish Ossian was a native of
Scotland; for my countrymen are universally allowed to have an
exclusive right to the second sight.

 From the instances given, the reader may form a complete idea of the
Irish compositions concerning the Fiona. The greatest part of them
make the heroes of Fion,

Siol Albin a n'nioma caoile.
The race of Albion of many firths.

The rest make them natives of Ireland. But the truth is, that their
authority is of little consequence on either side. From the instances
I have given, they appear to have been the work of a very modern
period. The pious ejaculations they contain, their allusions to the
manners of the times, fix them to the fifteenth century. Had even the
authors of these pieces avoided all allusions to their own times, it
is impossible that the poems could pass for ancient in the eyes of
any person tolerably conversant with the Irish tongue. The idiom is
so corrupted, and so many words borrowed from the English, that the
language must have made considerable progress in Ireland before the
poems were written.

 It remains now to show how the Irish bards began to appropriate the
Scottish Ossian and his heroes, to their own country. After the
English conquest, many of the natives of Ireland, averse to a foreign
yoke, either actually were in a state of hostility with the
conquerors, or, at least, paid little regard to government. The
Scots, in those ages, were often in open war, and never in cordial
friendship, with the English. The similarity of manners and language,
the traditions concerning their common origin, and, above all, their
having to do with the same enemy, created a free and friendly
intercourse between the Scottish and Irish nations. As the custom of
retaining bards and senachies was common to both, so each, no doubt,
had formed a system of history, it matters not how much soever
fabulous, concerning their respective origin. It was the natural
policy of the times to reconcile the traditions of both nations
together, and, if possible, to deduce them from the same original
stock.

 The Saxon manners and language had, at that time, made great
progress in the south of Scotland. The ancient language, and the
traditional history of the nation, became confined entirely to the
inhabitants of the Highlands, then falling, from several concurring
circumstances, into the last degree of ignorance and barbarism. The
Irish, who, for some ages before the conquest, had possessed a
competent share of that kind of learning which then prevailed in
Europe, found it no difficult matter to impose their own fictions on
the ignorant Highland senachies. By flattering the vanity of the
Highlanders with their long list of Hermonian kings and heroes, they,
without contradiction, assumed to themselves the character of being
the mother-nation of the Scots of Britain. At this time, certainly,
was established that Hibernian system of the original of the Scots,
which afterward, for want of any other, was universally received. The
Scots of the low country, who, by losing, the language of their
ancestors, lost, together with it, their national traditions..
received implicitly the history of their country from Irish refugees,
or from Highland senachies, persuaded over into the Hibernian system.

 These circumstances are far from being ideal. We have remaining many
particular traditions which bear testimony to a fact of itself
abundantly probable. What makes the matter incontestible is, that the
ancient traditional accounts of the genuine origin of the Scots, have
been handed down without interruption. Though a few ignorant
senachies might be persuaded out of their own opinion by the
smoothness of an Irish tale, it was impossible to eradicate, from
among the bulk of the people, their own national traditions. These
traditions afterward so much prevailed, that the Highlanders continue
totally unacquainted with the pretended Hibernian extract of the
Scotch nation. Ignorant chronicle writers, strangers to the ancient
language of their country, preserved only from failing to the ground
so improbable a story.

 This subject, perhaps, is pursued farther than it deserves; but a
discussion of the pretensions of Ireland was become in some measure
necessary. If the Irish poems concerning the Fiona should appear
ridiculous, it is but justice to observe, that they are scarcely more
so than the poems of other nations at that period. On other subjects,
the bards of Ireland have displayed a genius for poetry. It was alone
in matters of antiquity that they were monstrous in their fables.
Their love-sonnets, and their elegies on the death of persons worthy
or renowned, abound with simplicity, and a wild harmony of numbers.
They became more than an atonement for their errors in every other
species of poetry. But the beauty of these species depends so much on
a certain curiosa filicitas of expression m the original, that they
must appear much to disadvantage in another language.







 "We have fought with our swords. I was young. when, towards the
east, in the bay of Oreon, we made torrents of blood flow, to gorge
the ravenous beast of prey, and the yellow-footed bird. There
resounded the hard steel upon the lofty helmets of men. The whole
ocean was one wound. The crow waded in the blood of the slain. When
we had numbered twenty years, we lifted our spears on high, and
everywhere spread our renown. Eight barons we overcame in the east,
before the port of Diminum; and plentifully we feasted the eagle in
that slaughter. The warm stream of wounds ran into the ocean. The
army fell before us. When we steered our ships into the mouth of the
Vistula, we sent the Helsingians to the hall of Odin. Then did the
sword bite. The waters were all one wound. The earth was dyed red
with the warm stream. The sword rung upon the coats of mail, and
clove the bucklers in twain. None fled on that day, till among his
ships Heraudus fell. Than him no braver baron cleaves the sea with
ships; a cheerful heart did he ever bring to the combat. Then the
host threw away. their shields, when the uplifted spear flew at the
breast of heroes. The sword bit the Scarflan rocks; bloody was the
shield in battle, until Rafno the king was slain. From the heads of
warriors the warm sweat streamed down their armor. The crows around
the Indirian islands had an ample prey. It were difficult to single
out one among so many deaths. At the rising of the sun I beheld the
spears piercing the bodies of foes, and the bows throwing forth their
steel-pointed arrows. Loud roared the swords in the plains of Lano.--
The virgin long bewailed the slaughter of that morning."--In this
strain the poet continues to describe several other military
exploits. The images are not much varied: the noise of arms, the
streaming of blood, and the feasting the birds of prey often
recurring. He mentions the death of two of his sons in battle; and
the lamentation he describes as made for one of them is very
singular. A Grecian or a Roman poet would have introduced the virgins
or nymphs of the wood bewailing the untimely fall of a young hero.
But, says our Gothic poet, "When Rogvaldus was slain, for him mourned
all the hawks of heaven," as lamenting a benefactor who had so
liberally supplied them with prey; "for boldly," as he adds, "in the
strife of swords did the breaker of helmets throw the spear of
blood."

 The poem concludes with sentiments of the highest bravery and
contempt of death. "What is more certain to the brave man than death,
though amidst the storm of swords he stands always ready to oppose
it? He only regrets this life who hath never known distress. The
timorous man allures the, devouring eagle to the field of battle. The
coward, wherever he comes, is useless to himself. This I esteem
honorable, that the youth should advance to the combat fairly matched
one against another; nor man retreat from man. Long was this the
warrior's highest glory. He who aspires to the love of virgins, ought
always to be foremost in the roar of arms. It appears to me, of
truth, that we are led by the Fates. Seldom can any overcome the
appointment of destiny. Little did I foresee that Ella was to have my
life in his hands, in that day when fainting I concealed my blood,
and pushed forth my ships into the waves; after we had spread a
repast for the beasts of prey throughout the Scottish bays. But this
makes me always rejoice, that in the halls of our father Balder [or
Odin] I know there are seats prepared, where, in a short time, we
shall be drinking ale out of the hollow skulls of our enemies. In the
house of the mighty Odin, no brave man laments death. I come not with
the voice of despair to Odin's hall. How eagerly would all the sons
of Aslauga now rush to war, did they know the distress of their
father, whom a multitude of venomous serpents tear! I have given to
my children a mother who hath filled their hearts with valor. I am
fast approaching to my end. A cruel death awaits me from the viper's
bite. A snake dwells in the midst of my heart. I hope that the sword
of some of my sons shall yet be stained with the blood of Ella. The
valiant youths will wax red with anger, and will not sit in peace.
Fifty and one times have I reared the standard in battle. In my youth
I learned to dye the sword in blood: my hope was then that no king
among men would be more renowned than me. The goddesses of death will
now soon call me; I must not mourn my death. Now I end my song. The
goddesses invite me away; they whom Odin has sent to me from his
hall. I will sit upon a lofty seat, and drink ale joyfully with the
goddesses of death. The hours of my life are run out. I will smile
when I die."

 This is such poetry as we might expect from a barbarous nation. It
breathes a most ferocious spirit. It is wild, harsh, and irregular;
but at the same time animated and strong; the style in the original,
full of inversions, and, as we learn from some of Olaus's notes,
highly metaphorical and figured.

 But when we open the works of Ossian, a very different scene
presents itself. There we find the fire and enthusiasm of the most
early times, combined with an amazing, degree of regularity and art.
We find tenderness, and even delicacy of sentiment, greatly
predominant over fierceness and barbarity. Our hearts are melted with
the softest feelings, and at the same time elevated with the highest
ideas of magnanimity, generosity, and true heroism. When we turn from
the poetry of Lodbrog to that of Ossian, it is like passing from a
savage desert into a fertile and cultivated country. How is this to
be accounted for? or by what means to be reconciled with the remote
antiquity attributed to these poems? This is a curious point, and
requires to be illustrated.

 That the ancient Scots were of Celtic original, is past all doubt.
Their conformity with the Celtic nations in language, manners, and
religion, proves it to a full demonstration. The Celt, a great and
mighty people, altogether distinct from the Goths and Teutones, once
extended their dominion over all the west of Europe; but seem to have
had their most full and complete establishment in Gaul, Wherever the
Celt or Gauls are mentioned by ancient writers, we seldom fall to
hear of their Druids and their Bards; the institution of which two
orders was the capital distinction of their manners and policy. The
druids were their philosophers and priests; the bards their poets and
recorders of heroic actions; and, both these orders of men seem to
have subsisted among them, as chief members of the state, from time
immemorial. We must not therefore imagine' the Celt to have been
altogether a gross and rude nation. They possessed from very remote
ages a formed system of discipline and manners, which appears to have
had a deep and lasting influence Ammianus Marcellinus gives them this
express testimony, that there flourished among them the study of the
most laudable arts, introduced by the bards, whose office it was to
sing in heroic verse the gallant actions of illustrious men; and by
the druids, who lived together in colleges, or societies, after the
Pythagorean manner, and, philosophizing upon the highest subjects,
asserted the immortality of the human soul. Though Julius Csar, in
his account of Gaul, does not expressly mention the bards, yet it is
plain that, under the title of Druids, he comprehends that whole
college or order; of which the bards, who, it is probable, were the
disciples of the druids, undoubtedly made a part. It deserves remark,
that, according to his account, the druidical institution first took
rise in Britain, and passed from thence into Gaul; so that they who
aspires to be thorough masters of that learning, were wont to resort
to Britain. He adds, too, that such as were to be initiated among the
druids, were obliged to commit to their memory a great number of
verses, insomuch that some employed twenty years in this course of
education; and that they did not think it lawful to record those
poems in writing, but sacredly handed them down by tradition from
race to race.

 So strong was the attachment of the Celtic nations to their poetry
and bards, that, amidst all the changes of their government and
manners, even long after the order of the druids was extinct, and the
national religion altered, the bards continued to flourish; not as a
set of strolling songsters, like the Greek ???d?? ['Aoidoi], or Rhapsodists, in
Homer's time, but as an order of men highly respected in the state,
and supported by a public establishment. We find them, according to
the testimonies of Strabo and Diodorus, before the age of Augustus
Csar; and we find them remaining under the same name, and exercising
the same functions as of old, in Ireland, and in the north of
Scotland, almost down to our own times. It is well known, that in
both these countries every regulus or chief had his own bard, who was
considered as an officer of rank in his court; and had lands assigned
him, which descended to his family. Of the honor in which the bards
were held, many instances occur in Ossian's Poems. On all important
occasions they were the ambassadors between contending chiefs; and
their persons were held sacred. "Cairbar feared to stretch his sword
to the bards, though his soul was dark. 'Loose the bards,' said his
brother Cathmor, 'they are the sons of other times. Their voice shall
be heard in other ages, when the kings of Temora have failed.'"

 From all this, the Celtic tribes clearly appear to have been
addicted in so high a degree to poetry, and to have made it so much
their study from the earliest times, as may remove our wonder at
meeting with a vein of higher poetical refinement among them, than
was at first to have been expected among nations whom we are
accustomed to call barbarous. Barbarity, I must observe, is a very
equivocal term; it admits of many different forms and degrees; and
though, in all of them, it excludes polished manners, it is, however,
not inconsistent with generous sentiments and tender affections. What
degrees of friendship, love, and heroism may possibly be found to
prevail in a rude state of society, no one can say. Astonishing
instances of them we know, from history, have sometimes appeared; and
a few characters, distinguished by those high qualities, might lay a
foundation for a set of manners being introduced into the songs of
the bards, more refined, it is probable, and exalted, according to
the usual poetical license, than the real manners of the country.

 In particular, with respect to heroism; the great employment of the
Celtic bards was to delineate the characters, and sing the praises of
heroes. So Lucan--

Vos quoque qui fortes animos, belloque peremptos,
Laudibus in longum vates diffunditis vum
Plurima securi fudistis carmina bardi.--Phars. l. 1.

 Now when we consider a college or order of men, who, cultivating
poetry throughout a long series of ages, had their imaginations
continually employed on the ideas of heroism; who had all the poems
and panegyrics, which were composed by their predecessors, handed
down to them with care; who rivalled and endeavored to outstrip those
who had gone before them, each in the celebration of his particular
hero; is it not natural to think, that at length the character of a
hero would appear in their songs with the highest lustre, and be
adorned with qualities truly noble? Some of the qualities indeed
which distinguish a Fingal, moderation, humanity, and clemency, would
not probably be the first ideas of heroism occurring to a barbarous
people: but no sooner had such ideas begun to dawn on the minds of
poets, than, as the human mind easily opens to the native
representations of human perfection, they would be seized and
embraced; they would enter into their panegyrics; they would afford
materials for succeeding bards to work upon and improve; they would
contribute not a little to exalt the public manners. For such songs
as these, familiar to the Celtic warriors from their childhood, and,
throughout their whole life, both in war and in peace, their
principal entertainment, must have had a very considerable influence
in propagating among them real manners, nearly approaching to the
poetical; and in forming even such a hero as Fingal. Especially when
we consider, that among their limited objects of ambition, among the
few advantages which, in a savage state, man could obtain over man,
the chief was fame, and that immortality which they expected to
receive from their virtues and exploits, in songs of bards.

 Having made these remarks on the Celtic poetry and bards in general,
I shall next consider the particular advantages which Ossian
possessed. He appears clearly to have lived in a period which enjoyed
all the benefit I just now mentioned of traditionary poetry. The
exploits of Trathal, Trenmor, and the other ancestors of Fingal, are
spoken of as familiarly known. Ancient bards are frequently alluded
to. In one remarkable passage Ossian describes himself as living in a
sort of classical age, enlightened by the memorials of former times,
which were conveyed in the songs of bards; and points at a period of
darkness and ignorance which lay beyond the reach of tradition. "His
words," says he, "Came only by halves to our ears; they were dark as
the tales of other times, before the light of the song arose." Ossian
himself appears to have been endowed by nature with an exquisite
sensibility of heart; prone to that tender melancholy which is so
often an attendant on great genius: and susceptible equally of strong
and of soft emotion. He was not only a professed bard, educated with
care, as we may easily believe, to all the poetical art then known,
and connected, as he shows us himself, in intimate friendship with
the other contemporary bards, but a warrior also; and the son of the
most renowned hero and prince of his age. This formed a conjunction
of circumstances uncommonly favorable towards exalting the
imagination of a poet. He relates expeditions in which he had been
engaged; he sings of battles in which he had fought and overcome; he
had beheld the most illustrious scenes which that age could exhibit,
both of heroism in war and magnificence in peace. For however rude
the magnificence of those times may seem to us, we must remember,
that all ideas of magnificence are comparative; and that the age of
Fingal was an ra of distinguished splendor in that part of the
world. Fingal reigned over a considerable territory; he was enriched
with the spoils of the Roman province; he was ennobled by his
victories and great actions; and was in all respects a personage of
much higher dignity than any of the chieftains, or heads of clans,
who lived in the same country, after a more extensive monarchy was
established,

 The manners of Ossian's age, so far as we can gather them from his
writings, were abundantly favorable to a poetical genius. The two
dispiriting vices, to which Longinus imputes the decline of poetry,
covetousness and effeminacy, were as yet unknown. The cares of men
were few. They lived a roving indolent life; hunting and war their
principal employments; and their chief amusements, the music of
bards, and the feast of shells." The great objects pursued by heroic
spirits, was "to receive their fame;" that is, to become worthy of
being celebrated in the songs of bards; and "to have their name on
the four gray stones." To die unlamented by a bard, was deemed so
great a misfortune as even to disturb their ghosts in another state.
They wander in thick mists beside the reedy lake but never shall they
rise, without the song, to the dwelling of winds." After death, they
expected to follow employments of the same nature with those which
had amused them on earth; to fly with their friends on clouds, to
pursue airy deer, and to listen to their praise in the mouths of
bards. In such times as these, in a country where poetry had been so
long cultivated, and so highly honored, is it any wonder that, among
the race and succession of bards, one Homer should arise: a man, who,
endowed with a natural happy genius, favored with peculiar advantages
of birth and condition, and meeting, in the course of his life, with
a variety of incidents proper to fire his imagination, and to touch
his heart, should attain a degree of eminence in poetry, worthy to
draw the admiration of more refined ages?

 The compositions of Ossian are so strongly marked with characters of
antiquity, that although there were no external proof to support that
antiquity, hardly any reader of judgment and taste could hesitate in
referring them to a very remote ra. There are four great stages
through which men successively pass in the progress of society. The
first and earliest is the life of hunters; pasturage succeeds to
this, as the ideas of property begin to take root; next agriculture;
and, lastly, commerce. Throughout Ossian's Poems we plainly find
ourselves in the first of these periods of society; during which
hunting was the chief employment of men, and the principal method of
their procuring subsistence. Pasturage was not indeed wholly unknown;
for we hear of dividing the herd in the case of a divorce; but the
allusions to herds and to cattle are not many; and of agriculture we
find no traces. No cities appear to have been built in the
territories of Fingal. No arts are mentioned, except that of
navigation and of working in iron. Everything presents to us the most
simple and unimproved manners. At their feasts, the heroes prepared
their own repast; they sat round the light of the burning oak; the
wind lifted their locks, and whistled through their open halls.
Whatever was beyond the necessaries of life was known to them only as
the spoil of the Roman province; "the gold of the stranger; the
lights of the stranger; the steeds of the stranger; the children of
the rein."

 The representation of Ossian's times must strike us the more, as
genuine and authentic, when it is compared with a poem of later date,
which Mr. Macpherson has preserved in one of his notes. It is that in
which five bards are represented as passing the evening in the house
of a chief, and each of them separately giving his description of the
night. The night scenery is beautiful; and the author has plainly
imitated the style and manner of Ossian; but he has allowed some
images to appear which betray a later period of society. For we meet
with windows clapping, the herds of goats and cows seeking shelter,
the shepherd wandering, corn on the plain, and the wakeful hind
rebuilding the shocks of corn which had been overturned by the
tempest. Whereas, in Ossian's works, from beginning to end, all is
consistent; no modern allusion drops from him; but everywhere the
same face of rude nature appears; a country wholly uncultivated,
thinly inhabited, and recently peopled. The grass of the rock, the
flower of the heath, the thistle with its beard, are the chief
ornaments of his landscapes. "The desert," says Fingal, "is enough
for me, with all its woods and deer."

 The circle of ideas and transactions is no wider than suits such an
age; nor any greater diversity introduced into characters, than the
events of that period would naturally display. Valor and bodily
strength are the admired qualities. Contentions arise, as is usual
among savage nations, from the slightest causes. To be affronted at a
tournament, or to be omitted in the invitation to a feast, kindles a
war. Women are often carried away by force; and the whole tribe, as
in the Homeric times, rise to avenge the wrong. The heroes show
refinement of sentiment indeed on several occasions, but none of
manners. They speak of their past actions with freedom, boast of
their exploits, and sing their own praise. In their battles, it is
evident, that drums, trumpets, or bagpipes, were not known or used.
They had no expedient for giving the military alarms but striking a
shield, or raising a loud cry: and hence the loud and terrible voice
of Fingal is often mentioned as a necessary qualification of a great
general; like the ??? a?a??? ?e?e?a?? [Bone agathos Menelaos] of Homer. Of military
discipline or skill they appear to have been entirely destitute.
Their armies seem not to have been numerous; their battles were
disorderly; and terminated, for the most part, by a personal combat,
or wrestling of the two chiefs; after which, "the bard sung the song
of peace, and the battle ceased along the field."

 The manner of composition bears all the marks of the greatest
antiquity. No artful transitions, nor full and extended connexion of
parts; such as we find among the poets of later times, when order and
regularity of composition were more studied and known: but a style
always rapid and vehement; narration concise, even to abruptness, and
leaving several circumstances to be supplied by the reader's
imagination. The language has all that figurative cast, which, as I
before showed, partly a glowing and undisciplined imagination partly
the sterility of language and the want of proper terms, have always
introduced into the early speech of nations; and in several respects,
it carries a remarkable resemblance to the style of the Old
Testament. It deserves particular notice, as one of the most genuine
and decisive characters of antiquity, that very few general terms, or
abstract ideas, are to be met with in the whole collection of
Ossian's works. The ideas of men, at first, were all particular. They
had not words to express general conceptions. These were the
consequences of more profound reflection, and longer acquaintance
with the arts of thought and of speech. Ossian, accordingly, almost
never expresses himself in the abstract. His ideas extended little
further than to the objects he saw around him. A public, a community,
the universe, were conceptions beyond his sphere. Even a mountain, a
sea, or a lake, which he has occasion to mention, though only in a
simile, are for the most part particularized; it is the hill of
Cromla, the storm of the sea of Malmor, or the reeds of the lake of
Lego. A mode of expression which, while it is characteristical of
ancient ages, is at the same time highly favorable to descriptive
poetry. For the same reasons, personification is a poetical figure
not very common with Ossian. Inanimate objects, such as winds, trees,
flowers, he sometimes personifies with great beauty. But the
personifications which are so familiar to later poets, of Fame, Time,
Terror, Virtue, and the rest of that class, were unknown to our
Celtic bard. These were modes of conception too abstract for his age.

 All these are marks so undoubted, and some of them, too so nice and
delicate, of the most early times, as put the high antiquity of these
poems out of question. Especially when we consider, that if there had
been any imposture in this case, it must have been contrived and
executed in the Highlands of Scotland, two or three centuries ago; as
up to this period, both by manuscripts, and by the testimony of a
multitude of living witnesses, concerning the uncontrovertible
tradition of these poems, they can clearly be traced. Now, this is a
period when that country enjoyed no advantages for a composition of
this kind, which it may not be supposed to have enjoyed in as great,
if not in a greater degree, a thousand years before. To suppose that
two or three hundred years ago, when we well know the Highlands to
have been in a state of gross ignorance and barbarity, there should
have arisen in that country a poet, of such exquisite genius, and of
such deep knowledge of mankind, and of history, as to divest himself
of the ideas and manners of his own age, and to give us a just and
natural picture of a state of society ancienter by a thousand years;
one who could support this counterfeited antiquity through such a
large collection of poems, without the least inconsistency; and who,
possessed of all this genius and art, had, at the same time, the
self-denial of concealing himself, and of ascribing his own works to
an antiquated bard, without the imposture being detected; is a
supposition that transcends all bounds of credibility.

 There are, besides, two other circumstances to be attended to, still
of greater weight, if possible, against this hypothesis. One is, the
total absence of religious ideas from this work; for which the
translator has, in his preface, given a very probable account, on the
footing of its being the work of Ossian. The druidical superstition
was, in the days of Ossian, on the point of its final extinction;
and, for particular reasons, odious to the family of Fingal; whilst
the Christian faith was not yet established. But had it been the work
of one to whom the ideas of Christianity were familiar from his
infancy, and who had superadded to them also the bigoted superstition
of a dark age and country, it is impossible. but in some passage or
other, the traces of them would have appeared. The other circumstance
is, the entire silence which reigns with respect to all the great
clans or families which are now established in the Highlands. The
origin of these several clans is known to be very ancient; and it is
well known that there is no passion by which a native Highlander is
more distinguished than by attachment to his clan, and jealousy for
its honor. That a Highland bard, in forging a work relating to the
antiquities of his country, should have inserted no circumstance
which pointed out the rise of his own clan, which ascertained its
antiquity, or increased its glory, is, of all suppositions that can
be formed, the most improbable; and the silence on this head amounts
to a demonstration that the author lived before any of the present
great clans were formed or known.

 Assuming it then, as well we may, for certainty, that the poems, now
under consideration, are genuine venerable monuments of a very remote
antiquity, I proceed to make some remarks upon their general spirit
and strain. The two great characteristics of Ossian's poetry are,
tenderness and sublimity. It breathes nothing of the gay and cheerful
kind; an air of solemnity and seriousness is diffused over the whole.
Ossian is, perhaps, the only poet who never relaxes, or lets himself
down into the light and amusing strain which I readily admit to be no
small disadvantage to him, with the bulk of readers. He moves
perpetually in the high region of the grand and the pathetic. One
keynote is struck at the beginning, and supported to the end; nor is
any ornament introduced, but what is perfectly concordant with the
general tone of melody. The events recorded, are all serious and
grave; the scenery throughout, wild and romantic. The extended heath
by the seashore; the mountains shaded with mist; the torrent rushing
through a solitary valley; the scattered oaks, and the tombs of
warriors overgrown with moss; all produce a solemn attention in the
mind, and prepare it for great and extraordinary events. We find not
in Ossian an imagination that sports itself, and dresses out gay
trifles to please the fancy. His poetry, more perhaps than that of
any other writer, deserves to be styled, The poetry of the heart. It
is a heart penetrated with noble sentiments and with sublime and
tender passions; a heart that glows, and kindles the fancy; a heart
that is full, and pours itself forth. Ossian did not write,, like
modern poets, to please readers and critics. He sung from the love of
poetry and song. His delight was to think of the heroes among whom he
had flourished; to recall the affecting incidents of his life; to
dwell upon his past wars, and loves, and friendships: till, as he
expresses it himself, "there comes a voice to Ossian, and awakes his
soul. It is the voice of years that are gone; they roll before me
with all their deeds;" and under this true poetic inspiration, giving
vent to his genius, no wonder we should so often hear, and
acknowledge, in his strains, the powerful and ever-pleasing voice of
nature.

--Arte, natura potentior omni--
Est Deus in nobis, agitante calescimus illo.

 It is necessary here to observe, that the beauties of Ossian's
writings cannot be felt by those who have given them only a single or
hasty perusal. His manner is so different from that of the poets to
whom we are most accustomed; his style is so concise, and so much
crowned with imagery; the mind is kept at such a stretch in
accompanying the author; that an ordinary reader is at first apt to
be dazzled and fatigued, rather than pleased. His poems require to he
taken up at intervals, and to be frequently reviewed; and then it is
impossible but his beauties must open to every reader who is capable
of sensibility. Those who have the highest degree of it will relish
them the most.

 As Homer is, of all the great poets, the one whose manner, and whose
times, come the nearest to Ossian's, we are naturally led to run a
parallel in some instances between the Greek and Celtic bard. For
though Homer lived more than a thousand years before Ossian, it is
not from the age of the world, but from the state of society that we
are to judge of resembling times. The Greek has, in several points, a
manifest superiority. He introduces a greater variety of incidents;
he possesses a larger compass of ideas; has more diversity in his
characters; and a much deeper knowledge of human nature. It was not
to be expected, that in any of these particulars Ossian could equal
Homer. For Homer lived in a country where society was much farther
advanced; he had beheld many more objects; cities built and
flourishing; laws instituted; order, discipline, and arts, begun. His
field of observation was much larger and more splendid: his
knowledge, of course, more extensive; his mind also, it shall be
granted, more penetrating. But if Ossian's ideas and objects be less
diversified than those of Homer, they are all, however, of the kind
fittest for poetry: the bravery and generosity of heroes, the
tenderness of lovers, the attachment of friends, parents, and
children. In a rude age and country, though the events that happen be
few, the undissipated mind broods over them more; they strike the
imagination, and fire the passions, in a higher degree; and, of
consequence, become happier materials to a poetical genius, than the
same events when scattered through the wide circle of more varied
action and cultivated life.

 Homer is a more cheerful and sprightly poet than Ossian. You discern
in him all the Greek vivacity; whereas Ossian uniformly maintains the
gravity and solemnity of a Celtic hero. This, too, is in a great
measure to be accounted for from the different situations in which
they lived--partly personal, and partly national. Ossian had survived
all his friends, and was disposed to melancholy by the incidents of
his life. But, besides this, cheerfulness is one of the many
blessings which we owe to formed society. The solitary, wild state,
is always a serious one. Bating the sudden and violent bursts of
mirth, which sometimes break forth at their dances and feasts, the
savage American tribes have been noted by all travellers for their
gravity and taciturnity. Somewhat of this taciturnity may be also be
remarked in Ossian. On all occasions he is frugal of his words; and
never gives you more of an image, or a description, than is just
sufficient to place it before you in one clear point of view. It is a
blaze of lightning, which flashes and vanishes. Homer is more
extended in his descriptions, and fills them up with a greater
variety of circumstances. Both the poets are dramatic; that is, they
introduce their personages frequently speaking before us. But Ossian
is concise and rapid in his speeches, as he is in every other thing.
Homer, with the Greek vivacity, had also some portion of the Greek
loquacity. His speeches, indeed, are highly characteristical; and to
them we are much indebted for that admirable display he has given of
human nature. Yet, if he be tedious any where, it is in these: some
of them are trifling, and some of them plainly unseasonable. Both
poets are eminently sublime; but a difference may be remarked in the
species of their sublimity. Homer's sublimity is accompanied with
more impetuosity and fire; Ossian's with more of a solemn and awful
grandeur. Homer hurries you along; Ossian elevates, and fixes you in
astonishment. Homer is most sublime in actions and battles; Ossian in
description and sentiment. In the pathetic, Homer, when he chooses to
exert it, has great power; but Ossian exerts that power much oftener,
and has the character of tenderness far more deeply imprinted on his
works. No t knew better how to seize and melt the heart. With regard
to dignity of sentiment, the pre-eminence must clearly he given to
Ossian. This is, indeed, a surprising circumstance, that in point of
humanity, magnanimity, virtuous feelings of every kind, our rude
Celtic bard should be distinguished to such a degree, that not only
the heroes of Homer, but even those of the polite and refined Virgil,
are left far behind by those of Ossian.

 After these general observations on the genius and spirit of our
author, I now proceed to a nearer view and more accurate examination
of his works; and as Fingal is the first great poem in this
collection, it is proper to begin with it. To refuse the title of an
epic poem to Fingal, because it is not, in every little particular,
exactly conformable to the practice of Homer and Virgil, were the
mere squeamishness and pedantry of criticism. Examined even according
to Aristotle's rules, it will be found to have all the essential
requisites of a true and regular epic; and to have several of them in
so high a degree, as at first view to raise our astonishment on
finding Ossian's composition so agreeable to rules of which he was
entirely ignorant. But our astonishment will cease, when we consider
from what source Aristotle drew those rules. Homer knew no more of
the laws of criticism than Ossian. But, guided by nature, he composed
in verse a regular story, founded on heroic actions, which all
posterity admired. Aristotle, with great sagacity and penetration,
traced the causes of this general admiration. He observed what it was
in Homer's composition, and in the conduct of his story, which gave
it such power to please; from. this observation he deduced the rules
which poets ought to follow, who would write and please like Homer;
and to a composition formed according to such rules, he gave the name
of an epic poem. Hence his whole system arose. Aristotle studied
nature in Homer. Homer and Ossian both wrote from nature. No wonder
that among all the three, there should be such agreement and
conformity.

 The fundamental rules delivered by Aristotle concerning an epic
poem, are these: that the action, which is the groundwork of the
poem, should be one, complete, and great; that it should be feigned,
not merely historical; that it should be enlivened with characters
and manners, and heightened by the marvellous.

 But, before entering on any of these, it may perhaps be asked, what
is the moral of Fingal? For, according to M. Bossu, an epic poem is
no other than an allegory contrived to illustrate some, moral truth.
The poet, says this critic, must begin with fixing on some maxim or
instruction, which he intends to inculcate on mankind. He next forms
a fable, like one of sop's, wholly with a view to the moral; and
having thus settled and arranged his plan, he then looks into
traditionary history for names and incidents, to give his fable some
air of probability. Never did a more frigid, pedantic notion enter
into the mind of a critic. We may safely pronounce, that he who
should compose an epic poem after this manner, who should first lay
down a moral and contrive a plan, before he had thought of his
personages and actors, might deliver, indeed, very sound instruction,
but would find very few readers. There cannot be the least doubt that
the first object which strikes an epic poet, which fires his genius,
and gives him any idea of his work, is the action or subject he is to
celebrate. Hardly is there any tale, any subject, a poet can choose
for such a work, but will afford some general moral instruction. An
epic poem is, by its nature, one of the most moral of all poetical
compositions: but its moral tendency is by no means to be limited to
some commonplace maxim, which may be gathered from the story. It
arises from the admiration of heroic actions which such a composition
is peculiarly calculated to produce; from the virtuous emotions which
the characters and incidents raise, whilst we read it; from the happy
impressions which all the parts separately, as well as the whole
together, leave upon the mind. However, if a general moral be still
insisted on, Fingal obviously furnishes one, not inferior to that of
any other poet, viz: that wisdom and bravery always triumph over
brutal force: or another, nobler still: that the most complete
victory over an enemy is obtained by that moderation and generosity
which convert him into a friend.

 The unity of the epic action, which of all Aristotle's rules, is the
chief and most material, is so strictly preserved in Fingal, that it
must be perceived by every reader. It is a more complete unity than
what arises from relating the actions of one man, which the Greek
critic justly censures as imperfect: it is the unity of one
enterprise--the deliverance of Ireland from the invasion of Swaran;
an enterprise which has surely the full heroic dignity. All the
incidents recorded bear a constant reference to one end; no double
plot is carried on; but the pa unite into a regular whole; and as the
action is one and great, so it is an entire or complete action. For
we find, as the critic, farther requires, a beginning, a middle, and
an end; a nodus, or intrigue, in the poem; difficulties occurring
through Cuthullin's rashness and bad success; those difficulties
gradually surmounted; and at last, the work conducted to that happy
conclusion which is held essential to epic poetry. Unity is, indeed,
observed with greater exactness in Fingal, than in almost any other
epic composition. For not only is unity of subject maintained, but
that of time and place also. The autumn is clearly pointed out as the
season of the action; and from beginning to end the scene is never
shifted from the heath of Lena, along the seashore. The duration of
the action in Fingal, is much shorter than in the Iliad or neid; but
sure there may be shorter as well longer heroic poems; and if the
authority of Aristotle be also required for this, he says expressly,
that the epic composition is indefinite as to the time of its
duration. Accordingly, the action of the Iliad lasts only forty-seven
days, whilst that of the neid is continued for more than a year.

 Throughout the whole of Fingal, there reigns that grandeur of
sentiment, style, and imagery, which ought ever to distinguish this
high species of poetry. The story is conducted with no small art. The
poet goes not back to a tedious recital of the beginning of the war
with Swaran; but hastening to the main action, he falls in exactly,
by a most happy coincidence of thought, with the rule of Horace:

Semper ad eventum festinat, et in medias res,
Non secus ac notas, auditorem rapit--
Nec gemino bellum Trojanum orditur ab ovo.

De Arte Poet.

 He invokes no muse, for he acknowledged none. but his occasional
addresses to Malvina have a finer effect than the invocation of any
muse. He sets out with no formal proposition of his subject; but the
subject naturally and easily unfolds itself; the poem opening in an
animated manner, with the situation of Cuthullin, and the arrival of
a scout, who informs him of Swaran's landing. Mention is presently
made of Fingal, and of the expected assistance from the ships of the
lonely isle, in order to give farther light to the subject. For the
poet often shows his address in gradually preparing us for the events
he is to introduce; and, in particular, the preparation for the
appearance of Fingal, the previous expectations that are raised, and
the extreme magnificence, fully answering these expectations, with
which the hero is at length presented to us, are all worked up with
such skilful conduct as would do honor to any poet of the most
refined times. Homer's art in magnifying the character of Achilles,
has been universally admired. Ossian certainly shows no less aft in
aggrandizing Fingal. Nothing could be more happily imagined for this
purpose than the whole management of the last battle, wherein Gaul,
the son of Morni, had besought Fingal to retire, and to leave him and
his other chiefs the honor of the day. The generosity of the king in
agreeing to this proposal; the majesty with which he retreats to the
hill, from whence he was to behold the engagement, attended by his
bards, and waving the lightning of his sword; his perceiving the
chiefs overpowered by numbers, but, from unwillingness to deprive
them of the glory of victory by coming in person to their assistance,
first sending Ullin, the bard, to animate their courage, and at last,
when the danger becomes more pressing, his rising in his might, and
interposing, like a divinity, to decide the doubtful fate of the day;
are all circumstances contrived with so much art, as plainly discover
the Celtic bards to have been not unpractised in heroic poetry.

 The story which is the foundation of the Iliad, is in itself as
simple as that of Fingal. A quarrel arises between Achilles and
Agamemnon concerning a female slave; on which Achilles, apprehending
himself to be injured, withdraws his assistance from the rest of the
Greeks. The Greeks fall into great distress, and beseech him to be
reconciled to them. He refuses to fight for them in person, but sends
his friend Patroclus; and upon his being slain, goes forth to revenge
his death, and kills Hector. The subject of Fingal is this: Swaran
comes to invade Ireland; Cuthullin, the guardian of the young king,
had applied for his assistance to Fingal, who reigned in the opposite
coast of Scotland. But before Fingal's arrival, he is hurried by rash
counsel to encounter Swaran. He is defeated; he retreats, and
desponds. Fingal arrives in this conjuncture. The battle is for some
time dubious; but in the end he conquers Swaran; and the remembrance
of Swaran's being the brother of Agandecca, who, had once saved his
life, makes him dismiss him honorably. Homer, it is true, has filled
up his story with a much greater variety of particulars than Ossian;
and in this has shown a compass of invention superior to that of the
other poet. But it must not be forgotten that though Homer be more
circumstantial, his incidents, however, are less diversified in kind
than those of Ossian. War and bloodshed reign throughout the Iliad;
and, notwithstanding all the fertility of Homer's invention, there is
so much uniformity in his subjects, that there are few readers, who,
before the close, are not tired with perpetual fighting. Whereas in
Ossian, the mind is relieved by a more agreeable diversity. There is
a finer mixture of war and heroism, with love and friendship--of
martial, with tender scones, than is to be met with, perhaps, in any
other poet. The episodes, too, have great propriety--as natural, and
proper to that age and country: consisting of the songs of bards,
which are known to have been the great entertainment of the Celtic
heroes in war, as well as in peace. These songs are not introduced at
random; if you except the episode of Duchommar and Morna, in the
first book, which, though beautiful, is more unartful than any of the
rest, they have always some particular relation to the actor who is
interested, or to the events which are going on; and, whilst they
vary the scene, they preserve a sufficient connection with the main
subject by the fitness and propriety of their introduction.

 As Fingal's love to Agandecca influences some circumstances of the
poem, particularly the honorable dismission of Swaran at the end; it
was necessary that we should be let into this part of the hero's
story. But as it lay without the compass of the present action, it
could be regularly introduced nowhere except in an episode.
Accordingly, the poet, with as much propriety as if Aristotle himself
had directed the plan, has contrived an episode for this purpose in
the song of Carril, at the beginning of the third book.

 The conclusion of the poem is strictly according to rule, and is
every way noble and pleasing. Th reconciliation of the contending
heroes, the consolation of Cuthullin, and the general felicity that
crowns the action, soothe the mind in a very agreeable manner, and
form that passage from agitation and trouble, to perfect quiet and
repose, which critics require as the proper termination of the epic
work. "Thus they passed the night in song, and brought back the
morning with joy. Fingal arose on the heath; and shook his glittering
spear in his hand. He moved first towards the plains of Lena; and we
followed like a ridge of fire. Spread the sail, said the king of
Morven, and catch the winds that pour from Lena. We rose on the waves
with songs; and rushed with joy through the foam of the ocean." So
much for the unity and general conduct of the epic action in Fingal.

 With regard to that property of the subject which Aristotle
requires, that it should be feigned, not historical, he must not be
understood so strictly is if he meant to exclude all subjects which
have any foundation in truth. For such exclusion would both be
unreasonable in itself, and what is more, would be contrary to the
practice of Homer, who is known to have founded his Iliad on
historical facts concerning the war of Troy, which was famous
throughout all Greece. Aristotle means no more than that it is the
business of a poet not to be a more annalist of facts, but to
embellish truth with beautiful, probable, and useful fictions; to
copy nature as he himself explains it, like painters, who preserve a
likeness, but exhibit their objects more grand and beautiful than
they are in reality. That Ossian has followed this course, and
building upon true history, has sufficiently adorned it with poetical
fiction for aggrandizing his characters and facts, will not, I
believe, be questioned by most readers. At the same time, the
foundation which those facts and characters had in truth, and the
share which the poet had himself in the transactions which he
records, must be considered as no small advantage to his work. For
truth makes an impression on the mind far beyond any fiction; and no
man, let his imagination be ever so strong, relates any events so
feelingly as those in which he has been interested; paints any scene
so naturally as one which he has seen; or draws any characters in
such strong colors as those which he has personally known. It is
considered as an advantage of the epic subject to be taken from a
period so distant, as, by being involved in the darkness of
tradition, may give license to fable. Though Ossian's subject may at
first view appear unfavorable in this respect, as being taken from
his own times, yet, when we reflect that he lived to an extreme old
age; that he relates what had been transacted in another country, at
the distance of many years, and after all that race of men who had
been the actors were gone off the stage; we shall find the objection
in a great measure obviated. In so rude an age, when no written
records were known, when tradition was loose, and accuracy of any
kind little attended to, what was great and heroic in one generation,
easily ripened into the marvellous in the next.

 The natural representation of human character in an epic poem is
highly essential to its merit; and, in respect of this, there can be
no doubt of Homer's excelling all the heroic poets who have ever
wrote. But though Ossian be much inferior to Homer in this article,
he will be found to be equal at least, if not superior to Virgil; and
has, indeed, given all the display of human nature, which the simple
occurrences of his times could be expected to furnish. No dead
uniformity of character prevails in Fingal; but, on the contrary, the
principal characters are not only clearly distinguished, but
sometimes artfully contrasted, so as to illustrate each other.
Ossian's heroes are like Homer's, all brave; but their bravery, like
those of Homer's too, is of different kinds. For instance: the
prudent, the sedate, the modest and circumspect Connal, is finely
opposed to the presumptuous, rash, overbearing, but gallant and
generous Calmar. Calmar hurries Cuthullin into action by his
temerity; and when he sees the bad effects of his counsels, he will
not survive the disgrace. Connal, like another Ulysses, attends
Cuthullin to his retreat, counsels and comforts him under his
misfortune. The fierce, the proud, and the high-spirited Swaran, is
admirably contrasted with the calm, the moderate, and generous
Fingal. The character of Oscar is a favorite one throughout the whole
poems. The amiable warmth of the young warrior; his eager impetuosity
in the day of action; his passion for fame; his submission to his
father; his tenderness for Malvina; are the strokes of a masterly
pencil: the strokes are few; but it is the hand of nature, and
attracts the heart. Ossian's own character, the old man, the hero,
and the bard, all in one, presents to us, through the whole work, a
most respectable and venerable figure, which we always contemplate
with pleasure. Cuthullin is a hero of the highest class: daring,
magnanimous, and exquisitely sensible to honor. We become attached to
his interest, and are deeply touched with his distress; and after the
admiration raised for him in the first part of the poem, it is a
strong proof of Ossian's masterly genius, that he durst adventure to
produce to us another hero, compared with whom, even the great
Cuthullin should be only an inferior personage; and who should rise
as far above him, as Cuthullin rises above the rest.

 Here, indeed, in the character and description of Fingal, Ossian
triumphs almost unrivalled; for we may boldly defy all antiquity to
show us any hero equal to Fingal. Homer's Hector possesses several
great and amiable qualities; but Hector is a secondary personage in
the Iliad, not the hero of the work. We see him only occasionally; we
know much less of him than we do of Fingal; who, not only in this,
epic poem, but in Temora, and throughout the rest of Ossian's works,
is presented in all that variety of lights, which give the full
display of a character. And though Hector faithfully discharges his
duty to his country, his friends, and his family, he is tinctured,
however, with a degree of the same savage ferocity which prevails
among all the Homeric heroes: for we find him insulting over the
fallen Patroclus with the most cruel taunts, and telling him, when he
lies in the agonies of death, that Achilles cannot help him now; and
that in a short time his body, stripped naked, and deprived of
funeral honors, shall be devoured by the vultures. Whereas, in the
character of Fingal, concur almost all the qualities that can ennoble
human nature; that can either make us admire the hero, or love the
man. He is not only unconquerable in war, but he makes his people
happy by his wisdom in the days of peace. He is truly too father of
his people. He is known by the epithet or "Fingal of the mildest
look;" and distinguished on every occasion by humanity and
generosity. He is merciful to his foes; full of affection to his
children; full of concern about his friends; and never mentions
Agandecca, his first love, without the utmost tenderness. He is the
universal Protector of the distressed; "None ever went sad from
Fingal."--"O, Oscar! bend the strong in arms; but spare the feeble
hand. Be thou a stream of mighty tides against the foes of thy
people; but like the gale that moves the grass to those who ask thine
aid. So Trenmor lived; such Trathal was; and such has Fingal been. My
arm was the support of the injured; the weak rested behind the
lightning of my steel." These were the maxims of true heroism, to
which he formed his grandson. His fame is represented as everywhere
spread; the greatest heroes acknowledge his superiority; his enemies
tremble at his name; and the highest encomium that can be bestowed on
one whom the poets would most exalt, is to say, that his soul was
like the soul of Fingal.

 To do justice to the poet's merit, in supporting such a character as
this, I must observe, what is not commonly attended to, that there is
no part of poetical execution more difficult, than to draw a perfect
character in such a manner as to render it distinct, and affecting to
the mind. Some strokes of human imperfection and frailty, are what
usually give us the most clear view, and the most sensible impression
of a character; because they present to us a man, such as we have
seen; they recall known features of human nature. When poets attempt
to go beyond this range, and describe a faultless hero, they for the
most part set before us a sort of vague, undistinguishable character,
such as the imagination cannot lay hold of, or realize to itself as
the object of affection. We know how much Virgil has failed in this
particular. His perfect hero, neas, is an unanimated, insipid
personage, whom we may pretend to admire, but whom no one can
heartily love. But what Virgil has failed in, Ossian, to our
astonishment, has successfully executed. His Fingal, though exhibited
without any of the common human failings, is, nevertheless, a real
man; a character which touches and interests every reader. To this it
has much contributed that the poet has represented him as an old man;
and by this has gained the advantage of throwing around him a great
many circumstances, peculiar to that age, which paint him to the
fancy in a more distinct light. He is surrounded with his family; he
instructs his children in the principles of virtue; he is narrative
of his past exploits he is venerable with the gray locks of age; he
is frequently disposed to moralize, like an old man, on human vanity,
and the prospect of death. There is more art, at least more felicity,
in this, than may at first be imagined. For youth and old are the two
states of human life, capable of being placed in the most picturesque
lights. Middle age is more general and vague; and has fewer
circumstances peculiar to the idea of it. And when any object is in a
situation that admits it to be rendered particular, and to be clothed
with a variety of circumstances, it always stands out more clear and
full of poetical description.

 Besides human personages, divine or supernatural agents are often
introduced into epic poetry, forming what is called the machinery of
it; which most critics hold to be an essential part. The marvellous,
it must he admitted, has always a great charm for the bulk of
readers. It gratifies the imagination, and affords room for striking
and sublime description. No wonder, therefore, that all poets should
have a strong propensity towards it. But I must observe, that nothing
is more difficult than to adjust properly the marvellous with the
probable. If a poet sacrifice probability, and fill his work with
extravagant supernatural scenes, he spreads over it an appearance of
romance and childish fiction; he transports his readers from this
world into a fantastic visionary region; and loses that weight and
dignity which should reign in epic poetry. No work from which
probability is altogether banished, can make a lasting or deep
impression. Human actions and manners are always, the most
interesting objects which can be presented to a human mind. All
machinery, therefore, is faulty, which withdraws these too much from
view, or obscures them under a cloud of incredible fictions. Besides
being temperately employed, machinery ought always to have some
foundation in popular belief. A poet is by no means at liberty to
invent what system of the marvellous he pleases; he must avail
himself either of the religious faith, or the superstitious credulity
of the country wherein he lives; so as to give an air of probability
to events which are most contrary to the common course of nature.

 In these respects, Ossian appears to me to have been remarkably
happy. He has, indeed, followed the same course with Homer. For it is
perfectly absurd to imagine, as some critics have done, that Homer's
mythology was invented by him "in consequence of profound reflection
on the benefits it would yield to poetry." Homer was no such refining
genius. He found the traditionary stories, on which he built his
Iliad, mingled with popular legends concerning the intervention of
the gods; and he adopted these because they amused the fancy. Ossian,
in like manner, found the tales of his country full of ghosts and
spirits; it is likely he believed them himself; and he introduced
them, because they gave his poems that solemn and marvellous cast
which suited his genius. This was the only machinery he could employ
with propriety; because it was the only intervention of supernatural
beings which agreed with the common belief of the country. It was
happy; because it did not interfere in the least with the proper
display of human characters and actions; because it had less of the
incredible than most other kinds of poetical machinery; and because
it served to diversify the scene, and to heighten the subject by an
awful grandeur, which is the great design of machinery.

 As Ossian's mythology is peculiar to himself, and makes a
considerable figure in his other poems, as well as in Fingal, it may
be proper to make some observations on it, independent of its
subserviency to epic composition. It turns, for the most part, on the
appearances of departed spirits. These, consonantly to the notions of
every rude age, are represented not as purely immaterial, but as thin
airy forms, which can be visible or invisible at pleasure; their
voice is feeble, their arm is weak; but they are endowed with
knowledge more than human. In a separate state, they retain the same
dispositions which animated them in this life. They ride on the wind;
they bend their airy bows; and pursue deer formed of clouds. The
ghosts of departed bards continue to sing. The ghosts of departed
heroes frequent the fields of their former fame. "They rest together
in their caves, and talk of mortal men. Their songs are of other
worlds. They come sometimes to the ear of rest, and raise their
feeble voice." All this presents to us much the same set of ideas
concerning spirits, as we find in the eleventh book of the Odyssey,
where Ulysses visits the regions of the dead; and in the twenty-third
book of the Iliad, the ghost of Patroclus, after appearing to
Achilles, vanishes precisely like one of Ossian's, emitting a shrill,
feeble cry, and melting away like smoke.

 But though Homer's and Ossian's ideas concerning ghosts were of the
same nature, we cannot but observe, that Ossian's ghosts are drawn
with much stronger and livelier colors than those of Homer. Ossian
describes ghosts with all the particularity of one who had seen and
conversed with them, and whose imagination was full of the impression
they had left upon it. He calls up those awful and tremendous ideas
which the

--Simulacra modis pallentia miris

are fitted to raise in the human mind; and which, in Shakspeare's
style, "harrow up the soul." Crugal's ghost, in particular, in the
beginning of the second book of Fingal, may vie with any appearance
of this kind, described by any epic or tragic poet whatever. Most
poets would have contented themselves, with telling us, that he
resembled, in every particular, the living Crugal; that his form and
dress were the same, only his face more pale and sad; and that he
bore the mark of the wound by which he fell. But Ossian sets before
our eyes a spirit from the invisible world, distinguished by all
those features which a strong, astonished imagination would give to a
ghost. "A dark red stream of fire comes down from the hill. Crugal
sat upon the beam; he that lately fell by the band of Swaran,
striving in the battle of heroes. His face is like the beam of the
setting moon. His robes are of the cloud of the hill. His eyes are
like two decaying flames. Dark is the wound of his breast.--The stars
dim twinkled through his form; and his voice was like the sound of a
distant stream." The circumstance of the stars being beheld "dim
twinkling through his form," is wonderfully picturesque, and convoys
the most lively impression of his thin and shadowy substance. The
attitude in which he is afterward placed, and the speech put into his
mouth, are full of that solemn and awful sublimity, which suits the
subject. "Dim, and in tears he stood, and he stretched his pale hand
over the hero. Faintly he raised his feeble voice, like the gale of
the reedy Lego.--My ghost, O Connal! is on my native hills; but my
corse is on the sands of Ulla. Thou shalt never talk with Crugal, or
find his lone steps in the heath. I am light as the blast of Cromla;
and I move like the shadow of mist. Connal, son of Colgar! I see the
dark cloud of death; it hovers over the plains of Lena. The sons of
green Erin Shall fall. Remove from the field of ghosts.--Like the
darkened moon, he retired in the midst of the whistling blast."

 Several other appearances of spirits might be pointed out, as among
the most sublime passages of Ossian's poetry. The circumstances of
them are considerably diversified, and the scenery always suited to
the occasion. "Oscar slowly ascends the hill. The meteors of night
set on the heath before him. A distant torrent faintly roars.
Unfrequent blasts rush through aged oaks. The half enlightened moon
sinks dim and red behind her hill. Feeble voices are heard on the
heath. Oscar drew his sword--."Nothing can prepare the fancy more
happily for the awful scene that is to follow. "Trenmor came from his
hill at the voice of his mighty son. A cloud, like the steed of the
stranger, supported his airy limbs. His robe is of the mist of Lano,
that brings death to the people. His sword is a green meteor, half
extinguished. His face is without form, and dark. He sighed thrice
over the hero; and thrice the winds of the night roared around. Many
were his words to Oscar.--He slowly vanished, like a mist that melts
on the sunny hill." To appearances of this kind, we can find no
parallel among the Greek or Roman poets. They bring to mind that
noble description in the book of Job: "In thoughts from the vision of
the night, when deep sleep falleth on men, fear came upon me, and
trembling, which made all my bones to shake. Then a spirit passed
before my face: the hair of my flesh stood up It stood still: but I
could not discern the form thereof. An image was before mine eyes.
There was silence; and I heard a voice--Shall mortal man be more just
than God?"

 As Ossian's supernatural beings are described with a surprising
force of imagination, so they are introduced with propriety. We have
only three ghosts in Fingal: that of Crugal, which comes to warn the
host of impending destruction, and to advise them to save themselves
by retreat; that of Evir-allen, the spouse of Ossian, which calls on
him to rise and rescue their son from danger; and that of Agandecca,
which, just before the last engagement with Swaran, moves Fingal to
pity, by mourning for the approaching destruction of her kinsman and
people. In the other poems, ghosts sometimes appear, when invoked, to
foretell futurity; frequently, according to the notions of these
times, they come as forerunners of misfortune or death, to those whom
they visit; sometimes they inform their friends at a distance of
their own death; and sometimes they are introduced to heighten the
scenery on some great and solemn occasion. "A hundred oaks burn to
the wind; and faint light gleams over the heath. The ghosts of Ardven
pass through the beam, and show their dim and distant forms. Comala
is half unseen on her meteor; and Hidallan is sullen and dim."--"The
awful faces of other times looked from the clouds of Crona."--
"Fercuth! I saw the ghost of night. Silent he stood on that bank; his
robe of mist flew on the wind. I could behold his tears. An aged man
he seemed, and full of thought."

 The ghosts of strangers mingle not with those of the natives. "She
is seen: but not like the daughters of the hill. Her robes are from
the strangers' land; and she is still alone." When the ghost of one
whom we had formerly known is introduced, the propriety of the living
character is still preserved. This is remarkable in the appearance of
Calmar's ghost, in the poem entitled, The death of Cuthullin. He
seems to forebode Cuthullin's death, and to beckon him to his cave.
Cuthullin reproaches him for supposing that he could be intimidated
by such prognostics. "Why dost thou bend thy dark eyes on me, ghost
of the car-borne Calmar? Wouldst thou frighten me, O Matha's son!
from the battles of Cormac? Thy hand was not feeble in war; neither
was thy voice for peace. How art thou changed, chief of Lara! if thou
now dost advise to fly! Retire thou to thy cave thou art not Calmar's
ghost; lie delighted in battle and his arm was like the thunder of
heaven." Calmar makes no return to this seeming reproach: but "he
retired in his blast with joy; for he had heard the voice of his
praise." This is precisely the ghost of Achilles in Homer; who,
notwithstanding all the dissatisfaction he expresses with his state
in the region of the dead, as soon as he had heard his son
Neoptolemus praised for his gallant behavior, strode away with silent
joy to rejoin the rest of the shades.

 It is a great advantage of Ossian's mythology, that it is not local
and temporary, like that of most other ancient poets; which of course
is apt to seem ridiculous, after the superstitions have passed away
on which it is founded. Ossian's mythology is, to speak so, the
mythology of human nature; for it is founded on what has been the
popular belief, in all ages and countries, and under all forms of
religion, concerning the appearances of departed spirits. Homer's
machinery is always lively and amusing; but far from being always
supported with proper dignity. The indecent squabbles among his gods
surely do no honor to epic poetry. Whereas Ossian's machinery has
dignity upon all occasions. It is indeed a dignity of the dark and
awful kind; but this is proper; because coincident with the strain
and spirit of the poetry. A light and gay mythology, like Homer's,
would have been perfectly unsuitable to the subjects on which
Ossian's genius was employed. But though his machinery be always
solemn, it is not, however, always dreary or dismal; it as enlivened,
as much as the subject would permit, by those pleasant and beautiful
appearances, which he sometimes introduces, of the spirits of the
hill. These are gentle spirits: descending on sunbeams, fair moving
on the plain; their forms white and bright; their voices sweet; and
their visits to men propitious. The greatest praise that can be given
to the beauty of a living woman, is to say, "She is fair as the ghost
of the hill, when it moves in a sunbeam at noon, over the silence of
Morven." "The hunter shall hear my voice from his booth. He shall
fear, but love my voice. For sweet shall my voice be for my friends;
for pleasant were they to me."

 Besides ghosts, or the spirits of departed men, we find in Ossian
some instances of other kinds of machinery. Spirits of a superior
nature to ghosts are sometimes alluded to, which have power to
embroil the deep; to call forth winds and storms, and pour them on
the land of the stranger; to overturn forests, and to send death
among the people. We have prodigies too; a shower of blood; and when
some disaster is befalling at a distance, the sound of death is heard
on the strings of Ossian's harp: all perfectly consonant, not only to
the peculiar ideas of northern nations, but to the general current of
a superstitious mention in all countries. The description of Fingal's
airy hall, in the poem called Errathon, and of the ascent of Malvina
into it, deserves particular notice, as remarkably noble and
magnificent. But, above all, the engagement of Fingal with the spirit
of Loda, in Carric-thura, cannot be mentioned without admiration. I
forbear transcribing the passage, as it must have drawn the attention
of every one who has read the works of Ossian. The undaunted courage
of Fingal, opposed to all the terrors of the Scandinavian god; the
appearance and the speech of that awful spirit; the wound which he
receives, and the shriek which he sends forth, "as, rolled into
himself, he rose upon the wind;" are full of the most amazing and
terrible majesty. I know no passage more sublime in the writings of
any uninspired author. The fiction is calculated to aggrandize the
hero; which it does to a high degree: nor is it so unnatural or wild
a fiction as might at first be thought. According to the notions of
those times, supernatural beings were material, and, consequently,
vulnerable. The spirit of Loda was not acknowledged as a deity by
Fingal; he did not worship at the stone of his power; he plainly
considered him as the god of his enemies only; as a local deity,
whose dominion extended no farther than to the regions where he was
worshipped; who had, therefore, no title to threaten him, and no
claim to his submission. We know there are poetical precedents of
great authority, for fictions fully as extravagant; and if Homer be
forgiven for making Diomed attack and wound in battle the gods whom
that chief himself worshipped, Ossian surely is pardonable for making
his hero superior to the god of a foreign territory.

 Notwithstanding the poetical advantages which I have ascribed to
Ossian's machinery, I acknowledge it would have been much more
beautiful and perfect had the author discovered some knowledge of a
Supreme Being. Although his silence on this head has been accounted
for by the learned and ingenious translator in a very probable,
manner, yet still it must be held a considerable disadvantage to the
poetry. For the most august and lofty ideas that can embellish poetry
are derived from the belief of a divine administration of the
universe; and hence the invocation of a Supreme Being, or at least of
some superior powers, who are conceived as presiding over human
affairs, the solemnities of religious worship, prayers preferred, and
assistance implored on critical occasions, appear with great dignity
in the works of almost all poets, as chief ornaments of their
compositions. The absence of all such religious ideas from Ossian's
poetry is a sensible blank in it; the more to be regretted, as we can
easily imagine what an illustrious figure they would have made under
the management of such a genius as his; and how finely they would
have been adapted to many situations which occur in his works.

 After so particular an examination of Fingal, it were needless to
enter into as full a discussion of the conduct of Temora, the other
epic poem. Many of the same observations, especially with regard to
the great characteristics of heroic poetry, apply to both. The high
merit, however, of Temora, requires that we should not pass it by
without some remarks.

 The scene of Temora, as of Fingal, is laid in Ireland; and the
action is of a posterior date. The subject is, an expedition of the
hero to dethrone and punish a bloody usurper, and to restore the
possession of the kingdom to the posterity of the lawful prince: an
undertaking worthy of the justice and heroism of the great Fingal.
The action is one, and complete. The Poem opens with the descent of
Fingal on the coast, and the consultation held among the chiefs of
the enemy. The murder of the young prince Cormac, which was the cause
of the war, being antecedent to the epic action, is introduced with
great propriety as an episode in the first book. In the progress of
the poem, three battles are described, which rise in their importance
above, one another; the success is various, and the issue for some
time doubtful; till at last, Fingal, brought into distress, by the
wound of his great general Gaul, and the death of his son Fillan,
assumes the command himself; and, having slain the Irish king in
single combat, restores the rightful heir to his throne.

 Temora has perhaps less fire than the other epic poem; but in return
it has more variety, more tenderness, and more magnificence. The
reigning idea, so often resented to us, of "Fingal, in the last of
his fields, is venerable and affecting; nor could any more noble
conclusion be thought of, than the aged hero, after so many
successful achievements, taking his leave of battles, and, with all
the solemnities of those times, resigning his spear to his son. The
events are less crowded in Temora than in Fingal; actions and
characters are more particularly displayed: we are let into the
transactions of both hosts, and informed of the adventures of the
night as well as of the day. The still, pathetic, and the romantic
scenery of several of the night adventures, so remarkably suited to
Ossian's genius, occasion a fine diversity in the poem; and are
happily contrasted with the military operations of the day.

 In most of our author's poems, the horrors of war are softened by
intermixed scenes of love and friendship. In Fingal these are
introduced as episodes: in Temora we have an incident of this nature
wrought into the body of the piece, in the adventure of Cathmor and
Sulmalla. This forms one of the most conspicuous beauties of that
poem. The distress of Sulmalla, disguised and unknown amongst
strangers, her tender and anxious concern for the safety of Cathmor,
her dream, and her melting remembrance of the land of her fathers;
Cathmor's emotion when he first discovers her, his struggles to
conceal and suppress his passion, lest it should unman him in the
midst of war, though "his soul poured forth in secret, when he beheld
her fearful eye," and the last interview between them, when, overcome
by her tenderness, he lets her know he had discovered her, and
confesses his passion; are all wrought up with the most exquisite
sensibility and delicacy.

 Besides the characters which appeared in Fingal, several new ones
are here introduced; and though, as they are all the characters of
warriors, bravery is the predominant feature, they are nevertheless
diversified in a sensible and striking manner. Foldath, for instance,
the general of Cathmor, exhibits the perfect picture of a savage
chieftain; bold and daring, but presumptuous, cruel, and overbearing.
He is distinguished, on his first appearance, as the friend of the
tyrant Cairbar, "His stride is haughty; his red eye rolls in wrath."
In his person and whole deportment he is contrasted with the mild and
wise Hidalla, another leader of the same army, on whose humanity and
gentleness he looks with great contempt. He professedly delights in
strife and blood. He insults over the fallen. He is imperious in his
counsels, and factious when they are not followed. He is unrelenting
in all his schemes of revenge, even to the length of denying the
funeral song to the dead; which, from the injury thereby done to
their ghosts, was in those days considered as the greatest barbarity.
Fierce to the last, he comforts himself in his dying moments with
thinking that his ghost shall often leave its blast to rejoice over
the graves of those he had slain. Yet Ossian, ever prone to the
pathetic, has contrived to throw into his account of the death, even
of this man, some tender circumstances, by the moving description of
his daughter Dardulena, the last of his race.

 The character of Foldath tends much to exalt that of Cathmor, the
chief commander, which is distinguished by the most humane virtues.
He all fraud and cruelty, is famous for his hospitality to strangers;
open to every generous sentiment, and to every soft and compassionate
feeling. he is so amiable as to divide the reader's attachment
between him and the hero of the poem; though our author has artfully
managed it so as to make Cathmor himself indirectly acknowledge
Fingal's superiority, and to appear somewhat apprehensive of the
event, after the death of Fillan, which he knew would call forth
Fingal in all his might. It is very remarkable, that although Ossian
has introduced into his poems three complete heroes, Cuthullin,
Cathmor, and Fingal, he has, however, sensibly distinguished each of
their characters; Cuthullin is particularly honorable; Cathmor
particularly amiable; Fingal wise and great, retaining an ascendant
peculiar to himself in whatever light he is viewed.

 But the favorite figure in Temora, and the one most highly finished,
is Fillan. His character is of that sort for which Ossian shows a
particular fondness; an eager, fervent, young warrior, fired with all
the impatient enthusiasm for military glory peculiar to that time of
life. He had sketched this in the description of his own son Oscar;
but as he has extended it more fully in Fillan, and as the character
is so consonant to the epic strain, though, as far as I remember, not
placed in such a conspicuous light by any other epic poet, it may be
worth while to attend a little to Ossian's management of it in this
instance.

 Fillan was the youngest of all the sons of Fingal younger, it is
plain, than his nephew Oscar, by whose fame and great deeds in war we
may naturally suppose his ambition to have been highly stimulated.
Withal, as lie is younger, he is described as more rash and fiery.
His first appearance is soon after Oscar's death, when he was
employed to watch the motions of the foe by night. In a conversation
with his brother Ossian, on that occasion, we learn that it was not
long since he began to lift the spear. "Few are the marks of my sword
in battle; but my soul is fire." He is with some difficulty
restrained by Ossian from going to attack the enemy; and complains to
him, that his father had never allowed him any opportunity of
signalizing his valor. "The king hath not remarked my sword; I go
forth with the crowd; I return without my fame." Soon after, when
Fingal, according to custom, was to appoint one of his chiefs to
command the army, and each was standing forth, and putting in his
claim to this honor, Fillan is presented in the following most
picturesque and natural attitude: "On his spear stood the Son of
Clatho, in the wandering of his locks. Thrice he raised his eyes to
Fingal; his voice thrice failed him as he spoke. Fillan could not
boast of battles; at once he strode away. Bent over a distant stream
he stood; the tear hung in his eye. He struck, at times, the
thistle's head with his inverted spear." No less natural and
beautiful is the description of Fingal's paternal emotion on this
occasion. "Nor is he unseen of Fingal. Sidelong he beheld his son. He
beheld him with bursting joy. He hid the big tear with his locks, and
turned amidst his crowded soul." The command, for that day, being
given to Gaul, Fillan rushes amidst the thickest of the foe, saves
Gaul's life, who is wounded by a random arrow, and distinguishes
himself so in battle, that "the days of old return on Fingal's mind, 
as he beholds the renown of his son. As the sun rejoices from the
cloud, over the tree his beams have raised, whilst it shakes its
lonely head on the heath, so joyful is the king over Fillan." Sedate,
however, and wise, he mixes the praise which he bestows on him with
some reprehension of his rashness. "My son, I saw thy deeds, and my
soul was glad. Thou art brave, son of Clatho, but headlong in the
strife. So did not Fingal advance, though he never feared a foe. Let
thy people be a ridge behind thee; they are thy strength in the
field. Then shalt thou be long renowned, and behold the tombs of thy
fathers."

 On the next day, the, greatest and the last of Fillan's life, the
charge is committed to him of leading on the host to battle. Fingal's
speech to his troops on this occasion is full of noble sentiment;
and, where he recommends his son to their care, extremely touching.
"A young beam is before you: few are his steps to war. They are few,
but he is valiant; defend my dark-haired son. Bring him back with
joy; hereafter he may stand alone. His form is like his fathers; his
soul is a flame of their fire." When the battle begins, the poet puts
forth his strength to describe the exploits of the young hero; who,
at last encountering and killing with his own hand Foldath, the
opposite general, attains the pinnacle of glory. In what follows,
when the fate of Fillan is drawn near, Ossian, if anywhere, excels
himself. Foldath being slain, and a general rout begun, there was no
resource left to the enemy but in the great Cathmore himself, who in
this extremity descends from the hill, where, according to the custom
of those princes, he surveyed the battle. Observe how this critical
event is wrought up by the poet. "Wide-spreading over echoing Lubar,
the flight of Bolga is rolled along. Fillan hung forward on their
steps, and strewed the heath with dead. Fingal rejoiced over his
son.--Blue-shielded Cathmor rose.--Son of Alpin, bring the harp! Give
Fillan's praise to the wind: raise high his praise in my hall, while
yet he shines in war. Leave, blue-eyed Clatho! leave thy hall; behold
that early beam of thine! The host is withered in its course. No
farther look--it is dark--light trembling from the harp, strike,
virgins! strike the sound." The sudden interruption and suspense of
the narration on Cathmor's rising from his hill, the abrupt bursting
into the praise of Fillan, and the passionate apostrophe to his
mother Clatho, are admirable efforts of poetical art, in order to
interest us in Fillan's danger; and the whole is heightened by the
immediate following simile, one of the most magnificent and sublime
that is to be met with in any poet, and which, if it had been found
in Homer, would have been the frequent subject of admiration to
critics: "Fillan is like a spirit of heaven, that descends from the
skirt of big blast. The troubled ocean feels his steps as he strides
from wave to wave. His path kindles behind him; islands shake their
heads on the heaving seas."

 But the poet's art is not yet exhausted. The fall of this noble
young, warrior, or, in Ossian's style, the extinction of this beam of
heaven, could not be rendered too interesting and affecting. Our
attention is naturally drawn towards Fingal. He beholds front his
hill the rising of Cathmor, and the danger of his son. But what shall
he do? "Shall Fingal rise to his aid, and take the sword of Luno?
What then shall become of thy fame, son of white-bosomed Clatho? Turn
not thine eves from Fingal, daughter of Inistore! I shall not quench
thy early beam. No cloud of mine shall rise, my son, upon thy soul of
fire." Struggling between concern for the fame, and fear for the
safety of his son, be withdraws from the sight of the engagement, and
despatches Ossian in haste to the field, with this affectionate and
delicate injunction: "Father of Oscar!" addressing him by a title
which on this occasion has the highest propriety: "Father of Oscar!
lift the spear, defend the young in arms. But conceal thy steps from
Fillan's eyes. He must not know that I doubt his steel." Ossian
arrived too late. But unwilling to describe Fillan vanquished, the
poet suppresses all the circumstances of the combat with Cathmor; and
only shows us the dying hero. We see him animated to the end with the
same martial and ardent spirit; breathing his last in bitter regret
for-being so early cut off from the field of glory. "Ossian, lay me
in that hollow rock. Raise no stone above me, lest one should ask
about my fame. I am fallen in the first of my fields; fallen without
renown. Let thy voice alone send joy to my flying soul. Why should
the bard know where dwells the early-fallen Fillan?" He who, after
tracing the circumstances of this story, shall deny that our bard is
possessed of high sentiment and high art, must be strangely
prejudiced indeed. Let him read the story of Pallas in Virgil, which
is of a similar kind; and after all the praise he may justly bestow 
on the elegant and finished description of that amiable author, let
him say which of the two poets unfolds most of the human soul. I
waive insisting on any more of the particulars in Temora; as my aim
is rather to lead the reader into the genius and spirit of Ossian's
poetry, than to dwell on all his beauties.

 The judgment and art discovered in conducting works of such length
as Fingal and Temora, distinguish them from the other poems in this
collection. The smaller pieces, however, contain particular beauties,
no less eminent. They are historical poems, generally of the elegiac
kind; and plainly discover themselves to be the work of the same
author. One consistent face of manners is everywhere presented to us;
one spirit of poetry reigns; the masterly hand of Ossian appears
throughout; the same rapid and animated style; the same strong
coloring of imagination, and the same glowing sensibility of heart.
Besides the unity which belongs to the compositions of one man, there
is moreover a certain unity of subject, which very happily connects
all these poems. They form the poetical history of the age, of
Fingal, The same race of heroes whom we had met with in the greater
poems, Cuthullin, Oscar, Connar, and Gaul, return again upon the
stage; and Fingal himself is always the principal figure, presented
on every occasion, with equal magnificence, nay, rising upon us to
the last. The circumstances of Ossian's old age and blindness, his
surviving all his friends, and his relating their great exploits to
Malvina, the spouse or mistress of his beloved son Oscar, furnish the
finest poetical situations that fancy could devise for that tender
pathetic which reigns in Ossian's poetry.

 On each of these poems there might be room for separate
observations, with regard to he conduct and dispositions of the
incidents, as well as to the beauty of the descriptions and
sentiments. Carthon is a regular and highly finished piece. The main
story is very properly introduced by Clessamore's relation of the
adventure of his youth; and this introduction is finely heightened by
Fingal's song of mourning over Moina; in which Ossian, ever fond of
doing honor to his father, has contrived to distinguish him for being
an eminent poet, as well as warrior. Fingal's song upon this
occasion, when "his thousand bards leaned forwards from their seats,
to hear the voice of the king," is inferior to no passage in the
whole book; and with great judgement put in his mouth, as the
seriousness, no less than the sublimity of the strain, is peculiarly
suited to the hero's character. In Darthula are assembled almost all
the tender images that can touch the heart of man, friendship, love,
the affections of parents, sons, and brothers, the distress of the
aged, and the unavailing bravery of the young. The beautiful address
to the moon, with which the poem opens, and the transition from
thence to the subject, most happily prepare the mind for that train
of affecting events that is to follow. The story is regular,
dramatic, interesting to the last. He who can read it without emotion
may congratulate himself, if he pleases, upon being completely armed
against sympathetic sorrow. As Fingal had no occasion of appearing in
the action of this poem, Ossian makes a very artful transition from
his narration, to what was passing in the halls of Selma. The sound
heard there on the strings of his harp, the concern which Fingal
shows on bearing it, and the invocation of the ghosts of their
fathers, to receive the heroes falling in a distant land, are
introduced with great beauty of imagination to increase the
solemnity, and to diversify the scenery of the poem.

 Carric-thura is full of the most sublime dignity; and has this
advantage, of being more cheerful in the subject, and more happy in
the catastrophe, than most of the other poems: though tempered at the
same time with episodes in that strain of tender melancholy which
seems to have been the great delight of Ossian and the bards of his
age. Lathmon is peculiarly distinguished by high generosity of
sentiment. This is carried so far, particularly in the refusal of
Gaul, on one side, to take the advantage of a sleeping foe; and of
Lathmon, on the other, to overpower by numbers the two young warriors
as to recall into one's mind the manners of chivalry; some
resemblance to which may perhaps be suggested by other incidents in
this collection of poems. Chivalry, however, took rise in an age and
country too remote from those of Ossian, to admit the suspicion that
the one could have borrowed any thing from the other. So far as
chivalry had any real existence, the same military enthusiasm which
gave birth to it in the feudal times, might, in the days of Ossian,
that is, in the infancy of a rising state, through the operation of
the same cause, very naturally produce effects of the same kind on
the minds and manners of men. So far as chivalry was an ideal system,
existing only in romance, it will not be thought surprising, when we
reflect on the account before given of the Celtic bards, that this
imaginary refinement of heroic manners should be found among, them,
as much, at least, as among the Troubadors, or strolling Provenal
bards, in the 10th or 11th century; whose songs, it is said, first
gave rise to those romantic ideas of heroism, which for so long a
time enchanted Europe. Ossian's heroes have all the gallantry and
generosity of those fabulous knights, without their extravagance; and
his love scenes have native tenderness, without any mixture of those
forced and unnatural conceits which abound in the old romances. The
adventures related by our poet which resemble the most those of
romance, concern women who follow their lovers to war disguised in
the armor of men; and these are so managed as to produce, in the
discovery, several of the most interesting situations; one beautiful
instance of which may be seen in Carric-thura, and another in Calthon
and Colmal.

 Oithona presents a situation of a different nature. In the absence
of her lover Gaul, she had been carried off and ravished by
Dunrommath. Gaul discovers the place where she is kept concealed, and
comes to revenge her. The meeting of the two lovers, the sentiments
and the behavior of Oithona on that occasion, are described with such
tender and exquisite propriety, as does the greatest honor both to
the heart and to the delicacy of our author; and would have been
admired in any poet of the most refined age. The conduct of Cruma
must strike every reader as remarkably judicious and beautiful. We
are to be prepared for the death of Malvina, which is related in the
succeeding poem. She is therefore introduced in person; "she has
heard a voice in her dream; She feels the fluttering of her soul:"
and in a most moving lamentation addressed to her beloved Oscar, she
sings her own death-song. Nothing could be calculated with more art
to sooth and comfort her than the story which Ossian relates. In the
young and brave Fovargormo, another Oscar is introduced: his praises
are sung; and the happiness is set before her of those who die in
their youth "when their renown is around them; before the feeble
behold them in the hall, and smile at their trembling hands."

 But nowhere does Ossian's genius appear to greater advantage, than
in Berrathon, which is reckoned the conclusion of his songs, 'The
last sound of the voice of Cona.'

Qualis olor noto positurus littore vitam,
Ingemit, et mstis mulcens concentibus auras
Prsago quritur venientia funera cantu.

 The whole train of ideas is admirably suited to the subject. Every
thing is full of that invisible world, into which the aged bard
believes himself now ready to enter. The airy ball of Fingal presents
itself to his view; "he sees the cloud that shall receive his ghost;
he beholds the mist that shall form his robe when he appears on his
hill;" and all the natural objects around him seem to carry the
presages of death. "The thistle shakes its beard to the wind. The
flower hangs its heavy head; it seems to any, I am covered with the
drops of heaven; the time of my departure is near, and the blast that
shall scatter my leaves." Malvina's death is hinted to him in the
most delicate manner by the son of Alpin. His lamentation over her,
her apotheosis, or ascent to the habitation of heroes, and the
introduction to the story which follows from the mention which Ossian
supposes the father of Malvina to make of him in the ball of Fingal,
are all in the highest spirit of poetry. "And dost thou remember
Ossian, O Toscar, son of Conloch? The battles of our youth were many;
our swords went together to the field." Nothing could be more proper
than to end his songs with recording an exploit of the father of that
Malvina, of whom his heart was now so full; and who, from first to
last, had been such a favorite object throughout all his poems.

 The scene of most of Ossian's poems is laid in Scotland, or in the
coast of Ireland, opposite to the territories of Fingal. When the
scene is in Ireland, we perceive no change of manners from those of
Ossian's native country. For as Ireland was undoubtedly peopled with
Celtic tribes, the language, customs, and religion of both nations
were the same. They had been separated from one another by migration,
only a few generations, as it should seem, before our poet's age; and
they still maintained a close and frequent intercourse. But when the
poet relates the expeditions of any of his heroes to the Scandinavian
coast, or to the islands of Orkney, which were then part of the
Scandinavian territory, as he does in Carric-thura, Sul-malla of
Lumon, and Cathloda, the case is quite altered. Those countries were
inhabited by nations of the Teutonic descent, who, in their manners
and religious rites, differed widely from the Celt; and it is
curious and remarkable, to find this difference clearly pointed out
in the poems of Ossian. His descriptions bear the native marks of one
who was present in the expeditions which he relates, and who
describes what he had seen with his own eyes. No sooner are we
carried to Lochlin, or the islands of Inistore, than we perceive we
are in a foreign region. New objects begin to appear. We meet
everywhere with the stones and circles of Loda, that is, Odin, the
great Scandinavian deity. We meet with the divinations and
enchantments for which it is well known those northern nations were
early famous. "There, mixed with the murmur of waters, rose the voice
of aged men, who called the forms of night to aid them in their war;"
whilst the Caledonian chiefs, who assisted them, are described as
standing at a distance, heedless of their rites. That ferocity of
manners which distinguished those nations, also becomes conspicuous.
In the combats of their chiefs there is a peculiar savageness; even
their women are bloody and fierce. The spirit. and the very ideas of
Regner Lodbrog, that northern scalder, whom I formerly quoted, occur
to us again. "The hawks," Ossian makes one of the Scandinavian chiefs
say, "rush from all their winds; they are wont to trace my course. We
rejoiced three days above the dead, and called the hawks of heaven,
They came from all their winds, to feast on the foes of Annir."

 Dismissing now the separate consideration of any of our author's
works, I proceed to make some observations on his manner of writing,
under the general heads of Description, Imagery, and Sentiment.

 A poet of original genius is always distinguished by his talent for
description. A second-rate writer discerns nothing new or peculiar in
the object he means to describe. His conceptions of it are vague and
loose; his expressions feeble; and of course the object is presented
to us indistinctly, and as through a cloud. But a true poet makes us
imagine that we see it before our eyes; he catches the distinguishing
features; he gives it the colors of life and reality; he places it in
such a light that a painter could copy after him. This happy talent
is chiefly owing to a lively imagination, which first receives a
strong impression of the object; and then, by a proper selection of
capital picturesque circumstances employed in describing it,
transmits that impression in its full force to the imaginations of
others. That Ossian possesses this descriptive power in a high
degree, we have a clear proof, from the effect which his descriptions
produce upon the imaginations of those who read him with any degree
of attention, or taste. Few poets are more interesting. We contract
an intimate acquaintance with his principal heroes. The characters,
the manners, the face of the country, become familiar; we even think
we could draw the figure of his ghost. In a word, whilst reading him
we are transported as into a new region, and dwell among his objects
as if they were all real.

 It were easy to point out several instances of exquisite painting in
the works of our author. Such, for instance, is the scenery with
which Temora opens, and the attitude in which Cairbar is there
presented to us; the description of the young prince Cormac, in the
same book; and the ruins of Balclutha, in Cartho. "I have seen the
walls of Balclutha, but they were desolate. The fire had resounded in
the balls: and the voice of the people is heard no more. The stream
of Clutha was removed from its place by the fall of the walls. The
thistle shook there its lonely head; the moss whistled to the wind.
The fox looked out from the windows; the rank grass of the wall waved
round his head. Desolate is the dwelling of Moina; silence is in the
house of her fathers." Nothing also can be more natural and lively
than the manner in which Carthon afterward describes how the
conflagration of his city affected him when a child: "Have I not seen
the fallen Balclutha? And shall I feast with Comhal's son? Comhal!
who threw his fire in the midst of my father's hall! 1 was young, and
knew not the cause why the virgins wept. The columns of smoke pleased
mine eye, when they arose above my walls: I often looked back with
gladness, when my friends fled above the hill. But when the years of
my youth came on, I beheld the moss of my fallen walls. My sigh arose
with the morning; and my tears descended with night. Shall I not
fight, I said to my soul, against the children of my foes? And I will
fight, O bard! I feel the strength of my soul." In the same poem, the
assembling of the chiefs round Fingal, who had been warned of some
impending danger by the appearance of a prodigy, is described with so
many picturesque circumstances, that one imagines himself present in
the assembly. "The king alone beheld the terrible sight, and he
foresaw the death of his people. He came in silence to his hall, and
took his father's spear: the mail rattled on his breast. The heroes
rose around. They looked in silence on each other, marking the eyes
of Fingal. They saw the battle in his face. A thousand shields are
placed at once on their arms; and they drew a thousand swords. The
hall of Selma brightened around. The clang of arms ascends. The gray
dogs howl in their place. No word is among the mighty chiefs. Each
marked the eyes of the king; and half assumed his spear."

 It has been objected to Ossian, that his descriptions of military
actions are imperfect, and much less diversified by the circumstances
than those of Homer. This is in some measure true. The amazing
fertility of Homer's invention, is nowhere so much displayed as in
the incidents of his battles, and in the little history pieces he
gives of the persons slain. Nor, indeed, with regard to the talent of
description, can too much be said in praise of Homer. Every thing is
alive in his writings. The colors with which he paints are those of
nature. But Ossian's genius was of a different kind from Homer's. It
led him to hurry towards grand objects, rather than to amuse himself
with particulars of less importance. He could dwell on the death of a
favorite hero; but that of a private man seldom stopped his rapid
course. Homer's genius was more comprehensive than Ossian's. It
included a wider circle of objects; and could work up any incident
into description. Ossian's was more limited; but the region within
which it chiefly exerted itself was the highest of all, the region of
the pathetic and the sublime.

 We must not imagine, however, that Ossian's battles consist only of
general indistinct description. Such beautiful incidents are
sometimes introduced, and the circumstances of the persons slain so
much diversified, as show that be could have embellished his military
scenes with an abundant variety of particulars, if his genius had led
him to dwell upon them. "One man is stretched in the dust of his
native land; he fell, where often he had spread the feast, and often
raised the voice of the harp." The maid of Inistore is introduced in
a moving apostrophe, as weeping for another; and a third, "as rolled
in the dust he lifted his faint eyes to the king," is remembered and
mourned by Fingal as the friend of Agandecca. The blood pouring from
the wound of one who was slain by night, is heard "hissing on the
half-extinguished oak," which had been kindled for giving light.
Another climbing up a tree to escape from his foe, is pierced by his
spear from behind; shrieking, panting he fell; whilst moss and
withered branches pursue his fall, and strew the blue arms of Gaul.
Never was a finer picture drawn of the ardor of two youthful warriors
than the following: "I saw Gaul in his armor, and my soul was mixed
with his; for the fire of the battle was in his eyes, lie looked to
the foe with joy. We spoke the words of friendship in secret; and the
lightning of our swords poured together. We drew them behind the
wood, and tried the strength of our arms on the empty air.`

 Ossian is always concise in his descriptions, which adds much to
their beauty and force. For it is a great mistake to imagine, that a
crowd of particulars, or a very fall and extended style, is of
advantage to description. On the contrary, such a diffuse manner for
the most part weakens it. Any one redundant circumstance is a
nuisance. It encumbers and loads the fancy, and renders the main
image indistinct. "Obstat," as Quintilian says with regard to style,
"quicquid non adjuvat." To be concise in description, is one thing:
and to be general, is another. No description that rests in generals
can possibly be good; it can convey no lively idea; for it is of
particulars only that we have a distinct conception. But, at the same
time, no strong imagination dwells long upon any one particular; or
heaps together a mass of trivial ones. By the happy choice of some
one, or of a few that are the most striking, it presents the image
more complete, shows us more at one glance than a feeble imagination
is able to do, by turning its object round and round into a variety
of lights. Tacitus is of all prose writers the most concise. He has
even a degree of abruptness resembling our author: yet no writer is
more eminent for lively description. When Fingal, after having
conquered the haughty Swaran, proposes to dismiss him with honor:
"Raise to-morrow thy white sails to the wind, thou brother of
Agandecca!" he conveys, by thus addressing his enemy, a stronger
impression of the emotions then passing within his mind, than if
whole paragraphs had been spent in describing the conflict between
resentment against Swaran and the tender remembrance of his ancient
love. No amplification is needed to give us the most full idea of a
hardy veteran, after the few following words: "His shield is marked
with the strokes of battle; his red eye despises danger." When Oscar
left alone, was surrounded by foes, "he stood," it is said, "growing
in his place, like the flood of the narrow vale;" a happy
representation of one, who, by daring intrepidity in the midst of
danger, seems to increase in his appearance, and becomes more
formidable every moment, like the sudden rising of the torrent hemmed
in by the valley. And a whole crowd of ideas, concerning the
circumstances of domestic sorrow, occasioned by a young warrior's
first going forth to battle, is poured upon the mind by these words:
"Calmar leaned on his father's spear; that spear which he brought
from Lara's hall, when the soul of his mother was sad."

 The conciseness of Ossian's descriptions is the more proper, on
account of his subjects. Descriptions of gay and smiling scenes may,
without any disadvantage, be amplified and prolonged. Force is not
the predominant quality expected in these. The description may be
weakened by being diffuse, yet, notwithstanding, may be beautiful
still; whereas, with respect to grand, solemn, and pathetic subjects,
which are Ossian's chief field, the case is very different. In these,
energy is above all things required. The imagination must be seized
at once, or not at all; and is far more deeply impressed by one
strong and ardent image, than by the anxious minuteness of labored
illustration.

 But Ossian's genius, though chiefly turned towards the sublime and
pathetic, was not confined to it. In subjects also of grace and
delicacy, he discovers the hand of a master. Take for an example the
following elegant description of Agandecca, wherein the tenderness of
Tibullus seems united with the majesty of Virgil. "The daughter of
the snow overheard, and left the hall of her secret sigh. She came in
all her beauty; like the moon from the cloud of the east. Loveliness
was around her as light. Her steps were like the music of songs. She
saw the youth and loved him. He was the stolen sigh of her soul. Her
blue eyes rolled on him in secret; and she blest the chief of
Morven." Several other instances might be produced of the feelings of
love and friendship, painted by our author with a most natural and
happy delicacy.

 The simplicity of Ossian's manner adds great beauty to his
descriptions, and indeed to his whole poetry. We meet with no
affected ornaments; no forced refinement; no marks either in style or
thought of a studied endeavor to shine or sparkle. Ossian appears
everywhere to be prompted by his feelings; and to speak from the
abundance of his heart. I remember no more than one instance of what
may be called a quaint thought in this whole collection of his works.
It is in the first book of Fingal, where, from the tombs of two
lovers, two lonely yews are mentioned to have sprung, "whose branches
wished to meet on high." This sympathy of the trees with the lovers,
may be reckoned to border on an Italian conceit; and it is somewhat
curious to find this single instance of that sort of wit in our
Celtic poetry.

 "The joy of grief" is one of Ossian's remarkable expressions,
several times repeated. If any one shall think that it needs to be
justified by a precedent, he may find it twice used by Homer: in the
Iliad, when Achilles is visited by the ghost of Patroclus; and in the
Odyssey, when Ulysses meets his mother in the shades. On both these
occasions, the heroes, melted with tenderness, lament their not
having it in their power to throw their arms round the ghost, "that
we might," say they, "in mutual embrace, enjoy the delight of grief. "

 ???e???? t?ta?p?es?a ??a??.
[Kryeroio totarpomestha goaio]

 But, in truth, the expression stands in need of no defence from
authority; for it is a natural and just expression; and conveys a
clear idea of that gratification which a virtuous heart often feels
in the indulgence of a tender melancholy. Ossian makes a very proper
distinction between this gratification and the destructive effect of
overpowering grief. "There is a joy in grief when peace dwells in the
breasts of the sad. But sorrow wastes the mournful, O daughter of
Toscar, and their days are few." To "give the joy of grief,"
generally. signifies, to raise the strain of soft and grave music;
and finely characterizes the taste of Ossian's age and country. In
those days, when the songs of bards were the great delight of heroes,
the tragic muse was hold in chief honor: gallant actions and virtuous
sufferings, were the chosen theme; preferably to that light and
trifling strain, of poetry and music, which promotes light and
trifling manners, and serves to emasculate the mind. "Strike the harp
in my hall," said the great Fingal, in the midst of youth and
victory; "strike the harp in my hall, and let Fingal hear the song.
Pleasant is the joy of grief! It is like the shower O of spring, when
it softens the branch of the oak; and the young leaf lifts its green
head. Sing on, O bards! To-morrow we lift the sail."

 Personal epithets have been much used by all the poets of the most
ancient ages; and when well chosen, not general and unmeaning, they
contribute not a little to render the style descriptive and animated.
Besides epithets founded on bodily distinctions, akin to many of
Homer's, we find in Ossian several which are remarkably beautiful and
poetical. Such as Oscar of the future fights, Fingal of the mildest
look, Carril of other times, the mildly blushing Evir-allin: Bragela,
the lonely sun-beam of Dunscaich; a Culdee, the son of the secret
cell.

 But of all the ornaments employed in descriptive poetry, comparisons
or similes are the most splendid. These chiefly form what is called
the imagery of a poem; and as they abound go much in the works of
Ossian, and are commonly among the favorite passages of all poets, it
may be expected that I should be somewhat particular in my remarks
upon them.

 A poetical simile always supposes two objects brought together,
between which there is some near relation or connection in the fancy.
What that relation ought to be, cannot be precisely defined. For
various, almost numberless, are the analogies formed among objects,
by a sprightly imagination. The relation of actual similitude, or
likeness of appearance, is far from being the only foundation of
poetical comparison. Sometimes a resemblance in the effect produced
by two objects, is made the connecting principle: sometimes a
resemblance in one distinguishing property or circumstance. Very
often two objects are brought together in a simile, though they
resemble one another, strictly speaking, in nothing, only because
they raise in the mind a train of similar, and what may be called
concordant, ideas; so that the remembrance of the one, when recalled,
serves to quicken and heighten the impression made by the other.
Thus, to give an instance from our poet, the pleasure with which an
old man looks back on the exploits of his youth, has certainly no
direct resemblance to the beauty of a fine evening; further than that
both agree in producing a certain calm, placid joy. Yet Ossian has
founded upon this, one of the most beautiful comparisons that is to
be met with in any poet. "Wilt thou not listen, son of the rock, to
the song of Ossian? My soul is full of other times; the joy of my
youth returns. Thus the sun appears in the west, after the steps of
his brightness have moved behind a storm. The green hills lift their
dewy heads. The blue streams rejoice in the vale. The aged hero comes
forth on his staff; and his gray hair glitters in the beam." Never
was there a finer group of objects. It raises a strong conception of
the old man's joy and elation of heart, by displaying a scene which
produces in every spectator a corresponding train of pleasing
emotions; the declining sun looking forth in his brightness after a
storm; the cheerful face of all nature; and the still life finely
animated by the circumstance of the aged hero, with his staff and his
gray locks: a circumstance both extremely picturesque, in itself, and
peculiarly suited to the main object of the comparison. Such
analogies and associations of ideas as these, are highly pleasing to
the fancy. They give opportunity for introducing many a fine poetical
picture. They diversify the scene; they aggrandize the subject; they
keep the imagination awake and sprightly. For as the judgment is
principally exercised in distinguishing objects, and remarking the
differences among those which seem alike, so the highest amusement of
the imagination is to trace likenesses and agreements among those
which seem different.

 The principal rules which respect poetical comparisons are, that
they be introduced on proper occasions, when the mind is disposed to
relish them; and not in the midst of some severe and agitating
passion, which cannot admit this play of fancy; that they be founded
on a resemblance neither. too near and obvious, so as to give little
amusement to the imagination in tracing it, nor too faint and remote,
so as to he apprehended with difficulty; that they serve either to
illustrate the principal object, and to render the conception of it
more clear and distinct; or, at least, to heighten and embellish it,
by a suitable association of images.

 Every country has a scenery peculiar to itself; and the imagery of a
good poet will exhibit it. For as he copies after nature, his
allusions will of course be taken from those objects which he sees
around him, and which have often struck his fancy. For this reason,
In order to judge of the propriety of poetical imagery, we ought to
be in some measure acquainted with the natural history of the country
where the scene of the poem is laid. The introduction of foreign
images betrays a poet, copying not from nature, but from other
writers. Hence so many lions, and tigers, and eagles, and serpents,
which we meet, with in the similes of modern poets; as if these
animals had acquired some right to a place in poetical comparisons
for ever, because employed by ancient authors. They employed them
with propriety, as objects generally known in their, country, but
they are absurdly used for illustration by us, who know them only at
second hand, or by description. To most readers of modern poetry, it
were more to the purpose to describe lions or tigers by similes taken
from men, than to compare men to lions. Ossian is very correct in
this particular. His imagery is, without exception, copied from that
face of nature which be saw before his eyes; and by consequence may
be expected to be lively. We meet with no Grecian or Italian scenery;
but with the mists and clouds, and storms, of a northern mountainous
region.

 No poet abounds more in similes than Ossian. There are in this
collection as many, at least, as in the whole Iliad and Odyssey of
Homer. I am indeed inclined to think, that the works of both poets
are too much crowded with them. Similes are sparkling ornaments; and,
like all things that sparkle, are apt to dazzle and tire us by their
lustre. But if Ossian's similes be too frequent, they have this
advantage, of being commonly shorter than Homer's; they interrupt his
narration less; he just glances aside to some resembling, object, and
instantly returns to his former track. Homer's similes include a
wider range of objects; but, in return, Ossian's, are, without
exception, taken from objects of dignity, which cannot be said for
all those which Homer employs. The sun, the moon, and the stars,
clouds and meteors, lightning and thunder, seas and whales, rivers,
torrents, winds, ice, rain, snow, dews, mist, fire and smoke, trees
and forests, heath and grass and flowers, rocks and mountains, music
and songs, light and darkness, spirits and ghosts; these form the
circle within which Ossian's comparisons generally run. Some, not
many, are taken from birds and beasts: as eagles, sea-fowl, the
horse, the deer, and the mountain bee; and a very few from such
operations of art as were then known. Homer has diversified his
imagery, by many more allusions to the animal world; to lions, bulls,
goats, herds of cattle, serpents, insects; and to various occupations
of rural and pastoral life. Ossian's defect in this article, is
plainly owing to the desert, uncultivated state of his country, which
suggested to him few images beyond natural inanimate objects, in
their rudest form. The birds and animals of the country were probably
not numerous; and his acquaintance with them was slender, as they
were little subjected to the uses of man.

 The great objection made to Ossian's imagery, is its uniformity, and
the too frequent repetition of the same comparison. In a work so
thick-sown with similes one could not but expect to find images of
the same kind sometimes suggested to the poet by resembling objects;
especially to a poet like Ossian, who wrote from the immediate
impulse of poetical enthusiasm, and without much preparation of study
or labor. Fertile as Homer's imagination is acknowledged to be, who
does not know how often his lions, and bulls, and flocks of sheep,
recur with little or no variation; nay, sometimes, in the very same
words? The objection made to Ossian is, however, founded, in a great
measure, upon a mistake. It has been supposed by inattentive readers,
that wherever the moon, the cloud, or the thunder, returns in a
simile, it is the same simile, and the same moon, or cloud, or
thunder, which they had met with a few pages before. Whereas very
often the similes are widely different. The object, from whence they
are taken, is indeed in substance the same; but the image is new; for
the appearance of the object is changed; it is presented to the fancy
in another attitude: and clothed with new circumstances, to make it
suit the different illustration for which it is employed. In this
lies Ossian's great art; in so happily varying the form of the few
natural appearances with which he was acquainted, as to make them
correspond to a great many different objects.

 Let us take for one instance the moon, which is very frequently
introduced in his comparisons; as in northern climates, where the
nights are long, the moon is a greater object of attention than in
the climate of Homer; and let us view how much our poet has
diversified its appearance. The shield of it warrior is like "the
darkened moon when it moves a dun circle through the heavens." The
face of a ghost, wan and ale, is like "the beam of the setting moon."
And a different appearance of a ghost, thin and indistinct, is like
"the new moon seen through the gathered mist, when the sky pours down
its flaky snow, and the world is silent and dark;" or, in a different
form still, is like "the watery beam of the moon, when it rushes from
between two clouds, and the midnight shower is on the field." A very
opposite use is made of the moon in the description of Agandecca:
"She came in all her beauty, like the moon from the cloud of the
east." Hope succeeded by disappointment, is "joy rising on her face
and sorrow returning again, like a thin cloud on the moon." But when
Swaran, after his defeat, is cheered by Fingal's generosity, "his
face brightened like the full moon of heaven, when the clouds vanish
away, and leave her calm and broad in the midst of the sky." Venvela
is "bright as the moon when it trembles o'er the western wave;" but
the soul of the guilty Uthal is "dark as the troubled face of the
moon, when it foretells the storm." And by a very fanciful and
uncommon allusion, it is said of Cormac, who was to die in his early
years, "Nor long shalt thou lift the spear, mildly-shining beam of
youth! Death stands dim behind thee, like the darkened half of the
moon behind its growing light."

 Another instance of the same nature may be taken from mist, which,
as being a very familiar appearance in the country of Ossian, he
applies to a variety of purposes, and pursues through a great many
forms. Sometimes, which one would hardly expect, he employs it to
heighten the appearance of a beautiful object. The hair of Morna is
"like the mist of Cromla, when it curls on the rock, and shines to
the beam of the west." "The song comes with its music to melt and
please the ear. It is like soft mist, that rising from the lake pours
on the silent vale. The green flowers are filled with dew. The sun
returns in its strength, and, the mist is gone." But, for the most
part, mist is employed as a similitude of some disagreeable or
terrible object. "The soul of Nathos was sad, like the sun in the day
of mist, when his face is watery and dim."--"The darkness of old age
comes like the mist of the desert." The face of a ghost is "pale as
the mist of Cromla."--"The gloom of battle is rolled along as mist
that is poured on the valley, when storms invade the silent sunshine
of heaven." Fame, suddenly departing, is likened to "mist that flies
away before the rustling wind of the vale." A ghost, slowly
vanishing, to "mist that melts by degrees on the sunny hill."
Cairbar, after his treacherous assassination of Oscar, is compared to
a pestilential fog. "I love a foe like Cathmor," says Fingal, "his
soul is great; his arm is strong; his battles are full of fame. But
the little soul is like a vapor that hovers round the marshy lake. It
never rises on the green hill, lest the winds meet it there. Its
dwelling is in the cave; and it sends forth the dart of death." This
is a simile highly finished. But there is another which is still more
striking, founded also on mist, in the fourth book of Temora. Two
factious chiefs are contending: Cathmor, the king, interposes,
rebukes, and silences them. The poet intends to give us the highest
idea of Cathmor's superiority; and most effectually accomplishes his
intention by the following happy image. "They sunk from the king on
either side, like two columns of morning mist, when the sun rises
between them on his glittering rocks. Dark is their rolling on either
side; each towards its reedy pool." These instances may sufficiently
show with what richness of imagination Ossian's comparisons abound,
and, at the same time, with what propriety of judgment they are
employed. If his field was narrow, it must be admitted to have been
as well cultivated as its extent would allow.

 As it is usual to judge of poets from a comparison of their similes
more than of other passages, it will, perhaps, be agreeable to the
reader, to see how Homer and Ossian have conducted some images of the
same kind. This might be shown in many instances. For as the great
objects of nature are common to the poets of all nations, and make
the general storehouse of all imagery, the groundwork of their
comparisons must, of course, be Frequently the same. I shall select
only a few of the most considerable from both poets. Mr. Pope's
translation of Homer can be of no use to us here. The parallel is
altogether unfair between prose and the imposing harmony of flowing
numbers. It is only by viewing Homer in the simplicity of a prose
translation, that we can form any comparison between the two bards.

 The shock of two encountering armies, the noise and the tumult of
battle, afford one of the most grand and awful subjects of
description; on which all epic poets have exerted their strength. Let
us first hear Homer. The following description is a favorite one, for
we find it twice repeated in the same words. "When now the
conflicting hosts joined in the field of battle, then were mutually
opposed shields, and swords, and the strength of armed men. The bossy
bucklers were dashed against each other. The universal tumult rose.
There were mingled the triumphant shouts and the dying groans of the
victors and the vanquished. The earth streamed with blood. As when
winter torrents, rushing from the mountains, pour into a narrow
valley their violent waters. They issue from a thousand springs, and
mix in the hollowed channel. The distant shepherd hears on the
mountain their roar from afar. Such was the terror and the shout of
the engaging armies." In another passage, the poet, much in the
manner of Ossian, heaps simile on simile, to express the vastness of
the idea with which his imagination seems to labor. "With a mighty
shout the hosts engage. Not so loud roars the wave of ocean, when
driven against the shore by the whole force of the boisterous north;
not so loud in the woods of the mountain, the noise of the flame,
when rising in its fury to consume the forest; not so loud the wind
among the lofty oaks, when the wrath of the worm rages; as was the
clamor of the Greeks and Trojans, when, roaring terrible, they rushed
against each other." To these descriptions and similes, we may oppose
the following from Ossian, and leave the reader to judge between
them. He will find images of the same kind employed; commonly less
extended; but thrown forth with a glowing rapidity which
characterizes our poet. "As autumn's dark storms pour from two
echoing hills, towards each other approached the heroes. As two dark
streams from high rocks meet and mix, and roar on the plains; loud,
rough, and dark in battle, meet Lochlin and Inisfail. Chief mixed his
strokes with chief, and man with man. Steel clanging, sounded on
steel. Helmets are cleft on high; blood bursts and smokes around.--As
the troubled noise of the ocean, when roll the waves on high; as the
last peal of the thunder of heaven; such is the noise of battle." "As
roll a thousand waves to the rock, so Swaran's best came on; as meets
a rock a thousand waves, so Inisfail met Swaran. Death raises all his
voices around, and mixes with the sound of shields.--The field echoes
from wing to wing, as a hundred hammers that rise by turns on the red
son of the furnace."--"As a hundred winds on Morven; as the streams
of a hundred hills; as clouds fly successive over heaven or as the
dark ocean assaults the shore of the desert so roaring, so vast, so
terrible, the armies mixed on Lena's echoing heath." In several of
these images there is a remarkable similarity to Homer's: but what
follows is superior to any comparison that Homer uses on this
subject. "The groan of the people spread over the hills; it was like
the thunder of night, when the cloud bursts on Cona, and a thousand
ghosts shriek at once on the hollow wind." Never was an image of,
more awful sublimity employed to heighten the terror of battle.

 Both poets compare the appearance of an army approaching, to the
gathering of dark clouds. "As when a shepherd," says Homer, "beholds
from the rock a cloud borne along the sea by the western wind; black
as pitch it appears from afar sailing over the ocean, and carrying
the dreadful storm. He shrinks at the sight, and drives his flock
into the cave: such, under the Ajaces, moved on the dark, the
thickened phalanx to the war." 1--"They came," says Ossian, "over the
desert like stormy clouds, when the winds roll them over the heath;
their edges are tinged with lightning; and the echoing groves foresee
the storm." The edges of the clouds tinged with lightning, is a
sublime idea: but the shepherd and his flock render Homer's simile
more picturesque. This is frequently the difference between the two
poets. Ossian gives no more than the main image, strong and full:
Homer adds circumstances and appendages, which amuse the fancy by
enlivening the scenery.

 Homer compares the regular appearance of an army, to "clouds that
are settled on the mountain-top, in the day of calmness, when the
strength of the north wind sleeps." fn_32

Ossian, with full as much propriety, compares the appearance of a
disordered army, to "the mountain cloud, when the. blast hath entered
its womb, and scatters the curling gloom on every side." Ossian's
clouds assume a great many forms, and, as we might expect from his
climate, are a fertile source of imagery to him. "The warriors
followed their chiefs like the gathering of the rainy clouds behind
the red meteors of heaven." An army retreating without coming to
action, is likened to "clouds, that having long threatened rain,
retire slowly behind the hills." The picture of Oithona, after she
had determined to die, is lively and delicate. "Her soul was
resolved, and the tear was dried from her wildly-looking eye. A
troubled joy rose on her mind, like the red path of the lightning on
a stormy cloud." The image also of the gloomy Cairbar, meditating, in
silence, the assassination of Oscar, until the moment came when his
designs were ripe for execution, is extremely noble and complete in
all its parts. "Cairbar heard their words in silence, like the cloud
of a shower; it stands dark on Cromla till the lightning bursts its
side. The valley gleams with red light; the spirits of the storm
rejoice. So stood the silent king of Temora; at length his words are
heard."

 Homer's comparison of Achilles to the Dog-Star, is very sublime.
"Priam beheld him rushing along the plain, shining in his armor, like
the star of autumn bright are its beams, distinguished amidst the
multitude of stars in the dark hour of night. It rises in its
splendor; but its splendor is fatal; betokening to miserable men the
destroying heat." 1 The first appearance of Fingal is, in like
manner, compared by Ossian to a star or meteor. "Fingal, tall in his
ship, stretched his bright lance before him. Terrible was the gleam
of his steel; it was like the green meteor of death, setting in the
heath of Malmor, when the traveller is alone, and the broad moon is
darkened in heaven." The hero's appearance in Homer is more
magnificent; in Ossian, more terrible.

 A tree cut down, or overthrown by a storm, is a similitude frequent
among poets for describing the fall of a warrior in battle. Homer
employs it often. But the most beautiful, by far, of his comparisons,
founded on this object, indeed one of the most beautiful in the whole
Iliad, is that on the death of Euphorbus. "As the young and verdant
olive, which a man hath reared with care in a lonely field, where the
springs of water bubble around it; it is fair and flourishing; it is
fanned by the breath of all the winds, and loaded with white
blossoms; when the sudden blast of a whirlwind descending, roots it
out from its bed, and stretches it on the dust." To this, elegant as
it is, we may oppose the following simile of Ossian's, relating to
the death of the three sons of Usnoth. "They fell, like three young
oaks which stood alone on the hill. The traveller saw the lovely
trees, and wondered how they grew so lonely. The blast of the desert
came by night, and laid their green heads low. Next day he returned;
but they were withered, and the heath was bare." Malvina's allusion
to the same object, in her lamentation over Oscar, is so exquisitely
tender, that I cannot forbear giving it a place also. "I was a lovely
tree in thy presence, Oscar! with all my branches round me. But thy
death came, like a blast from the desert, and laid my green head low.
The spring returned with its showers; but no leaf of mine arose."
Several of Ossian's similes, taken from trees, are remarkably
beautiful, and diversified with well-chosen circumstances such as
that upon the death of Ryno and Orla: They have fallen like the oak
of the desert; when it lies across a stream, and withers in the wind
of the mountains." Or that which Ossian applies to himself: "I, like
an ancient oak in Morven, moulder alone in my place; the blast hath
lopped my branches away; and I tremble at the winds of the north."

 As Homer exalts his heroes by comparing them to gods, Ossian makes
the same use of comparisons taken from spirits and ghosts. "Swaran
roared in battle, like the shrill spirit of a storm, that sits dim on
the clouds of Gormal, and enjoys the death of the mariner." His
people gathered round Erragon, "like storms around the ghost of
night, when he calls them from the top of Morven, and prepares to
pour them on the land of the stranger."--"They fell before my son
like groves in the desert, when an angry ghost rushes through night,
and takes their green heads in his hand." In such images, Ossian
appears in his strength; for very seldom have supernatural beings
been painted with so much sublimity, and such force of imagination,
as by this poet. Even Homer, great as he is, must yield to him in
similes formed upon these. Take, for instance, the following, which
is the most remarkable of this kind in the Iliad. "Meriones followed
Idomeneus to battle, like Mars, the destroyer of men, when lie rushes
to war. Terror, his beloved son, strong and fierce, attends him; who
fills with dismay the most valiant hero. They come from Thrace armed
against the Ephyrians and Phlegyans; nor do they regard the prayers
of either, but dispose of success at their will." 1 The idea here is
undoubtedly noble, but observe what a figure Ossian sets before the
astonished imagination, and with what sublimely terrible
circumstances he has heightened it. "He rushed, in the sound of his
arms, like the dreadful spirit of Loda, when he comes in the roar of
a thousand storms, and scatters battles from his eyes. He sits on a
cloud over Lochlin's seas. His mighty hand is on his sword. The wind
lifts his flaming locks. So terrible was Cuthullin in the day of his
fame."

 Homer's comparisons relate chiefly to martial subjects, to the
appearances and motions of armies, the engagement and death of
heroes, and the various incidents of war. In Ossian, we find a
greater variety of other subjects, illustrated by similes,
particularly the songs of bards, the beauty of women, the different
circumstances of old age, sorrow, and private distress; which give
occasion to much beautiful imagery. What, for instance, can be more
delicate and moving, than the following simile of Oithona's, in her
lamentation over the dishonor she had suffered "Chief of Strumon."
replied the sighing maid, why didst thou come over the dark blue wave
to Nuath's mournful daughter? Why did not I pass away in secret, like
the flower of the rock, that lifts its fair head unseen, and strews
its withered leaves on the blast?" The music of bards, a favorite
object with Ossian, is illustrated by a variety of the most beautiful
appearances that are to be found in nature. It is compared to the
calm shower of spring; to the dews of the morning on the hill of
roes; to the face of the blue and still lake. Two similes on this
subject I shall quote, because they would do honor to any of the most
celebrated classics. The one is: "Sit thou on the heath, O bard! and
let us hear thy voice; it is pleasant as the gale of the spring that
sighs on the hunter's ear, when he awakens from dreams of joy, and
has heard the music of the spirits of the hill." The other contains a
short but exquisitely tender image, accompanied with the finest
poetical painting. "The music of Carril was like the memory of joys
that are past, pleasant, and mournful to the soul. The ghosts of
departed bards heard it from Slimora's side. Soft sounds spread along
the wood; and the silent valleys of night rejoice." What a figure
would such imagery and such scenery have made, had they been
presented to us adorned with the sweetness and harmony of the
Virgilian numbers!

 I have chosen all along to compare Ossian with Homer, rather than
Virgil, for an obvious reason. There is a much nearer correspondence
between the times and manners of the two former poets. Both wrote in
an early period of society; both are originals; both are
distinguished by simplicity, sublimity, and fire. The correct
elegances of Virgil, his artful imitation of Homer, the Roman
stateliness which he everywhere maintains, admit no parallel with the
abrupt boldness and enthusiastic warmth of the Celtic bard. In one
article, indeed, there is a resemblance. Virgil is more tender than
Homer, and thereby agrees more with Ossian; with this difference,
that the feelings of the one are more gentle and polished--those of
the other more strong: the tenderness of Virgil softens--that of
Ossian dissolves and overcomes the heart.

 A resemblance may be sometimes observed between Ossian's Comparisons
and those employed by the sacred writers. They abound much in this
figure, and they use it with the utmost propriety. The imagery of
Scripture exhibits a soil and climate altogether different from those
of Ossian: a warmer country, a more smiling face of nature, the arts
of agriculture and of rural life much farther advanced. The wine-
press and the threshing-floor are often presented to us; the cedar
and the palm-tree, the fragrance of perfumes the voice of the turtle,
and the beds of lilies. The similes are, like Ossian's, generally
short, touching on one point of resemblance, rather than spread out
into little episodes. In the following example may be perceived what
inexpressible grandeur poetry receives from the intervention of the
Deity. "The nations shall rush like the rushing of many waters; but
God shall rebuke them, and they shall fly far off, and shall be
chased as the chaff of the "mountains before the wind, and like the
down of the thistle before the whirlwind." Besides formal
comparisons, the poetry of Ossian is embellished with many beautiful
metaphors; such as that remarkably fine one applied to Deugala: "She
was covered with the light of beauty; but her heart was the house of
pride." This mode of expression, which suppresses the mark of
comparison, and substitutes a figured description in room of the
object described, is a great enlivener of style. It denotes that glow
and rapidity of fancy, which, without pausing to form a regular
simile, paints the object at one stroke. "Thou art to me the beam of
the cast, rising in a land unknown."--"In peace, thou art the gale of
spring; In war, the mountain storm."--"Pleasant be thy rest, O lovely
beam! soon hast thou set on our hills! The steps of thy departure
were stately, like the moon on the blue trembling wave. But thou hast
left us in darkness, first of the maids of Lutha!--Soon hast thou
set, Malvina! but thou risest, like the beam of the east, among the
spirits of thy friends, where they sit in their stormy halls, the
chambers of the thunder." This is correct, and finely supported. But
in the following instance, the metaphor, though very beautiful at the
beginning, becomes imperfect before it closes, by being improperly
mixed with the literal sense. "Trathal went forth with the stream of
his people: but they met a rock; Fingal stood unmoved; broken, they
rolled back from his side. Nor did they roll in safety; the Spear of
the king pursued their flight."

 The hyperbole is a figure which we might expect to find often
employed by Ossian; as the undisciplined imagination of early ages
generally prompts exaggeration, and carries its objects to excess;
whereas longer experience, and farther progress in the arts of life,
chasten men's ideas and expressions. Yet Ossian's hyperboles appear
not, to me, either so frequent or so harsh as might at first have
been looked for; an advantage owing, no doubt, to the more cultivated
state in which, as was before shown, poetry subsisted among the
ancient Celt, than among most other barbarous nations. One of the
most exaggerated descriptions in the whole work, is what meets us at
the beginning of Fingal, where the scout makes his report to
Cuthullin of the landing of the foe. But this is so far from
deserving censure, that it merits praise, as being on that occasion
natural and proper. The scout arrives, trembling and full of fears;
and it is well known that no passion disposes men to hyperbolize more
than terror. It both annihilates themselves in their own
apprehension, and magnifies every object which they view through the
medium of a troubled imagination. Hence all those indistinct images
of formidable greatness, the natural marks of a disturbed and
confused mind, which occur in Moran's description of Swaran's
appearance, and in his relation of the conference which they held
together; not unlike the report which the affrighted Jewish spies
made to their leader, of the land of Canaan. "The land through which
we have gone to search it, is a land that eateth up the inhabitants 
thereof; and all the people that we saw in it are men of a great
stature: and there saw we giants, the sons of Anak, which come of the
giants; and we were in our own sight as grasshoppers, and so we were
in their sight."

 With regard to personifications, I formerly observed that Ossian was
sparing, and I accounted for his being so. Allegorical personages he
has none; and their absence is not to be regretted. For the
intermixture of those shadowy beings, which have not the support even
of mythological or legendary belief, with human actors, seldom
produces a good effect. The fiction becomes too visible and
fantastic; and overthrows that impression of reality, which the
probable recital of human actions is calculated to make upon the
mind. In the serious and pathetic scenes of Ossian, especially,
allegorical characters would have been as much out of place as in
tragedy; serving only unseasonably to use the fancy, whilst they
stopped the current and weakened the force of passion.

 With apostrophes, or addresses to persons absent or dead, which have
been in, all ages the language of passion, our poet abounds; and they
are among his highest beauties. Witness the apostrophe, in the first
book of Fingal, to the maid of Inistore, whose lover had fallen in
battle; and that inimitably fine one of Cuthullin to Bragela, at the
conclusion of the same book. He commands his harp to be struck in her
praise; and the mention of Bragela's name immediately suggesting to
him a crowd of tender ideas--"Dost thou raise thy fair face from the
rocks," he exclaims, "to find the sails of Cuthullin? The sea is
rolling far distant, and its white foam shall deceive thee for my
sails." And now his imagination being wrought up to conceive her as,
at that moment, really in this situation, he becomes afraid of the
harm she may receive from the inclemency of the night; and with an
enthusiasm happy and affecting, though beyond the cautious strain of
modern poetry, "Retire," he proceeds, "retire, for it is night, my
love, and the dark winds sigh in thy hair. Retire to the hall of my
feasts, and think of the times that are past: for I will not return
until the storm of war has ceased. O, Connal! speak of wars and arms,
and send her from my mind; for lovely with her raven hair is the
white-bosomed daughter of Sorglan." This breathes all the native
spirit of passion and tenderness.

 The addresses to the sun, to the moon, and to the evening star, must
draw the attention of every reader of taste, as among the most
splendid ornaments of this collection. The beauties of each are too
great and too obvious to need any particular comment. In one passage
only of the address to the moon, there appears some obscurity.
"Whither dost thou retire from thy course when the darkness of they
countenance grows? Hast thou thy hall like Ossian? Dwellest thou in
the shadow of grief? Have thy sisters fallen from heaven? Are they
who rejoiced with thee, at night, no more? Yes, they have fallen,
fair light! and thou dost often retire to mourn." We may be at a loss
to comprehend, at first view, the ground of those speculations of
Ossian concerning the moon: but when all the circumstances are
attended to, they will appear to flow naturally from the present
situation of his mind. A mind under the domination of any strong
passion, tinctures with its own disposition every object which it
beholds. The old bard, with his heart bleeding for the loss of all
his friends, is meditating on the different phases of the moon. Her
waning and darkness present to his melancholy imagination the image
of sorrow; and presently the idea arises, and is indulged, that like
himself, she retires to mourn over the loss of other moons, or of 
stars, whom he calls her sisters, and fancies to have once rejoiced
with her at night, now fallen from heaven. Darkness suggested the
idea of mourning, and mourning suggested nothing so naturally to
Ossian as the death of beloved friends. An instance precisely
similar, of this influence of passion, may be seen in a passage,
which has always been admired, of Shakspeare's King Lear. The old
man, on the point of distraction through the inhumanity of his
daughters, sees Edgar appear, disguised as a beggar and a madman.

 Lear. Didst thou give all to thy daughters? And art thou come to
this?
Couldst thou leave nothing? Didst thou give them all?

 Kent. He hath no daughters, sir.

 Lear. Death, traitor! nothing could have subdued nature
To such a lowness, but his unkind daughters.

 The apostrophe to the winds, in the opening of Dar-thula, is in the
highest spirit of poetry. "But the winds deceive me, O Dar-thula! and
deny the woody Etha to thy sails. These are not the mountains,
Nathos, nor is that roar of thy climbing waves. The halls of Cairbar
are near, and the towers of the foe lift their heads. Where have ye
been, ye southern winds! when the sons of thy love were deceived? But
ye have been sporting on plains, and pursuing the thistle's beard. O
that ye had been rustling in the sails of Nathos, till the hills of
Etha rose! till they rose in the clouds, and saw their coming chief."
This passage is remarkable for the resemblance it bears to an
expostulation with the wood nymphs, on their absence at a critical
time; which, as a favorite poetical idea, Virgil has copied from
Theocritus, and Milton has very happily imitated from both.

Where were ye, nymphs! when the remorseless deep
Closed o'er the head of your lov'd Lycidas?
For neither were ye playing on the steep
Where your old bards, the famous Druids, he!
Nor on the shaggy top of Mona, high,
Nor yet where Deva spreads her wizard stream.--Lycid.

 Having now treated fully of Ossian's talents, with respect to
description and imagery, it only remains to make some observations on
his sentiments. No sentiments can be beautiful without being proper;
that is, suited to the character and situation of those who utter
them. In this respect Ossian is as correct as most writers. His
characters, as above described, are, in general, well supported;
which could not have been the case, had the sentiments been unnatural
or out of place. A variety of personages, of different ages, sexes,
and conditions, are introduced into his poems; and they speak and act
with a propriety of sentiment and behavior which it is surprising to
find in so rude an age. Let the poem of Dar-thula, throughout, be
taken as an example.

 But it is not enough that sentiments be natural and proper. In order
to acquire any high degree of poetical merit, they must also be
sublime and pathetic.

 The sublime is not confined to sentiment alone. It belongs to
description also; and whether in description or in sentiment, imports
such ideas presented to the mind, as raise it to an uncommon degree
of elevation, and fill it with admiration and astonishment. This is
the highest effect either of eloquence or poetry; and, to produce
this effect, requires a genius glowing with the strongest and warmest
conception of some object, awful, great, or magnificent. That this
character of genius belongs to Ossian, may, I think, sufficiently
appear from many of the passages I have already had occasion to
quote. To produce more instances were superfluous. If the engagement
of Fingal with the spirit of Loda, in Carric-thura; if the encounters
of the armies, in Fingal; if the address to the sun, in Carthon; if
the similes founded upon ghosts and spirits of the night, all
formerly mentioned, be not admitted as examples, and illustrious ones
too, of the true poetical sublime, I confess myself entirely ignorant
of this quality in writing.

 All the circumstances, indeed, of Ossian's composition, are
favorable to the sublime, more perhaps than to any other species of
beauty. Accuracy and correct. ness, artfully connected narration,
exact method and proportion. of parts, we may look for in polished
times. The gay and the beautiful will appear to more advantage in the
midst of smiling scenery and pleasurable themes; but, amidst the rude
scenes of nature, amidst rocks and torrents, and whirlwinds and
battles, dwells the sublime. It is the thunder and the lightning of
genius. It is the offspring of nature, not of art. It is negligent of
all the lesser graces, and perfectly consistent with a certain noble
disorder. It associates naturally with that grave and solemn spirit
which distinguishes our author. For the sublime is an awful and
serious emotion; and is heightened by all the Images of trouble, and
terror, and darkness.

Ipse pater, media nimborum in nocte, corusc
Fulmina molitur dextra; quo maxima motu
Terra tremit; fugere fer; et mortalia corda
Per gentes, humilis stravit pavor; ille, flagranti
Aut Atho, aut Rhodopen, aut alta Ceraunia telo
Dejicit.--
--Virg. Georg. i.

 Simplicity and conciseness are never-failing characteristics of the
style of a sublime writer. He rests on the majesty of his sentiments,
not on the pomp of his expressions. The main secret of being sublime
is to say great things in few, and in plain words: for every
superfluous decoration degrades a sublime idea. The mind rises and
swells, when a lofty description or sentiment is presented to it in
its native form. But no sooner does the poet attempt to spread out
this sentiment, or description, and to deck it round and round with
glittering ornaments, than the mind begins to fall from its high
elevation; the transport is over; the beautiful may remain, but the
sublime is gone. Hence the concise and simple style of Ossian gives
great advantage to his sublime conceptions, and assists them in
seizing the imagination with full power.

 Sublimity, as belonging to sentiment, coincides, in a great measure,
with magnanimity, heroism, and generosity of sentiment. Whatever
discovers human nature in its greatest elevation; whatever bespeaks a
high effort of soul, or shows a mind superior to pleasures, to
dangers, and to death, forms what may be called the moral of
sentimental sublime. For this Ossian is eminently distinguished. No
poet maintains a higher tone of virtuous and noble sentiment
throughout all his works. Particularly in all the sentiments of
Fingal there is a grandeur and loftiness, proper to swell the mind
with the highest ideas of human perfection. Wherever he appears, we
behold the hero. The objects which he pursues are always truly great:
to bend the proud; to protect the injured; to defend his friends; to
overcome his enemies by generosity more than by force. A portion of
the same spirit actuates all the other heroes. Valor reigns; but it
is a generous valor, void of cruelty, animated by honor, not by
hatred. We behold no debasing passions among Fingal's warriors; no
spirit of avarice or of insult; but a perpetual contention for fame;
a desire of being distinguished and remembered for gallant actions; a
love of justice; and a zealous attachment to their friends and their
country. Such is the strain of sentiment in the works of Ossian.

 But the sublimity of moral sentiments, if they wanted the softening
of the tender, would be in hazard of giving a hard and stiff air to
poetry. It is not enough to admire. Admiration is a cold feeling, in
comparison of that deep interest which the heart takes in tender and
pathetic scenes; where, by a mysterious attachment to the objects of
compassion, we are pleased and delighted, even whilst we mourn. With
scenes of this kind Ossian abounds; and his high merit in these is
incontestible. He may be blamed for drawing tears too often from our
eyes; but that he has the power of commanding them, I believe no man,
who as the least sensibility, will question. The general character of
his poetry is the heroic mixed with the elegiac strain; admiration
tempered with pity. Ever fond of giving, as he expresses it, "the joy
of grief," it is visible that, on all moving subjects, he delights to
exert his genius; and, accordingly, never were there finer pathetic
situations than what his works present. His great art in managing
them lies in giving vent to the simple and natural emotions of the
heart. We meet with no exaggerated declamation; no subtile
refinements on sorrow; no substitution of description in place of
passion. Ossian felt strongly himself; and the heart, when uttering
its native language, never fails, by powerful sympathy, to affect the
heart. A great variety of examples might be produced. We need only
open the book to find them everywhere. What, for instance, can be
more moving than the lamentations of Oithona, after her misfortune?
Gaul, the son of Morni, her lover, ignorant of what she had suffered,
comes to her rescue. Their meeting is tender in the highest degree.
He proposes to engage her foe, in single combat, and gives her in
charge what she is to do if he himself shall fall. "And shall the
daughter of Nuath live?" she replied, with a bursting sigh. "Shall I
live in Tromathon, and the son of Morni low? My heart is not of that
rock; nor my soul careless as that sea, which lifts its blue waves to
every wind, and rolls beneath the storm. The blast, which shall lay
thee low, shall spread the branches of Oithona, on earth. We shall
wither together, son of car-borne Morni! The narrow house is pleasant
to me, and the gray stone of the dead; for never more will I leave my
rocks, sea-surrounded Tromathon!--Chief of Strumon! why comest thou
over the waves to Nuath's mournful daughter? Why did I not pass away
in secret, like the flower of the rocks that lifts its fair head
unseen, and strews its withered leaves on the blast? Why didst thou
come, O Gaul I to bear my departing sigh ?--O, had I dwelt at
Duvranna, in the bright beam of my fame! Then had my years come on
with joy: and the virgins would bless my steps. But I fall in youth,
son of Morni! and my father shall blush in his hall!"

 Oithona mourns like a woman: in Cuthullin's expressions of grief
after his defeat, we behold the sentiments of a hero--generous, but
desponding. The situation is remarkably fine. Cuthullin, roused from
his cave by the noise of battle, sees Fingal victorious in the field.
He is described as kindling at the sight. "His hand is on the sword
of his fathers; his red-rolling eyes on the foe. He thrice attempted
to rush to battle; and thrice did Connal stop him;" suggesting that
Fingal was routing the foe; and that he ought not, by the show of
superfluous aid, to deprive the king of any part of the honor of a
victory, which was owing to him alone. Cuthullin yields to this
generous sentiment; but we see it stinging him to the heart with the
sense of his own disgrace. "Then, Carril, go," replied the chief,
"and greet the king of Morven. When Lochlin fails away like a stream
after rain, and the noise of the battle is over, then be thy voice
sweet in his ear, to praise the king of swords. Give him the sword of
Caithbat; for Cuthullin is worthy no more to lift the arms of his
fathers. But, O ye ghosts of the lonely Cromla! ye souls of chiefs
that are no more! be ye the companions of Cuthullin, and talk to him
in the cave of his sorrow. For never more shall I be renowned among
the mighty in the land. I am like a beam that has shone: like a mist
that has fled away; when the blast of the morning came, and
brightened the shaggy side of the hill. Connal! talk of arms no more:
departed is my fame. My sighs shall be on Cromla's wind; till my
footsteps cease to be seen. And thou, white-bosomed Bragela! mourn
over the fall of my fame: for vanquished, I will never return to
thee, thou sunbeam of Dunscaich!"

--stuat ingens
Uno in corde pudor, luctusque, et conscia virtus.

 Besides such extended pathetic scenes, Ossian frequently pierces the
heart by a single unexpected stroke. When Oscar fell in battle, "No
father mourned his son slain in youth; no brother, his brother of
love; they fell without tears, for the chief of the people was low."
In the admirable interview of Hector with Andromache, in the sixth
Iliad, the circumstance of the child in his nurse's arms, has often
been remarked as adding much to the tenderness of the scene. In the
following passage, relating to the death of Cuthullin, we find a
circumstance that must strike the imagination with still greater
force. "And is the son of Semo fallen?" said Carril, with a sigh.
"Mournful are Tura's walls, and sorrow dwells at Dunscaich. Thy
spouse is left alone in her youth; the son of thy love is alone. He
shall come to Bragela, and ask her why she weeps? He shall lift his
eyes to the wall, and see his father's sword. Whose sword is that? he
will say; and the soul of his mother is sad." Soon after Fingal had
shown all the grief of a father's heart for Ryno, one of his sons,
fallen in battle, he is calling, after his accustomed manner, his
sons to the chase. "Call," says he, "Fillan and Ryno.--But he is not
here.--My son rests on the bed of death." This unexpected start of
anguish is worthy of the highest tragic poet.

If she come in, she'll sure speak to I wife--
My wife!--my wife!--What wife!--I have no wife--
Oh, insupportable! Oh, heavy hour!--
Othello.

 The contrivance of the incident in both poets is similar: but the
circumstances are varied with judgment. Othello dwells upon the name
of wife, when it had fallen from him, with the confusion and horror
of one tortured with guilt. Fingal, with the dignity of a hero,
corrects himself, and suppresses his rising grief. The contrast which
Ossian frequently makes between his present and his former state,
diffuses over his whole poetry a solemn pathetic air, which cannot
fail to make impression on every heart. The conclusion of the songs
of Selma is particularly calculated for this purpose. Nothing can be
more poetical and tender, or can leave upon the mind a stronger and
more affecting idea of the venerable and aged bard. "Such were the
words of the bards in the days of the song; when the king heard the
music of harps, and the tales of other times. The chiefs gathered
from all their hills, and heard the lovely sound. They praised the
voice of Cona, the first among a thousand bards. But age is now on my
tongue, and my soul has failed. I hear, sometimes, the ghosts of
bards, and learn their pleasant song. But memory fails on my mind; I
hear the call of years. They say, as they pass along, Why does Ossian
sing? Soon shall he lie in the narrow house, and no bard shall raise
his fame. Roll on, ye dark-brown years! for ye bring no joy in your
course. Let the tomb open to Ossian, for his strength has failed. The
sons of the song are gone to rest. My voice remains, like a blast,
that roars lonely on the sea-rur-rounded rock, after the winds are
laid. The dark moss whistles there, and the distant mariner sees the
waving trees."

 Upon the whole, if to feel strongly, and to describe naturally, be
the two chief ingredients in poetical genius, Ossian must, after fair
examination, be held to possess that genius in a high degree. The
question is not, whether a few improprieties may be pointed out in
his works?-whether this or that passage might not have been worked up
with more art and skill, by some writer of happier times? A thousand
such cold and frivolous criticisms are altogether indecisive as to
his genuine merit. But has he the spirit, the fire the inspiration of
a poet? Does he utter the voice of nature? Does he elevate by his
sentiments? Does lie interest by his description? Does be paint to
the heart as well as to the fancy? Does he make his readers glow, and
tremble, and weep? These are the great characteristics of true
poetry. Where these are found, he must be a minute critic, indeed,
who can dwell, upon slight defects. A few beauties of this high kind
transcend whole volumes of faultless mediocrity. Uncouth and abrupt
Ossian may sometimes appear, by reason of his conciseness; but he is
sublime, he is pathetic, in an eminent degree. If he has not the
extensive knowledge, the regular dignity of narration, the fulness
and accuracy of description, which we find in Homer and Virgil, yet
in strength of imagination, in grandeur of sentiment, in native
majesty of passion, he is fully their equal. If he flows not always 
like a clear stream, yet he breaks forth often like a torrent of
fire. Of art, too, he is far from being destitute; and his
imagination is remarkable for delicacy as well as strength. Seldom or
never is he either trifling or tedious; and if he be thought too
melancholy, yet he is always moral. Though his merit were in other
respects much less than it is, this alone ought to entitle him to
high regard, that his writings are remarkably favorable to virtue.
They awake the tenderest sympathies, and inspire the most generous
emotions. No reader can rise from him without being warmed with the
sentiments of humanity, virtue, and honor.

 Though unacquainted with the original language, there is no one but
must judge the translation to deserve the highest praise, on account
of its beauty and elegance. Of its faithfulness and accuracy, I have
been assured by persons skilled in the Gaelic tongue, who from their
youth were acquainted with many of these poems of Ossian. To
transfuse such spirited and fervid ideas from one language into
another; to translate literally, and yet with such a glow of poetry;
to keep alive so much passion, and support so much dignity
throughout; is one of the most difficult works of genius, and proves
the translator to have been animated with no small portion of
Ossian's spirit.

 The measured prose which he has employed, possesses considerable
advantages above any sort of versification he could have chosen.
While it pleases and fills the ear with a variety of harmonious
cadences, being, at the same time, freer from constraint in the
choice and arrangement of words, it allows the spirit of the original
to be exhibited, with more justness, force, and simplicity. Elegant,
however, and masterly, as Mr. Macpherson's translation is, we must
never forget, whilst we read it, that we are putting the merit of the
original to a severe test. For we are examining a poet stripped of
his native dress; divested of the harmony of his own numbers. We know
how much grace and energy the works of the Greek and Latin poets
receive from the charm of versification in their original languages.
If then, destitute of this advantage, exhibited in a literal version,
Ossian still has power to please as a poet; and not to please only,
but often to command, to transport, to melt the heart; we may very
safely infer that his productions are the off-spring of a true and
uncommon genius; and we may proudly assign him a place among those
whose works are to last for ages.



Funeral Song by Regner Lodbrog

Translated into Latin from the Gothic

by Olaus Wormius

Pugnavimus ensibus
Haud post longum tempus
Cum in Gotlandia accessimus
Ad serpentis immensi necem
Tunc impetravimus Thoram
Ex hoc vocarunt me virum
Quod serpentem transfodi
Hirsutam braccam ob illam cdem
Cuspide ictum intuli in colubrum
Ferro lucidorum stupendiorum.

Multum juvenis fui quando acquisivimus
Orientem versus in Oreonico freto
Vulnerum amnes avid fer
Et flavipedi avi
Accepimus ibidem sonuerunt
Ad sublimes galeas
Dura ferra magnam escam
Omnis erat oceanus vulnus
Vadavit corvus in sanguine csorum.

Alte tulimus tune lanceas
Quando viginti annos numeravimus
Et celebrem laudem comparavimus passim
Vicimus octo barones
In oriente ante Dimini portum
Aquil impetravimus tunc sufficientem
Hospitii sumptum in illa strage
Sudor decidit in vulnerum
Oceano perdidit exercitus tatem.

Pugn facta copia
Cum Helsingianos postulavimus
Ad aulam Odini
Naves direximus in estium Vistul
Mucro potuit tum mordere
Omnis erat vulnus unda
Terra rubefacta calido
Frendebat gladius in loricas
Gladius findebat clypeos.

Memini neminem tunc fugisse
Priusquam in navibus
Heraudus in bello caderet
Non findit navibus
Alius baro prstantior
Mare ad portum
In navibus longis post ilium
Sic attulit princeps passim
Alacre in bellum, cor.

Exercitus abjecit clypeos
Cum hasta volavit
Ardua ad virorum pectora
Momordit Scarforum cautes
Cladius in pugna
Sanguineus erat clypeus
Antequam Rafho rex caderet
Fluxit ex virorum capitibus
Calidas in loricas sudor.

Habere potuerunt tum, corvi
Ante Indirorum insulas
Sufficientem prdam dilaniandam
Acquisivimus feris carnivoris
Plenum prandium unico actu
Difficile erat unius facere mentionem
Oriente sole
Spicula, vidi pungere,
Propulerunt arcus ex se ferra.

Altum mugierunt enses
Antequam in Laneo campo
Eislinus rex cecidit
Processimus auro, ditati
Ad terram prostratorum dimicandum
Gladius secuit clypeorum
Picturas in galearum conventu,
Cervicum mustum ex vulneribus
Diffusum per cerebrum fissum.

Tenuimus clypeos in sanguine
Cum hastam unximus
Ante Boring holmum
Telorum nubes disrumpunt clypeum
Extrusit arcus ex se metallum,
Volnir cecidit in conflictu.
Non erat illo rex major
Csi dispersi late per littora
Fer amplectebantur escam.

Pugna manifeste crescebat
Antequam Freyr rex caderet
In Flandorum terra
Cpit cruleus ad incidendum
Sanguine illitus in auream
Loricam in pugna
Durus armorum mucro olim
Virgo deploravit matutinam lanienam
Multa prda dabatur feris.

Centies centenos vidi jacere
In navibus
Ubi nglanes vocatur
Navigavimus ad pugnam
Per sex dies antequam exercitus missam
In exortu solis
Coactus est pro nostris gladiis
Valdiofur in bello occumbere

Ruit pluvia sanguinis de gladiis
Prceps in Bardafyrde
Pallidum corpus pro accipitribus
Murmumvit arcus ubi mucro
Acriter mordebat loricas
In conflictu,
Odini pileus gales.
Cucurrit arcus ad vulnus
Venenate acutus conspersus sudore sanguineo.

Tenuimus magica scuta
Alte in pugn ludo
Ante Hiadningum sinum
Videre licuit tum viros
Qui gladiis lacerarunt clypeos
In gladiatorio murmure
Gale attrit virorum
Erat sicut splendidam virginem
In lecto, juxta se collocare.

Dura venit tempestas clypeis
Cadaver cecidit in terram
In Nortumbria
Erat circa matutinum tempus
Hominibus necessum erat fugere
Ex prlio ubi acute
Cassidis campos mordebant gladii
Erat hoc veluti juvenem viduam
In primaria sede osculari.

Herthiofe evasit fortunatus
In Australibus Orcadibus ipse
Victori in nostris hominibus
Cogrebatur in armorum nimbo,
Rogvaldus occumbere
Iste venit summus super accipitres
Luctus in gladiorum ludo
Strenue jactabat concussor
Gale sanguinis teli.

Quilibet jacebat transversim supra alium
Gaudebat pugna ltus
Accipiter ob gladiorum ludum
Non fecit aquilam aut aprum
Qui Irlandiam gubernavit
Conventus fiebat ferri et clypei
Marstanus rex jejunis
Fiebat in vedr sinu
Prda data corvis.

Bellatorem multum vidi cadere
Mante ante machram
Virum in mucronum dissidio
Filio meo incidit mature
Gladius juxta cor
Egillus fecit Agnerum spoliatum
Imperterritum virum vita
Sonuit lancea prope Hamdi
Griseam loricam splendebant vexilla.

Verborum tenaces vidi dissecare
Haud minutim pro lupis
Endili maris ensibus
Erat per hebdomad spatium
Quasi mulieres vinum apportarent
Rubefact erant naves
Valde in strepitu armorum
Scissa erat lorica
In Scioldungorum prlio.

Pulcricomum vidi crepuscuascere
Virginis amatorem circa matutinum
Et confabulationis amicum viduarum
Erat sicut calidum balneum
Vinei vasis nympha portaret
Nos in Il freto
Antequam Orn rex caderet
Sanguineum clypeum vidi ruptum
Hoc invertit virorum vitam.

Egimus gladiorum ad cdem
Ludum in Lindis insula
Cum regibus tribus
Pauci potuerunt inde ltari
Cecidit multus in rictum ferarum
Accipiter dilaniavit carnem cum lupo
Ut satur inde discederet
Hybernorum sanguinis in oceanum
Copiose decidit per mactationis tempus.

Alte gladius mordebat clypeos
Tune cum aurei colors
Hasta fricabat loricas
Videre licuit in Onlugs insula
Per scula multum post
Ibi fuit ad gladiorum ludos
Reges processerunt
Rubicundum erat circa insulam,
At volans Draco vulnerum.

Quid est viro forti morte certius
Etsi ipse in armorum nimbo
Adversus collocatus sit
Spe deplorat tatem
Qui nunquam premitur
Malum ferunt timidum incitare
Aquilam ad gladiorum ludum
Meticulosus venit nuspiam
Cordi suo usui.

Hoc numero quum ut procedat
In contactu gladiorum
Juvenis unus contra alterum
Non retrocedat vir a viro
Hoe fuit viri fortis nobilitas diti
Semper debet amoris amicus virginum,
Audax esse in fremitu armorum.

Hoc videtur mihi re vera
Quod fata sequimur
Rarus transgreditur fata Parcarum
Non destinavi Ell
De vit exitu me
Cum ego sanguinem semimortuus tegerem
Et naves in aquas protrusi
Passim impetravimus tum feris
Escam in Scoti sinubus.

Hoc ridere me facit semper
Quod Balderi patris scamne
Parata scio in aula
Bibemus cerevisiam brevi
Ex concavis crateribus craniorum
Non gemit vir fortis contra mortem
Magnifici in Odini domibus
Non venio disperabundis
Verbis ad Odini aulam.

Hic vellent nunc omnes
Filii Aslaug gladiis
Amarum bellum excitare
Si exacte scirent
Calamitates nostras
Quem non pauci angues
Venenati me discerpunt
Matrem accepi meis
Filiis ita ut corda valeant.

Valde inclinatur ad hreditatem
Crudele stat nocumentum a vipera
Anguis inhabitat aulam cordis
Speramus alterius ad Othini
Virgam in Ell sanguine
Filiis meis livescet
Sua ira rubescet
Non acres juvenes
Sessionem tranquillam facient.

Habeo quinquagies
Prlia sub signis facta
Ex belli invitatione et semel
Minime putavi hominum
Quod me futurus esset
Juvenis didici mucronem rubefacore
Alius rex prstantior
Nos As invitabunt
Non est lugenda mors.

Fert animus finire
Invitant me Dys
Quas ex Othini aula
Othinus mihi misit
Ltus cerevisiam cum Asis
In summa sede, bibam
Vit elaps suot hor
Ridens moriar.



THE POEMS OF OSSIAN


CATH-LODA.


CATH-LODA -- DUAN I. <1>

ARGUMENT

Fingal when very young, making a voyage to the Orkney Islands,
was driven by stress of weather into a bay of Scandinavia, near
the residence of Starno, king of Lochlin. Starno invites Fingal to a
feast. Fingal, doubting the faith of the king, and mindful of a
former breach of hospitality, refuses to go. -- Starno gathers
together his tribes; Fingal resolves to defend himself. -- Night
coming on, Duth-maruno proposes to Fingal to observe the
motions of the enemy. -- The king himself undertakes the watch.
Advancing towards the enemy, he accidentally comes to the cave
of Turthor, where Starno had confined Conban-Cargla, the
captive daughter of a neighboring chief. -- Her story is imperfect,
a part of the original being lost. -- Fingal comes to a place of
worship, where Starno, and his son Swaran, consulted the spirit
of Loda concerning the issue of the war. -- The rencounter of
Fingal and Swaran.-- Duan first concludes with a description of
the airy hall of Cruth-loda, supposed to be the Odin of
Scandinavia.

<1> The bards distinguished those compositions in which the
narration is often interrupted by episodes and apostrophes, by
the name of Duan.


	A TALE of the times of old!
	Why, thou wanderer unseen! thou bender of the thistle of
Lora; why, thou breeze of the valley, hast thou left mine ear? I
hear no distant roar of streams! No sound of the harp from the
rock! Come, thou huntress of Lutha, Malvina, call back his soul
to the bard. I look forward to Lochlin of lakes, to the dark billowy
bay of U-thorno, where Fingal descends from ocean, from the
roar of winds. Few are the heroes of Morven in a land unknown!

	Starno sent a dweller of Loda to bid Fingal to the feast; but
the king remembered the past, and all his rage arose. "Nor
Gormal's mossy towers, nor Starno, shall Fingal behold. Deaths
wander, like shadows, over his fiery soul! Do I forget that beam of
light, the white-handed daughter of kings? <1> Go, son of Loda;
his words are wind to Fingal: wind, that, to and fro drives the
thistle in autumn's dusky vale. Duth-maruno, arm of death!
Cromma-glas, of Iron shields! Struthmor, dweller of battle's wing!
Cromar, whose ships bound on seas, careless as the course of a
meteor, on dark-rolling clouds! Arise around me, children of
heroes, in a land unknown! Let each look on his shield like
Trenmor, the ruler of wars." -- "Come down," thus Trenmor said,
"thou dweller between the harps! Thou shalt roll this stream
away, or waste with me in earth."
	Around the king they rise in wrath. No words come forth:
they seize their spears. Each soul is rolled into itself. At length
the sudden clang is waked on all their echoing shields. Each
takes his hill by night; at intervals they darkly stand. Unequal
bursts the hum of songs, between the roaring wind!
	Broad over them rose the moon!
	In his arms came tall Duth-maruno: he, from Croma of
rocks, stern hunter of the boar! In his dark boat he rose on
waves, when Crumthormo <2> awaked its woods. In the chase he
shone, among foes: No fear was thine, Duth-maruno!
	'O Son of daring Comhal, shall my steps be forward
through night? From this shield shall I view them, over their
gleaming tribes? Starno, king of lakes, is before me, and Swaran,
the foe of strangers. Their words are not in vain, by Loda's stone
of power. Should Duth-maruno not return, his spouse is lonely at
home, where meet two roaring streams on Crathmocraulo's plain.
Around are hills, with echoing woods; the ocean is rolling near.
My son looks on screaming sea-fowl, a young wanderer on the
field. Give the head of a boar to Candona, tell him of his father's
joy, when the bristly strength of U-thorno rolled on his lifted
spear. Tell him of my deeds in war! Tell where his father fell!"
	"Not forgetful of my fathers," said Fingal, "I have bounded
over the seas. Theirs were the times of danger in the days of old.
Nor settles darkness on me, before foes, though youthful in my
locks. Chief of Crathmocraulo, the field of night is mine."
	Fingal rushed, in all his arms, wide bounding over
Turthor's stream, that sent its sullen roar, by night, through
Gormal's misty vale. A moonbeam glittered on a rock; in the
midst stood a stately form; a form with floating locks, like
Lochlin's white-bosomed maids. Unequal are her steps, and
short. She throws a broken song on wind. At times she tosses her
white arms: for grief is dwelling in her soul.
	"Torcal-torno, of aged locks," she said, "where now are thy
steps, by Lulan? Thou hast failed at thine own dark streams,
father of Conban-cargla! But I behold thee, chief of Lulan,
sporting by Loda's hall, when the dark-skirted night is rolled
along the sky. Thou sometimes hidest the moon with thy shield. I
have seen her dim, in heaven. Thou kindlest thy hair into
meteors, and sailest along the night. Why am I forgot, in my cave,
king of shaggy boars? Look from the hall of Loda, on thy lonely
daughter."
	"Who art thou," said Fingal, "voice of night?"
	She, trembling, turned away.
	"Who art thou, in thy darkness?"
	She shrunk into the cave.
	The king loosed the thong from her hands. He asked about
her fathers.
	"Torcul-torno," she said, "once dwelt at Lulan's foamy
stream: he dwelt-but now, in Loda's hall, he shakes the sounding
shell. He met Starno of Lochlin in war; long fought the dark-eyed
kings. My father fell, in his blood, blue-shielded Torcul-torno! By
a rock, at Lulan's stream, I had pierced the bounding roe. My
white hand gathered my hair from off the rushing winds. I heard
a noise. Mine eyes were up. My soft breast rose on high. My step
was forward, at Lulan, to meet thee, Torcul-torno. It was Starno,
dreadful king! His red eves rolled on me in love. Dark waved his
shaggy brow, above his gathered smile. Where is my father, I
said, he that was mighty in war! Thou art left alone among foes,
O daughter of Torcul-torno! He took my hand. He raised the sail.
In this cave he placed me dark. At times he comes a gathered
mist. He lifts before me my father's shield. But often passes a
beam of youth far distant from my cave. The son of Starno moves
in my sight. He dwells lonely in my soul."
	"Maid of Lulan," said Fingal, "white-handed daughter of
grief! a cloud, marked with streaks of fire, is rolled along my soul.
Look not to that dark-robed moon; look not to those meteors of
heaven. My gleaming steel is around thee, the terror of my foes! It
is not the steel of the feeble, nor of the dark in soul! The maids
are not shut in our caves of streams! They toss not their white
arms alone. They bend fair within their locks, above the harps of
Selma. Their voice is not in the desert wild. We melt along the
pleasing sound!"

     *     *     *     *     *     *     *

	Fingal again advanced his steps, wide through the bosom
of night, to where the trees of Loda shook amid squally winds.
Three stones, with heads of moss, are there; a stream with
foaming course: and dreadful, rolled around them, is the dark red
cloud of Loda. High from its top looked forward a ghost, half
formed of the shadowy stroke. He poured his voice, at times,
amidst the roaring stream. Near, bending beneath a blasted tree,
two heroes received his words: Swaran of lakes, and Starno, foe
of strangers. On their dun shields they darkly leaned: their
spears are forward through night. Shrill sounds the blast of
darkness in Starno's floating beard.
	They heard the tread of Fingal. The warriors rose in arms.
"Swaran, lay that wanderer low," said Starno, in his pride. "Take
the shield of thy father. It is a rock in war." Swaran threw his
gleaming spear. It stood fixed in Loda's tree. Then came the foes
forward with swords. They mixed their rattling steel. Through the
thongs of Swaran's shield rushed the blade <3> of Luno. The
shield fell rolling on earth. Cleft, the helmet fell down. Fingal
stopt the lifted steel. Wrathful stood Swaran, unarmed. He rolled
his silent eyes; he threw his sword on earth. Then, slowly
stalking over the stream, he whistled as he went.
	Nor unseen of his father is Swaran. Starno turns away in
wrath. His shaggy brows were dark above his gathered rage. He
strikes Loda's tree with his spear. He raises the hum of songs.
They come to the host of Lochlin, each in his own dark path; like
two foam-covered streams from two rainy vales!
To Turthor's plain Fingal returned. Fair rose the beam of the
east. It shone on the spoils of Lochlin in the hand of the king.
From her cave came forth, in her beauty, the daughter of Torcul-
torno. She gathered her hair from wind. She wildly raised her
song. The song of Lulan of shells, where once her father dwelt.
She saw Starno's bloody shield. Gladness rose, a light. on her
face. She saw the cleft helmet of Swaran She shrunk, darkened,
from Fingal. "Art thou fallen by thy hundred streams, O love of
the mournful maid?"
	U-thorno that risest in waters! on whose side are the
meteors of night? I behold the dark moon descending behind thy
resounding woods. On thy top dwells the misty Loda: the house
of the spirits of men! In the end of his cloudy hall bends forward
Cruth-loda of swords. His form is dimly seen amid his wavy mist.
His right hand is on his shield. In his left is the half viewless
shell. The roof of his dreadful hall is marked with nightly fires!
	The race of Cruth-loda advance, a ridge of formless shades.
He reaches the sounding shell to those who shone in war. But
between him and the feeble, his shield rises a darkened orb. He is
a setting meteor to the weak in arms. Bright as a rainbow on
streams, came Lulan's white-bosomed maid.

<1> The white-handed daughter of kings: Agandecca, the
daughter of Starno, whom her father killed, on account of her
discovering to Fingal a plot laid against his life.

<2> Crumthormoth: one of the Orkney or Shetland Islands

<3> The blade of Luno: The sword of Fingal, so called from its
maker, Luno of Lochlin



CATHLODA -- DUAN II.

ARGUMENT

Fingal, returning with day, devolves the command on Duth-
maruno, who engages the enemy, and drives them over the
stream of Turthor. Having recalled his people, he congratulates
Duth-maruno on his success, but discovers that that hero had
been mortally wounded in the action -- Duth-maruno dies. Ullin,
the bard in honor of the dead, introduces the episode of Colgorm
and Strina-dona, which concludes this duan.


	"WHERE art thou, son of the king?" said darkhaired Duth-
maruno. "Where hast thou failed, young beam of Selma? He
returns not from the bosom of night! Morning is spread on U-
thorno. In his mist is the sun on his hill. Warriors, lift the shields
in my presence. He must not fall like a fire from heaven, whose
place is not marked on the ground. He comes like an eagle, from
the skirt of his squally wind! in his hand are the spoil of foes.
King of Selma, our souls were sad!"
	"Near us are the foes, Duth-maruno. They come forward,
like waves in mist, when their foamy tops are seen at times above
the low-sailing vapor. The traveller shrinks on his journey; he
knows not whither to fly. No trembling travellers are we! Sons of
heroes call forth the steel. Shall the sword of Fingal arise, or shall
a warrior lead?"
	The deeds of old, said Duth-maruno, are like paths to our
eyes, O Fingal! Broad-shielded Trenmor is still seen amidst his
own dim years. Nor feeble was the soul of the king. There no dark
deed wandered in secret. From their hundred streams came the
tribes, to glassy Colglan-crona. Their chiefs were before them.
Each strove to lead the war. Their swords were often half
unsheathed. Red rolled their eyes of rage. Separate they stood,
and hummed their surly songs. "Why should they yield to each
other? their fathers were equal in war." Trenmor was there, with
his people stately, in youthful locks. He saw the advancing foe.
The grief of his soul arose. He bade the chiefs to lead by turns;
they led, but they were rolled away. From his own mossy hill
blue-shielded Trenmor came down. He led wide-skirted battle,
and the strangers failed. Around him the dark-browed warriors
came: they struck the shield of joy. Like a pleasant gale the
words of power rushed forth from Selma of kings. But the chiefs
led by turns, in war, till mighty danger rose: then was the hour of
the king to conquer in the field.
	"Not unknown," said Cromma-glas of shields, "are the
deeds of our fathers. But who shall now lead the war before the
race of kings? Mist settles on these four dark hills: within it let
each warrior strike his shield. Spirits may descend in darkness,
and mark us for the war."  They went each to his hill of mist.
Bards marked the sounds of the shields. Loudest rung thy boss
Duth-maruno. Thou must lead in war!
	Like the murmurs of waters the race of U-thorno came
down. Starno led the battle, and Swaran of stormy isles. They
looked forward from iron shields like Cruth-loda, fiery-eyed, when
he looks from behind the darkened moon, and strews his signs
on night. The foes met by Turthor's stream. They heaved like
ridgy waves. Their echoing strokes are mixed. Shadowy death
flies over the hosts. They were clouds of hail. with squally winds
in their skirts. Their showers are roaring together. Below them
swells the dark-rolling deep.
	Strife of gloomy U-thorno, why should I mark thy wounds?
Thou art with the years that are gone; thou fadest on my soul!
	Starno brought forward his skirt of war, and Swaran his
own dark wing. Nor a harmless fire is Duthmaruno's sword.
Lochlin is rolled over her streams. The wrathful kings are lost in
thought. They roll their silent eyes over the flight of their land.
The horn of Fingal was heard; the sons of woody Albion returned.
But many lay, by Turthor's stream, silent in their blood.
	" Chief of Crathmo," said the king, " Duth-maruno, hunter
of boars! not harmless returns my eagle from the field of foes! For
this white-bosomed Lanul shall brighten at her streams;
Candona shall rejoice as he wanders in Crathmo's fields."
	" Colgorm," replied the chief, " was the first of my race in
Albion; Colgorm, the rider of ocean; through Its watery vales. He
slew his brother in I-thorno:<1> he left the land of his fathers. He
chose his place in silence, by rocky Crathmo-craulo. His race
came forth in their years; they came forth to war, but they always
fell. The wound of my fathers is mine, king of echoing isles!
	He drew an arrow from his side! He fell pale in a land
unknown. His soul came forth to his fathers, to their stormy isle.
There they pursued boars of mist, along the skirts of winds. The
chiefs stood silent around, as the stones of Loda, on their hill.
The traveller sees them, through the twilight, from his lonely
path. He thinks them the ghosts of the aged, forming future wars.
	Night came down on U-thorno. Still stood the chiefs in their
grief. The blast whistled, by turns, through every warrior's hair.
Fingal, at length, broke forth from the thoughts of his soul. He
called Ullin of harps, and bade the song to rise. "No falling fire,
that is only seen, and then retires in night; no departing meteor
was he that is laid so low. He was like the strong-beaming sun,
long rejoicing on his hill, Call the names of his fathers from their
dwellings old!'"
	I-thorno, said the bard, that risest midst ridgy seas! Why is
thy head so gloomy in the ocean's mist? From thy vales came
forth a race, fearless as thy strong winged eagles: the race of
Colgorm of iron shields, dwellers of Loda's hall.
	In Tormoth's resounding isle arose Lurthan, streamy hill. It
bent its woody head over a silent vale. There, at foamy Cruruth's
source, dwelt Rurmar, hunter of boars! His daughter was fair as
a sunbeam, white-bosomed Strina-dona!
	Many a king of heroes, and hero of iron shields; many a
youth of heavy locks came to Rurmar's echoing hall. They came
to woo the maid, the stately huntress of Tormoth wild. But thou
lookest careless from thy steps, high-bosomed Strina-dona!
	If on the heath she moved, her breast was whiter than the
down of cana;<2>  If on the sea-beat shore, than the foam of the
rolling ocean. Her eyes were two stars of light. Her face was
heaven's bow in showers. Her dark hair flowed round it, like the
streaming clouds. Thou wert the dweller of souls, white-handed
Strina-dona!
	Colgorm came in his ship, and Corcul-suran, king of shells.
The brothers came from I-thorno to woo the sunbeam of Tormoth
wild. She saw them in their echoing steel. Her soul was fixed on
blue-eyed Colgorm. Ul-lochlin's <3> nightly eye looked in, and
saw the tossing arms of Strina-dona.
.	Wrathful the brothers frowned. Their flaming eyes in
silence met. They turned away. They struck their shields. Their
hands were trembling on their swords. They rushed into the strife
of heroes for long haired Strina-dona.
	Corcul-suran fell in blood. On his isle raged the strength of 
his father. He turned Colgorm from I-thorno, to wander on all the
winds. In Crathmocraulo's rocky field he dwelt by a foreign
stream. Nor darkened the king alone, that beam of light was
near, the daughter of echoing Tormoth, white armed Strina-dona.

<1> I-thorno: an island of Scandinavia.

<2> The cana is a certain kind of grass, which grows plentifully in
the heathy morasses of the north.

<3> Ul-lochlin "the guide to Lochlin;" the name of a star



CATH-LODA -- DUAN III.

ARGUMENT

Ossian, after some general reflections, describes the situation of 
Fingal, and the position of the army of Lochlin. -- The
conversation of Starno and Swaran. -- The episode of Corman-
trunar and Foina-bragal. -- Starno, from his own example,
recommends to Swaran to surprise Fingal, who had retired alone
to a neighboring hill. Upon Swaran's refusal, Starno undertakes
the enterprise himself, is overcome and taken prisoner by Fingal.
He is dismissed  after a severe reprimand for his cruelty.


	WHENCE is the stream of years? Whither do they roll
along? Where have they hid, in mist, their many colored sides.
	I look unto the times of old, but they seem dim to Ossian's
eyes, like reflected moonbeams on a distant lake. Here rise the
red beams of war! There, silent dwells a feeble race! They mark
no years with their deeds, as slow they pass along. Dweller
between the shields! thou that awakest the failing soul! descend
from thy wall, harp of Cona, with thy voices three! Come with
that which kindles the past: rear the forms of old, on their own
dark-brown years!
	U-thorno, hill of storms, I behold my race on thy side.
Fingal is bending in night over Duthmaruno's tomb. Near him are
the steps of his heroes, hunters of the boar. By Turthor's stream
the host of Lochlin is deep in shades. The wrathful kings stood on
two hills: they looked forward on their bossy shields. They looked
forward to the stars of night, red wandering in the west. Cruth-
loda bends from high, like formless meteor in clouds. He sends
abroad the winds and marks them with his signs. Starno foresaw
that Morven's king was not to yield in war.
	He twice struck the tree in wrath. He rushed before his
son. He hummed a surly song, and heard his air in wind. Turned
from one another, they stood like two oaks, which different winds
had bent; each hangs over his own loud rill, and shakes his
boughs in the course of blasts.
	" Annir," said Starno of lakes, "was a fire that consumed of
old. He poured death from his eyes along the striving fields. His
joy was in the fall of men. Blood to him was a summer stream,
that brings joy to the withered vales, from its own mossy rock. He
came forth to the lake Luth-cormo, to meet the tall Corman-
trunar, he from Urlor of streams, dweller of battle's wing."
	The chief of Urlor had come to Gormal with his dark-
bosomed ships. He saw the daughter of Annir, white-armed
Foina-bragal. He saw her! Nor careless rolled her eyes on the
rider of stormy waves. She fled to his ship in darkness, like a
moonbeam through a nightly veil. Annir pursued along the deep;
he called the winds of heaven. Nor alone was the king! Starno
was by his side. Like U-thorno's young eagle, I turned my eyes on
my father.
	We rushed into roaring Urlor. With his people came tall
Corman-trunar. We fought; but the foe prevailed. In his wrath my
father stood. He lopped the young trees with his sword. His eyes
rolled red in his rage. I marked the soul of the king, and I retired 
in night. From the field I took a broken helmet; a shield that was
pierced with steel; pointless was the spear in my hand. I went to
find the foe.
	On a rock sat tall Corman-trunar beside his burning oak;
and near him beneath a tree, sat deep-bosomed Foina-bragal. I
threw my broken shield before her! I spoke the words of peace.
"Beside his rolling sea lies Annir of many lakes. The king was
pierced in battle; and Starno is to raise his tomb. Me, a son of
Loda, he sends to white-handed Foina, to bid her send a lock
from her hair, to rest with her father in earth. And thou, king of
roaring Urlor, let the battle cease, till Annir receive the shell from
fiery-eyed Cruth-loda."
	Bursting into tears, she rose, and tore a lock from her hair; 
a lock, which wandered in the blast, along her heaving breast.
Corman-trunar gave the shell, and bade me rejoice before him. I
rested in the shade of night, and hid my face in my helmet deep.
Sleep descended on the foe. I rose, like a stalking ghost. I pierced
the side of Corman-trunar. Nor did Foina-bragal escape. She
rolled her white bosom in blood.
	Why, then, daughter of heroes, didst thou wake my rage?
	Morning rose. The foe were fled, like the departure of mist.
Annir struck his bossy shield. He called his dark-haired son. I
came, streaked with wandering blood: thrice rose the shout of the
king, like the bursting forth of a squall of wind from a cloud by
night. We rejoiced three days above the dead, and called the
hawks of heaven. They came from all their winds to feast on
Annir's foes. Swaran, Fingal is alone in his hill of night. Let thy
spear pierce the king in secret; like Annir, my soul shall rejoice.
	"O Son of Annir," said Swaran, "I shall not slay in shades: I
move forth in light: the hawks rush from all their winds. They are
wont to trace my course: it is not harmless through war."
	Burning rose the rage of the king. He thrice raised his
gleaming spear. But, starting, he spared his son,  and rushed
into the night. By Turthor's stream, a cave is dark, the dwelling of
Conban-carglas. There he laid the helmet of kings, and called the
maid of Lulan; but she was distant far in Loda's resounding hall.
	Swelling in his rage, he strode to where Fingal lay alone.
The king was laid on his shield, on his own secret hill.
	Stern hunter of shaggy boars! no feeble maid is laid before
thee. No boy on his ferny bed, by Turthor's murmuring stream.
Here is spread the couch of the mighty, from which they rise to
deeds of death! Hunter of shaggy boars, awaken not the terrible!
	Starno came murmuring on. Fingal arose in arms. "Who art
thou, son of night!" Silent he threw the spear. They mixed their
gloomy strife. The shield of Starno fell, cleft in twain. He is bound
to an oak. The early beam arose. It was then Fingal beheld the
king. He rolled awhile his silent eyes. He thought of other days,
when white-bosomed Agandecca moved like the music of songs.
He loosed the thong from his hands. Son of Annir, he said, retire.
Retire to Gormal of shells; a beam that was set returns. I
remember thy white-bosomed daughter; dreadful king, away! Go
to thy troubled dwelling, cloudy foe of the lovely Let the stranger
shun thee, thou gloomy in the hall"
	A tale of the times of old!



COMALA, A DRAMATIC POEM

ARGUMENT.

This poem. is valuable on account of the light it throws on the
antiquity of Ossian's compositions. The Caracul mentioned here
is the same with Caracalla, the son of Severus, who, in the year
211, commanded an expedition against the Caledonians. The
variety of the measure shows that the poem was originally set to
music, and perhaps presented before the chiefs upon solemn
occasions. Tradition has handed down the story more complete
than it is in the poem. "Comala, the daughter of Sarno, king of
Inistore, or Orkney Islands, fell in love with Fingal, the son of
Comhal, at a feast, to which her father had invited him [Fingal,
B. III.] upon his return from Lochlin, after the death of
Agandecca. Her passion was so violent, that she followed him,
disguised like a youth, who wanted to be employed in his wars.
She was soon discovered by Hidallan, the son of Lamor, one of
Fingal's heroes, whose love she had slighted some time before.
Her romantic passion and beauty recommended her so much to
the king, that he had resolved to make her his wife; when news
was brought him of Caracul's expedition. He marched to stop the
progress of the enemy, and Comala attended him. He left her on
a hill, within sight of Caracul's army, when he himself went to
battle, having previously promised, if he survived, to return that
night." The sequel of the story may be gathered from the poem
itself.

The Persons.

FINGAL
COMALA
HIDALLAN
MELILCOMA	}Daughters
DERSAGRENA	}of Morni.
BARDS

	Dersagrena. The chase is over. No noise on Erdven but the
torrent's roar! Daughter of Morni, come from Crona's banks. Lay
down the bow and take the harp. Let the night come on with
songs; let our joy be great on Ardven.
	Melilcoma. Night comes on apace, thou blue-eyed maid!
gray night grows dim along the plain, I saw a deer at Crona's
stream; a mossy bank he seemed through the gloom, but soon he
bounded away. A meteor played round his branching horns; the
awful faces of other times looked from the clouds of Crona.
	Dersagrena. These are the signs of Fingal's death. The king
of shields is fallen! and Caracul prevails. Rise, Comala, from thy
rock; daughter of Sarno, rise in tears! the youth of thy love is low;
his ghost is on our hills.
	Melilcoma. There Comala sits forlorn! two gray dogs near
shake their rough ears, and catch the flying breeze. Her red
cheek rests upon her arm, the mountain wind is in her hair. She
turns her blue eyes towards the fields of his promise. Where art
thou, O Fingal? The night is gathering around.
	Comala. O Carun of the streams! why do I behold thy
waters rolling in blood? Has the noise of the battle been heard;
and sleeps the king of Morven? Rise, moon, thou daughter of the
sky! look from between thy clouds; rise, that I may behold the
gleam of his steel on the field of his promise. Or rather let the
meteor, that lights our fathers through the night, come with its
red beam, to show me the way to my fallen hero. Who will defend
me from sorrow? Who from the love of Hidallan? Long shall
Comala look before she can behold Fingal in the midst of his
host; bright as the coming forth of the morning in the cloud of an
early shower.
	Hidallan. Dwell, thou mist of gloomy Crona, dwell on the
path of the king! Hide his steps from mine eyes, let me remember
my friend no more. The bands of battle are scattered, no
crowding tread round the noise of his steel.  O Carun! roll thy
streams of blood, the chief of the people is low.
	Comala. Who fell on Carun's sounding banks, son of the
cloudy night? Was he white as the snow of Ardven? Blooming as
the bow of the shower? Was his hair like the mist of the hill, soft
and curling in the day of the sun? Was he like the thunder of
heaven in battle? Fleet as the roe of the desert?
	Hidallan. O that I might behold his love, fair-leaning from
her rock! Her red eye dim in tears, her blushing cheek half hid in
her locks! Blow, O gentle breeze! lift thou the heavy locks of the
maid, that I may behold her white arm, her lovely cheek in her
grief.
	Comala. And is the son of Comhal fallen, chief of the
mournful tale! The thunder rolls on the hill! The lightning flies on
wings of fire! They frighten not Comala; for Fingal is low. Say,
chief of the mournful tale, fell the breaker of the shields?
	Hidallan. The nations are scattered on their hills! they shall
hear the voice of the king no more.
	Comala. Confusion pursue thee over thy plains! Ruin
overtake thee, thou king of the world! Few be thy steps to thy
grave; and let one virgin mourn thee! Let her be like Comala,
tearful in the days of her youth! Why hast thou told me, Hidallan,
that my hero fell? I might have hoped a little while his return; I
might have thought I saw him on the distant rock: a tree might
have deceived me with his appearance; the wind of the hill might
have been the sound of his horn in mine ear. O that I were on the
banks or Carun; that my tears might be warm on his cheek.
	Hidallan. He lies not on the banks of Carun: on Ardven
heroes raise his tomb. Look on them, O moon! from thy clouds;
be thy beam bright on his breast, that Comala may behold him in
the light of his armor.
	Comala. Stop, ye sons of the grave, till I behold lily love! He
left me at the chase alone. I knew not that he went to war. He
said he would return with the night; the king of Morven is
returned! Why didst thou not tell me that he would fall, O
trembling dweller of the rock? <1> Thou sawest him in the blood
of his youth; but thou didst not tell Comala.
	Melilcoma. What sound is that on Ardven? Who is that
bright in the vale?  Who comes like the strength of rivers, when
their crowded waters glitter to the moon?
	Comala. Who is it but the foe of Comala, the son of the king
of the world! Ghost of Fingal! do thou, from thy cloud, direct
Comala's bow. Let him fall like the hart of the desert. It is Fingal
in the crowd of his ghosts. Why dost thou come, my love, to
frighten and please my soul?
	Fingal. Raise, ye bards, the song; raise the wars of the
streamy Carun! Caracul has fled from our arms along the field of
his pride. He sets far distant like a meteor, that encloses a spirit
of night, when the winds drive it over the heath, and the dark
woods are gleaming around. I heard a voice, or was it the breeze
of my hills? Is it the huntress of Ardven, the white-handed
daughter of Sarno? Look from the rocks, my love; let me hear the
voice of Comala!
	Comala. Take me to the cave of thy rest, O lovely son of
death
	Fingal. Come to the cave of my rest. The storm is past, the
sun is on our fields. Come to the cave of my rest, huntress of
echoing Ardven!
	Comala. He is returned with his fame! I feel the right hand
of his wars! But I must rest beside the rock till my soul returns
from my fear! O let the harp be near! raise the song, ye daughters
of Morna.
	Dersagrena. Comala has slain three deer on Ardven, the
fire ascends on the rock; go to the feast of  Comala, king of the
woody Morven!
	Fingal. Raise, ye sons of song, the wars of the streamy
Carun; that my white-handed maid may rejoice: while I behold
the feast of my love.
	Bards. Roll, streamy Carun, roll in joy, the sons of battle
are fled! the steed is not seen on our fields; the wings of their
pride spread on other lands. The sun will now rise in peace, and
the shadows descend in joy. The voice of the chase will be heard;
the shields hang in the hall. Our delight will be in the war of the
ocean, our hands shall grow red in the blood of Lochlin. Roll,
streamy Carun, roll in joy, the sons of battle fled!
	Melilcoma. Descend, ye light mists from high!  Ye
moonbeams, lift her soul! Pale lies the maid at the rock! Comala
is no more!
	Fingal. Is the daughter of Sarno dead; the white-bosomed
maid of my love? Meet me, Comala, on my heaths, when I sit
alone at the streams of my hills.
	Hidallan. Ceased the voice of the huntress of  Ardven? why
did I trouble the soul of the maid? When shall I see thee, with joy,
in the chase of the dark-brown hinds? 	Fingal. Youth of the
gloomy brow! No more shalt thou feast in my halls! Thou shalt
not pursue my chase, my foes shall not fall by thy sword. Lead
me to the place of her rest, that I may behold her beauty. Pale
she lies as the rock, the cold winds lift her hair. Her bow-string
sounds in the blast, her arrow was broken in her fall. Raise the
praise of the daughter of Sarno! give her name to the winds of
heaven.
	Bards. See! meteors gleam around the maid! See!
moonbeams lift her soul! Around her, from their clouds, bend the
awful faces of her father: Sarna of the gloomy brow! the red-
rolling eyes of Hidallan! When shall thy white hand arise? When
shall thy voice be heard on our rocks? The maids shall seek thee
on the heath, but they shall not find thee. Thou shalt come, at
times, to their dreams, to settle peace in their soul. Thy voice
shall remain in their ears, they shall think with joy on the
dreams of their rest. Meteors gleam around the maid, and
moonbeams lift her soul!

<1> By the " dweller of the rock" she means a Druid.



CARRIC-THURA.


ARGUMENT.

Fingal, returning from an expedition which he had made into the
Roman province, resolved to visit Cathulla, king of Inistore, and
brother to Comala, whose story is related at large in the
preceding dramatic poem. Upon his coming in sight of Carric-
thura, the palace of Cathulla, he observed a flame on its top,
which, in those days, was a signal of distress. The wind drove
him into a bay at some distance from Carric-thura, and he was
obliged to pass the night on shore. Next day he attacked the army
of Frothal, king of Sora, who had besieged Cathulla in his palace
of Carric-thura, and took Frothal himself prisoner, after he had
engaged him in a single combat. The deliverance of Carric-thura
is the subject of the poem; but several other episodes are
interwoven with it. It appears, from tradition, that this poem was
addressed to a Culdee, or one of the first Christian missionaries,
and that the story of the spirit of Loda, supposed to be the
ancient Odin of Scandinavia, was introduced by Ossian in
opposition to the Culdee's doctrine. Be this as it will, it lets us
into Ossian's notions of a superior Being; and shows us that he
was not addicted to the superstition which prevailed all the world
over, before the introduction of Christianity.

	HAST thou left thy blue course in heaven, golden-haired
son of the sky! The west opened its gates; the bed of thy repose is
there. The waves come to behold thy beauty. They lift their
trembling heads. They see thee lovely in thy sleep; they shrink
away with fear. Rest in thy shadowy cave, O sun! let thy return
be in joy.
	But let a thousand lights arise to the sound of the harps of
Selma: let the beam spread in the hall, the king of shells is
returned! The strife of Crona is past, like sounds that are no
more. Raise the song, O bards! the king is returned with his
fame!
	Such were the words of Ullin, when Fingal returned from
war; when he returned in the fair blushing of youth with all his
heavy locks. His blue arms were on the hero; like a light cloud on
the sun, when he moves in his robes of mist, and shows but half
his beams. His heroes followed the king: the feast of shells is
spread. Fingal turns to his bards, and bids the song to rise.
	Voices of echoing Cona! he said; O bards of other times! Ye,
on whose souls the blue host of our fathers rise! strike the harp
in my hall: and let me hear the song. Pleasant is the joy of grief; it
is like the shower of spring when it softens the branch of the oak,
and the young leaf rears its green head. Sing on, O bards! to-
morrow we lift the sail. My blue course is through the ocean, to
Carric-thura's walls; the mossy walls of Sarno, where Comala
dwelt. There the noble Cathulla spreads the feast of shells. The
boars of his woods are many; the sound of the chase shall arise!
	Cronnan, son of the song! said Ullin; Minona, graceful at
the harp! raise the tale of Shilric, to please the king of Morven.
Let Vinvela come in her beauty, like the showery bow when it
shows its lovely head on the lake, and the setting sun is bright.
She comes, O Fingal! her voice is soft, but sad.
	Vinvela. My love is a son of the hill. He pursues the flying
deer. His gray dogs are panting around him; his bow-string
sounds in the wind. Dost thou rest by the fount of the rock, or by
the noise of the mountain stream? The rushes are nodding to the
wind, the mist flies over the hill. I will approach my love unseen; I
will behold him from the rock. Lovely I saw thee first by the aged
oak of Branno; thou wert returning tall from the chase; the
fairest among thy friends.
	Shilric. What voice is that I hear? that voice like the
summer wind! I sit not by the nodding rushes; I hear not the
fount of the rock . Afar, Vinvela, afar, I go to the wars of Fingal.
My dogs attend me no more. No more I tread the hill. No more
from on high I see thee, fair moving by the stream of the plain;
bright as the bow of heaven; as the moon on the western wave.
	Vinvela. Then thou art gone, O Shilric! I am alone on the
hill! The deer are seen on the brow: void of fear they graze along.
No more they dread the wind; no more the rustling tree. The
hunter is far removed, he is in the field of graves. Strangers! sons
of the waves! spare my lovely Shilric!
	Shilric. If fall I must in the field, raise high my grave,
Vinvela. Gray stones, and heaped up earth, shall mark me to
future times. When the hunter shall  sit by the mound, and
produce his food at noon, "some warrior rests here," he will say;
and my fame shall live in his praise. Remember me, Vinvela,
when low on earth I lie!
	Vinvela. Yes! I will remember thee! alas! my Shilric will fall!
What shall I do, my love, when thou art for ever gone? Through
these hills I will go at noon: I will go through the silent heath. 
There I will see the place of thy rest, returning from the chase.
Alas! my Shilric will fall; but I will remember Shilric.
	And I remember the chief, said the king of woody Morven;
he consumed the battle in his rage. But now my eyes behold him
not. I met him one day on the hill; his cheek was pale: his brow
was dark. The sigh was frequent in his breast: his steps were
towards the desert. But now he is not in the crowd of my chiefs,
when the sounds of my shields arise. Dwells he in the narrow 
house,<1> the chief of high Carmora?
	Cronnan! said Ullin of other times, raise the song of Shilric!
when he returned to his hills, and Vinvela was no more. He
leaned on her gray mossy stone he thought Vinvela lived. He saw
her fair moving on the plain; but the bright form lasted not: the
sunbeam fled from the field, and she was seen no more. Hear the
song of Shilric; it is soft, but sad!
	I sit by the mossy fountain; on the top of the hill of winds.
One tree is rustling above me. Dark waves roll over the heath.
The lake is troubled below. The deer descend from the hill. No
hunter at a distance is seen. It is mid-day: but all is silent. Sad
are my thoughts alone. Didst thou but appear, O my love? a
wanderer on the heath? thy hair floating on the wind behind
thee; thy bosom heaving on the sight; thine eyes full of tears for
thy friends, whom the mists of the hill had concealed? Thee I
would comfort, my love, and bring thee to thy father's house?
	But is it she that there appears, like a beam of light on the
heath? bright as the moon in autumn, as the sun in a summer
storm, comest thou, O maid, over rocks, over mountains, to me?
She speaks: but how weak her voice! like the breeze in the reeds
of the lake.
	"Returnest thou safe from the war? Where are thy friends,
my love? I heard of thy death on the hill; I heard and mourned
thee, Shilric! Yes, my fair, I return: but I alone of my race. Thou
shalt see them no more; their graves I raised on the plain. But
why art thou on the desert hill? Why on the heath alone?
	" Alone I am, O Shilric! alone in the winter-house. With
grief for thee I fell. Shilric, I am pale in the tomb."
	She fleets, she sails away; as mist before the wind; and wilt
thou not stay, Vinvela? Stay, and behold my tears! Fair thou
appearest, Vinvela! fair thou wast, when alive!
	By the mossy fountain I will sit; on the top of the hills of
winds. When mid-day is silent around, O talk with me, Vinvela!
come on the light-winged gale! on the breeze of the desert, come!
Let me hear thy voice, as thou passest, when mid-day is silent
around!
	Such was the song of Cronnan, on the night of Selma's joy.
But morning rose in the east; the blue waters rolled in light.
Fingal bade his sails to rise; the winds came rustling from their
hills. Inistore rose to sight, and Carric-thura's mossy towers! But
the sign of distress was on their top: the warning flame edged
with smoke. The king of Morven struck his breast: he assumed at
once his spear. His darkened brow bends forward to the coast: he
looks back to the lagging winds. His hair is disordered on his
back. The silence of the king is terrible!
	Night came down on the sea: Rotha's bay received the ship.
A rock bends along the coast with all its echoing wood. On the
top is the circle of Loda, the mossy stone of power! A narrow plain
spreads beneath covered with grass and aged trees, which the
midnight winds, in their wrath, had torn from their shaggy rock.
The blue course of a stream is there! the lonely blast of ocean
pursues the thistle's beard. The flame of three oaks arose: the
feast is spread round; but the soul of the king is sad, for Carric-
thura's chief distrest.
	The wan cold moon rose in the east. Sleep descended on
the youths! Their blue helmets glitter to the beam; the fading fire
decays. But sleep did not rest on the king: he rose in the midst of
his arms, and slowly ascended the hill, to behold the flame of
Sarno's tower.
	The flame was dim and distant; the moon hid her red face
in the east. A blast came from the mountain, on its wings was the
spirit of Loda. He came to his place in his terrors, and shook his
dusky spear. His eyes appear like flames in his dark face; his
voice is like distant thunder. Fingal advanced his spear in night,
and raised his voice on high.
	Son of night, retire; call thy winds, and fly! Why dost thou
come to my presence, with thy shadowy arms? Do I fear thy
gloomy form, spirit of dismal Loda! Weak is thy shield of clouds;
feeble is that meteor, thy sword! The blast rolls them together;
and thou thyself art lost. Fly from my presence, son of night; call
thy winds, and fly!
	Dost thou force me from my place? replied the hollow voice.
The people bend before me. I turn the battle in the field of the
brave. I look on the nations, and they vanish: my nostrils pour
the blasts of death. I come abroad on the winds; the tempests are
before my face. But my dwelling is calm, above the clouds; the
fields of my rest are pleasant.
	Dwell in thy pleasant fields, said the king: Let Comhal's
son be forgot. Do my steps ascend from my hills into thy peaceful
plains? Do I meet thee with a spear on thy cloud, spirit of dismal
Loda? Why then dost thou frown on me? Why shake thine airy
spear? Thou frownest in vain: I never fled from the mighty in war.
And shall the Sons of the wind frighten the king of Morven? No!
he knows the weakness of their arms!
	Fly to thy land, replied the form: receive thy wind and fly?
The blasts are in the hollow of my hand the course of the storm is
mine. The king of Sora is my son, he bends at the stone of my
power. His battle is around Carric-thura; and he will prevail! Fly
to thy land, son of Comhal, or feel my flaming wrath.
	He lifted high his shadowy spear! He bent forward his
dreadful height. Fingal, advancing, drew his sword; the blade of
dark-brown Luno. The gleaming path of the steel winds through
the gloomy ghost. The form fell shapeless into the air, like a
column of smoke, which the staff of the boy disturbs as it rises
from the half-extinguished furnace.
	The spirit of Loda shrieked, as, rolled into himself, he rose
on the wind. Inistore shook at the sound. The waves heard it on
the deep. They stopped in their course with fear; the friends of
Fingal started at once, and took their heavy spears. They missed
the king: they rose in rage; all their arms resound!
	The moon came forth in the east. Fingal returned in the
gleam of his arms. The joy of his youth was great, their souls
settled, as a sea from a storm. Ullin raised the song of gladness.
The hills of Inistore rejoiced. The flame of the oak arose; and the
tales of heroes are told.
But Frothal Sora's wrathful king sits in sadness beneath a tree.
The host spreads around Carric-thura. He looks towards the
walls with rage He longs for the blood of Cathulla, who once
overcame him in war. When Annir reigned in Sora, the father of
sea-borne Frothal, a storm arose on the sea, and carried Frothal
to Inistore. Three days he feasted in Sarno's halls, and saw the
slow-rolling eyes of Comala. He loved her in the flame of youth,
and rushed to seize the white-armed maid. Cathulla met the
chief. The gloomy battle arose. Frothal was bound in the hall:
three days he pined alone. On the forth, Sarno sent him to his
ship, and he returned to his land. But wrath darkened in his soul
against the noble Cathulla. When Annir's stone of fame arose,
Frothal came in his strength. The battle burned round Carric-
thura and Sarno's mossy walls.
	Morning rose on Inistore. Frothal struck his dark brown
shield. His chiefs started at the sound; they stood, but their eyes
were turned to the sea. They saw Fingal coming in his strength;
and first the noble Thubar spoke, "Who comes, like the stag oft
he desert, with all his herd behind him? Frothal, it is a foe! I see
his forward spear. Perhaps it is the king of Morven, Fingal the
first of men. His deeds are well known in Lochlin! the blood of his
foes is in Sarno's halls. Shall I ask the peace of kings? His sword
is the bolt of heaven!"
	Son of the feeble hand, said Frothal, shall my days begin in
a cloud? Shall I yield before I have conquered, chief of streamy
Tora? The people would say in Sora, Frothal flew forth like a
meteor; but a darkness has met him, and his fame is no more.
No, Thubar, I will never yield; my fame shall surround me like
light. No: I will never yield, chief of streamy Tora!
	He went forth with the stream of his people, but they met a
rock; Fingal stood unmoved, broken they rolled back from his
side. Nor did they safely fly; the spear of the king pursued their
steps. The field is covered with heroes. A rising hill preserved the
foe.
	Frothal saw their flight. The rage of his bosom rose. He
bent his eyes to the ground, and called the noble Thubar.
Thubar! my people are fled. My fame has ceased to rise. I will
fight the king; I feel my burning soul! Send a bard to demand the
combat. Speak not against Frothal's words! But, Thubar! I love a
maid; she dwells by Thano's stream, the white-bosomed daughter
of Herman, Utha, with soft-rolling eyes. She feared the low-laid
Comala; her secret sighs rose when I spread the sail. Tell to Utha
of harps that my soul delighted in her.
	Such were his words, resolved to fight. The soft sigh of
Utha was near! She had followed her hero in the armor of a man.
She rolled her eye on the youth, in secret, from beneath her steel.
She saw the bard as he went; the spear fell thrice from her hand!
Her loose hair flew on the wind. Her white breast rose with sighs.
She raised her eyes to the king. She would speak, but thrice she
failed.
	Fingal heard the words of the bard; he came in the strength
of his steel. They mixed their deathful spears: they raised the
gleam of their arms. But the sword of Fingal descended and cut
Frothal's shield in twain. His fair side is exposed; half-bent, he
foresees his death. Darkness gathered on Utha's soul. The fear
rolled down her cheek. She rushed to cover the chief with her
shield: but a fallen oak met her steps. She fell on her arm of
snow; her shield, her helmet flew wide. Her white bosom heaved
to the sigh; her dark-brown hair is spread on earth.
	Fingal pitied the white-armed maid! he stayed the uplifted
sword. The tear was in the eye of the king, as, bending forward,
he spoke, "King of streamy Sora! fear not the sword of Fingal. it
was never stained with the blood of the vanquished it never
pierced a fallen foe. Let thy people rejoice by their native Streams.
Let the maid of thy love be glad. Why shouldst thou fall in thy
youth, king of streamy Sora?" Frothal heard the words of Fingal,
and saw the rising maid: they <2> stood in silence, in their
beauty, like two young trees of the plain, when the shower of
spring is on their leaves, and the loud winds are laid.
	Daughter of Herman, said Frothal, didst thou come from
streams? didst thou come in thy beauty to behold thy warrior
low? But he was low before the mighty, maid of the slow-rolling
eye! The feeble did not overcome the son of car-borne Annir!
Terrible art thou, O king of Morven! in battles of the spear. But,
in peace, thou art like the sun when he looks through a silent
shower: the flowers lift their fair heads before him; the gales
shake their rustling wings. O that thou wert in Sora! that my
feast were spread! The future kings of Sora would see thy arms
and rejoice. They would rejoice at the fame of their fathers, who
beheld the mighty Fingal!
	Son of Annir, replied the king, the fame of Sora's race shall
be heard! When. chiefs are strong in war, then does the song
arise! But if their swords are stretched over the feeble; if the
blood of the weak has stained their arms; the bard shall forget
them in the song, and their tombs shall not be known. The
stranger shall come and build there, and remove the heaped-up
earth. An half-worn sword shall rise before him; bending above it,
he will say, "These are the arms of the chiefs of old, but their
names are not in song." Come thou, O Frothal! to the feast of
Inistore: let the maid of thy love be there; let our faces brighten
with joy!
	Fingal took his spear, moving in the steps of his might. The
gates of Carric-thura are opened wide. The feast of shells is
spread. The soft sound of music arose. Gladness brightened in
the hall. The voice of Ullin was heard; the harp of Selma was
strung. Utha rejoiced in his presence, and demanded the song of
grief; the big tear hung in her eye when the soft Crimora spoke.
Crimora, the daughter of Rinval, who dwelt at Lotha's roaring
stream! The tale was long, but lovely; and pleased the blushing
Utha.
	Crimora. Who cometh from the hill, like a cloud tinged with
the beam of the west? Whose voice is that, loud as the wind, but
pleasant as the harp of Carril? It is my love in the light of steel;
but sad is his darkened brow! Live the mighty race of Fingal? or
what darkens Connal's soul?
	Connal. They live. They return from the chase like a stream
of light. The sun is on their shields. Like a ridge of fire they
descend the hill. Loud is the voice of the youth! the war, my love,
is near! To-morrow the dreadful Dargo comes to try the force of 
our race . The race of Fingal he defies; the race of battles and
wounds!
	Crimora. Connal, I saw his sails like gray mist on the dark-
brown wave. They slowly came to land. Connal, many are the
warriors of Dargo.
	Connal. Bring me thy father's shield, the bossy iron shield
of Rinval! that shield like the full-orbed moon, when she moves
darkened through heaven.
	Crimora. That shield I bring, O Connal! but it did not
defend my father. By the spear of Gormar he fell. Thou mayst fall,
O Connal!
	Connal. Fall I may! but raise my tomb, Crimora! Gray
stones, a mound of earth, shall send my name to other times.
Bend thy red eye over my grave, beat thy mournful heaving
breast. Though fair thou art, my love, as the light; more pleasant
than the gale of the hill; yet I will not hear remain. Raise my
tomb, Crimora!
	Crimora. Then give me those arms that gleam; that sword
and that spear of steel. I shall meet Dargo with Connal, and aid
him in the fight. Farewell, ye rocks of Ardven! ye deer! and ye
streams of the hill! We shall return no more! Our tombs are
distant far!
	"And did they return no more?" said Utha's bursting sigh." 
Fell the mighty in battle, and did Crimora live? Her steps were
lonely; her soul was sad for Connal. Was he not young and lovely;
like the beam of the setting sun? Ullin saw the virgin's tear, he
took the softly trembling harp; the song was lovely, but sad, and
silence was in Carric-thura.
	Autumn is dark on the mountains; gray mist rests on the
hills. The whirlwind is heard on the heath. Dark rolls the river
through the narrow plain. A tree ands alone on the hill, and
marks the slumbering Connal. The leaves whirl round with the
wind, and strew the grave of the dead. At times are seen here the
ghosts of the departed, when the musing hunter alone stalks
slowly over the heath.
	Who can reach the source of thy race, O Connal, who
recount thy fathers? Thy family grew like an oak on the
mountain, which meeteth the wind with its lofty head. But now it
is torn from the earth. Who shall supply the place of Connal?
Here was the din of arms; here the groans of the dying. Bloody
are the wars of Fingal, O Connal! it was here thou didst fall.
Thine arm was like a storm; thy sword a beam of the sky; thy
height a rock on the plain; thine eyes a furnace of fire. Louder
than a storm was thy voice, in the battles of thy steel. Warriors
fell by thy sword, as the thistles by the staff of a boy. Dargo the
mighty came on, darkened in his rage. His brows were gathered
into wrath. His eyes like two caves in a rock. Bright rose their
swords on each side; loud was the clang of their steel.
	The daughter of Rinval was near; Crimora bright in the
armor of man; her yellow hair is loose behind, her bow is in her
hand. She followed the youth to the war, Connal her much-
beloved. She drew the string on Dargo; but, erring, she pierced
her Connal. He falls like an oak on the plain; like a rock from the
shaggy hill. What shall she do. hapless maid? He bleeds; her
Connal dies! All the night long she cries, and all the day, "O
Connal, my love, and my friend!"  With grief the sad mourner
dies! Earth here encloses the loveliest pair on the hill. The grass
grows between the stones of the tomb: I often sit in the mournful
shade. The wind sighs through the grass; their memory rushes
on my mind. Undisturbed you now sleep together; in the tomb of
the mountain you rest alone!
	And soft be their rest, said Utha, hapless children of
dreamy Lotha! I will remember them with tears, and my secret
song shall rise; when the wind is in the groves of Tora, when the
stream is roaring near. Then shall they come on my soul, with all
their lovely grief!
	Three days feasted the kings: on the fourth their white sails
arose. The winds of the north drove Fingal to Morven's woody
land. But the spirit of Loda sat in his cloud behind the ships of
Frothal. He hung forward with all his blasts, and spread the
white-bosomed sails. The wounds of his form were not forgotten!
he still feared the hand of the king!

<1> The narrow house: The grave.

<2> They: Frothal and Utha.



CARTHON.


ARGUMENT.

This poem is complete, and the subject of it, as of most of
Ossian's compositions, tragical. In the time of Comhal, the son of
Trathal, and father of the celebrated Fingal, Cless mmor, the son
of Thaddu, and brother of Morna, Fingal's mother, was driven by
a storm into the river Clyde, on the banks of which stood
Balclutha, a town belonging to the Britons, between the walls. He
was hospitably received by Reuth mir, the principal man in the
place, who gave him Moina, his only daughter, in marriage.
Reudo, the son of Cormo, a Briton, who was in love with Moina,
came to Reuth mir's house, and behaved haughtily towards
Cless mmor. A quarrel ensued, in which Reudo was killed; the
Britons who attended him, pressed so hard on Cless mmor, that
he was obliged to throw himself into the Clyde and swim to his
ship. He hoisted sail, and the wind being favorable, bore him out
to sea. He often endeavored to return, and carry off his beloved
Moina by night; but the wind continuing contrary, he was forced
to desist.
	Moina, who had been left with child by her husband,
brought forth a son, and died soon after. Reuth mir named the
child Carthon, i. e., "the murmur of waves," from the storm which
carried off Cless mmor his father, who was supposed to have
been cast away. When Carthon was three years old, Comhal, the
father of Fingal, in one of his expeditions against the Britons,
took and burnt Balclutha. Reuth mir was killed in the attack;
and Carthon was carried safe away by his nurse, who fled farther
into the country of the Britons. Carthon, coming to man's estate,
was resolved to revenge the fall of Balclutha on Comhal's
posterity. He set sail from the Clyde, and falling on the coast of
Morven, defeated two of Fingal's heroes, who came to oppose his
progress. He was, at last, unwittingly killed by his father
Cless mmor, in a single combat. This story is the foundation of
the present poem, which opens on the night preceding the death
of Carthon, so that what passed before is introduced by way of
episode. The poem is addressed to Malvina, the daughter of 
Toscar.

	A TALE of the times of old! The deeds of days of other
years.
	The murmur of thy streams, O Lora! brings back the
memory of the past. The sound of thy woods, Garmaller, is lovely
in mine ear. Dost thou not behold Malvina, a rock with its head
of heath! Three aged pines bend from its face; green is the narrow
plain at its feet; there the flower of the mountain grows, and
shakes its white head in the breeze. The thistle is there alone,
shedding its aged beard. Two stones, half sunk in the ground,
show their heads of moss. The deer of the mountain avoids the
place, for he beholds a dim ghost standing there. The mighty lie,
O Malvina! in the narrow plain of the rock.
	A tale of the times of old! The deeds of days of other years!
	Who comes from the land of strangers, with his thousands
around him? The sunbeam pours its bright stream before him;
his hair meets the wind of his hills. His face is settled from war.
He is calm as the evening beam that looks from the cloud of the
west, on Cona's silent vale. Who is it but Comhal's son, the king
of mighty deeds! He beholds the hills with joy, he bids a
thousand voices rise. "Ye have fled over your fields, ye sons of the
distant land! The king of the world sits in his hall, and hears of
his people's flight. He lifts his red eye of pride; he takes his
father's sword. Ye have fled over your fields, sons of the distant
land!
	Such were the words of the bards, when they came to
Selma's halls. A thousand lights from the stranger's land rose in
the midst of his people. The feast is spread around; the night
passed away in joy. Where is the noble Cless mmor? said the
fair-haired Fingal. Where is the brother of Morna, in the hour of
my joy? Sullen and dark, he passes his days in the vale of
echoing Lora: but, behold, he comes from the hill, like a steed in
his strength, who finds his companions in the breeze, and tosses
his bright mane in the wind. Blest be the soul of Cless mmor,
why so long from Selma?
	Returns the chief, said Cless mmor, in the midst of his
fame? Such was the renown of Comhal in the battles of his
youth. Often did we pass over Carun to the land of the strangers:
our swords returned, not unstained with blood: nor did the kings
of the world rejoice. Why do I remember the times of our war? My
hair is mixed with gray. My hand forgets to bend the bow: I lift a
lighter spear. O that my joy would return, as when I first beheld
the maid; the white bosomed daughter of strangers, Moina, with
the dark-blue eyes!
	Tell, said the mighty Fingal, the tale of thy youthful days.
Sorrow, like a cloud on the sun, shades the soul of Cless mmor.
Mournful are thy thoughts, alone, on the banks of the roaring
Lora. Let us hear the sorrow of thy youth and the darkness of thy
days!
	"It was in the days of peace," replied the great Cless mmor,
"I came in my bounding ship to Balclutha's walls of towers. The
winds had roared behind my sails, and Clutha's streams received
my dark-bosomed ship. Three days I remained in Reuth mir's
halls, and saw his daughter, that beam of light. The joy of the
shell went round, and the aged hero gave the fair. Her breasts
were like foam on the waves, and her eyes like stars of light; her
hair was dark as the raven's wing: her soul was generous and
mild. My love for Moina was great; my heart poured forth in joy.
	"The son of a stranger came; a chief who loved the white-
bosomed Moina. His words were mighty in the hall; he often half-
unsheathed his sword. 'Where,' said he, 'is the mighty Comhal,
the restless wanderer of the heath? Comes he, with his host, to
Balclutha, since Cless mmor is so bold?' My soul, I replied, O 
warrior! burns in a light of its own. I stand without fear in the
midst of thousands, though the valiant are distant far. Stranger!
thy words are mighty, for Cless mmor is alone. But my sword
trembles by my side, and longs to glitter in my hand. Speak no
more of Comhal, son of the winding Clutha!
	"The strength of his pride arose. We fought: he fell beneath
my sword. The banks of Clutha heard his fall; a thousand spears
glittered around. I fought: the strangers prevailed: I plunged into
the stream of Clutha. My white sails rose over the waves, and I
bounded on the dark-blue sea. Moina came to the shore, and
rolled the red eye of her tears; her loose hair flew on the wind;
and I heard her mournful, distant cries. Often did I turn my ship;
but the winds of the east prevailed. Nor Clutha ever since have I
seen, nor Moina of the dark-brown hair. She fell in Balclutha, for
I have seen her ghost. I knew her as she came through the dusky
night, along the murmur of Lora: she was like the new moon,
seen through the gathered mist; when the sky pours down its
flaky snow, and the world is silent and dark."
	Raise, ye bards, said the mighty Fingal, the praise of
unhappy Moina. Call her ghost, with your songs, to our hills, that
she may rest with the fair of Morven, the sunbeams of other days,
the delight of heroes of old. I have seen the walls of Balclutha,
but they were desolate. The fire had resounded in the halls: and
the voice of the people is heard no more. The stream of Clutha
was removed from its place by the fall of the walls. The thistle
shook there its lonely head: the moss whistled to the wind. The
fox looked out from the windows, the rank grass of the wall
waved round its head. Desolate is the dwelling of Moina, silence
is in the house of her fathers. Raise the song of mourning, O 
bards, over the land of strangers. They have but fallen before us:
for one day we must fall. Why dost thou build the hall, son of the
winged days? Thou lookest from thy towers to-day: yet a few
years, and the blast of the desert comes; it howls in thy empty
court, and whistles round thy half-worn shield. And let the blast
of the desert come! we shall be renowned in our day! The mark of
my arm shall be in battle; my name in the song of bards. Raise
the song, send round the shell: let joy be heard in my hall. When
thou, sun of heaven! shalt fail; if thou shalt fail, thou mighty
light! if thy brightness is for a season, like Fingal; our fame shall
survive thy beams.
	Such was the song of Fingal in the day of his joy. His
thousand bards leaned forward from their seats, to hear the voice
of the king. It was like the music of harps on the gale of the
spring. Lovely were thy  thoughts, O Fingal! why had not Ossian
the strength of thy soul? But thou standest alone, my father! who
can equal the king of Selma?
	The night passed away in song; morning returned in joy.
The mountains showed their gray heads; the blue face of ocean
smiled. The white wave is seen tumbling round the distant rock;
a mist rose slowly from the lake. It came, in the figure of an aged
man, along the silent plain. Its large limbs did not move in steps,
for a ghost supported it in mid air. It came towards Selma's hall,
and dissolved in a shower of blood.
	The king alone beheld the sight; he foresaw the death of the
people. He came in silence to his hall, and took his father's spear.
The mail rattled on his breast. The heroes rose around. They
looked in silence on each other, marking the eyes of Fingal. They
saw battle in his face; the death of armies on his spear. A
thousand shields at once are placed on their arms; they drew a
thousand swords. The hall of Selma brightened around. The
clang of arms ascends. The gray dogs howl in their place. No
word is among the mighty chiefs. Each marked the eyes of the
king and half-assumed his spear.
	Sons of Morven, began the king, this is no time to fill the
shell; the battle darkens near us, death hovers over the land.
Some ghost, the friend of Fingal, has forewarned us of the foe.
The sons of the stranger come from the darkly rolling sea; for
from the water came the sign of Morven's gloomy danger. Let
each assume his heavy spear, each gird on his father's sword. Let
the dark helmet rise on every head; the mail pour its lightning
from every side. The battle gathers like a storm; soon shall ye
hear the roar of death.
	The hero moved on before his host, like a cloud before a
ridge of green fire, when it pours on the sky of night, and
mariners foresee a storm. On Cona's rising heath they stood: the
white-bosomed maids beheld them above like a grove; they
foresaw the death of the youth, and looked towards the sea with
fear. The white wave deceived them for distant sails; the tear is
on their cheek! The sun rose on the sea, and we beheld a distant
fleet. Like the mist of ocean they came and poured their youth
upon the coast. The chief was among them, like the stag in the
midst of the herd. His shield is studded with gold; stately strode
the king of spears. He moved towards Selma; his thousands
moved behind.
	Go, with a song of peace, said Fingal: go, Ullin, to the king
of swords. Tell him that we are mighty in war; that the ghosts of
our foes are many. But renowned are they who have feasted in
my halls; show the arms of my fathers in a foreign land; the Sons
of the strangers wonder, and bless the friends of Morven's race;
for our names have been heard afar: the kings of the world shook
in the midst of their host.
	Ullin went with his song. Fingal rested on his spear: he saw
the mighty foe in his armor: he blest the stranger's son. "How
stately art thou, son of the sea!" said the king of woody Morven.
"Thy sword is a beam of fire by thy side; thy spear is a pine that
defies the storm. The varied face of the moon is not broader than
thy shield. Ruddy is thy face of youth! soft the ringlets of thy hair!
But this tree may fall, and his memory be forgot! The daughter of
the stranger will be sad, looking to the rolling sea: the children
will say, 'We see a ship; perhaps it is the king of Balclutha.' The
tear starts from their mother's eye: her thoughts are of him who
sleeps in Morven!"
	Such were the words of the king when Ullin came to the
mighty Carthon: he threw down the spear before him, he raised
the song of peace. "Come to the feast of Fingal, Carthon, from the
rolling sea! partake of the feast of the king, or lift the spear of
war! The ghosts of our foes are many: but renowned are the
friends of Morven! Behold that field, O Carthon! many a green hill
rises there, with mossy stones and rustling grass; these are the
tombs of Fingal's foes, the Sons of the rolling sea!"
	"Dost thou speak to the weak in arms!" said Carthon, "bard
of the woody Morven? Is my face pale for fear, son of the peaceful
song? Why then dost thou think to darken my soul with the tales
of those who fell? My arm has fought in battle, my renown is
known afar. Go to the feeble in arms, bid them yield to Fingal.
Have not I seen the fallen Balclutha? And shall I feast with
Comhal's son? Comhal, who threw his fire in the midst of my
father's hall? I was young, and knew not the cause why the
virgins wept. The columns of smoke pleased mine eye, when they
rose above my walls! I often looked back with gladness when my
friends flew along the hill. But when the years of my youth came
on, I beheld the moss of my fallen walls. My sigh arose with the
morning, and my tears descended with night. Shall I not fight, I
said to my soul, against the children of my foes? And I will fight,
O bard! I feel the strength of my soul!"
	His people gathered around the hero, and drew at once
their shining swords. He stands in the midst, like a pillar of fire,
the tear half-starting from his eye, for he thought of the fallen
Balclutha. The crowded pride of his soul arose. Sidelong he
looked up to the hill, where our heroes shone in arms: the spear
trembled in his hand. Bending forward, he seemed to threaten
the king.
	Shall I, said Fingal to his soul, meet at once the youth?
Shall I stop him in the midst of his course before his fame shall
arise! But the bard hereafter may say, when he sees the tomb of
Carthon, Fingal took his thousands to battle, before the noble
Carthon fell. No: bard of the times to come! thou shalt not lessen
Fingal's fame! my heroes will fight the youth, and Fingal behold
the war. If he overcomes, I rush, in my strength, like the roaring
stream of Cona. Who of my chiefs will meet the son of the rolling
sea? Many are his warriors on the coast, and strong is his ashen
spear!
	Cathul rose in his strength, the son of the mighty Lormar:
three hundred youths attend the chief, the race of his native
streams. Feeble was his arm against Carthon: he fell, and his
heroes fled. Connal resumed the battle, but he broke his heavy
spear: he lay bound on the field: Carthon pursued his people.
	Cless mmor, said the king of Morven, where is the spear of
thy strength. Wilt thou behold Connal bound: thy friend at the
stream of Lora? Rise, in the light of thy steel, companion of
valiant Comhal! let the youth of Balclutha feel the strength of
Morven's race. He rose in the strength of his steel, shaking his
grisly locks. He fitted the steel to his side; he rushed in the pride
of valor.
	Carthon stood on a rock: he saw the hero rushing on. He
loved the dreadful joy of his face: his strength in the locks of age!
"Shall I lift that spear," he said, "that never strikes but once a
foe? Or shall I, with the words of peace, preserve the warrior's
life? Stately are his steps of age! lovely the remnant of his years!
Perhaps it is the husband of Moina, the father of car-borne
Carthon. Often have I heard that he dwelt at the echoing stream
of Lora."
	Such were his words when Cless mmor came, and lifted
high his spear. The youth received it on his shield, and spoke the
words of peace. "Warrior of the aged locks! is there no youth to
lift the spear? Hast thou no son to raise the shield before his
father to meet the arm of youth? Is the spouse of thy love no
more? or weeps she over the tombs of thy sons? Art thou of the
kings of men? What will be the fame of my sword shouldst thou
fall?"
	It will be great, thou son of pride! begun the tall
Cless mmor. I have been renowned in battle, but I - never told
my name to a foe. <1> Yield to me, son of the wave, then shalt
thou know that the mark of my sword is in many a field. " I never
yielded, king of spears!" replied the noble pride of Carthon: "I
have also fought in war, I behold my future fame. Despise me
not, thou chief of men! my arm, my spear is strong. Retire among
thy friends; let younger heroes fight." Why dost thou wound my
soul? replied Cless mmor, with a tear. Age does not tremble on
my hand. I still can lift the sword. Shall I fly in Fingal's sight, in
the sight of him I love? Son of the sea! I never fled: exalt thy
pointed spear.
	They fought like two contending winds, that strive to roil
the wave. Calthon bade his spear to err: he still thought that the
foe was the spouse of Moina. He broke Cless mmor's beamy
spear in twain: he seized his shining sword. But as Carthon was
binding the chief, the chief drew the dagger of his fathers. He saw
the foe's uncovered side, and opened there a wound.
	Fingal saw Cless mmor low: he moved in the sound of his
steel. The host stood silent in his presence: they turned their eyes
to the king. He came like the sullen noise of a storm before the
winds arise: the hunter hears it in the vale, and retires to the
cave of the rock. Carthon stood in his place, the blood is rushing
down his side: he saw the coming down of the king, his hopes of
fame arose, but pale was his cheek: his hair flew loose, his
helmet shook on high: the force of Carthon failed, but his sword
was strong.
	Fingal beheld the hero's blood; he stopt the uplifted spear.
"Yield, king of swords!" said Comhal's son, "I behold thy blood;
thou hast been mighty in battle, and thy fame shall never fade."
Art thou the king so far renowned? replied the car-borne
Carthon: art thou that light of death, that frightens the kings of
the world? But why should Carthon ask? for he is like the stream
of his hills, strong as a river in his course, swift as the eagle of
heaven. O that I had fought with the king, that my fame might be
great in song! that the hunter,  beholding my tomb, might say, he
fought with the mighty Fingal. But Carthon dies unknown: he
has poured out his force on the weak.
	" But thou shalt not die unknown, replied the king of 
woody Morven: my bards are many, O Carthon! their songs
descend to future times. The children of years to come shall hear
the fame of Carthon, when they sit round the burning oak, and
the night is spent in songs of old. The hunter, sitting in the
heath, shall hear the rustling blast, and raising his eyes, behold
the rock where Carthon fell. He shall turn to his son, and show
the place where the mighty fought: There the king of Balclutha
fought, like the strength of a thousand streams."
	Joy rose in Carthon's face; he lifted his heavy eyes. He gave
his sword to Fingal, to lie within his hall, that the memory of
Balclutha's king might remain in Morven. The battle ceased along
the field, the bard had sung the song of peace. The chiefs
gathered round the falling Carthon; they heard his words with
sighs. Silent they leaned on their spears, while Balclutha's hero
spoke. His hair sighed in the wind, and his voice was sad and
low.
	"King of Morven," Carthon said, "I fall in the midst of my
course. A foreign tomb receives, in youth, the last of Reuth mir's
race. Darkness dwells in Balclutha; the shadows of grief in
Crathmo. But raise my remembrance on the banks of Lora, where
my fathers dwelt. Perhaps the husband of Moina will mourn over
his fallen Carthon." His words reached the heart of Cless mmor:
he fell in silence on his son. The host stood darkened around: no
voice is on the plain. Night came: the moon, from the east, looked
on the mournful field; but still they stood, like a silent grove that
lifts its head on Gormal, when the loud winds are laid, and dark
autumn is on the plain.
	Three days they mourned above Carthon; on the fourth his
father died. In the narrow plain of the rock they lie; a dim ghost
defends their tomb. There lovely Moina is often seen, when the
sunbeam darts on the rock, and all around is dark. There she is
seen, Malvina; but not like the daughters of the hill. Her robes
are from the stranger's land, and she is still alone!
	Fingal was sad for Carthon; he commanded his bards to
mark the day when shadowy autumn returned; and often did
they mark the day, and sing the hero's praise. "Who comes so
dark from ocean's roar, like autumn's shadowy cloud? Death is
trembling in his hand! his eyes are flames of fire! Who roars along
dark Lora's heath? Who but Carthon, king of swords!  The people
fall! see how he strides like the sullen ghost of Morven! But there
he lies, a goodly oak which sudden blasts overturned! When shalt
thou rise, Balclutha's joy? When, Carthon, shalt thou arise? Who
comes so dark from ocean's roar, like autumn's shadowy cloud?"
Such were the words of the bards in the day of their mourning;
Ossian often joined their voice, and added to their song. My soul
has been mournful for Carthon: he fell in the days of his youth;
and thou, O Cless mmor! where is thy dwelling in the wind? Has
the youth forgot his wound? Flies he on clouds with thee? I feel
the sun, O Malvina! leave me to my rest. Perhaps they may come
to my dreams: I think I hear a feeble voice! The beam of heaven
delights to shine on the grave of Carthon: I feel it warm around.
	O thou that rollest above, round as the shield of my
fathers! Whence are thy beams, O sun! thy everlasting light! Thou
comest forth in thy awful beauty; the stars hide themselves in the
sky; the moon, cold and pale, sinks in the western wave; but
thou thyself movest alone. Who can be a companion of thy
course? The oaks of the mountains fall; the mountains
themselves decay with years; the ocean shrinks and grows again;
the moon herself is lost in heaven: but thou art forever the same,
rejoicing in the brightness of thy course. When the world is dark
with tempests, when thunder rolls and lightning flies, thou
lookest in thy  beauty from the clouds, and laughest at the storm.
But to Ossian thou lookest in vain, for he beholds thy beams no
more: whether thy yellow hair flows on the eastern clouds, or
thou tremblest at the gates of the west. But thou art, perhaps,
like me, for a season; thy years will have an end. Thou shalt sleep
in thy clouds, careless of the voice of the morning. Exult then, O
sun, in the strength of thy youth! age is dark and unlovely; it is
like the glimmering light of the moon, when it shines through
broken clouds, and the mist is on the hills: the blast of the north
is on the plain, the traveller shrinks in the midst of his journey.

<1> To tell one's name to an enemy, was reckoned, in those days
of heroism, a manifest evasion of fighting him; for if it was once
known that friendship subsisted of old, between the ancestors of
the combatants. the battle immediately ceased, and the ancient
amity of their forefathers was renewed. "A man who tells his
name to his enemy," was of old an ignominious term for a
coward.



OINA-MORUL.

ARGUMENT.

After an address to Malvina, the daughter of Toscar, Ossian
proceeds to relate his own expedition to Furfed, an island of
Scandinavia. Mal-orchol, king of Furfed, being hard pressed in
war by Ton-thormod, chief of Sar-dronto (who had demanded in
vain the daughter of Mal-orchol in marriage,) Fingal sent Ossian
to his aid. Ossian, on the day after his arrival, came to battle with
Ton-thormod, and took him prisoner. Mal-orchol offers his
daughter, Oina-morul, to Ossian; but he, discovering her passion
for Ton-thormod, generously surrenders her to her lover, and
brings about a reconciliation between the two kings.

	As flies the inconstant sun over Larmon's grassy hill so
pass the tales of old along my soul by night! When bards are
removed to their place, when harps are hung in Selma's hall,
then comes a voice to Ossian, and awakes his soul! It is the voice
of years that are gone! they roll before me with all their deeds! I
seize the tales as they pass, and pour them forth in song. Nor a
troubled stream is the song of the king, it is like the rising of
music from Lutha of the strings. Lutha of many strings, not silent
are thy streamy rocks, when the white hands of Malvina move
upon the harp! Light of the shadowy thoughts that fly across my
soul, daughter of Toscar of helmets, wilt thou not hear the song?
We call back, maid of Lutha, the years that have rolled away! It
was in the days of the king, while yet my locks were young, that I
marked Con-cathlin <1> on high, from ocean's nightly wave. My
course was towards the isle of Furfed, woody dweller of seas!
Fingal had sent me to the aid Mal-orchol, king of Furfed wild:
for war was around him, and our fathers had met at the feast.
	In Col-coiled I bound my sails. I sent my sword to Mal-
orchol of shells. He knew the signal of Albion, and his joy arose.
He came from his own high hall, and seized my hand in grief.
"Why comes the race of heroes to a falling king? Ton-thormod of
many spears is the chief of wavy Sar-dronlo. He saw and loved
my daughter, white-bosomed Oina-morul. He sought. I denied
the maid, for our fathers had been foes. He came with battle to
Furfed; my people are rolled away. Why comes the race of
heroes to a falling king?"
	I come not, I said, to look, like a boy, on the strife. Fingal
remembers Mal-orchol, and his hall for strangers. From his
waves the warrior descended on thy woody isle: thou wert no
cloud before him. Thy feast was spread with songs. For this my
sword shall rise, and thy foes perhaps may fail. Our friends are
not forgot in their danger, though distant is our land.
	"Descendant of the daring Trenmor, thy words are like the
voice of Cruth-Loda, when he speaks from his parting cloud,
strong dweller of the sky! Many have rejoiced at my feast; but
they all have forgot Mal-orchol. I have looked towards all the
winds, but no white sails were seen! but steel resounds in my
hall, and not the joyful shells. Come to my dwelling, race of
heroes! dark-skirted night is near. Hear the voice of songs from
the maid of Furfed wild."
	We went. On the harp arose the white hands of Oina-
morul. She waked her own sad tale from every trembling string. I
stood in silence; for bright in her locks was the daughter of many
isles! Her eyes were two stars, looking forward through a rushing
shower. The mariner marks them on high, and blesses the lovely
beams. With morning we rushed to battle, to Tormul's
resounding stream: the foe moved to the sound of Ton-thormod's
bossy shield. From wing to wing the strife was mixed. I met Ton-
thormod in fight. Wide flew his broken steel. I seized the king in
war. I gave his hand, fast bound with thongs, to Mal-orchol, the
giver of shells. Joy rose at the feast of Furfed, for the foe had
failed. Ton-thormod turned his face away from Oina-morul of
isles.
	Son of Fingal, began Mal-orchol, not forgot shalt thou pass
from me. A light shall dwell in thy ship, Oina-morul of slow-
rolling eyes. She shall kindle gladness along thy mighty soul. Nor
unheeded shall the maid move in Selma through the dwelling of
kings.
	In the hall I lay in night. Mine eyes were half closed in
sleep. Soft music came to mine ear. It was like the rising breeze,
that whirls at first the thistle's beard, then flies dark-shadowy
over the grass. It was the maid of Furfed wild! she raised the
nightly song; she knew that my soul was a stream that flowed at
pleasant sounds. "Who looks," she said, "from his rock on ocean's
closing mist? His long locks like the raven's wing, are wandering
on the blast. -- Stately are his steps in grief! The tears are in his
eyes! His manly breast is heaving over his bursting soul! Retire, I
am distant afar, a wanderer in lands unknown. Though the race
of kings are around me, yet my soul is dark. Why have our
fathers been foes, Ton-thormod, love of maids!"
	"Soft voice of the streamy isle," I said, "why dost thou
mourn by night? The race of daring Trenmor are not the dark in
soul. Thou shalt not wander by streams unknown, blue-eyed
Oina-morul! within this bosom is a voice: it comes not to other
ears: it bids Ossian hear the hapless in their hour of woe. Retire,
soft singer by night! Ton-thormod shall not mourn on his rock!"
	With morning I loosed the king. I gave the long-haired
maid. Mal-orchol heard my words in the midst of his echoing
halls. "King of Furfed wild, why should Ton-thormod mourn? He
is of the race of heroes, and a flame in war. Your fathers have
been foes, but now their dim ghosts rejoice in death. They stretch
their hands of mist to the same shell in Loda. Forget their rage,
ye warriors! It was the cloud of other years."
	Such were the deeds of Ossian, while yet his locks were
young; though loveliness, with a robe of beams, clothed the
daughter of many isles. We call back,  of Lutha, the years that
have rolled away!

<1> Con-cathlin, "mild beam of the wave." What star was so
called of old is not easily ascertained. Some now distinguish the
pole-star by that name.



COLNA-DONA.

ARGUMENT.

Fingal despatches Ossian and Toscar, the son of Conloch, and
father of Malvina, to raise a stone on the banks of the stream of
Crona, to perpetuate the memory of a victory which he had
obtained in that place. When they were employed in that work,
Car-ul, a neighboring chief, invited them to a feast. They went,
and Toscar fell desperately in love with Colna-dona, the daughter
of Car-ul. Colna-dona became no less enamored of Toscar. An
incident at a hunting party brings their loves to a happy issue.

	COL-AMON <1> of troubled streams, dark wanderer of
distant vales, I behold thy course, between trees near Car-ul's
echoing halls! There dwelt bright Colna-dona, the daughter of the
king. Her eyes were rolling stars; her arms were white as the
foam of streams. Her breast rose slowly to sight, like ocean's
heaving wave. Her soul was a stream of light. Who, among the
maids was like the love of heroes?
	Beneath the voice of the king we moved to Crona <2> of the
streams, Toscar of grassy Lutha, and Ossian young in fields.
Three bards attended with songs. Three bossy shields were borne
before us; for we were to rear the stone in memory of the past. By
Crona's mossy course Fingal had scattered his foes; he had rolled
away the strangers like a troubled sea. We came to the place of
renown; from the mountains descended night. I tore an oak from
its hill, and raised a flame on high. I bade my fathers to look
down from the clouds of their hall; for, at the fame of their race
they brighten in the wind.
	I took a stone from the stream, amidst the song of bards.
The blood of Fingal's foes hung curdled in its ooze. Beneath I
placed, at intervals, three bosses from the shield of foes, as rose
or fell the sound of Ullin's nightly song. Toscar laid a dagger in
earth, a mail of sounding steel. We raised the mould around the
stone, and bade it speak to other years.
	Oozy daughter of streams, that now art reared on high,
speak to the feeble, O stone! after Selma's race have failed! Prone
from the stormy night, the traveller shall lay him by thy side: thy
whistling moss shall sound in his dreams; the years that were
past shall return. Battles rise before him, blue-shielded kings
descend to war: the darkened moon looks from heaven on the
troubled field. He shall burst with morning from dreams, and see
the tombs of warriors round. He shall ask about the stone, and
the aged shall reply, "This gray stone was raised by Ossian, a
chief of other years!"
	From Col-amon came a bard, from Car-ul, the friend of
strangers. He bade us to the feast of kings, to the dwelling of
bright Colna-dona. We went to the hall of harps. There Car-ul
brightened between his aged locks, when he beheld the sons of
his friends, like two young branches before him.
	"Sons of the mighty," he said, "ye bring back the days of
old, when first I descended from waves, on Selma's streamy vale!
I pursued Duthmocarglos, dweller of ocean's wind. Our fathers
had been foes; we met by Clutha's winding waters. He fled along
the sea, and my sails were spread behind him. Night deceived me
on the deep. I came to the dwelling of kings, to Selma of high-
bosomed maids. Fingal came forth with his bards, and Conloch,
arm of heath. I feasted three days in the hall, and saw the blue
eye.  Erin, Roscrana, daughter of heroes, light of Cormac's race.
Nor forgot did my steps depart: the kings gave their shields to
Car-ul: they hang on high in Col-amon, in memory of the past.
Sons of the daring kings, ye bring back the days of old!
	Car-ul kindled the oak of feasts, he took two bosses from
our shields. He laid them in earth beneath a stone, to speak to
the hero's race. "When battle," said the king, "shall roar, and our
sons are to meet in wrath, my race shall look perhaps on this
stone, when they prepare the spear. Have not our fathers met in
peace? they will say, and lay aside the shield."
	Night came down. In her long locks moved the daughter of
Car-ul. Mixed with the harp arose the voice of white-armed
Colna-dona. Toscar darkened in his place before the love of
heroes. She came on  his troubled soul, like a beam to the dark-
heaving ocean, when it bursts from a cloud, and brightens the
foamy side of a wave. <3>

*          *          *          *          *          *          *

	With morning we awaked the woods and hung forward on
the path of the roes. They fell by their wonted streams. We
returned through Crona's vale. From the wood a youth came
forward, with a shield and pointless spear. -- "Whence," said
Toscar of Lutha, "is the flying beam? Dwells there peace at Col-
amon, round bright Colna-dona of harps?"
	"By Col-amon of streams," said the youth, "bright Colna-
dona dwelt. She dwelt; but her course is now in deserts with the
son of the king; he that seized with love her soul as it wandered
through the hall."  "Stranger of tales," said Toscar, "hast thou
marked the warrior's course? He must fall; give thou that bossy
shield." In wrath he took the shield. Fair behind it rose the
breasts of a maid, white as the bosom of a swan, rising graceful
on swift-rolling waves, It was Colna-dona of harps, the daughter
of the king! Her blue eyes had rolled on Toscar, and her love
arose!


<1> Colna-dona signifies "the love of heroes." Col-amon, "narrow
river." Car-ul, "dark-eyed."

<2> Crona, "murmuring," was the name of a small stream which
discharged itself in the river Carron.

<3> Here an episode is entirely lost; or, at least, is handed down
so imperfectly, that it does not deserve a place in the poem.



OITHONA.


ARGUMENT.

Gaul, the son of Morni, attended Lathmon into his own country,
after his being defeated in Morven, as related in a preceding
poem. He was kindly entertained by Nuth, the father of
Lathmon, and fell in love with his daughter Oithona. The lady
was no less enamored of Gaul, and a day was fixed for their
marriage. In the mean time Fingal, preparing for an expedition
into the country of the Britons, sent for Gaul. He obeyed, and
went; but not without promising to Oithona to return, it he
survived the war, by a certain day. Lathmon too was obliged to
attend his father Nuth in his wars, and Oithona was left alone
at Dunlathmon, the seat of the family. Dunrommath, Lord of
Uthal, supposed to be one of the Orkneys, taking advantage of
the absence of her friends, came and carried off, by force,
Oithona, who had formerly rejected his love, into Trom thon, a
desert island, where he concealed her in a cave.
	Gaul returned on the day appointed; heard of the rape, and
sailed to Trom thon, to revenge himself on Dunrommath. When
he landed, he found Oithona disconsolate, and resolved not to
survive the loss of her honor. She told him the story of her
misfortunes, and she scarce ended when Dunrommath with his
followers appeared at the farther end of the island. Gaul prepared
to attack him, recommending to Uithona to retire till the battle
was over. She seemingly obeyed; but she secretly armed herself
rushed into the thickest of the battle, and was mortally wounded.
Gaul, pursuing the flying enemy, found her just expiring on the
field; he mourned over her, raised her tomb, and returned to
Morven. Thus is the story handed down by tradition; nor is it
given with any material difference in the poem, which opens with
Gaul's return to Dunlathmon, after the rape of Oithona.


DARKNESS dwells around Dunlathmon, though the moon shows
half her face on the hill. The daughter of night turns her eyes
away; she beholds the approaching grief. The son of Morni is on
the plain: there is no sound in the hall. No long streaming beam
of light comes trembling through the gloom. The voice of Oithona
is not heard amidst the noise of the streams of Dunranna.
"Whither art thou gone in thy  beauty, dark-haired daughter of
Nuth? Lathmon is in the field of the valiant, but thou didst
promise to remain in the hall till the son of Morni returned. Till
he returned from Strumon, to the maid of his love! The tear was
on thy cheek at his departure; the sigh rose in secret in thy
breast. But thou dost not come forth with songs, with the lightly
trembling sound of the harp!"
	Such were the words of Gaul, when he came to
Dunlathmon's towers. The gates were open and dark. The winds
were blustering in the hall. The trees strewed the threshold with
leaves; the murmur of night was abroad. Sad and silent, at a
rock, the son of Morni sat: his soul trembled for the maid; but he
knew not whither to turn his course! The son of Leth stood at a
distance, and heard the winds in his bushy hair. But he did not
raise his voice, for he saw the sorrow of Gaul!
	Sleep descended on the chiefs. The visions of night arose.
Oithona stood, in a dream, before the eyes of Morni's son. Her
hair was loose and disordered; her lovely eye rolled deep in tears.
Blood stained her snowy arm. The robe half hid the wound of her
breast. She stood over the chief, and her voice was feebly heard. "
Sleeps the son of Morni, he that was lovely in the eyes of
Oithona? Sleeps Gaul at the distant rock, and the daughter of
Nuth low? The sea rolls round the dark isle of Trom thon. I sit
in my tears in the cave! Nor do I sit alone, O Gaul! the dark chief
of Cuthal is there. He is there in the rage of his love. What can
Oithona do?"
	A rougher blast rushed through the oak. The dream  of
night departed. Gaul took his aspen spear. He stood in the rage
of his soul. Often did hid turn to the east. He accused the lagging
light. At length the morning came forth. The hero lifted up the
sail. The winds came rustling from the hill; he bounded on the
waves of the deep. On the third day arose Trom thon, like a blue
shield in the midst of the sea. The white wave roared against its
rocks; sad Oithona sat on the coast! She looked on the rolling
waters, and her tears came down. But when she saw Gaul in his
arms, she started, and turned her eyes away. Her lovely cheek is
bent and red; her white arm trembles by her side. Thrice she
strove to fly from his presence; thrice her steps failed as she
went!
	"Daughter of Nuth," said the hero, " why dost thou fly
from Gaul? Do my eyes send forth the flame of death? Darkens
hatred in my soul? Thou art to me the beam of the east, rising in
a land unknown. But thou coverest thy face with sadness,
daughter of car-borne Nuth! Is the foe of Oithona near! My soul
burns to meet him in fight. The sword trembles by the side of
Gaul, and longs to glitter in his hand. Speak, daughter of Nuth!
Dost thou not behold my tears?"
	" Young chief of Strumon," replied the maid, " why comest
thou over the dark-blue wave, to Nuth's mournful daughter!
Why did I not pass away in secret, like the flower of the rock, that
lifts its fair head unseen, and strews its withered leaves on the
blast! Why didst thou come, O Gaul! to hear my departing sigh! I
vanish in my youth; my name shall not be heard. Or it will be
heard with grief; the tears of Nuth must fall. Thou wilt be sad,
son of Morni! for the departed fame of Oithona. But she shall
sleep in the narrow tomb, far from the voice of the mourner. Why
didst thou come, chief of Strumon! to the sea-beat rocks of
Trom thon!"
	"I came to meet thy foes, daughter of car-borne Nuth! The
death of Cuthal's chief darkens before me; or Morni's son shall
fall! Oithona! when Gaul is low, raise my tomb on that oozy rock.
When the dark, bounding ship shall pass, call the sons of the
sea; call them, and give this sword, to bear it hence to Morni's
hall. The gray-haired chief will then cease to look towards the
desert for the return of his son!"
	"Shall the daughter of Nuth live?" she replied, with a
bursting sig. "Shall I live in Trom thon, and the son of Morni
low? My heart is not of that rock; nor my soul careless as that
sea, which lifts its blue waves to every wind, and rolls beneath
the storm! The blast which shall lay thee low, shall spread the
branches of Oithona on earth. We shall wither together, son of
car-borne Morni! The narrow house is pleasant to me, and the
gray stone of the dead: for never more will I leave thy rocks, O
sea-surrounded Trom thon! Night came on with her clouds after
the departure of Lathmon, when he went to the wars of his
fathers, to the moss-covered rock of Duthrmoth. Night came on.
I sat in the hall, at the beam of the oak! The wind was abroad in
the trees. I heard the sound of arms. Joy rose in my face. I
thought of thy return. It was the chief of Cuthal, the red-haired
strength of Dunrommath. His eyes rolled in fire: the blood of my
people was on his sword. They who defended Oithona fell by the
gloomy chief! What could I do? My arm was weak. I could not lift
the spear. He took me in my grief; amidst my tears he raised the
sail. He feared the returning Lathmon, the brother of unhappy
Oithona! But behold, he comes with his people! the dark wave is
divided before him! Whither wilt thou turn thy steps, son of
Morni? Many are the warriors of thy foe!"
	"My steps never turned from battle," Gaul said, and
unsheathed his sword: " shall I then begin to fear, Oithona! when
thy foes are near? Go to thy cave, my love, till our battle tease on
the field. Son of Leth bring the bows of our fathers! the sounding
quiver of Morni! Let our three warriors bend the yew. Ourselves
will lift the spear. They are a host on the rock! our souls are
strong in war!
	Oithona went to the cave. A troubled joy rose on her mind,
like the red path of lightning on a stormy cloud! Her soul was
resolved: the tear was dried from her wildly-looking eye.
Dunrommath slowly approached. He saw the son of Morni.
Contempt contracted his face, a smile is on his dark-brown
cheek; his red eye rolled half concealed, beneath his shaggy
brows!
	"Whence are the sons of the sea?" began the gloomy chief.
Have the winds driven you on the rocks of Trom thon? or come
you in search of the white-handed maid? the sons of the
unhappy, ye feeble men, come to the hand of Dunrommath! His
eye spares not the weak; he delights in the blood of strangers.
Oithona is a beam of light, and the chief of Cuthal enjoys it in
secret; wouldst thou come on its loveliness like a cloud, son of
the feeble hand? Thou mayest come, but shalt thou return to the
halls of thy fathers?"
	" Dost thou not know me," said Gaul, "red-haired chief of
Cuthal? Thy feet were swift on the heath, in the battle of car-
borne Lathmon; when the sword of Morni's son pursued his host,
in Morven's woody land. Dunrommath! thy words are mighty, for
thy warriors gather behind thee. But do I fear them, son of pride?
I am not of the race of the feeble!"
	Gaul advanced in his arms; Dunrommath shrunk behind
his people. But the spear of Gaul pierced the gloomy chief: his
sword lopped off his head, as it bended in death. The son of
Morni shook it thrice by the lock; the warriors of Dunrommath
fled. The arrows of Morven pursued them: ten fell on the mossy
rocks. The rest lift the sounding sail, and bound on the troubled
deep. Gaul advanced towards the cave of Oithona. He beheld a
youth leaning on a rock. An arrow had pierced his side; his eye
rolled faintly beneath his helmet. The soul of Morni's son was
sad; he came, and spoke the words of peace.
	" Can the hand of Gaul heal thee, youth of the mournful
brow? I have searched for the herbs of the mountains; I have
gathered them on the secret banks of their streams. My hand has
closed the wound of the brave, their eyes have blessed the son of
Morni. Where dwelt thy fathers, warrior? Were they of the sons of
the mighty! Sadness shall come, like night, on thy native
streams. Thou art fallen in thy youth!"
	" My fathers," replied the stranger, " were of the race of the
mighty; but they shall not be sad; for my fame is departed like
morning mist. High walls rise on the banks of Duvranna; and see
their mossy towers in the stream; a rock ascends behind them
with its bending pines. Thou mayest behold it far distant. There
my brother dwells. He is renowned in battle: give him this
glittering helmet."
	The helmet fell from the hand of Gaul. It was the wounded
Oithona! She had armed herself in the cave, and came in search
of death. Her heavy eyes are half closed; the blood pours from her
heaving side. "Son of Morni!" she said, "prepare the narrow tomb.
Sleep grows, like darkness, on my soul. The eyes of Oithona are
dim! O had I dwelt at Duvranna, in the bright beam of my fame!
then had my years come on with joy; the virgins would then bless
my steps. But I fall in youth, son of Morni! my father shall blush
in his hall!"
	She fell pale on the rock of Trom thon. The mournful
warrior raised her tomb. He came to Morven; we saw the
darkness of his soul. Ossian took the harp in the praise of
Oithona. The brightness of the face of Gaul returned. But his sigh
rose, at times, in the midst of his friends; like blasts that shake
their unfrequent wings, after the stormy winds are laid!


CROMA.


ARGUMENT.

Malvina, the daughter of Toscar, is overheard by Ossian
lamenting the death of Oscar her lover. Ossian, to divert her grief,
relates his own actions in expedition which he undertook, at
Fingal's command, to aid Crothar the petty king of Croma, a
country in Ireland, against Rothmar, who invaded his dominions.
The story is delivered down thus in tradition. Crothar, king of
Croma, being blind with age, and his son too young for the field,
Rothmar, the chief of Tromo resolved to avail himself of the
opportunity offered of annexing the dominions of Crothar to his
own. He accordingly marched into the country subject to Crothar,
but which he held of Arth or Artho, who was, at the time,
supreme king of Ireland.
	Crothar being, on account of his age and blindness unfit
for action, sent for aid to Fingal, king of Scotland; who ordered
his son Ossian to the relief of Crothar. But before his arrival
Fovargormo, the son of Crothar, attacking Rothmar, was slain
himself, and his forces totally defeated. Ossian renewed the war;
came to battle, killed Rothmar, and routed his army. Croma
being thus delivered of its enemies, Ossian returned to Scotland.


	"It was the voice of my love! seldom art thou in the dreams
of Malvina! Open your airy halls, O father of Toscar of shields!
Unfold the gates of your clouds: the steps of Malvina are near. I
have heard a voice in my dream. I feel the fluttering of my soul.
Why didst thou come, O blast! from the dark-rolling face of the
lake? Thy rustling wing was in the tree; the dream of Malvina
fled. But she beheld her love when his robe of mist flew on the
wind. A sunbeam was on his skirts, they glittered like the gold of
the stranger. It was the voice of my love! seldom comes he to my
dreams!
	"But thou dwellest in the soul of Malvina, son of mighty
Ossian! My sighs arise with the beam of the east; my tears
descend with the drops of night. I was a lovely tree, in thy
presence, Oscar, with all my branches round me; but thy death
came like a blast from the desert, and laid my green head low.
The spring returned with its showers; no leaf of mine arose! The
virgins saw me silent in the hall; they touched the harp of joy.
The tear was on the cheek of Malvina: the virgins beheld me in
my grief. Why art thou sad, they said, thou first of the maids of
Lutha! Was he lovely as the beam of the morning, and stately in
thy sight?"
	Pleasant is thy song in Ossian's ear, daughter of streamy
Lutha! Thou hast heard the music of departed bards in the
dream of thy rest, when sleep fell on thine eyes, at the murmur of
Moruth. When thou didst return from the chase in the day of the
sun, thou hast heard the music of bards, and thy song is lovely!
It is lovely, O Malvina! but it  melts the soul. There is a joy in
grief when peace dwells in the breast of the sad. But sorrow
wastes the mournful, O daughter of Toscar! and their days are
few! They fall away, like the flower on which the sun hath looked
in his strength, after the mildew has passed over it, when its
head is heavy with the drops of night. Attend to the tales of
Ossian, O maid! He remembers the days of his youth!
	The king commanded; I raised my sails, and rushed into
the bay of Croma; into Croma's sounding bay in lovely
Inisfail.<1> High on the coast arose the towers of Crothar king of
spears; Crothar renowned in the battles of his youth; but age
dwelt then around the chief. Rothmar had raised the sword
against the hero; and the wrath of Fingal burned. He sent Ossian
to meet Rothmar in war, for the chief of Croma was the friend of
his youth. I sent the bard before me with songs. I came into the
hall of Crothar. There sat the chief amidst the arms of his
fathers, but his eyes had failed. His gray locks waved around a
staff which the warrior leaned. He hummed the song of other
times; when the sound of our arms reached his ears Crothar
rose, stretched his aged hand, and blessed the son of Fingal.
	"Ossian!" said the hero, "the strength of Crothar's arm has
failed. O could I lift the sword, as on the day that Fingal fought at
Strutha! He was the first of men; but Crothar had also his fame.
The king of Morven praised me; he placed on my arm the bossy
shield of Calthar, whom the king had slain in his wars. Dost thou
not behold it on the wall? for Crothar's eyes have failed. Is thy
strength like thy father's, Ossian! let the aged feel thine arm!"
	I gave my arm to the king; he felt it with his aged hands.
The sigh rose in his breast, and his tears came down. "Thou art
strong, my son," he said, "but not like the king of Morven! But
who is like the hero among the mighty in war? Let the feast of my
hall be spread; and let my bards exalt the song. Great is he that
is within my walls, ye sons of echoing Croma!" The feast is
spread. The harp is heard; and joy is in the hall. But it was joy
covering a sigh, that darkly dwelt in every breast. It was like the
faint beam of the moon spread on a cloud in heaven. At length
the music ceased, and the aged king of Croma spoke; he spoke
without a tear, but sorrow swelled in the midst of his voice.
	" Son of Fingal! beholdest thou not the darkness of
Crothar's joy? My soul was not sad at the feast, when my people
lived before me. I rejoiced in the presence of strangers, when my
son shone in the hall. But, Ossian, he is a beam that is departed.
He left no streak of light behind. He is fallen, son of Fingal! in the
wars of his father. Rothmar the chief of grassy Tromlo heard that
these eyes had failed; he heard that my arms were fixed in the
hall, and the pride of his soul arose! He came towards Croma; my
people fell before him. I took my arms in my wrath, but what
could sightless Crothar do? My steps were unequal; my grief was
great. I wished for the days that were past. Days! wherein I
fought; and won in the field of blood. My son returned from the
chase: the fair haired Fovargormo. He had not lifted his sword in
battle, for his arm was young. But the soul of the youth was
great; the fire of valor burned in his eyes. He saw the disordered
steps of his father, and his sigh arose -- "King of Croma," he said,
"is it because thou hast no son; is it for the weakness of
Fovargormo's arm that thy sighs arise? I begin, my father, to feel
my strength; I have drawn the sword of my youth; and I have
bent the bow. Let me meet this Rothmar, with the sons of Croma:
let me meet him, O my father? I feel my burning soul!" -- "And
thou shalt meet him," I said, "son of the sightless Crothar! But let
others advance before thee that I may hear the tread of thy feet at
thy return; for my eyes behold thee not, fair haired Fovargormo!"
He went; he met the foe; he fell. Rothmar advances to Croma. He
who slew my son is near, with all his pointed spears."
	This is no time to fill the shell, I replied, and took my spear!
My people saw the fire of my eyes; they all arose around. Through
night we strode along the heath. Gray morning rose in the east. A
green narrow vale appeared before us; nor wanting are its
winding streams. The dark host of Rothmar are on its banks with
all their glittering arms. We fought along the vale. They fled.
Rothmar sunk beneath my sword! Day had not descended in the
west, when I brought his arms to Crothar. The aged hero felt
them with his hands; and joy brightened over all his thoughts.
	The people gather to the hall! The shells of the feast are
heard. Ten harps are strung; five bards advance, and sing, by
turns, the praise of Ossian; they poured forth their burning
souls, and the string answered to their voice. The joy of Croma
was great; for peace returned to the land. The night came on with
silence; the morning returned with joy. No foe came in darkness
with his glittering spear. The joy of Croma was great; for the
gloomy Rothmar had fallen!
	I raised my voice for Fovargormo, when they laid the chief
in earth. The aged Crothar was there, but his sigh was not heard.
He searched for the wound of his son, and found it in his breast.
Joy rose in the face of the aged. He came and spoke to Ossian.
"King of spears!" he said, "my son has not fallen without his
fame. The young warrior did not fly; but met death as he went
forward in his strength. Happy are they who die in youth, when
their renown is heard! The feeble will not behold them in the hall;
or smile at their trembling hands. Their memory shall be honored
in song; the young tear of the virgin will fall. But the aged wither
away by degrees; the fame of their youth, while yet they live, is all
forgot. They fall in secret. The sigh of their son is not heard. Joy
is around their tomb; the stone of their fame is placed without a
tear. Happy are they who die in their youth, when their renown is
around them!"

<1>  Inisfail: one of the ancient names of Ireland.



CALTHON AND COLMAL.


ARGUMENT.

This piece, as many more of Ossian's compositions, is addressed
to one of the first Christian missionaries. The story of the poem is
handed down by tradition thus:- In the country of the Britons,
between the walls, two chiefs lived in the days of Fingal,
Dunthalmo, Lord of Teutha, supposed to be the Tweed; and
Rathmor, who dwelt at Clutha, well known to be the river Clyde.
Rathmor was not more renowned for his generosity and
hospitality, than Dunthalmo was infamous for his cruelty and
ambition. Dunthalmo, through envy, or on account of some
private feuds, which subsisted between the families, murdered
Rathmor at a feast; but being afterward touched with remorse, he
educated the two sons of Rathmor, Calthon and Colmar, in his
own house. They growing up to man's estate, dropped some hints
that they intended to revenge the death of their father, upon
which Dunthalmo shut them up in two caves, on the banks of
Teutha, intending to take them off privately. Colmal, the
daughter of Dunthalmo, who was secretly in love with Calthon,
helped him to make his escape from prison, and hied with him to
Fingal, disguised in the habit of a young warrior, and implored
his aid against Dunthalmo. Fingal sent Ossian with three
hundred men to Colmar's relief. Dunthalmo, having previously
murdered Colmar, came to a battle with Ossian, but he was
killed by that hero, and his army totally defeated.  Calthon
married Colmal his deliverer; and Ossian returned to Morven.

	Pleasant is the voice of thy song, thou lonely dweller of the
rock! It comes on the sound of the stream, along the narrow vale.
My soul awakes, O stranger, in the midst of my hall. I stretch my
hand to the spear, as in the days of other years. I stretch my
hand, but it is feeble: and the sigh of my bosom grows. Wilt thou
not listen, son of the rock! to the song of Ossian? My soul is full
of other times; the joy of my youth returns. Thus the sun appears
in the west, after the steps of his brightness have moved behind a
storm: the green hills lift their dewy heads: the blue streams
rejoice in the vale. The aged hero comes forth on his stair; his
gray hair glitters in the beam. Dost thou not behold, son of the
rock! a shield in Ossian's hall? It is marked with the strokes of
battle; and the brightness of its bosses has failed. That shield the
great Dunthalmo bore, the chief of streamy Teutha. Dunthalmo
bore it in battle before he fell by Ossian's spear. Listen, son of the
rock! to the tale of other years.
	Rathmor was a chief of Clutha. The feeble dwelt in his ball.
The gates of Rathmor were never shut: his feast was always
spread. The sons of the stranger came. They blessed the generous
chief of Clutha. Bards raised the song, and touched the harp: joy
brightened on the face of the sad! Dunthalmo came, in his pride,
and rushed into the combat of Rathmor. The chief of Clutha
overcame: the rage of Dunthalmo rose. He came, by night, with
his warriors; the mighty Rathmor fell. He fell in his halls, where
his feast was often spread for strangers.
	Colmar and Calthon were young, the sons of car-borne
Rathmor. They came, in the joy of youth, into their father's hall.
They behold him in his blood; their bursting tears descend. The
soul of Dunthalmo melted, when he saw the children of youth. He
brought them to Alteutha's walls; they grew in the house of their
foe. They bent the bow in his presence: and came forth to his
wars. They saw the fallen walls of their fathers; they saw the
green thorn in the hall. Their tears rushed forth in secret. At
times their faces were sad. Dunthalmo beheld their grief; his
darkening soul designed their death. He closed them in two
caves, on the echoing banks of Teutha. The sun did not come
there with his beams; nor the moon of heaven by night. The sons
of Rathmor remained in darkness, and foresaw their death.
	The daughter of Dunthalmo wept in silence, the fair-haired
blue-eyed Colmal. Her eye had rolled in secret on Calthon; his
loveliness swelled in her soul. She trembled for her warrior; but
what could Colmal do? Her arm could not lift the spear; nor was
the sword formed for her side. Her white breast never rose
beneath a mail. Neither was her eye the terror of heroes. What
canst thou do, O Colmal!! for the falling chief? Her steps are
unequal; her hair is loose; her eye looks wildly through her tears.
She came, by night, to the hall. She armed her lovely form in
steel; the steel of a young warrior, who fell in the first of his
battles. She came to the cave of Calthon, and loosed the thong
from his hands.
	"Arise, son of Rathmor," she said, "arise, the night is dark!
Let us fly to the king of Selma, chief of fallen Clutha! I am the son
of Lamgal, who dwelt in thy father's hall. I heard of thy dark
dwelling in the cave, and my soul arose. Arise, son of Rathmor!
arise, the night is dark!" -- "Blest voice!" replied the chief, "comest
thou from the clouds to Calthon? The ghosts of his fathers have
often descended in his dreams, since the sun has retired from his
eyes, and darkness has dwelt around him. Or art thou the son of
Lamgal, the chief I often saw in Clutha? But shall I fly to Fingal,
and Colmar my brother low? Will I fly to Morven, and the hero
closed in night? No; give me that spear, son of Lamgal; Calthon
will defend his brother!"
	"A thousand warriors," replied the maid, "stretch their
spears round car-borne Colmar. What can Calthon do against a
host so great? Let us fly to the king of Morven, he will come with
war. His arm is stretched forth to the unhappy; the lightning of
his sword is round the weak. Arise, thou son of Rathmor; the
shadows will fly away. Arise, or thy steps may be seen, and thou
must fall in youth."
	The sighing hero rose; his tears descend for car-borne
Colmar. He came with the maid to Selma's hall: but he knew not
that it was Colmal. The helmet covered her lovely face. Her bosom
heaved beneath the steel. Fingal returned from the chase, and
found the lovely strangers. They were like two beams of light, in
the midst of the hall of shells. The king heard the tale of grief,
and turned his eyes around. A thousand heroes half rose before
him; claiming the war of Teutha. I came with my spear from the
hill; the joy of battle rose in my breast: for the king spoke to
Ossian in the midst of a thousand chiefs.
	" Son of my strength," began the king, "take thou the spear
of Fingal. Go to Teutha's rushing stream, and save the car-borne
Colmar. Let thy fame return before thee like a pleasant gale; that
my soul may rejoice over my son, who renews the renown of
fathers. Ossian! be thou a storm in war; but mild when the foe is
low! it was thus my fame arose, O my son! be thou like Selma's
chief. When the haughty come to my halls, my eyes behold them
not. But my arm is stretched forth to the unhappy. My sword
defends the weak."
	I rejoiced in the words of the king. I took my rattling arms.
Diaran rose at my side, and Dargo, king of spears. Three hundred
youths followed our steps; the lovely strangers were at my side.
Dunthalmo heard the sound of our approach. He gathered the
strength of Teutha. He stood on a hill with his host. They were 
like rocks broken with thunder, when their bent trees are singed
and bare, and the streams of their chinks have failed. The stream
of Teutha rolled in its pride, before the gloomy foe. I sent a bard
to Dunthalmo, to offer the combat on the plain; but he smiled in
the darkness of his pride. His unsettled host moved on the hill;
like the mountain cloud, when the blast has entered its womb,
and scatters the curling gloom on every side.
	They brought Colmar to Teutha's bank, bound with a
thousand thongs. The chief is sad, but stately. His eye is on his
friends; for we stood in our arms, whilst Teutha's waters rolled
between. Dunthalmo came with his spear, and pierced the hero's
side: he rolled on the bank in his blood. We heard his broken 
sighs. Calthon rushed into the stream: I bounded forward on my
spear. Teutha's race fell before us. Night came rolling down.
Dunthalmo rested on a rock, amidst an aged wood. The rage of
his bosom burned against the car-borne Calthon. But Calthon
stood in grief; he mourned the fallen Colmar; Colmar slain in
youth before his fame arose!
	I bade the song of wo to rise, to soothe the mournful chief;
but he stood beneath a tree, and often threw his spear on the
earth. The humid eye of Colmar rolled near in a secret tear: she
foresaw the fall of Dunthalmo, or of Clutha's warlike chief. Now
half the night had passed away. Silence and darkness were on
the field. Sleep rested on the eyes of the heroes: Calthon's settling
soul was still. His eyes were half closed; but the murmur of
Teutha had not yet failed in his ear. Pale, and showing his
wounds, the ghost of Colmar came: he bent his head over the
hero, and raised his feeble voice!
	" Sleeps the son of Rathmor in his night, and his brother
low? Did we not rise to the chase together? Pursued we not the
dark-brown hinds? Colmar was not forgot till he fell, till death
had blasted his youth I lie pale beneath the rock of Lona. O let
Calthon rise! the morning comes with its beams; Dunthalmo will
dishonor the fallen." He passed away in his blast The rising
Calthon saw the steps of his departure. He rushed in the sound
of his steel. Unhappy Colmal rose. She followed her hero through
night, and dragged her spear behind. But when Calthon came to
Lona's rock, he found his fallen brother. The rage of his bosom
rose; he rushed among the foe. The groans of death ascend. They
close around the chief. He is bound in the midst, and brought to
gloomy Dunthalmo. The shout of joy arose; and the hills of night
replied.
	I started at the sound; and took my father's spear. Diaran
rose at my side; and the youthful strength of Dargo. We missed
the chief of Clutha, and our souls were sad. I dreaded the
departure of my fame. The pride of my valor rose. "Sons of
Morven," I said, "it is not thus our fathers fought. They rested not
on the field of strangers, when the foe was not fallen before them.
Their strength was like the eagles of heaven; their renown is in
the song. But our people fall by degrees. Our fame begins to
depart. What shall the king of Morven say, if Ossian conquers not
at Teutha? Rise in your steel, ye warriors, follow the sound of
Ossian's course. He will not return, but renowned, to the echoing
walls of Selma."
	Morning rose on the blue waters of Teutha. Colmal stood
before me in tears. She told of the chief of Clutha: thrice the
spear fell from her hand. My wrath turned against the stranger;
for my soul trembled for Calthon. '"Son of the feeble hand!" I said,
"do Teutha's warriors fight with tears? The battle is not won with
grief; nor dwells the sigh in the soul of war. Go to the deer of
Carmun, to the lowing herds of Teutha. But leave these arms,
thou son of fear! A warrior may lift them in fight."
	I tore the mail from her shoulders. Her snowy breast
appeared. She bent her blushing face to the ground. I looked in
silence to the chiefs. The spear fell from my hand; the sigh of my
bosom rose! But when I heard the name of the maid, my
crowding tears rushed down. I blessed the lovely beam of youth,
and bade the battle move!
	Why, son of the rock, should Ossian tell how  warriors
died? They are now forgot in their land; their tombs are not found
on the heath. Years came on with their storms. The green
mounds are mouldered away. Scarce is the grave of Dunthalmo
seen, or the place where he fell by the spear of Ossian.
	Some gray warrior, half blind with age, sitting by night at
the flaming oak of the hall, tells now my deeds to his sons, and
the fall of the dark Dunthalmo. The faces of youth bend sidelong
towards his voice. Surprise and joy burn in their eyes! I found
Calthon bound to an oak; my sword cut the thongs from his
hands. I gave him the white-bosomed Colmal. They dwelt in the
halls of Teutha.



THE WAR OF CAROS.


ARGUMENT.

Caros is probably the noted usurper Carausius, by birth a
Menapran, who assumed the purple in the year 284; and, seizing
on Britain, defeated the emperor Maximinian Herculius in several
naval engagements, which gives propriety to his being called in
this poem "the king of ships." He repaired Agricola's wall, in order
to obstruct the incursions of the Caledonians, and when he was
employed in that work, it appears he was attacked by a party
under the command of Oscar the son of' Ossian. This battle is the
foundation of the present poem, which is addressed to Malvina,
the daughter of Toscar.

	Bring, daughter of Toscar, bring the harp! the light of the
song rises in Ossian's soul! It is like the field, when darkness
covers the hills around, and the shadow grows slowly on the
plain of the sun. I behold my son, O Malvina! near the mossy
rock of Crona. But it is the mist of the desert, tinged with the
beam of the west! Lovely is the mist that assumes the form of
Oscar! turn from it, ye winds, when ye roar on the side of Ardven!
	Who comes towards my son, with the murmur of a song?
His staff is in his hand, his gray hair loose on the wind. Surly joy
lightens his face. He often looks back to Caros. It is Ryno of
songs, he that went to view the foe. "What does Caros, king of
ships?" said the son of the now mournful Ossian: "spreads he the
wings <1> of his pride, bard of the times of old?" "He spreads
them, Oscar," replied the bard," but it is behind his gathered
heap.<2> He looks over his stones with fear. He beholds thee
terrible, as the ghost of night, that rolls the waves to his ships!"
	"Go, thou first of my bards!" says Oscar, "take the spear of
Fingal. Fix a flame on its point. Shake it to the winds of heaven.
Bid him in songs, to advance, and leave the rolling of his wave.
Tell to Caros that I long for battle; that my bow is weary of the
chase of Cona. Tell him the mighty are not here; and that my arm
is young."
	He went with the murmur of songs. Oscar reared his voice
on high. It reached his heroes on Ardven, like the noise of a cave,
when the sea of Togorma rolls before it, and its trees meet the
roaring winds. They gather round my son like the streams of the
hill; when, after rain, they roll in the pride of their course. Ryno
came to the mighty Caros. He struck his flaming spear. Come to
the battle of Oscar. O thou that sittest on the rolling waves!
Fingal is distant far; he hears the songs of bards in Morven: the
wind of his hall is in his hair. His terrible spear is at his side; his
shield that is like the darkened moon Come to the battle of
Oscar; the hero is alone.
	He came not over the streamy Carun. The bard returned
with his song. Gray night grows dim on Crona. The feast of shells
is spread. A hundred oaks burn to the wind; faint light gleams
over the heath. The ghosts of Ardven pass through the beam, and
show their dim and distant forms. Comala <3> is half unseen on
her meteor; Hidallan is sullen and dim, like the darkened moon
behind the mist of night.
	" Why art thou sad?" said Ryno; for he alone beheld the
chief. "Why art thou sad, Hidallan! hast thou not received thy
fame? The songs of Ossian have been heard , thy ghost has
brightened in wind, when thou didst bend from thy cloud to hear
the song of Morven's bard!"---" And do thine eyes," said Oscar, "
behold the chief, like the dim meteor of night? Say, Ryno, say,
how fell Hidallan, the renowned in the days of my fathers! His
name remains on the rocks of Cona. I have often seen the
streams of his hills!"
	Fingal, replied the bard, drove Hidallan from his wars. The
king's soul was sad for Comala, and his eyes could not behold
the chief. Lonely, sad, along the heath he slowly moved, with
silent steps. His arms hung disordered on his side. His hair flies
loose from his brow. The tear is in his downcast eyes; a sigh half
silent in his breast! Three days he strayed unseen, alone, before
he came to Lamor's halls: the mossy halls of his fathers, at the
stream of Balva. There Lamor sat alone beneath a tree; for he had
sent his people with Hidallan to war. The stream ran at his feet;
his gray head rested on his staff. Sightless are his aged eyes. He
hums the song of other times. The noise of Hidallan's feet came
to his ear: he knew the tread of his son.
	"Is the son of Lamor returned; or is it the sound of his
ghost? Hast thou fallen on the banks of Carun, son of the aged
Lamor? Or, if I hear the sound of Hidallan's feet, where are the
mighty in the war? where are my people, Hidallan! that were wont
to return with their echoing shields? Have they fallen on the
banks of Carun?"
	"No," replied the sighing youth, "the people of Lamor live.
They are renowned in war, my father! but Hidallan is renowned
no more. I must sit alone on the banks of Balva, when the roar of
the battle grows."
" But thy fathers never sat alone," replied the rising pride of
Lamor. "They never sat alone on the banks of Balva, when the
roar of battle rose. Dost thou not behold that tomb? My eyes
discern it not; there rests the noble Garm llon, who never fled
from war! Come, thou renowned in battle, he says, come to thy
father's tomb. How am I renowned, Garm llon? my son has fled
from war!"
	"King of the streamy Balva!" said Hidallan with a sigh, "why
dost thou torment my soul? Lamor, I never fled. Fingal was sad
for Comala; he denied his wars to Hidallan. Go to the gray
streams of thy land, he said; moulder like a leafless oak, which
the winds have bent over Balva, never more to grow."
	"And must I hear," Lamor replied, "the lonely tread of
Hidallan's feet? When thousands are renowned in battle, shall he
bend over my gray streams? Spirit of the noble Garm llon! carry
Lamor to his place; his eyes are dark, his soul is sad, his son has
lost his fame."
	"Where," said the youth, " shall I search for fames to
gladden the soul of Lamor? From whence shall return with
renown, that the sound of my arms may be pleasant in his ear? If
I go to the chase of hinds, my name will not be heard. Lamor will
not feel my dogs with his hands, glad at my arrival from the hill.
He will not inquire of his mountains, or of the dark-brown deer of
his deserts!"
	"I must fall," said Lamor, "like a leafless oak: it grew on a
rock! it was overturned by the winds! My ghost will be seen on
my hills, mournful for my young Hidallan. Will not ye, ye mists,
as ye rise, hide him from my sight! My son, go to Lamor's ball:
there the arms of our fathers hang. Bring the sword of
Garm llon: he took it from a foe!"
	He went and brought the sword with all its studded thongs.
He gave it to his father. The gray-haired hero felt the point with
his hand.
	"My son, lead me to Garm llon's tomb: it rises beside that
rustling tree. The long grass is withered; I hear the breezes
whistling there. A little fountain murmurs near, and sends its
waters to Balva. There let me rest; it is noon: the sun is on our
fields!"
	He led him to Garm llon's tomb. Lamor pierced the side of
his son. They sleep together: their ancient halls moulder away.
Ghosts are seen there at noon: the valley is silent, and the people
shun the place of Lamor.
	"Mournful is thy tale," said Oscar, "son of the times of old!
My soul sighs for Hidallan; he fell in the days of his youth. He
flies on the blast of the desert: his wandering is in a foreign land.
Sons of the echoing Morven! draw near to the foes of Fingal. Send
the night away in songs; watch the strength of Caros. Oscar goes
to the people of other times; to the shades of silent Ardven, where
his fathers sit dim in their clouds, and behold the future war.
And art thou there, Hidallan, like a half-extinguished meteor?
Come to my sight, in thy sorrow, chief of the winding Balva!"
	The heroes move with their songs. Oscar slowly ascends
the hill. The meteors of night set on the heath before him. A
distant torrent faintly roars.  Unfrequent blasts rush through
aged oaks. The half enlightened moon sinks dim and red behind
her hill.  Feeble Voices are heard on the heath. Oscar drew his
sword! " Come," said the hero, " O ye ghosts of my fathers! ye that
fought against the kings of the world! Tell the deeds of future
times; and your converse in our caves, when you talk together,
and behold your sons in the fields of the brave!"
	Trenmo came from his hill at the voice of his mighty son. A
cloud, like the steed of the stranger, supported his airy limbs. His
robe is of the mist of Lano, that brings death to the people. His
sword is a green meteor, half-extinguished. His face is without
form, and dark. He sighed thrice over the hero; thrice the winds
of night roared around! Many were his words to Oscar; but they
only came by halves to our ears; they were dark as the tales of
other times, before the light of the song arose. He slowly
vanished, like a mist that melts on the sunny hill. it was then, O
daughter of Toscar! my son began first to be sad. He foresaw the
fall of his race. At times he was thoughtful and dark, like the sun
when he carries a cloud on his face, but again he looks forth from
his darkness on the green hills of Cona.
	Oscar passed the night among his fathers: gray morning
met him on Carun's banks. A green vale surrounded a tomb
which arose in the times of old. Little hills lift their heads at a
distance, and stretch their old trees to the wind. The warriors of
Caros sat there, for they had passed the stream by night. They
appeared like the trunks of aged pines, to the pale light of the
morning. Oscar stood at the tomb, and raised thrice his terrible
voice. The rocking hills echoed around; the starting roes bounded
away: and the trembling ghosts of the dead fled, shrieking on
their clouds. So terrible was the voice of my son, when he called
his friends!
	A thousand spears arose around; the people of Caros rose.
Why, daughter of Toscar, why that tear? My son, though alone, is
brave. Oscar is like a beam of the sky; he turns around, and the
people fall. his hand is the arm of a ghost, when he stretches it
from a cloud; the rest of his thin form is unseen; but the people
die in the vale! My son beheld the approach of the foe; he stood in
the silent darkness of his strength. " Am I alone," said Oscar, " in
the midst of a thousand foes? Many a spear is there! many a
darkly-rolling eye. Shall I fly to Ardven? But did my fathers ever
fly? The mark of their arm is in a thousand battles. Oscar too
shall be renowned. Come, ye dim ghosts of my fathers, and
behold my deeds in war! I may fall; but I will be renowned like the
race of the echoing Morven." He stood, growing in his place, like a
flood in a narrow vale! The battle came, but they fell: bloody was
the sword of Oscar!
	The noise reached his people at Crona; they came like a
hundred streams. The warriors of Caros fled; Oscar remained like
a rock left by the ebbing sea. Now dark and deep, with all his
steeds, Caros rolled his might along: the little streams are lost in
his course: the earth is rocking round. Battle spreads from wing
to wing; ten thousand swords gleam at once in the sky. But why
should Ossian sing of battles? For never more shall my steel
shine in war. I remember the days of my youth with grief, when I
feel the weakness of my arm. Happy are they who fell in their
youth, in the midst of their renown! They have not beheld the
tombs of their friends, or failed to bend the bow of their strength.
Happy art thou, O Oscar, in the midst of thy rushing blast! Thou
often goest to the fields of thy fame, where Caros fled from thy
lifted sword!
	Darkness comes on my soul, O fair daughter of Toscar! I
behold not the form of my son at Carun, nor the figure of Oscar
on Crona. The rustling winds have carried him far away, and the
heart of his father is sad. But lead me, O Malvina! to the sound of
my woods, to the roar of my mountain streams. Let the chase be
heard on Cona: let me think on the days of other years. And
bring me the harp, O maid! that I may touch it when the light of
my soul shall arise. Be thou near to learn the song; future times
shall hear of me! The sons of the feeble hereafter will lift the voice
of Cona; and looking up to the rocks, say, "Here Ossian dwelt."
They shall admire the chiefs of old, the race that are no more,
while we ride on our clouds, Malvina! on the wings of the roaring
winds. Our voices shall be heard at times in the desert; we shall
sing on the breeze of the rock!


<1> The wings of his pride: The Roman eagle.

<2> His gathered heap: Agricola's wall, which Carausius repaired.

<3> This is the scene of Comala's death, which is the subject of
the dramatic poem.



CATHLIN OF CLUTHA.


ARGUMENT.

An address to Malvina, the daughter of Toscar. The poet relates
the arrival of Cathlin in Selma, to solicit aid against Duth-carmor
of Cluba, who had killed Cathmol for the sake of his daughter
Lanul. Fingal declining to make a choice among his heroes, who
were all claiming the command of the expedition, they retired
"each to his hill of ghosts," to be determined by dreams. The
spirit of Trenmor appears to Ossian and Oscar. They sail from the
bay of Carmona, and on the fourth day, appear off the valley of
Rath-col, in Inis-huna, where Duth-carmor had fixed his
residence. Ossian despatches a bard to Duth-carmor to demand
battle. Night comes on. The distress of Cathlin of Clutha. Ossian
devolves the command on Oscar, who, according to the custom of
the kings of Morven, before battle, retired to a neighboring hill.
Upon the coming on of day, the battle joins. Oscar carries the
mail and helmet of Duth-carmor to Cathlin, who had retired from
the field. Cathlin is discovered to be the daughter of Cathmol in
disguise, who had been carried off by force by, and had made her
escape from, Duth-carmor.

	COME, thou beam that art lonely, from watching in the
night! The squalling winds are around thee, from all their echoing
hills. Red, over my hundred streams, are the light-covered paths
of the dead. They rejoice on the eddying winds, in the season of
night. Dwells there no joy in song, white-hand of the harps of
Lutha? Awake the voice of the string; roll my soul to me. It is a
stream that has failed. Malvina, pour the song.
	I hear thee from thy darkness in Selma, thou that 
watchest lonely by night! Why didst thou withhold  the song from
Ossian's falling soul? As the falling  brook to the ear of the
hunter, descending from his storm-covered hill, in a sunbeam
rolls the echoing  stream, he hears and shakes his dewy locks:
such is the voice of Lutha to the friend of the spirits of heroes. My
swelling bosom beats high. I look back on the days that are past.
Come, thou beam that art lonely, from watching in the night!
	In the echoing bay of Carmona we saw one day the
bounding ship. On high hung a broken shield; it was marked
with wandering blood. Forward came a youth in arms, and
stretched his pointless spear. Long, over his tearful eyes, hung
loose his disordered locks. Fingal gave the shell of kings. The
words of the stranger arose. "In his hall lies Cathmol of Clutha,
by the winding of his own dark streams. Duth-carmor saw white-
bosomed Lanul, and pierced her father's side. In the rushy desert
were my steps. He fled in the season of night. Give thine aid to
Cathlin to revenge his father. I sought thee not as a beam in a
land of clouds. Thou, like the sun, art known, king of echoing
Selma!"
	Selma's king looked around. In his presence we rose in
arms. But who should lift the shield? for all had claimed the war.
The night came down; we strode in silence, each to his hill of
ghosts, that spirits might descend in our dreams to mark us for
the field. We struck the shield of the dead: we raised the hum of
songs. We thrice called the ghosts of our fathers. We laid us down
in dreams. Trenmor came, before mine eyes, the tall form of other
years! His blue hosts were behind him in half-distinguished rows.
-- Scarce seen is their strife in mist, or the stretching forward to
deaths. I listened, but no sound was there. The forms were empty
wind!
	I started from the dream of ghosts. On a sudden blast flew
my whistling hair. Low sounding. in the oak, is the departure of
the dead. I took my shield from its bough. Onward came the
rattling of steel. It was Oscar of Lego. He had seen his fathers.  As
rushes forth the blast on the bosom of whitening waves, so
careless shall my course be, through ocean, to the dwelling of
foes. I have seen the dead, my father! My beating soul is high! My
fame is bright before me, like the streak of light on a cloud, when
the broad sun comes forth, red traveller of the sky!"
	" Grandson of Branno," I said, "not Oscar alone shall meet
the foe. I rush forward, through ocean, to the woody dwelling of
heroes. Let us contend, my son, like eagles from one rock, when
they lift their broad wings against the stream of winds." We
raised our sails in Carmona. From three ships they marked my
shield on the wave, as I looked on nightly Ton-thena,<1> red
traveller between the clouds. Four days came the breeze abroad.
Lumon came forward in mist. In winds were its hundred groves.
Sunbeams marked at times its brown side. White leapt the foamy
streams from all its echoing rocks.
	A green field, in the bosom of hills, winds silent with its
own blue stream. Here, "midst the waving of oaks, were the
dwellings of kings of old." But silence, for many dark-brown
years, had settled in grassy Rath-col; for the race of heroes had
failed along the pleasant vale. Duth-carmor was here, with his
people, dark rider of the wave! Ton-thena had hid her head in the
sky. He bound his white-bosomed sails. His course is on the hills
of Rath-col to the seats of roes. We came. I sent the bard, with
songs, to call the foe to fight. Duth-carmor heard him with joy.
The king's soul was like a beam of fire; a beam of  fire, marked
with smoke, rushing, varied through the bosom of night. The
deeds of Duth-carmor were dark, though his arm was strong.
	Night came with the gathering of clouds. By the beam of
the oak we sat down. At a distance stood Cathlin of Clutha. I saw
the changeful soul of the stranger. As shadows fly over the field of
grass, so various is Cathlin's cheek. It was fair within locks, that
rose on Rath-col's wind. I did not rush, amidst his soul, with my
words. I bade the song to rise.
	"Oscar of Lego," I said, "be thine the secret hill to-night.
<2> Strike the shield like Morven's kings. With day thou shalt
lead in war. From my rock I shall see thee, Oscar, a dreadful form
ascending in fight, like the appearance of ghosts amidst the
storms they raise. Why should mine eyes return to the dim times
of old, ere yet the song had bursted forth, like the sudden rising
of winds? But the years that are past are marked with mighty
deeds. As the nightly rider of waves looks up to Ton-thena of
beams, so let us turn our eyes to Trenmor the father of kings."
	"Wide, in Caracha's echoing field, Carmal had poured his
tribes. They were a dark ridge of waves. The gray-haired bards
were like moving foam on their face. They kindle the strife around
with their red-rolling eyes. Nor alone were the dwellers of rocks; a
son of Loda was there, a voice in his own dark land, to call the
ghosts from high. On his hill he had dwelt in Lochlin, in the
midst of a leafless grove. Five stones lifted near their heads. Loud
roared his rushing stream. He often raised his voice to the winds,
when meteors marked their nightly wings, when the dark-robed
moon was rolled behind her hill. Nor unheard of ghosts was he!
They came with the sound of eagle-wings. They turned battle, in
fields, before the kings of men.
	" But Trenmor they turned not from battle. He drew
forward that troubled war: in its dark skirt was Trathal, like a
rising light. It was dark, and Loda's son poured forth his signs on
night. The feeble were not before thee, son of other lands! Then
rose the strife of kings about the hill of night; but it was soft as
two summer gales, shaking their light wings on a lake. Trenmor
yielded to his son, for the fame of the king had been heard.
Trathal came forth before his father, and the foes failed in
echoing Caracha. The years that are past, my son, are marked
with mighty deeds."
	In clouds rose the eastern light. The foe came forth in
arms. The strife is mixed on Rath-col, like the roar of streams.
Behold the contending of kings! They meet beside the oak. In
gleams of steel the dark forms are lost; such is the meeting of
meteors in a vale by night: red light is scattered round, and men
foresee the storm! -- Duth-carmor is low in blood! The son of
Ossian overcame! Not harmless, in battle, was he, Malvina, hand
of harps!
	Nor, in the field, were the steps of Cathlin. The strangers
stood by secret stream, where the foam of Rath-col skirted the
mossy stones. Above bends the branchy birch, and strews its
leaves on wind. The inverted spear of Cathlin touched at times
the stream. Oscar brought Duth-carmor's mail: his helmet with
its eagle-wing. He placed them before the stranger, and his words
were heard. " The foes of thy father have fallen. They are laid in
the field of ghosts. Renown returns to Morven like a rising wind.
Why art thou dark, chief of Clutha? Is there cause for grief?"
	" Son of Ossian of harps, my soul is darkly sad. I behold
the arms of Cathmol, which lie raised in war. Take the mail of
Cathlin, place it high in Selma's hall, that thou mayest remember
the hapless in thy distant land." From white breasts descended
the mail. It was the race of kings: the soft-handed daughter of
Cathmol, at the streams of Clutha! Duth-carmor saw her bright
in the hall; he had come by night to Clutha. Cathmol met him in
battle, but the hero fell. Three days dwelt the foe with the maid.
On the fourth she fled in arms. She remembered the race of
kings, and felt her bursting soul!
	Why, maid of Toscar of Lutha, should I tell how Cathlin
failed? Her tomb is at rushy Lumon, in a distant land. Near it
were the steps of Sul-malla, in the days of grief. She raised the
song for the daughter of strangers, and touched the mournful
harp.
	Come from the watching of night, Malvina, lonely beam!


<1> Ton-thena, " fire of the wave," was the remarkable star
mentioned in the seventh book of Temora, which directed the
course of Larthon to Ireland.

<2> This passage alludes to the well-known custom among the
ancient kings of Scotland, to retire from their army on the night
preceding a battle. The story which Ossian introduces in the next
paragraph, concerns the fall of the Druids.



SUL-MALLA OF LUMON.

ARGUMENT.

	This poem, which, properly speaking, is a continuation of
the last, opens with an address to Sul-malla, the daughter of the
king of Inis-huna, whom Ossian met at the chase, as he returned
from the battle of Rath-col. Sul-malla invites Ossian and Oscar to
a feast, at the residence of her father, who was then absent on
the wars. Upon hearing their names and family, she relates an
expedition of Fingal into Inis-huna. She casually mentioning
Cathmor, chief of Atha, (who then assisted her father against his
enemies,) Ossian introduces the episode of Culgorm and Suran-
dronlo, two Scandinavian kings, in whose wars Ossian himself
and Cathmor were engaged on opposite sides. The story is
imperfect, a part of the original being lost. Ossian, warned in a
dream by the ghost of Trenmor, sets sail from Inis-huna.


	WHO moves so stately on Lumon, at the roar of the foamy
waters? Her hair falls upon her heaving breast. White is her arm
behind, as slow she bends the bow. Why dost thou wander in
deserts, like a light through a cloudy field? The young roes are
panting by their secret rocks. Return, thou daughter of kings! the
cloudy night is near! It was the young branch of green Inishuna,
Sul-malla of blue eyes. She sent the  bard from her rock to bid us
to her feast. Amidst the song we sat down in Cluba's echoing
hall. White moved the hands of Sul-malla on the trembling
strings. Half-heard amidst the sound, was the name of Atha's
king: he that was absent in battle for her own green land. Nor
absent from her soul was he: he came 'midst her thoughts by
night. Ton-thena looked in from the sky, and saw her tossing
arms.
	The sound of shells had ceased. Amidst long locks Sul-
malla rose. She spoke with bended eyes, and asked of our course
through seas; "for of the kings of men are ye, tall riders of the
wave." "Not unknown," I said, "at his streams is he, the father of
our race. Fingal has been heard of at Cluba, blue-eyed daughter
of kings. Not only at Crona's stream is Ossian and Oscar known.
Foes tremble at our voice and shrink in other lands."
	"Not unmarked," said the maid, "by Sul-malla, is the shield
of Morven's king. It hangs high in my father's hall, in memory of
the past, when Fingal came to Cluba, in the days of other years.
Loud roared the boar of Culdarnu, in the midst of his rocks and
woods. Inis-huna sent her youths; but they failed, and virgins
wept over tombs. Careless went Fingal to Culdarnu. On his spear
rolled the strength of the woods. He was bright, they said, in his
locks, the first of mortal men. Nor at the feast were heard his
words. His deeds passed from his soul of fire, like the rolling of
vapors from the face of the wandering sun. Not careless looked
the blue eyes of Cluba on his stately steps. In white bosoms rose
the king of Selma, in the midst of their thoughts by night. But
the winds bore the stranger to the echoing vales of his roes. Nor
lost to other lands was he, like a meteor, that sinks in a cloud.
He came forth, at times in his brightness, to the distant dwelling
of foes. His fame came, like the sound of winds, to Cluba's woody
vale.
	"Darkness dwells in Cluba of harps! the race of kings is
distant far: in battle is my father Conmor; and Lormar, my
brother, king of streams. Nor darkening alone are they; a beam
from other lands is nigh; the friend of strangers <1> in Atha, the
troubler of the field. High from their misty hills looks forth the
blue eyes of Erin, for he is far away, young dweller of their souls!
Nor harmless, white hands of Erin! is Cathmor in the skirts of
war; he rolls ten thousand before him in his distant field."
	"Not unseen by Ossian," I said, "rushed Cathmor from his
streams, when he poured his strength on I-thorno, isle of many
waves! In strife met two kings in I-thorno, Culgorm and Suran-
dronlo: each from his echoing isle, stern hunters of the boar!
	"They met a boar at a foamy stream; each pierced him with
his spear. They strove for the fame of the deed, and gloomy battle
rose. From isle to isle they sent a spear broken and stained with
blood, to call the friends of their fathers in their sounding arms.
Cathmor came from Erin to Colgorm, red-eyed king; I aided 
Suran-dronlo in his land of boars.
	"We rushed on either side of a stream, which roared
through a blasted heath. High broken rocks were round with all
their bending trees. Near were two circles of Loda, with the stone
of power, where spirits descended by night in dark-red streams of
fire. There, mixed with the murmur of waters, rose the voice of
aged men; they called the forms of night to aid them in their war.
	"Heedless I stood with my people, where fell the foamy
stream from rocks. The moon moved red from the mountain. My
song at times arose. Dark, on the other side, young Cathmor
heard my voice, for he lay beneath the oak in all his gleaming
arms. Morning came: we rushed to the fight; from wing to wing is
the rolling of strife. They fell like the thistle's head beneath
autumnal winds.
	"In armor came a stately form: I mixed my strokes with the
chief. By turns our shields are pierced: loud rung our steely mail.
His helmet fell to the ground. In brightness shone the foe. His
eyes, two pleasant flames,  rolled between his wandering locks. I
knew Cathmor of Atha, and threw my spear on earth. Dark we
turned, and silent passed to mix with other foes.
	"Not so passed the striving kings. They mixed in echoing
fray, like the meeting of ghosts in the dark wing of winds.
Through either breast rushed the spears, nor yet lay the foes on
earth! A rock received their fall; half-reclined they lay in death.
Each held the lock of his foe: each grimly seemed to roll his eyes.
The stream of the rock leapt on their shields, and mixed below
with blood.
	"The battle ceased in I-thorno. The strangers met in peace:
Cathmor from Atha of streams, and Ossian king of harps. We
placed the dead in earth. Our steps were by Runar's bay. With
the bounding boat afar advanced a ridgy wave. Dark was the
rider of seas, but a beam of light was there like the ray of the sun
in Stromlo's rolling smoke. It was the daughter of Suran-dronlo,
wild in brightened looks. Her eyes were wandering flames amidst
disordered locks. Forward is her white arm with the spear; her
high-heaving breast is seen, white as foamy waves that rise, by
turns, amidst rocks. They are beautiful, but terrible, and
mariners call the winds!
	"Come, ye dwellers of Loda!" she said:  "come, Carchar, pale
in the midst of clouds! Sluthmor that stridest in airy halls!
Corchtur, terrible in winds! Receive from his daughter's spear the
foes of Suran-dronlo. No shadow at his roaring streams, no
mildly looking form, was he! When he took up his spear, the
hawks shook their sounding wings: for blood was poured a round
the steps of dark-eyed Suran-dronlo. He lighted me no harmless
beam to glitter on his streams. Like meteors I was bright, but I
blasted the foes of Suran-dronlo."

*     *     *     *     *     *     *     *     *     *     *      *

	Nor unconcerned heard Sul-malla the praise of Cathmor of
shields. He was within her soul, like a fire in secret heath, which
awakes at the voice of the blast, and sends its beam abroad.
Amidst the song removed the daughter of kings, like the voice of a
summer breeze, when it lifts the heads of flowers, and curls the
lakes and streams. The rustling Sound gently spreads o'er the
vale, softly-pleasing as it saddens the soul.
	By night came a dream to Ossian; formless stood the
shadow of Trenmor. He seemed to strike the dim shield on
Selma's streamy rock. I rose in my rattling steel: I knew that war
was near; before the winds our sails were spread, when Lumon
showed its streams to the morn.
	Come from the watching night Malvina, lonely beam!

<1> The friend of strangers: Cathmor, the son of  Barbar-duthol.



THE WAR OF INIS-THONA


ARGUMENT.

Reflections on the poet's youth. An apostrophe to Selma. Oscar
obtains leave to go to Inis-thona, an island of Scandinavia. The
mournful story of Argon and Ruro, the two sons of the king of
Inis-thona. Oscar revenges their death, and returns in triumph to
Selma. A soliloquy by the poet himself.

	Our youth is like the dream of the hunter on the hill of
heath. He sleeps in the mild beams of the sun: he awakes amidst
a storm; the red lightning flies around: trees shake their heads to
the wind! He looks back with joy on the day of the sun, and the
pleasant dreams of his rest! When shall Ossian's youth return?
When his ear delight in the sound of arms? When shall I, like
Oscar, travel in the light of my steel? Come with your streams, ye
hills of Cona! listen to the voice of Ossian. The song rises, like the
sun, in my soul. I feel the joys of other times.
	I behold thy towers, O Selma! the oaks of thy shaded wall:
thy streams sound in my ear; thy heroes gather round. Fingal
sits in the midst. He leans on the shield of Trenmor; his spear
stands against the wall; he listens to the songs of his bards. The
deeds of his arm are  heard; the actions of the king in his youth!
Oscar had returned from the chase, and heard the hero's praise.
He took the shield of Branno <1> from the wall; his eyes were
filed with tears. Red was the cheek of youth. His voice was
trembling low. My spear shook its bright head in his hand: he
spoke to Morven's king.
	"Fingal! thou king of heroes! Ossian, next to him in war! ye
have fought in your youth; your names are renowned in song.
Oscar is like the mist of Cona; I appear and I vanish away. The
bard will not know my name. The hunter will not search in the
heath for my tomb. Let me fight, O heroes, in the battles of Inis-
thona. Distant is the land of my war! ye shall not hear of Oscar's
fall: some bard may find me there; some bard may give my name
to song. The daughter of the stranger shall see my tomb, and
weep over the youth, that came from afar. The bard shall say, at
the feast, Hear the song of Oscar from the distant land!"
	" Oscar," replied the king of Morven, " thou shalt fight, son
of my fame! Prepare my dark-bosomed ship to carry my hero to
Inis-thona. Son of my son, regard our fame; thou art of the race
of renown: let not the children of strangers say, Feeble are the
sons of Morven! Be thou, in battle, a roaring storm: mild as the
evening sun in peace! Tell, Oscar, to Inis-thona's king, that Fingal
remembers his youth; when we strove in the combat together, in
the days of Agandecca."
They lifted up the sounding sail: the wind whistled through the
thongs <2> of their masts. Waves lashed the oozy rocks: the
strength of ocean roars. My son beheld, from the wave, the land
of groves. He rushed into Runa's sounding bay, and sent his
sword to Annir of spears. The gray-headed hero rose, when he
saw the sword of Fingal. His eyes were full of tears; he
remembered his battles in youth. Twice had they lifted the spear
before the lovely Agandecca.: heroes stood far distant, as if two
spirits were striving in winds.
	" But now," began the king, " I am old; the Sword lies
useless in my hall. Thou who art of Morven's race! Annir has
seen the battle of spears; but now he is pale and withered, like
the oak of Lano. I have no son to meet thee with joy, to bring thee
to the halls of his fathers. Argon is pale in the tomb, and Ruro is
no more. My daughter is in the hall of strangers: she longs to
behold my tomb. Her spouse shakes ten thousand spears; he
comes a cloud of death from Lano. Come, to share the feast of
Annir, son of echoing Morven?
Three days they feasted together. On the fourth, Annir heard the
name of Oscar. They rejoiced in the shell. <3> They pursued the
boars of Runa. Beside the fount of mossy stones the weary heroes
rest. The tear steals in secret from Annir: he broke the rising
sigh. "Here darkly rest," the hero said, "the children of my youth.
This stone is the tomb of Ruro; that tree sounds over the grave of
Argon. Do ye hear my voice, O my sons, within your narrow
house? Or do ye speak in these rustling leaves, when the wind of
the desert rises?"
	"King of Inis-thona," said Oscar, "how fell the children of
youth? The wild boar rushes over their tombs, but he does not
disturb their repose. They pursue deer formed of clouds, and
bend their airy bow. They still love the sport of their youth; and
mount the wind with joy."
"Cormalo," replied the king, " is a chief of ten thousand spears.
He dwells at the waters of Lano <4> which sends forth the vapor
of death. He came to Runa's echoing halls, and sought the honor
of the spear.<5> The youth was lovely as the first beam of the
sun; few were they who could meet him in fight. My heroes
yielded to Cormalo; my daughter was seized in his love. Argon
and Ruro returned from the chase; the tears of their pride
descend: they roll their silent eyes on Runa's heroes, who had
yielded to stranger. Three days they feasted with Cormalo; on the
fourth young Argon fought. But who could light with Argon?
Cormalo is overcome. His heart swelled with the grief of pride; he
resolved in secret to behold the death of my sons. They went to
the hills of Runa; they pursued the dark-brown hinds. The arrow
of Cormalo flew in secret; my children fell in blood. He came to
the maid of his love; to Inis-thona's long-haired maid. They fled
over the desert, Annir remained alone. Night came on, and day
appeared; nor Argon's voice nor Ruro's came. At length their
much-loved dog was seen; the fleet and bounding Runa. He came
into the hall and howled; and seemed to look towards the place of
their fall. We followed him; we found them here: we laid them by
this mossy stream. This is the haunt of Annir, when the chase of
the hinds is past. I bend like the trunk of an aged oak; my tears
for ever flow!"
	" O Ronnan!" said the rising Oscar, "Osgar, king of spears!
call my heroes to my side, the sons of streamy Morven. To-day we
go to Lano's water, that sends forth the vapor of death. Cormalo
will not long rejoice: death is often at the point of our swords!"
	They came over the desert like stormy clouds, when the
winds roll them along the heath; their edges are tinged with
lightning; the echoing groves foresee the storm! The horn of
Oscar's battle is heard; Lano shook over all its waves. The
children of the lake convened around the sounding shield of
Cormalo. Oscar fought as he was wont in war. Cormalo fell
beneath his sword: the sons of dismal Lano fled to their secret
vales! Oscar brought the daughter of Inis-thona to Annir's
echoing halls. The face of age is bright with joy; he blest the king
of swords.
	How great was the joy of Ossian, when he beheld the
distant sail of his son! it was like a cloud of light that rises in the
east, when the traveller is sad in a land unknown: and dismal
night with her ghosts, is sitting around in shades! We brought
him with songs to Selma's halls. Fingal spread the feast of shells.
A thousand bards raised the name of Oscar: Morven answered to
the sound. The daughter of Toscar was there; her voice was like
the harp, when the distant sound comes in the evening, on the
soft rustling breeze of the vale!
	O lay me, ye that see the light, near some rock of my hills!
let the thick hazels be around, let the rustling oak be near. Green
be the place of my rest; let the sound of the distant torrent be
heard. Daughter of Toscar, take the harp, and raise the lovely
song of Selma; that sleep may overtake my soul in the midst of
joy; that the dreams of my youth may return, and the days of the
mighty Fingal. Selma! I behold thy towers, thy trees, thy shaded
wall! I see the heroes of Morven; I hear the song of bards: Oscar
lifts the sword of Cormalo; a thousand youths admire its studded
thongs. They look with wonder on my son: they admire the
strength of his arm. They mark the joy of his father's eyes; they
long for an equal fame, and ye shall have your fame, O sons of
streamy Morven! My soul is often brightened with song; I
remember the friends of my youth. But sleep descends in the
sound of the harp! pleasant dreams begin to rise! Ye Sons of the
chase, stand far distant nor disturb my rest The bard of other
times holds discourse with his fathers! the chiefs of the days of
old! Sons of the chase, stand far distant! disturb not the dreams
of Ossian!

<1> Branno: The father of Everallin, and grandfather to Oscar

<2> Leather thongs were used among the Celtic nations, instead
of ropes

<3> To "rejoice in the shell," is a phrase for feasting sumptuously
and drinking freely.

<4> Lano was a lake of Scandinavia, remarkable in the days of
Ossian for emitting a pestilential vapor in autumn.

<5> By " the honor of the spear," is meant the tournament
practised among the ancient northern nations.



THE SONGS OF SELMA.

ARGUMENT.

Address to the evening star. Apostrophe to Fingal and his times.
Minona sings before the king the song of the unfortunate Colma,
and the bards exhibit other specimens of their poetical talents
according to an annual custom established by the monarchs of
the ancient Caledonians.

	STAR of descending night! fair is thy light in the west! thou
that liftest thy unshorn head from thy cloud: thy steps are stately
on thy hill. What dost thou behold in the plain? The stormy
winds are laid. The murmur of the torrent comes from afar.
Roaring waves climb the distant rock. The flies of evening are on
their feeble wings: the hum of their course is in the field. What
dost thou behold, fair light? But thou dost smile and depart. The
waves come with joy around thee: they bathe thy lovely hair.
Farewell, thou silent beam! Let the light of Ossian's soul arise!
	And it does arise in its strength! I behold my departed
friends. Their gathering is on Lora, as in the days of other years.
Fingal comes like a watery column of mist! his heroes are around:
and see the bards of song, gray-haired Ullin! Stately Ryno! Alpin
with the tuneful voice! the soft complaint of Minona! How are ye
changed, my friends, since the days of Selma's feast! when we
contended, like gales of spring, as they fly along the hill, and
bend by turns the feebly whistling grass.
	Minona came forth in her beauty: with downcast look and
tearful eye. Her hair flew slowly on the blast, that rushed
unfrequent from the hill. The souls of the heroes were sad when
she raised the tuneful voice. Often had they seen the grave of
Salgar, the dark dwelling of white-bosomed Colma. Colma left
alone on the hill, with all her voice of song! Salgar promised to
come: but the night descended around. Hear the voice of Colma,
when she sat alone on the hill.
	Colma. It is night, I am alone, forlorn on the hill of storms.
The wind is heard on the mountain. The torrent pours down the
rock. No hut receives me from the rain; forlorn on the hill of
winds!
	Rise, moon! from behind thy clouds. Stars of the night,
arise! Lead me, some light, to the place where my love rests from
the chase alone! his bow near him, unstrung: his dogs panting
around him. But here I must sit alone, by the rock of the mossy
stream. The stream and the wind roar aloud. I hear not the voice
of my love! Why delays my Salgar, why the chief of the hill, his
promise? here is the rock, and here the tree! here is the roaring
stream! Thou didst promise with night to be here. Ah! whither is
my Salgar gone? With thee, I would fly from my father; with thee,
from my brother of pride. Our race have long been foes; we are
not foes, O Salgar!
	Cease a little while, O wind! stream, be thou silent awhile!
let my voice be heard around. Let my wanderer hear me! Salgar!
it is Colma who calls. Here is the tree, and the rock. Salgar, my
love! I am here. Why delayest thou thy coming? Lo! the calm
moon comes forth. The flood is bright in the vale. The rocks are
gray on the steep, I see him not on the brow. His dogs come not
before him, with tidings of his near approach. Here I must sit 
alone!
	Who lie on the heath beside me? Are they my love and my
brother? Speak to me, O my friends! To Colma they give no reply.
Speak to me; I am alone! My soul is tormented with fears! Ah!
they are dead! Their swords are red from the fight. O my brother!
my brother! why hast thou slain my Salgar? why, O Salgar! hast
thou slain my brother? Dear were ye both to me! what shalt I say
in your praise? Thou wert fair on the hill among thousands! he
was terrible in fight. Speak to me; hear my voice; hear me, song
of my love! They are silent; silent for ever! Cold, cold, are their
breasts of clay! Oh! from the rock on the hill, from the top of the
windy steep, speak, ye ghosts of the dead! speak, I will not be
afraid! Whither are ye gone to rest? In what cave of the hill shall I
find the departed? No feeble voice is on the gale: no answer half-
drowned in the storm!
	I sit in my grief; I wait for morning in my tears! Rear the
tomb, ye friends of the dead. Close it not till Colma come. My life
flies away like a dream: why should I stay behind? Here shall I
rest with my friends, by the stream of the sounding rock. When
night comes on the hilt; when the loud winds arise; my ghost
shall stand in the blast, and mourn the death of my friends. The
hunter shall hear from his booth. he shall fear but love my voice!
For sweet shall my voice be for my friends: pleasant were her
friends to Colma!
	Such was thy song, Minona, softly-blushing daughter of
Torman. Our tears descended for Colma, and our souls were sad!
Ullin came with his harp! he gave the song of Alpin. The voice of
Alpin was pleasant: the soul of Ryno was a beam of fire! But they
had rested in the narrow house: their voice had ceased in Selma.
Ullin had returned, one day, from the chase, before the heroes
fell. He heard their strife on the hilt; their song was soft but sad!
They mourned the fall of Morar, first of mortal men! His soul was
like the soul of Fingal: his sword like the sword of Oscar. But he
fell, and his father mourned: his sister's eyes were full of tears.
Minona's eyes were full of tears, the sister of car-borne Morar.
She retired from the song of Ullin, like the moon in the west,
when she foresees the shower, and hides her fair head in a cloud.
I touched the harp with Ullin; the song of mourning rose!
	Ryno. The wind and the rain are past; calm is the noon of
day. The clouds are divided in heaven. Over the green hills flies
the inconstant sun. Red through the stony vale comes down the
stream of the hill. Sweet are thy murmurs, O stream! but more
sweet is the voice I hear. It is the voice of Alpin, the son of song,
mourning for the dead! Bent is his head of age; red his tearful
eye. Alpin, thou son of song, why alone on the silent hill? why
complainest thou, as a blast in the wood; as a wave on the lonely
shore?
	Alpin. My tears, O Ryno! are for the dead; my voice for
those that have passed away. Tall thou art on the hill; fair among
the sons of the vale. But thou shalt fall like Morar; the mourner
shall sit on thy tomb. The hills shall know thee no more; thy bow
shall in thy hall unstrung.
	Thou wert swift, O Morar! as a roe on the desert; terrible as
a meteor of fire. Thy wrath was as the storm. Thy sword in battle,
as lightning in the field. Thy voice was a stream after rain; like
thunder on distant hills. Many fell by thy arm; they were
consumed in the flames of thy wrath. But when thou didst return
from war, how peaceful was thy brow! Thy face was like the sun
after rain; like the moon in the silence of night; calm as the
breast of the lake when the loud wind is laid.
	Narrow is thy dwelling now! Dark the place of thine abode!
With three steps I compass thy grave. O thou who wast so great
before! Four stones, with their heads of moss, are the only
memorial of thee. A tree with scarce a leaf, long grass, which
whistles in the wind, mark to the hunter's eye the grave of the
mighty Morar. Morar! thou art low indeed. Thou hast no mother
to mourn thee; no maid with her tears of love. Dead is she that
brought thee forth. Fallen is the daughter of Morglan.
	Who on his staff is this? who is this whose head is white
with age; whose eyes are red with tears? who quakes at every
step? It is thy father, O Morar! the father of no son but thee. He
heard of thy fame in war; he heard of foes dispersed. He heard of
Morar's renown; why did he not hear of his wound? Weep, thou
father of Morar! weep; but thy son heareth thee not. Deep is the 
sleep of the dead; low their pillow of dust. No more shall he hear
thy voice; no more awake at thy call. When shall it be morn in the
grave, to bid the slumberer awake Farewell, thou bravest of men!
thou conqueror in the field! but the field shall see thee no more;
nor the dark wood be lightened with the splendor of thy steel.
Thou hast left no son. The song shall preserve thy name. Future
times shall hear of thee; they shall hear of the fallen Morar.
	The grief of all arose, but most the bursting sigh of Armin.
He remembers the death of his son, who fell in the days of his
youth. Carmor was near the hero, the chief of the echoing
Galmal. Why burst the sigh of Armin? he said. Is there a cause to
mourn? The song comes, with its music, to melt and please the
soul. It is like soft mist, that, rising from a lake, pours on the
silent vale; the green flowers are filled with dew, but the sun
returns in his strength, and the mist is gone. Why art thou sad,
O Armin, chief of sea-surrounded Gorma?
	Sad I am! nor small is my cause of wo. Carmor, thou hast
lost no son; thou hast lost no daughter of beauty. Colgar the
valiant lives; and Annira, fairest maid. The boughs of thy house
ascend, O Carmor! but Armin is the last of his race. Dark is thy
bed, O Daura! deep thy sleep in the tomb! When shalt thou
awake with thy songs? with all thy voice of music?
	Arise, winds of autumn, arise; blow along the heath!
streams of the mountains, roar! roar, tempests, in the groves of
my oaks! walk through broken clouds, O moon! show thy pale
face, at intervals! bring to my mind the night, when all my
children fell; when Arindal the mighty fell! when Daura the lovely
failed! Daura, my daughter! thou wert fair; fair as the moon  on
Fura , white as the driven snow; sweet as the breathing gale.
Arindal, thy bow was strong. Thy spear was swift on the field. Thy
look was like mist on the wave: thy shield, a red cloud in a storm.
Armar, renowned in war, came, and sought Daura's love. He was
not long refused: fair was the hope of their friends!
	Erath, son of Odgal, repined: his brother had been slain by
Armar. He came disguised like a son of the sea: fair was his skiff
on the wave; white his locks of age; calm his serious brow.
Fairest of women, he said, lovely daughter of Armin! a rock not
distant in the sea bears a tree on its side: red shines the fruit
afar! There Armar waits for Daura. I come to carry his love! She
went; she called on Armar. Nought answered, but the son of the
rock. <1> Armar, my love! my love! why tormentest thou me with
fear! hear, son of Arnart, hear: it is Daura who calleth thee! Erath
the traitor fled laughing to the land. She lifted up her voice; she
called for her brother and for her father. Arindal! Armin! none to
relieve your Daura!
	Her voice came over the sea. Arindal my son descended
from the hill; rough in the spoils of the chase. His arrows rattled
by his side; his bow was in his hand; five dark-gray dogs
attended his steps. He saw fierce Erath on the shore: he seized
and bound him to an oak. Thick wind the thongs of the hide
around his limbs: he loads the winds with his groans . Arindal
ascends the deep in his boat, to bring Daura to land. Armar came
in his wrath, and let fly the gray-feathered shaft. It sunk, it sunk
in thy heart, O Arindal, my son! for Erath the traitor thou diest.
The oar is stopped at once; he panted on the rock and expired.
What is thy grief, O Daura, when round thy feet is poured thy
brother's blood! The boat is broke in twain. Armar plunges into
the sea, to rescue his Daura, or die. Sudden a blast from a hill
came over the waves. He sunk, and he rose no more.
	Alone on the sea-beat rock, my daughter was heard to
complain. Frequent and loud were her cries. What could her
father do? All night I stood on the shore. I saw her by the faint
beam of the moon. All night I heard her cries. Loud was the wind;
the rain beat hard on the hill. Before morning appeared her voice
was weak. it died away, like the evening breeze among the grass
of the rocks. Spent with grief, she expired; and left thee, Armin,
alone. Gone is my strength in war! fallen my pride among women!
When the storms aloft arise; when the north lifts the wave on
high! I sit by the sounding shore, and look on the fatal rock.
Often by the setting moon, I see the ghosts of my children. Half
viewless, they walk in mournful conference together. Will none of
you speak in pity. They do not regard their father. I am sad, O
Carmor, nor small is my cause of wo.
	Such were the words of the bards in the days of song: when
the king heard the music of harps, the tales of other times! The
chiefs gathered from all their hills, and heard the lovely sound.
They praised the voice of Cona; <2> the first among a thousand
bards! But age is now on my tongue; my soul has failed: I hear,
at times, the ghosts of bards, and learn their pleasant Song. But
memory fails on my mind. I hear the call of years; they say, as
they pass along, Why does Ossian sing? Soon shall he lie in the
narrow house, and no bard shall raise his fame! Roll on, ye dark-
brown years; ye bring no joy on your course! Let the tomb open to
Ossian, for his strength has failed. The sons of song are gone to
rest. My voice remains, like a blast, that roars, lonely, on a sea-
surrounded rock, after the winds are laid. The dark moss
whistles there; the distant mariner sees the waving trees!

<1> By "the son of the rock," the poet means the echoing back of
the human voice from a rock.

<2> Ossian is sometimes poetically called "the voice of Cona".



FINGAL: AN ANCIENT EPIC POEM


FINGAL -- BOOK I.


ARGUMENT.

Cuthullin (general of the Irish tribes, in the minority of Cormac,
king of Ireland) sitting alone beneath a tree, at the gate of Tura, a
castle of Ulster (the other chiefs having gone on a hunting party
to Cromla, a neighboring hill,) is informed of the landing of
Swaran, king of Lochlin, by Moran, the son of Fithil, one of his
scouts. He convenes the chiefs; a council is held, and disputes
run high about giving battle to the enemy. Connal, the petty king
of Togorma, and an intimate friend of Cuthullin, was for
retreating, till Fingal, king of those Caledonians who inhabited
the north-west coast of Scotland, whose aid had been previously
solicited, should arrive; but Calmar, the son of Matha, lord of
Lara, a country in Connaught, was for engaging the enemy
immediately. Cuthullin, of himself willing to fight, went into the
opinion of Calmar. Marching towards the enemy, he missed three
of his bravest heroes, Fergus, Duch"mar, and C thba. Fergus
arriving, tells Cuthullin of the death of the two other chiefs:
which introduces the affecting episode of Morna, the daughter of
Cormac. The army of Cuthullin is descried at a distance by
Swaran, who sent the son of Arno to observe the motions of the
enemy, while he himself ranged his forces in order of battle. The
son of Arno returning to Swaran, describes to him Cuthullin's
chariot, and the terrible appearance of that hero. The armies
engage, but night coming on, leaves the victory undecided.
Cuthullin, according to the hospitality of the times, sends to
Swaran a formal invitation to a feast, by his bard Carril, the son
of Kinfena. Swaran refuses to come. Carril relates to Cuthullin
the story of Grudar and Brassolis. A party, by Connal's advice, is
sent to observe the enemy; which closes the action of the first
day.

	CUTHULLIN sat by Tura's wall; by the tree of the rustling
sound. His spear leaned against the rock. His shield lay on the
grass by his side. Amid his thoughts of mighty Cairbar, a hero
slain by the chief in war; the scout of ocean comes, Moran the
son of Fithil!
	"Arise," said the youth, "Cuthullin, arise. I see the ships of
the north! Many, chief of men, are the foe. Many the heroes of the
sea-borne Swaran!" -- "Moran!" replied the blue-eyed chief "thou
ever tremblest, son of Fithil! Thy fears have increased the foe. It
is Fingal, king of deserts, with aid to green Erin of streams." -- "I
beheld their chief," says Moran, "tall as a glittering rock. His
spear is a blasted pine. His shield the rising moon! He sat on the
shore! like a cloud of mist on the silent hill! Many, chief of heroes!
I said, many are our hands of war. Well art thou named, the
mighty man; but many mighty men are seen from Tura's windy
walls.
	"He spoke, like a wave on a rock, 'Who in this land appears
like me? Heroes stand not in my presence: they fall to earth from
my hand. Who can meet Swaran in fight? Who but Fingal, king of
Selma of storms? Once we wrestled on Malmor; our heels
overturned the woods. Rocks fell from their place; rivulets,
changing their course, fled murmuring from our side. Three days
we renewed the strife; heroes stood at a distance and trembled.
On the fourth, Fingal says, that the king of the ocean fell! but
Swaran says he stood! Let dark Cuthullin yield to him, that is
strong as the storms of his land!'
	"No!" replied the blue-eyed chief, "I never yield to mortal
man! Dark Cuthullin shall be great or dead! Go, son of Fithil,
take my spear. Strike the sounding shield of Semo. It hangs at
Tura's rustling gale. The sound of peace is not its voice! My
heroes shall hear and obey." He went. He struck the bossy shield.
The hills, the rocks reply. The sound spreads along the wood:
deer start by the lake of roes. Curach leaps from the sounding
rock! and Connal of the bloody spear! Crugal's breast of snow
beats high. The son of Favi leaves the dark-brown hind. It is the
shield of war, said Ronnart; the spear of Cuthullin, said Lugar!
Son of the sea, put on thy arms! Calmar, lift thy sounding steel!
Puno! dreadful hero, arise! Cairbar, from thy red tree of Cromla!
Bend thy knee, O Eth! descend from the streams of Lena Caolt,
stretch thy side as thou movest along the whistling heath of
Mora: thy side that is white as the foam of the troubled sea, when
the dark winds pour it on rocky Cuthon.
	Now I behold the chiefs, in the pride of their former deeds!
Their souls are kindled at the battles of old; at the actions of
other times. Their eyes are flames of fire. They roll in search of
the foes of the land. Their mighty hands are on their swords.
Lightning pours from their sides of steel. They come like streams
from the mountains; each rushes roaring from the hill. Bright are
the chiefs of battle, in the armor of their fathers. Gloomy and
dark, their heroes follow like the gathering of the rainy clouds
behind the red meteors of heaven. The sounds of crashing arms
ascend. The gray dogs howl between. Unequal bursts the song of
battle. Rocking Cromla echoes round. On Lena's dusky heath
they stand, like mist that shades the hills of autumn; when
broken and dark it settles high, and lifts its head to heaven.
	"Hail," said Cuthullin, "Sons of the narrow vales! hail,
hunters of the deer! Another sport is drawing near: it is like the
dark rolling of that wave on the coast! Or shall we fight, ye sons
of war! or yield green Erin to Lochlin? O Connal! speak, thou first
of men! thou breaker of the shields! thou hast often fought with
Lochlin: wilt thou lift thy father's spear?"
	"Cuthullin!" calm the chief replied, "the spear of Connal is
keen. it delights to shine in battle, to mix  with the blood of
thousands. But though my hand is bent on fight, my heart is for
the peace of Erin. <1>  Behold, thou first in Cormac's war, the
sable fleet of Swaran. His masts are many on our coasts, like
reeds on the lake of Lego. His ships are forests clothed with
mists, when the trees yield by turns to the squally wind. Many
are his chiefs in battle. Connal is for peace! Fingal would shun
his arm, the first of mortal men! Fingal who scatters the mighty,
as stormy winds the echoing Cona; and night settles with all her
clouds on the hill!"
	"Fly, thou man of peace!" said Colmar, "fly," said the son of
Matha; "go, Connal, to thy silent hills, where the spear never
brightens in war! Pursue the dark-brown deer of Cromla: stop
with thine arrows the bounding roes of Lena. But blue-eyed son
of Semo, Cuthullin, ruler of the field, scatter thou the Sons of
Lochlin! <2> roar through the ranks of their pride. Let no vessel
of the kingdom of snow bound on the dark-rolling waves of
Inistore. <3> Rise, ye dark winds of Erin, rise! roar, whirlwinds of
Lara of hinds! Amid the tempest let me die, torn, in a cloud, by
angry ghosts of men; amid the tempest let Calmar die, if ever
chase was sport to him, so much as the battle of shields!
	"Calmar!" Connal slow replied, "I never fled, young son of
Matha! I was swift with my friends in fight; but small is the fame
of Connal! The battle was won in my presence! the valiant
overcame! But, son of Semo, hear my voice, regard the ancient
throne of Cormac. Give wealth and half the land for peace, till
Fingal shall arrive on our coast. Or, if war be thy choice, I lift the
sword and spear. My joy shall be in  midst of thousands; my soul
shall alighten through the gloom of the fight!"
	"To me," Cuthullin replies, "pleasant is the noise of arms!
pleasant as the thunder of heaven, before the shower of spring!
But gather all the shining tribes, that I may view the sons of war!
Let then pass along the heath, bright as the sunshine before a
storm; when the west wind collects the clouds, and Morven
echoes over all her oaks! But where are my friends in battle? the
supporters of my arm in danger? Where art thou, white-bosomed
Cthba? Where is that cloud in war, Duch"mar? Hast thou left
me, O Fergus! in the day of the storm? Fergus, first in our joy at
the feast! son of Rossa! arm of death!
comest thou like a roe from Malmor? like a hart from thy echoing
hills? Hall, thou son of Rossa! what shades the soul of war?"
	"Four stones," <4> replied the chief, "rise on the grave of
Cthba.  These hands have laid in earth Duch"mar, that cloud in
war! Cthba, son of Torman! thou wert a sunbeam in Erin. And
thou, O valiant Duch"mar! a mist of the marshy Lano; when it
moves on the plains of autumn, bearing the death of thousands
along. Morna! fairest of maids! calm is thy sleep in the cave of the
rock! Thou hast fallen in darkness, like a star, that shoots across
the desert; when the traveller is alone, and mourns the transient
beam!"
	"Say," said Semo's blue-eyed son, "say how fell the chiefs of
Erin. Fell they by the sons of Lochlin, striving in the battle of
heroes? Or what confines the strong in arms to the dark and
narrow house?"
	"Cthba," replied the hero, " fell by the sword of Duch"mar
at the oak of the noisy streams. Duch"mar came to Tura's cave;
he spoke to the lovely Morna. 'Morna, fairest among women,
lovely daughter of strong-armed Cormac! Why in the circle of
stones: in the cave of the rock alone? The stream murmurs along.
The old tree groans in the wind. The lake is troubled before thee:
dark are the clouds of the sky! But thou art snow on the heath;
thy hair is the mist of Cromla; when it curls on the hill, when it
shines to the beam of the west! Thy breasts are two smooth rocks
seen from Branno of streams. Thy arms, like two white pillars in
the halls of the great Fingal.'
	"'From whence,' the fair-haired maid replied, 'from whence
Duch"mar, most gloomy of men? Dark are thy brows and terrible!
Red are thy rolling eyes! Does Swaran appear on the sea? What of
the foe, Duch"mar?' 'From the hill I return, O Morna, from the
hill of the dark-brown hinds. Three have I slain with my bended
yew. Three with my long-bounding dogs of the chase. Lovely
daughter of Cormac, I love thee as my soul: I have slain one
stately deer for thee. High was his branchy head-and fleet his feet
of wind.' 'Duch"mar!' calm the maid replied, 'I love thee not, thou
gloomy man! hard is thy heart of rock; dark is thy terrible brow.
But Cthba, young son of Torman, thou art the love of Morna.
Thou art a sunbeam, in the day of the gloomy storm. Sawest thou
the son of Torman, lovely on the hill of his hinds? Here the
daughter of Cormac waits the coming of Cthba!"
	"'Long shall Morna wait,' Duch"mar said, 'long shall Morna
wait for Cthba! Behold this sword unsheathed! Here wanders
the blood of Cthba. Long shall Morna wait. He fell by the stream
of Branno. On Croma I will raise his tomb, daughter of blue-
shielded Cormac! Turn on Duch"mar thine eyes; his arm is
strong as a storm.' 'Is the son of Torman fallen?' said the wildly-
bursting voice of the maid; 'is he fallen on his echoing hills, the
youth with the breast of snow? the first in the chase of hinds! the
foe of the strangers of ocean! Thou art dark <5>  to me,
Duch"mar; cruel is thine arm to Morna! Give me that sword, my
foe! I loved the wandering blood of Cthba!'
	"He gave the sword to her tears. She pierced his manly
breast! He fell, like the bank of a mountain stream, and
stretching forth his hand, he spoke: 'Daughter of blue-shielded
Cormac! Thou hast slain me in youth! the sword is cold in my
breast! Morna; I feel it cold. Give me to Moina the maid.
Duch"mar was the dream of her night! She will raise my tomb;
the hunter shall raise my fame. But draw the sword from my
breast, Morna, the steel is cold!' She came, in all her tears she
came; she drew the sword from his breast. He pierced her white
side! He spread her fair locks on the ground! Her bursting blood
sounds from her side: her white arm is stained with red. Rolling
in death she lay. The cave re-echoed to her sighs."
	"Peace," said Cuthullin, "to the souls of the heroes! their
deeds were great in fight. Let them ride around me on clouds. Let
them show their features of war. My soul shall then be firm in
danger; mine arm like the thunder of heaven! But be thou on a
moonbeam, O Morna! near the window of my rest; when my
thoughts are of peace; when the din of arms is past. Gather the
strength of the tribes! Move to the wars of Erin! Attend the car of
my battles! Rejoice in the noise of my course! Place three spears
by my side: follow the bounding of my steeds! that my soul may
be strong in my friends, when battle darken around the beams of
my steel!
	As rushes a stream of foam from the dark shady deep of
Cromla, when the thunder is traveling above, and dark-brown
night sits on half the hill. Through the breaches of the tempest
look forth the dim faces of ghosts. So fierce, so vast, so terrible
rushed on the sons of Erin. The chief, like a whale of ocean,
whom all his billows pursue, poured valor forth, as a stream,
rolling his might along the shore. The sons of Lochlin heard the
noise, as the sound of a winter storm. Swaran struck his bossy
shield: he called the son of Arno. "What murmur rolls along the
hill, like the gathered flies of the eve? The sons of Erin descend,
or rustling winds roar in the distant wood! Such is the noise of
Gormal, before the white tops of my waves arise. O son of Arno!
ascend the hill; view the dark face of the heath!"
	He went. He trembling swift returned. His eyes rolled wildly
round. His heart beat high against his side. His words were
faltering, broken, slow. "Arise, son of ocean, arise, chief of the
dark-brown shields! I see the dark, the mountain-stream of
battle! the deep. moving strength of the sons of Erin! the car of
war comes on, like the flame of death! the rapid car of Cuthullin,
the noble son of Semo! It bends behind like a wave near a rock;
like a sun-streaked mist of the heath. Its sides are embossed with
stones, and sparkle like the sea round the boat of night. Of
polished yew is its beam; its seat of the smoothest bone. The
sides are replenished with spears; the bottom is the foot-stool of
heroes! Before the right side of the car is seen the snorting horse!
the high-maned, broad-breasted, proud, wide-leaping strong
steed of the hill. Loud and resounding is his hoof: the spreading
of his mane above is like a stream of smoke on a ridge of rocks.
Bright are the sides of his steed! his name Sulin-Sifadda!
	"Before the left side of the car is seen the snorting horse!
The thin-maned, high-headed, strong-hoofed fleet-bounding son
of the hill: His name is Dusronnal, among the stormy sons of the
sword! A thousand thongs bind the car on high. Hard polished
bits shine in wreath of foam. Thin thongs, bright studded with
gems, bend on the stately necks of the steeds. The steeds, that
like wreaths of mist fly over the streamy vales! The wildness of
deer is in their course, the strength of eagles descending on the
prey. Their noise is like the blast of winter, on the sides of the
snow-headed Gormal.
	"Within the car is seen the chief; the strong-armed son of
the sword. The hero's name is Cuthullin, son of Semo, king of
shells. His red cheek is like my polished yew. The look of his
blue-rolling eye is wide, beneath the dark arch of his brow. His
hair flies from his head like a flame, as bending forward he wields
the spear. Fly, king of ocean, fly! He comes, like a storm along the
streamy vale!
	"When did I fly?" replied the king; " when fled Swaran from
the battle of spears? When did I shrink from danger, chief of the
little soul? I met the storm of Gormal when the foam of my waves
beat high. I met the storm of the clouds; shall Swaran fly from a
hero? Were Fingal himself before me, my soul should not darken
with fear. Arise to battle, my thousands! pour round me like the
echoing main, gather round the bright steel of your king; strong
as the rocks of my land; that meet the storm with joys and
stretch their dark pines to the wind!"
	Like autumn's dark storms pouring from two echoing hills,
towards each other approached the heroes. Like two deep
streams from high rocks meeting, mixing roaring on the plain;
loud, rough, and dark in battle meet Lochlin and Ins-fail. Chief
mixes his strokes with chief, and man with man: steel, clanging,
sounds on steel. Helmets are cleft on high. Blood bursts and
smokes around. Strings murmur on the polished yews. Darts
rush along the sky. Spears fall like the circles of light, which gild
the face of night: as the noise of the troubled ocean, when roll the
waves on high. As the last peal of thunder in heaven, such is the
din of war! Though Cormac's hundred bards were there to give
the fight to song; feeble was the voice of a hundred bards to send
the deaths to future times! For many were the deaths of heroes;
wide poured the blood of the brave!
	Mourn, ye sons of song, mourn the death of the noble
Sith llin. Let the sons of Fiona rise, on the lone plains of her
lovely Ardan. They fell, like two hinds of the desert, by the hands
of the mighty Swaran; when, in the midst of thousands, he
roared like the shrill spirit of a storm. He sits dim on the clouds
of the north, and enjoys the death of the mariner. Nor slept thy
hand by thy side, chief of the isle of mist! <6> Many were the
deaths of thine arm, Cuthullin, thou son of Semo! His sword was
like the beam of heaven when it pierces the sons of the vale:
when the people are blasted and fall, and all the hills are burning
around. Dusronnal snorted over the bodies of heroes. Sifadda
bathed his hoof in blood. The battle lay behind them, as groves
overturned on the desert of Cromla; when the blast has passed
the heath, laden with the spirits of night!
	Weep on the rocks of roaring winds, O maid of Inistore!
Bend thy fair head over the waves, thou lovelier than the ghost of
the hills, when it moves on the sun-beam, at noon, over the
silence of Morven. He is fallen: thy youth is low! pale beneath the
sword of Cuthullin! No more shall valor raise thy love to match
the blood of kings. Trenar, graceful Trenar died, O maid of
Inistore! His gray dogs are howling at home: they see his passing
ghost. His bow is in the hall unstrung. No sound is in the hall of
his hinds!
	As roll a thousand waves to the rocks, so Swaran's host
came on. As meets a rock a thousand waves, so Erin met Swaran
of spears. Death raises all his voices around, and mixes with the
sounds of shields. Each hero is a pillar of darkness; the sword
abeam of fire in his hand. The field echoes from wing to wing, as
a hundred hammers, that rise, by turns, on the red son of the
furnace. Who are these on Lena's heath, these so gloomy and
dark? Who are these like two clouds, and their swords like
lightning. above them? The little hills are troubled around; the
rocks tremble with all their moss. Who is it but ocean's son and
the car-borne chief of Erin? Many are the anxious eyes of their
friends, as they see them dim on the heath. But night conceals
the chiefs in clouds, and ends the dreadful fight!
	It was on Cromla's shaggy side that Dorglas had placed the
deer; the early fortune of the chase, before the heroes left the hill.
A hundred youths collect the heath; ten warriors make the fire;
three hundred choose the polished stones. The feast is smoking
wide! Cuthullin, chief of Erin's war, resumed his mighty soul. He
stood upon his beamy spear, and spoke to the son of songs; to
Carril of other times, the gray-headed son of Kinfena. "Is this
feast spread for  me alone, and the king of Lochlin on Erin's
shore, far from the deer of his hills, and sounding halls of his
feasts? Rise, Carril of other times, carry my words to Swaran. Tell
him from the roaring of waters, that Cuthullin gives his feast.
Here let him listen to the sound of my groves, amidst the clouds
of night, for cold and bleak the blustering winds rush over the
foam of his seas. Here let him praise the trembling harp, and
hear the songs of heroes!"
	Old Carril went with softest voice. He called the king of
dark-brown shields! Rise, from the skins of thy chase; rise,
Swaran, king of groves! Cuthullin gives the joy of shells. Partake
the feast of Erin's blue-eyed chief! He answered like the sullen
sound of Cromla before a storm. Though all thy daughters, Inis-
fail, should stretch their arms of snow, should raise the heavings
of their breasts, softly roll their eyes of love, yet fixed as Lochlin's
thousand rocks here Swaran should remain, till morn, with the
young beams of the east, shall light me to the death of Cuthullin.
Pleasant to my ear is Lochlin's wind! It rushes over my seas! It
speaks aloft in all my shrouds, and brings my green forests to my
mind: the green forests of Gormal, which often echoed to my
winds when my spear was red in the chase of the boar. Let dark
Cuthullin yield to me the ancient throne of Cormac, or Erin's
torrents shall show from their hills the red foam of the blood of
his pride!
	"Sad is the sound of Swaran's voice," said Carril  other
times! "Sad to himself alone," said the blue-eyed son of Semo.
"But, Carril, raise the voice on high; tell the deeds of other times.
Send thou the night away in song, and give the joy of grief. For
many heroes and maids of love have moved on Inis-fail, and
lovely are the songs of wo that are heard on Albion's rocks, when
the noise of the chase is past, and the streams of Cona <7>
answer to the voice of Ossian.
	"In other days," Carril replies, "came the sons of ocean to
Erin; a thousand vessels bounded on waves to Ullin's lovely
plains. The sons of Inis-fail arose to meet the race of dark-brown
shields. Cairbar, first of men, was there, and Grudar, stately
youth! Long had they strove for the spotted bull that towed on
Golbun's echoing heath. Each claimed him as his own. Death
was often at the point of their steel. Side by side the heroes
fought: the strangers of ocean fled.  Whose name was fairer on
the hill than the name of Cairbar and Grudar? But, ah! why ever
lowed the bull on Golbun's echoing heath? they saw him leaping
like snow. The wrath of the chiefs returned.
"On Lubar's <8> grassy banks they fought; Grudar fell in his
blood. Fierce Cairbar came to the vale, where Brassolis, fairest of
his sisters, all alone, raised the song of grief. She sung of the
actions of Grudar, the youth of her secret soul. She mourned him
in the field of blood, but still she hoped for his return. Her white
bosom is seen from her robe, as the moon from the clouds of
night, when its edge heaves white on the view from the darkness
which covers its orb). Her  voice was softer than the harp to raise
the song of grief. Her soul was fixed on Grudar. The secret look of
her eye was his. 'When shalt thou come in thine arms, thou
mighty in the war?'
	"'Take, Brassolis,' Cairbar came and said; 'take, Brassolis,
this shield of blood. Fix it on high within my hall, the armor of
my foe!' Her soft heart beat against her side. Distracted, pale, she
flew. She found her youth in all his blood; she died on Cromla's
heath. Here rests their dust, Cuthullin! these lonely yews sprung
from their tombs, and shade them from the storm. Fair was
Brassolis on the plain! Stately was Grudar on the hill! The bard
shall preserve their names, and send them down to future times!"
	"Pleasant is thy voice, O Carril," said the blue-eyed chief of
Erin. Pleasant are the words of other times. They are like the
calm shower of spring, when the sun looks on the field, and the
light cloud flies over the hills. O strike the harp in praise of my
love, the lonely sunbeam of Dunscaith! Strike the harp in the
praise of Bragla, she that I left in the isle of mist, the spouse of
Semo's son! Dost thou raise thy fair face from the rock to find the
sails of Cuthullin? The sea is rolling distant far: its white foam
deceives thee for my sails. Retire, for it is night, my love; the dark
winds sigh in thy hair. Retire to the halls of my feasts, think of
the times that are past. I will not return till the storm of war is
ceased. O Connal! speak of war and arms, and send her from my
mind. Lovely with her flowing hair is the white-bosomed daughter 
of Sorglan."
	Connal, slow to speak, replied, "Guard against the race of
ocean. Send thy troop of night abroad, and watch the strength of
Swaran. Cuthullin, I am for peace till the race of Selma come, till
Fingal come, the first of men, and beam, like the sun on our
fields!" The hero struck the shield of alarms, the warriors of the
night moved on. The rest lay in the heath of the deer, and slept
beneath the dusky wind. The ghosts <9> of the lately dead were
near, and swam on the gloomy clouds; and far distant in the dark
silence of Lena, the feeble voices of death were faintly heard.


<1> Erin, a name of Ireland; for "ear," or "iar," west, and "in", an
island.

<2> Lochlin: The Gaelic name of a Scandinavian general.

<3> Inistore: The Orkney islands.

<4>  This passage alludes to the manner of burial among the
ancient Scots. They opened a grave six or eight feet deep; the
bottom was lined with fine clay; and on this they laid the body of
the deceased, and, if a warrior, his sword, and the heads of
twelve arrows by his side. Above they laid another stratum of
clay, in which they placed the horn of a deer, the symbol of
hunting. The whole was covered with a fine mould, and four
stones placed on end to mark the extent of the grave. These are
the four stones alluded to here.

<5> Thou art dark  to me: She alludes to his name the " dark
man."

<6> The isle of mist:  The isle of Sky; not improperly called the
"isle of mist," as its high hills, which catch the clouds from the
Western Ocean, occasion almost continual rains.

<7> The Cona here mentioned is the small river that runs
through Glenco in Argyleshire.

<8> Lubar, a river in Ulster; "Labhar," loud, noisy.

<9> It was long the opinion of the ancient Scots, that a ghost was
heard shrieking near the place where a death was to happen soon
after.



FINGAL -- BOOK II.


ARGUMENT.

The ghost of Crugal, one of the Irish heroes who was killed in
battle, appearing to Connal, foretells the defeat of Cuthullin in
the next battle, and earnestly advises him to make peace with
Swaran. Connal communicates the vision; but Cuthullin is
inflexible; from a principle of honor he would not be the first to
sue for peace, and he resolved to continue the war. Morning
comes; Swaran proposes dishonorable terms to Cuthullin, which
are rejected. The battle begins, and is obstinately fought for some
time, until, upon the flight of Grumal, the whole Irish army gave
way. Cuthullin and Connal cover their retreat. Carril leads them
to a neighboring hill, whither they are soon followed by Cuthullin
himself; who descries the fleet of Fingal making towards their
coast; but night coming on, he lost sight of it again. Cuthullin,
dejected after his defeat, attributes his ill success to the death of
Ferda, his friend, whom he had killed some time before. Carril, to
show that ill success did not always attend those who innocently
killed their friends, introduces the episode of Connal and
Galvina.

	Connal lay by the sound of the mountain-stream, beneath
the aged tree. A stone, with its moss, supported his head. Shrill,
through the heath of Lena, he heard the voice of night. At
distance from the heroes he lay; the son of the sword feared no
foe! The hero beheld, in his rest, a dark-red stream of fire rushing
down from the hill. Crugal sat upon the beam, a chief who fell in
fight. He fell by the hand of Swaran, striving in the battle of
heroes. His face is like the beam of the setting moon. His robes
are of the clouds of the hill. His eyes are two decaying flames.
	Dark is the wound of his breast! "Crugal," said the mighty
Connal, "son of Dedgal famed on the hill of hinds! Why so pale
and sad, thou breaker of shields? Thou hast never been pale for
fear! What disturbs the departed Crugal?" Dim, and in tears he
stood, and stretched his pale hand over the hero. Faintly he
raised his feeble voice, like the gale of the reedy Lego.
	"My spirit, Connal, is on my hills; my course on the sands
of Erin. Thou shalt never talk with Crugal, nor find his lone steps
in the heath. I am light as the blast of Cromla. I move like the
shadow of mist! Connal, son of Colgar, I see a cloud of death: it
hovers dark over the plains of Lena. The Sons of green Erin must
fall. Remove from the field of ghosts." Like the darkened moon he
retired, in the midst of the whistling blast. "Stay," said the mighty
Connal " stay, my dark-red friend. Lay by that beam of heaven,
son of windy Cromla! What cave is thy lonely house? What green-
headed hill the place of thy repose? Shall we not hear thee in the
storm? in the noise of the mountain-stream? when the feeble
Sons of the wind come forth, and, scarcely seen, pass over the
desert?"
	The soft-voiced Connal rose, in the midst of his sounding
arms. He struck his shield above Cuthullin. The son of battle
waked. "Why," said the ruler of the car, "comes Connal through
my night? My spear might turn against the sound, and Cuthullin
mourn the death of his friend. Speak, Connal; son of Colgar,
speak; thy counsel is the sun of heaven!" "Son of Semo!" replied
the chief, "the ghost of Crugal came from his cave. The stars dim
twinkled through his form His voice was like the sound of a
distant stream He is a messenger of death! He speaks of the dark
and narrow house! Sue for peace, O chief of Erin!, or fly over the
heath of Lena!"
	"He spoke to Connal," replied the hero, "though stars dim
twinkled through his form. Son of Colgar, it was the wind that
murmured across thy car. Or if it was the form of Crugal, why
didst thou not force him to my sight? Hast thou inquired where is
his cave? the house of that son of wind? My sword might find
that voice, and force his knowledge from Crugal. But small is his
knowledge, Connal; he was here to-day. He could not have gone
beyond our hills! who could tell him there of our fall?" "Ghosts fly
on clouds, and ride on winds," said Connal's voice of wisdom.
"They rest together in their caves, and talk of mortal men."
	"Then let them talk of mortal men; of every man but Erin's
chief. Let me be forgot in their cave. I will not fly from Swaran! If
fall I must, my tomb shall rise amidst the fame of future times.
The hunter shall shed a tear on my stone: sorrow shall dwell
around the high-bosomed Bragla. I fear not death; to fly I fear!
Fingal has seen me victorious! Thou dim phantom of the hill,
show thyself to me! come on thy beam of heaven, show me my
death in thine hand! yet I will not fly, thou feeble son of the wind!
Go, son of Colgar, strike the shield. It hangs between the spears.
Let my warriors rise to the sound in the midst of the battles of
Erin. Though Fingal delays his coming with the race of his
stormy isles, we shall fight; O Colgar's son, and die in the battle
of heroes!"
	The sound spreads wide. The heroes rise, like the breaking
of a blue-rolling wave. They stood on the heath, like oaks with all
their branches round them, when they echo to the stream of
frost, and their withered leaves are rustling to the wind! High
Cromla's head of clouds is gray. Morning trembles on the half-
enlightened ocean. The blue mist swims slowly by, and hides the
Sons of Inis-fail!
	"Rise ye," said the king of the dark-brown shields, "ye that
came from Lochlin's waves. The sons of Erin have fled from our
arms; pursue them over the plains of Lena! Morla, go to Cormac's
hall. Bid them yield to Swaran, before his people sink to the
tomb, and silence spread over his isle." They rose, rustling like a
flock of sea-fowl, when the waves expel them from the shore.
Their sound was like a thousand streams, that meet in Cona's
vale, when after a stormy night, they turn their dark eddies
beneath the pale light of the morn.
	As the dark shades of autumn fly over the hills of grass, so
gloomy, dark, successive came the chiefs of Lochlin's echoing
woods. Tall as the stag of Morven, moved stately before them the
king. His shining shield is on his side, like a flame on the heath
at night, when the world is silent and dark, and the traveller sees
some ghosts sporting in the beam! Dimly gleam the hills around,
and show indistinctly their oaks! A blast from the troubled ocean
removed the settled mist. The Sons of Erin appear, like a ridge of
rocks on the coast; when mariners, on shores unknown, are
trembling at veering winds!
	"Go, Morla, go," said the king of Lochlin, "offer peace to
these. Offer the terms we give to kings, when nations bow down
to our swords. When the valiant are dead in war; when virgins
weep on the field!" Tall Morla came, the son of Swaran, and
stately strode the youth along! He spoke to Erin's blue-eyed chief,
among the lesser heroes. "Take Swaran's peace," the warrior 
spoke, "the peace he gives to kings when nations bow to his
sword. Leave Erin's streamy plains to us, and give thy spouse
and dog. Thy spouse, high-bosomed heaving fair! Thy dog that
overtakes the wind! Give these to prove the weakness of thine
arm, live then beneath our power!"
	"Tell Swaran, tell that heart of pride, Cuthullin never
yields! I give him the dark-rolling sea; I give his people graves in
Erin. But never shall a stranger have the pleasing sunbeam of my
love. No deer shall fly on Lochlin's hills, before swift-footed
Luth." "Vain ruler of the car," said Morla, " wilt thou then fight
the king? the king whose ships of many groves could carry off
thine isle! So little is thy green-hilled Erin to him who rules the
stormy waves!" " In words I yield to many, Morla. My sword shall
yield to none. Erin shall own the sway of Cormac while Connal
and Cuthullin live! O Connal, first of mighty men, thou hearest
the words of Morla. Shall thy thoughts then be of peace, thou
breaker of the shields? Spirit of fallen Crugal, Why didst thou
threaten us with death? The narrow house shall receive me in the
midst of the light of renown. Exalt, ye sons of Erin, exalt the
spear and bend the bow; rush on the foe in darkness, as the
spirits of stormy nights!"
	Then dismal, roaring fierce and deep, the gloom of battle
poured along, as mist that is rolled on a valley when storms
invade the silent sunshine of heaven. Cuthullin moves before me
in arms, like an angry ghost before a cloud, when meteors
enclose him with fire; when the dark winds are in his hand.
Carril, far on the heath, bids the horn of battle sound. He raises
the voice of song, and pours his soul into the minds of the brave.
	"Where," said the mouth of the song, "where is the fallen
Crugal? He lies forgot on earth; the hall of shells <1> is silent.
Sad is the spouse of Crugal. She is a stranger in the hall of her
grief. But who is she that, like a sunbeam, flies before the ranks
of the foe?  It is Degrena, lovely fair, the spouse of fallen Crugal.
Her hair is on the wind behind. Her eye is red; her voice is shrill.
Pale, empty, is thy Crugal now! His form is in the cave of the hill.
He comes to the ear of rest; he raises his feeble voice, like the 
humming of the mountain-bee, like the collected flies of the eve!
But Degrena falls like a cloud of the morn; the sword of Lochlin is
in her side. Cairbar, she is fallen, the rising thought of thy youth!
She is fallen, O Cairbar! the thought of thy youthful hours!"
	Fierce Cairbar heard the mournful sound. He rushed along
like ocean's whale. He saw the death of his daughter: he roared in
the midst of thousands. His spear met a son of Lochlin! battle
spreads from wing to wing! As a hundred winds in Lochlin's
groves, as fire in the pines of a hundred hills, so loud, so
ruinous, so vast, the ranks of men are hewn down. Cuthullin cut
off heroes like thistles; Swaran wasted Erin. Curach fell by his
hand, Cairbar of the bossy shield! Morglan lies in lasting rest! Ca-
olt trembles as he dies! His white breast is stained with blood! his
yellow hair stretched in the dust of his native land! He often had
spread the feast where he fell. He often there had raised the voice
of the harp, when his dogs leapt round for joy, and the youths of
the chase prepared the bow!
	Still Swaran advanced, as a stream that bursts from the
desert. The little hills are rolled in its course, the rocks are half-
sunk by its side. But Cuthullin stood before him, like a hill, that
catches the clouds of heaven. The winds contend on its head of
pines, the hail rattles on its rocks. But, firm in its strength, it
stands, and shades the silent vale of Cona. So Cuthullin shaded
the sons of Erin, and stood in the midst of thousands. Blood rises
like the fount of a rock from panting heroes around. But Erin
falls on either wing, like snow in the day of the sun.
	O sons of Erin," said Grumal, "Lochlin conquers in the
field. Why strive we as reeds against the wind? Fly to the hill of
dark-brown hinds." He fled like the stag of Morven; his spear is a
trembling beam of light behind him. Few fled with Grumal, chief
of  the little soul: they fell in the battle of heroes on Lena's
echoing heath. High on his car of many gems the chief of Erin
stood. He slew a mighty son of Lochlin, and spoke in haste to
Connal. "O Connal, first of mortal men, thou hast taught this
arm of death! Though Erin's Sons have fled, shall we not fight the
foe? Carril, son of other times, carry my friends to that bushy
hill. Here, Connal, let us stand like rocks, and save our flying
friends."
	Connal mounts the car of gems. They stretch their shields,
like the darkened moon, the daughter of the starry skies, when
she moves a dun circle through heaven, and dreadful change is
expected by men. Sith-fadda panted up the hill, and Stronnal,
haughty steed. Like waves behind a whale, behind them rushed
the foe. Now on the rising side of Cromla stood Erin's few sad
sons: like a grove through which the flame had rushed, hurried
on by the winds of the stormy night; distant, withered, dark, they
stand, with not a leaf to shake in the vale.
	Cuthullin stood beside an oak. He rolled his red eye in
silence, and heard the wind in his bushy hair; the scout of ocean
came, Moran the son of Fithil "The ships," he cried, "the ships of
the lonely isles. Fingal comes, the first of men, the breaker of the
shields! The waves foam before his black prows! His masts with
sails are like groves in clouds!" -- "Blow," said Cuthullin, "blow,
ye winds that rush along my isle of mist. Come to the death of
thousands, O king of resounding Selma! Thy sails, my friend, are
to me the clouds of the morning; thy ships the light of heaven;
and thou thyself a pillar of fire that beams on the world by night.
O Connal, first of men, how pleasing in grief are our friends! But
the night is gathering around. Where now are the ships of Fingal?
Here let us pass the hours of darkness; here wish for the moon of
heaven."
	The winds came down on the woods. The torrents rush
from the rocks. Rain gathers round the head of Cromla. The red
stars tremble between the flying clouds. Sad, by the side of a
stream, whose sound is echoed by a tree, sad by the side of a
stream the chief of Erin sits. Connal, son of Colgar, is there, and
Carril of other times. "Unhappy is the hand of Cuthullin," said
the son of Semo, "unhappy is the hand of Cuthullin since he slew
his friend! Ferda, son of Damman, I loved thee as myself!"
	"How, Cuthullin, son of Semo, how fell the breaker of the
shields? Well I remember," said Connal, "the son of the noble
Damman. Tall and fair, he was like the rainbow of heaven. Ferda
from Albion came, the chief of a hundred hills. In Muri's <2> hall
he learned the sword, and won the friendship of Cuthullin. We
moved to the chase together: one was our bed in the  heath."
	Deugala was the spouse of Cairbar, chief of the plains of
Ullin. She was covered with the light of beauty, but her heart was
the house of pride. She loved that sunbeam of youth, the son of
the noble Damman. "Cairbar," said the white-armed Deugala,
"give me half of the herd. No more I will remain in your halls.
Divide the herd, dark Cairbar!" "Let Cuthullin," said Cairbar,
"divide my herd on the hill.
	His breast is the seat of justice.  Depart, thou light of
beauty!"  I went and divided the herd. One snow-white bull
remained. I gave that bull to Cairbar. The wrath of Deugala rose!
	"Son of Damman," began the fair, "Cuthullin hath pained
my soul. I must hear of his death, or Lubar's stream shall roll
over me. My pale ghost shall wander near thee, and mourn the
wound of my pride. Pour out the blood of Cuthullin, or pierce this
heaving breast." "Deugala," said the fair-haired youth, "how shall
I slay the son of Semo? He is the friend of my secret thoughts.
Shall I then lift the sword?" She wept three days before the chief;
on the fourth he said he would fight. "I will fight my friend,
Deugala, but may I fall by his sword! Could I wander on the hill
alone? Could I behold the grave of Cuthullin?" We fought on the
plain of Mori. Our swords avoid a wound. They slide on the
helmets of steel, or sound on the slippery shields. Deugala was
near with a smile, and said to the son of Damman: "Thine arm is
feeble, sunbeam of youth! Thy years are not strong for steel. Yield
to the son of Semo. He is a rock on Malmor."
	The tear is in the eye of youth. He faltering said to me:
"Cuthullin, raise thy bossy shield. Defend thee from the hand of
thy friend. My soul is laden with grief, for I must slay the chief of
men." I sighed as the wind in the cleft of a rock. I lifted high the
edge of my steel. The sunbeam of battle fell: the first of
Cuthullin's friends! Unhappy is the hand of Cuthullin since the
hero fell!"
	 ""Mournful is thy tale, son of the car," said Carril of other
times. "It sends my soul back to the ages of old, to the days of
other years. Often have I heard of Comal, who slew the friend he
loved; yet victory attended his steel: the battle was consumed in
his presence!"
	Comal was the son of Albion, the chief of a hundred hills!
His deer drunk of a thousand streams. A thousand rocks replied
to the voice of his dogs. His face was the mildness of youth; his
hand the death of heroes. One was his love, and fair was she, the
daughter of the mighty Conloch. She appeared like a sunbeam
among women. Her hair was the wing of the raven. Her dogs were
taught to the chase. Her bowstring sounded on the winds. Her
soul was fixed on Comal. Often met their eyes of love. Their
course in the chase was one. Happy were their words in secret.
But Grumal loved the maid, the dark chief of the gloomy Ardven.
He watched her lone steps in the heath, the foe of unhappy
Comal.
	One day, tired of the chase, when the mist had concealed
their friends, Comal and the daughter of Conloch met in the cave
of Ronan. It was the wonted haunt of Comal. Its sides were hung
with his arms. A hundred shields of thongs were there; a
hundred helms of sounding steel. "Rest here," he said, "my love,
Galbina: thou light of the cave of Ronan! A deer appears on
Mora's brow. I go; but I will soon return." "I fear," she said, "dark
Grumal, my foe: he haunts the cave of Ronan! I will rest among
the arms; but soon return, my love!"
	He went to the deer of Mora. The daughter of Conloch
would try his love. She clothed her fair sides with his armor: she
strode from the cave of Ronan! he thought it was his foe. His
heart beat high. His color changed, and darkness dimmed his
eyes. He drew the bow. The arrow flew. Galbina fell in blood! He
run with wildness in his steps: he called the daughter of Conloch.
No answer in the lonely rock. Where art thou, O my love? He saw
at length her heaving heart, beating around the arrow he threw.
"O Conloch's daughter! is it thou?" He sunk upon her breast! The
hunters found the hapless pair! He afterward walked the hill. But
many and silent were his steps round the dark dwelling of his
love. The fleet of the ocean came. He fought; the strangers fled.
He searched for death along the field. But who could slay the
mighty Coma!? He threw away his dark-brown shield. An arrow
found his manly breast. He sleeps with his loved Galbina at the
noise of the sounding surge! Their green tombs are seen by the
mariner, when he bounds on the waves of the north.

<1> The ancient Scots, well as the present Highlanders, drunk in
shells; hence it is, that we so often meet in the old poetry with
"chief of shells," and "the hall of shells."

<2> Muri: A place in Ulster.



FINGAL -- BOOK III <1>


ARGUMENT.

Cuthullin, pleased with the story of Carril, insists with that bard
for more of his songs. He relates the actions of Fingal in Lochlin,
and death of Agandecca, the beautiful sister of Swaran. He had
scarce finished, when Calmar, the son of Matha, who had advised
the first battle, came wounded from the field, and told them of
Swaran's design to surprise the remains of the Irish army. He
himself proposes to withstand singly the whole force of the
enemy, in a narrow pass, till the Irish should make good their
retreat. Cuthullin, touched with the gallant proposal of Calmar,
resolves to accompany him and orders Carril to carry off the few
that remained of the Irish. Morning comes, Calmar dies of his
wounds; and the ships of the Caledonians appearing, Swaran
gives over the pursuit of the Irish, and returns to oppose Fingal's
landing. Cuthullin, ashamed, after his defeat, to appear before
Fingal re tires to the cave of Tura. Fingal engages the enemy,
puts them to flight: but the coming on of night makes the victory
not decisive. The king, who had observed the gallant behavior of
his grandson Oscar, gives him advice concerning his conduct in
peace and war. He recommends to him to place the example of
his fathers before his eyes, as the best model for his conduct;
which introduces the episode concerning Fainasllis, the
daughter of the king of Craca, whom Fingal had taken under his
protection in his youth. Fillan and Oscar are despatched to
observe the motions of the enemy by night: Gaul, the son of
Morni, desires the command of the army in the next battle, which
Fingal promises to give him. Some general reflections of the poet
close the third day.

	"PLEASANT are the words of the song! "said Cuthullin,
"lovely the tales of other times! They are like the calm dew of the
morning on the hill of roes! when the sun is faint on its side, and
the lake is settled and blue on the vale. O Carril, raise again thy
voice! let me hear the song of Selma: which was sung in my halls
of joy, when Fingal, king of shields, was there, and glowed at the
deeds of his fathers.
	"Fingal! thou dweller of battle," said Carril, "early were thy
deeds in arms. Lochlin was consumed in thy wrath, when thy
youth strove in the beauty of maids. They smiled at the fair-
blooming face of the hero; but death was in his hands. He was
strong as the waters of Lora. His followers were the roar of a
thousand streams. They took the king of Lochlin in war; they
restored him to his ship. His big heart swelled with pride; the
death of the youth was dark in his soul. For none ever but Fingal,
had overcome the strength of the mighty Starno. He sat in the
hall of his shells in Lochlin's woody land. He called the gray-
haired Snivan, that often sung round the circle  of Loda; when
the stone of power heard his voice <2>, and battle turned in the
field of the valiant!
	"'Go, gray-haired Snivan,' Starno said: 'go to Ardven's sea-
surrounded rocks. Tell to the king of Selma; he the fairest among
his thousands; tell him I give to him my daughter, the loveliest
maid that ever heaved a breast of snow. Her arms are white as
the foam of my waves. Her soul is generous and mild. Let him
come with his bravest heroes to the daughter of the secret hall!'
Snivan came to Selma's hall: fair-haired Fingal attended his
steps. His kindled soul flew to the maid, as he bounded on the
waves of the north. 'Welcome,' said the dark-brown Starno,
'welcome, king of rocky Morven! welcome his heroes of might,
sons of the distant isle! Three days within thy halls shall we
feast; three days pursue my boars; that your fame may reach the
maid who dwells in the secret hall.'
	"Starno designed their death. He gave the feast of shells.
Fingal, who doubted the foe, kept on his arms of steel. The sons
of death were afraid: they fled from the eyes of the king. The voice
of sprightly mirth arose. The trembling harps of joy were strung.
Bards sung the battles of heroes; they sung the heaving breast of
love. Ullin, Fingal's bard, was there: the sweet voice of resounding
Cona. He praised the daughter of Lochlin; and Morven's <3>
high-descended chief. The daughter of Lochlin overheard. She left
the hall of her secret sigh! She came in all her beauty, like the
moon from the cloud of the east. Loveliness was round her as
light. Her steps were the music of songs. She saw the youth and
loved him. He was the stolen sigh of her soul. Her blue eyes rolled
on him in secret: she blessed the chief of resounding Morven.
	"The third day, with all its beams, shone bright on the
wood of boars. Forth moved the dark-browed Starno; and Fingal,
king of shields. Half the day they spent in the chase; the spear of
Selma was red in blood. It was then the daughter of Starno, with
blue eyes rolling in tears; it was then she came with her voice of
love, and spoke to the king of Morven. 'Fingal, high-descended
chief, trust not Starno's heart of pride. Within that wood he has
placed his chiefs. Beware of the wood of death. But remember,
son of the isle, remember Agandecca; save me from the wrath of
my father, king of the windy Morven!'
	"The youth with unconcern went on; his heroes by his side.
The sons of death fell by his hand; and Germal echoed around!
Before the halls of Starno the sons of the chase convened. The
king's dark brows were like clouds; his eyes like meteors of night.
'Bring hither,' he said, 'Agandecca to her lovely king of Morven!
His hand is stained with the blood of my people; her words have
not been in vain!' She came with the red eye of tears. She came
with loosely flowing locks. Her white breast heaved with broken
sighs, like the foam of the streamy Lubar. Starno pierced her side
with steel. She fell, like a wreath of snow, which slides from the
rocks of Ronan, when the woods are still, and echo deepens in
the vale! Then Fingal eyed his valiant chiefs: his valiant chiefs
took arms! The gloom of battle roared: Lochlin fled or died. Pale
in his bounding ship he closed the maid of the softest soul. Her
tomb ascends on Ardven; the sea roars round her narrow
dwelling."
	"Blessed be her soul," said Cuthullin; "blessed be the
mouth of the song! Strong was the youth of Fingal; strong is his
arm of age. Lochlin shall fall again before the king of echoing
Morven. Show thy face from a cloud, O moon! light his white sails
on the wave: and if any strong spirit of heaven sits on that low-
hung cloud; turn his dark ships from the rock, thou rider of the
storm!"
	Such were the words of Cuthullin at the sound of the
mountain stream; when Calmar ascended the hill, the wounded
son of Matha. From the field he came in his blood. He leaned on
his bending spear. Feeble is the arm of battle! but strong the soul
of the hero! "Welcome! O son of Matha," said Connal, "welcome
art thou to thy friends! Why bursts that broken sigh from the
breast of him who never feared before?" "And never, Connal, will
he fear, chief of the pointed steel! My soul brightens in danger; in
the noise of arms I am of the race of battle. My fathers never
feared.
	"Cormar was the first of my race. He sported through the
storms of waves. His black skiff bounded on ocean; he travelled
on the wings of the wind. A spirit once embroiled the night. Seas
swell and rocks resound. Winds drive along the clouds. The
lightning flies on wings of fire. He feared, and came to land, then
blushed that he feared at all. He rushed again among the waves,
to find the son of the wind. Three youths guide the bounding
bark: he stood with sword unsheathed. When the low-hung vapor
passed, he took it by the curling head. He searched its dark
womb with his steel. The son of the wind forsook the air. The
moon and the stars returned! Such was the boldness of my race.
Calmar is like his fathers. Danger flies from the lifted sword. They
best succeed who dare!
	"But now, ye sons of green Erin, retire from Lena's bloody
heath. Collect the sad remnant of our friends, and join the sword
of Fingal. I heard the sound of Lochlin's advancing arms: Calmar
will remain and fight. My voice shall be such, my friends, as if
thousands were behind me. But, son of Semo, remember me.
Remember Calmar's lifeless corse. When Fingal shall have wasted
the field, place me by some stone of remembrance, that future
times may hear my fame; that the mother of Calmar may rejoice
in my renown."
	"No: son of Matha," said Cuthullin, "I will never leave thee
here. My joy is in an unequal fight: my soul increases in danger.
Connal, and Carril of other times, carry off the sad sons of Erin.
When the battle is over, search for us in this narrow way. For
near this oak we shall fall, in the streams of the battle of
thousands! O Fithal's son, with flying speed rush over the heath
of Lena. Tell to Fingal that Erin is fallen. Bid the king of Morven
come. O let him come like the sun in a storm, to lighten, to
restore the isle!"
	Morning is gray on Cromla. The sons of the sea ascend.
Calmar stood forth to meet them in the pride of his kindling soul. 
But pale was the face of the chief. He leaned on his father's
spear. That spear which he brought from Lara, when the soul of
his mother was sad; the soul of the lonely Alcletha, waning in the
sorrow of years. But slowly now the hero falls, like a tree on the
plain. Dark Cuthullin stands alone like a rock in a sandy vale.
The sea comes with its waves, and roars on its hardened sides.
Its head is covered with foam; the hills are echoing round.
	Now from the gray mist of the ocean the white-sailed ships
of Fingal appear. High is the grove of their masts, as they nod, by
turns, on the rolling wave. Swaran saw them from the hill. He
returned from the sons of Erin. As ebbs the resounding sea,
through the hundred isles of Inistore; so loud, so vast, so
immense, returned the sons of Lochlin against the king. But
bending, weeping, sad, and slow, and dragging his long spear
behind, Cuthullin sunk in Cromla's wood, and mourned his
fallen friends. He feared the face of Fingal, who was wont to greet
him from the fields of renown!
	"How many lie there of my heroes! the chiefs of Erin's race!
they that were cheerful in the hall, when the sound of the shells
arose! No more shall I find their steps in the heath! No more shall
I hear their voice in the chase. Pale, silent, low on bloody beds,
are they who were my friends! O spirits of the lately dead, meet
Cuthullin on his heath! Speak to him on the winds, when the
rustling tree of Tura's cave resounds. There, far remote, I shall lie
unknown. No bard shall hear of me. No gray stone shall rise to
my renown. Mourn me with the dead, O Bragla! departed is my
fame." Such were the words of Cuthullin, when he sunk in the
woods of Cromla!
	Fingal, tall in his ship, stretched his bright lance before
him. Terrible was the gleam of his steel: It was like the green
meteor of death, setting in the heath of Malmor, when the
traveller is alone, and the broad moon is darkened in heaven.
	"The battle is past," said the king. "I behold the blood of my
friends. Sad is the heath of Lena! mournful the oaks of Cromla!
The hunters have fallen in their strength: the son of Semo is no
more! Ryno and Fillan, my sons, sound the horn of Fingal!
Ascend that hill on the shore; call the children of the foe. Call
them from the grave of Lamderg, the chief of other times. Be your
voice like that of your father, when he enters the battles of his
strength! I wait for the mighty stranger. I wait on Lena's shore for
Swaran. Let him come with all his race; strong in battle are the
friends of the dead!"
	Fair Ryno as lightning gleamed along: dark Fillan rushed
like the shade of autumn. On Lena's heath their voice is heard.
The sons of ocean heard the horn of Fingal. As the roaring eddy
of ocean returning from the kingdom of snows: so strong, so
dark, so sudden, came down the sons of Lochlin. The king in
their front appears, in the dismal pride of his arms! Wrath burns
on his dark-brown face; his eyes roll in the fire of his valor. Fingal
beheld the son of Starno: he remembered Agandecca. For Swaran
with tears of youth had mourned his white-bosomed sister. He
sent Ullin of songs to bid him to the feast of shells: for pleasant
on Fingal's soul returned the memory of the first of his loves!
	Ullin came with aged steps, and spoke to Starno's son. "O
thou that dwellest afar, surrounded, like a rock, with thy waves!
come to the feast of the king, and pass the day in rest. To-morrow
let us fight, O Swaran, and break the echoing shields." -- "To-
day," said Starno's wrathful son, "we break the echoing shields:
to-morrow my feast shall be spread; but Fingal shall lie on earth."
-- "To-morrow let his feast be spread," said Fingal, with a smile.
"To-day, O my sons! we shall break the echoing shields. Ossian,
stand thou near my arm. Gaul, lift thy terrible sword. Fergus,
bend thy crooked yew. Throw, Fillan, thy lance through heaven.
Lift your shields, like the darkened moon. Be your spears the
meteors of death. Follow me in the path of my fame. Equal my
deeds in battle."
	As a hundred winds on Morven; as the streams of a
hundred hills; as clouds fly successive over heaven; as the dark
ocean assails the shore of the desert: so roaring, so vast, so
terrible, the armies mixed on Lena's echoing heath. The groans of
the people spread over the hills: it was like the thunder of night,
when the cloud bursts on Cona; and a thousand ghosts shriek at
once on the hollow wind. Fingal rushed on in his strength,
terrible as the spirit of Trenmor; when in a whirlwind he comes to
Morven, to see the children of his pride. The oaks resound on
their mountains, and the rocks fall down before him. Dimly seen
as lightens the night, he strides largely from hill to hill. Bloody
was the hand of my father, when he whirled the gleam of his
sword. He remembers the battles of his youth. The field is wasted
in its course!
	Ryno went on like a pillar of fire. Dark is the brow of Gaul.
Fergus rushed forward with feet of wind; Fillin like the mist of the
hill. Ossian, like a rock, came down. I exulted in the strength of
the king. Many were the deaths of my arm! dismal the gleam of
my sword! My locks were not then so gray; nor trembled my
hands with age. My eyes were not closed in darkness; my feet
failed not in the race!
	Who can relate the deaths of the people? who the deeds of
mighty heroes? when Fingal, burning in his wrath, consumed the
sons of Lochlin? Groans swelled on groans from hill to hill, till
night had covered all. Pale, staring like a herd of deer, the sons of
Lochlin convene on Lena. We sat and heard the sprightly harp, at
Lubar's gentle stream. Fingal himself was next to the foe. He
listened to the tales of his bards. His godlike race were in the
song, the chiefs of other times. Attentive, leaning on his shield,
the king of Morven sat. The wind whistled through his locks; his
thoughts are of the days of other years. Near him, on his bending
spear, my young, my valiant Oscar stood. He admired the king of
Morven: his deeds were swelling in his soul.
	"Son of my son," began the king, "O Oscar, pride of youth: I
saw the shining of the sword. I gloried in my race. Pursue the
fame of our fathers; be thou what they have been, when Trenmor
lived, the first of men, and Trathal, the father of heroes! They
fought the battle in their youth. They are the song of bards. O
Oscar! bend the strong in arm; but spare the feeble hand. Be
thou a stream of many tides against the foes of thy people; but
like the gale, that moves the grass. to those who ask thine aid. So
Trenmor lived; such Trathal was; and such has Fingal been. My
arm was the support of the injured; the weak rested behind the
lightning of my steel.
	"Oscar! I was young, like thee, when lovely Fainasllis
came: that sunbeam! that mild light of love! the daughter of
Craca's <4> king. I then returned from Cona's heath, and few
were in my train. A white-sailed boat appeared far off; we saw it
like a mist that rode on ocean's wind. It soon approached. We
saw the fair. Her white breast heaved with sighs.  The wind was
in her loose dark hair; her rosy cheek had tears. 'Daughter of
beauty,' calm I said, 'what sigh is in thy breast? Can I, young as I
am, defend thee, daughter of the sea? My sword is not
unmatched in war, but dauntless is my heart."
	"'To thee I fly,' with sighs she said, 'O prince of mighty men!
To thee I fly, chief of the generous shells, supporter of the feeble
hand! The king of Craca's echoing isle owned me the sunbeam of
his race. Cromla's hills have heard the sighs of love for unhappy
Fainasllis! Sora's chief beheld me fair; he loved the daughter of
Craca. His sword is a beam of light upon the warrior's side. But
dark is his brow; and tempests are in his soul. I shun him on the
roaring sea; but Sora's chief pursues.'
	"'Rest thou,' I said, 'behind my shield! rest in peace, thou
beam of light! The gloomy chief of Sora will fly, if Fingal's arm is
like his soul. In some lone cave I might conceal thee, daughter of
the sea. But Fingal never flies. Where the danger threatens, I
rejoice in the storm of spears.' I saw the tears upon her cheek. I
pitied Craca's fair. Now, like a dreadful wave afar, appeared the
ship of stormy Borbar. His masts high-bended over the sea
behind their sheets of snow. White roll the waters on either side.
The strength of ocean sounds. 'Come thou,' I said, 'from the roar
of ocean, thou rider of the storm. Partake the feast within my
hall. It is the house of strangers.'
	"The maid stood trembling by my side. He drew the bow.
She fell. 'Unerring is thy hand,' I said, 'but feeble was the foe.' We
fought, nor weak the strife of death. He sunk beneath my sword.
We laid them in two tombs of stone; the hapless lovers of youth!
Such have I been, in my youth, O Oscar! be thou like the age of
Fingal. Never search thou for battle; nor shun it when it comes.
	"Fillan and Oscar of the dark-brown hair! ye that are swift
in the race fly over the heath in my presence. View the sons of
Lochlin. Far off I hear the noise of their feet, like distant sounds
in woods. Go: that they may not fly from my sword, along the
waves of the north. For many chiefs of Erin's race lie here on the
dark bed of death. The children of war are low; the sons of
echoing Cromla."
	The heroes flew like two dark clouds: two dark clouds that
are the chariots of ghosts; when air's dark children come forth to
frighten hapless men. It was then that Gaul, the son of Morni,
stood like a rock in night. His spear is glittering to the stars; his
voice like many streams.
	"Son of battle," cried the chief, "O Fingal, king of shells! let
the bards of many songs soothe Erin's friends to rest. Fingal,
sheath thou thy sword of death; and let thy people fight. We
wither away without our fame; our king is the only breaker of
shields! When morning rises on our hills, behold at a distance
our deeds. Let Lochlin feel the sword of Morni's son; that bards
may sing of me. Such was the custom heretofore of Fingal's noble
race. Such was thine own, thou king of swords, in battles of the
spear."
	O son of Morni," Fingal replied, "I glory in thy fame. Fight;
but my spear shall be near, to aid thee in the midst of danger.
Raise, raise the voice, ye sons of song, and lull me into rest. Here
will Fingal lie, amidst the wind of night. And if thou, Agandecca,
art near, among the children of thy land; if thou sittest on a blast
of wind, among the high-shrouded masts of Lochlin; come to my
dreams, my fair one! Show thy bright face to my soul ."
	Many a voice and many a harp, in tuneful sounds arose. Of
Fingal noble deeds they sung; of Fingal's noble race: and
sometimes, on the lovely sound was heard the name of Ossian. I
often fought, and often won in battles of the spear. But blind, and
tearful, and forlorn, I walk with little men! O Fingal, with thy race
of war I now behold thee not. The wild roes feed on the green
tomb of the mighty king of Morven! Blest be thy soul, thou king of
swords, thou most renowned on the hills of Cona!


<1> The second night, since the opening of the poem, continues;
and Cuthullin, Connal, and Carril, still sit in the place described
in the preceding book.

<2> This passage most certainly alludes to the religion of Lochlin,
and  "the stone of power," here mentioned, is the image of one of
the deities of Scandinavia.

<3> All the Northwest coast of Scotland probably went, of old
under the name of Morven, which signifies a ridge of very high
hills

<4> What the Craca here mentioned was, it is not, at this
distance of time, easy to determine. The most probable opinion is,
that it was one of the Shetland Isles.



FINGAL -- BOOK IV.

ARGUMENT.
The action of the poem being suspended by night, Ossian takes
the opportunity to relate his own actions at the lake of Lego, and
his courtship of Everallin, who was the mother of Oscar, and had
died some time before the expedition of Fingal into Ireland. Her
ghost appears to him, and tells him that Oscar, who had been
sent, the beginning of the night, to observe the enemy, was
engaged with an advanced party, and almost overpowered.
Ossian relieves his son; and an alarm is given to Fingal of the
approach of Swaran. The king rises, calls his army together, and,
as he had promised the preceding night, devolves the command
on Gaul the son of Morni, while he himself, after charging his
sons to behave gallantly and defend his people, retires to a hill,
from whence he could have a view of the battle. The battle joins;
the poet relates Oscar's great actions. But when Oscar, in
conjunction with his father, conquered in one wing, Gaul, who
was attacked by Swaran in person, was on the point of retreating
in the other. Fingal sends Ullin his bard to encourage them with
a war song, but notwithstanding Swaran prevails; and Gaul and
his army are obliged to give way. Fingal descending from the hill,
rallies them again; Swaran desists from the pursuit, possesses
himself of a rising ground, restores the ranks, and waits the
approach of Fingal. The king, having encouraged his men, gives
the necessary orders, and renews the battle. Cuthullin, who, with
his friend Connal, and Carril his bard, had retired to the cave of
Tura, hearing the noise, came to the brow of the hill, which
overlooked the field of battle, where he saw Fingal engaged with
the enemy. He, being hindered by Connal from joining Fingal,
who was himself upon the point of obtaining a complete victory,
sends Carril to congratulate that hero on success.

	Who comes with her songs from the hill, like the bow of the
showery Lena? It is the maid of the voice of love: the white-armed
daughter of Toscar! Often hast thou heard my song; often given
the tear of beauty. Hast thou come to the wars of thy people? to
hear the actions of Oscar? When shall I cease to mourn, by the
streams of resounding Cona? My years have passed away in
battle. My age is darkened with grief!
	"Daughter of the hand of snow, I was not so mournful and
blind; I was not so dark and forlorn, when Everallin loved me!
Everallin with the dark-brown hair, the white-bosomed daughter
of Branno. A thousand heroes sought the maid, she refused her
love to a thousand. The sons of the sword were despised: for
graceful in her eyes was Ossian. I went, in suit of the maid, to
Lego's sable surge. Twelve of my people were there, the sons of
streamy Morven! We came to Branno, friend of strangers! Branno
of the sounding mail! 'From whence,' he said, 'are the arms of
steel? Not easy to win is the maid, who has denied the blue-eyed
sons of Erin. But blest be thou, O son of Fingal! Happy is the
maid that waits thee! Though twelve daughters of beauty were
mine, thine were the choice, thou son of fame!'
	"He opened the hall of the maid, the dark-haired Everallin.
Joy kindled in our manly breasts. We blest the maid of Branno.
Above us on the hill appeared the people of stately Cormac. Eight
were the heroes of the chief. The heath flamed wide with their
arms. There Colla; there Durra of wounds; there mighty Toscar,
and Tago; there Fresta the victorious stood; Dairo of the happy
deeds; Dala the battle's bulwark in the narrow way! The sword
flamed in the hand of Cormac. Graceful was the look of the hero!
Eight were the heroes of Ossian. Ullin, stormy son of war. Mullo
of the generous deeds. The noble,  the graceful Scelacha. Oglan,
and Cerdan the wrathful. Dumariccan's brows of death. And why
should Ogar be the last; so wide-renowned on the hills of Ardven?
	"Ogar met Dala the strong face to face, on the field of
heroes. The battle of the chiefs was like wind, on ocean's foamy
waves. The dagger is remembered by Ogar; the weapon which he
loved. Nine times he drowned it in Dala's side. The stormy battle
turned. Three times I broke on Cormac's shield: three times he
broke his spear. But, unhappy youth of love! I cut his head away.
Five times I shook it by the lock. The friends of Cormac fled.
Whoever would have told me, lovely maid, when then I strove in
battle, that blind, forsaken, and forlorn, I now should pass the
night; firm ought his mail to have been; unmatched his arm in
war."
	On Lena's gloomy heath the voice of music died away. The
inconstant blast blew hard. The high oak shook its leaves
around. Of Everallin were my thoughts, when in all the light of
beauty she came; her blue eyes rolling in tears. She stood on a
cloud before my sight, and spoke with feeble voice! "Rise, Ossian,
rise, and save my son; save Oscar, prince of men. Near the red
oak of Luba's stream he fights with Lochlin's sons." She sunk
into her cloud again. I covered me with steel. My spear supported
my steps; my rattling armor rung. I hummed, as I was wont in
danger, the songs of heroes of old. Like distant thunder Lochlin
heard. They fled; my son pursued.
	I called him like a distant stream. "Oscar, return over Lena.
No further pursue the foe," I said, "though Ossian is behind
thee." He came! and pleasant to my ear was Oscar's sounding
steel. "Why didst thou stop my hand," he said, "till death had
covered all? For dark and dreadful by the stream they met thy
son and Fillin. They watched the terrors of the night. Our swords
have conquered some. But as the winds of night pour the ocean
over the white sands of Mora, so dark advance the sons of
Lochlin, over Lena's rustling heat! The ghosts of night shriek afar:
I have seen the meteors of death. Let me awake the king of
Morven, he that smiles in danger! He that is like the sun of
heaven, rising in a storm!"
	Fingal had started from a dream, and leaned on Trenmor's
shield! the dark-brown shield of his fathers, which they had lifted
of old in war. The hero had seen, in his rest, the mournful form of
Agandecca. She came from the way of the ocean. She slowly,
lonely, moved over Lena. Her face was pale, like the mist of
Cromla. Dark were the tears of her cheek. She often raised her
dim hand from her robe, her robe which was of the clouds of the
desert: she raised her dim hand over Fingal, and turned away
silent eyes! "Why weeps the daughter of Starno?" said Fingal with
a sigh; "why is thy face so pale, fair wanderer of the clouds?" She
departed on the wind of Lena. She left him in the midst of the
night. She mourned the sons of her people, that were to fall by
the hand of Fingal.
	The hero started from rest. Still he beheld her in his soul.
The sound of Oscar's steps approached. The king saw the gray
shield on his side: for the faint beam of the morning came over
the waters of Ullin. "What do the foes in their fear?" said the
rising king of Morven: "or fly they through ocean's foam, or wait
they the battle of steel? But why should Fingal ask? I hear their
voice on the early wind! Fly over Lena's heath: O Oscar, awake
our friends!"
	The king stood by the stone of Lubar. Thrice he reared his
terrible voice. The deer started from the fountains of Cromla. The
rocks shook, on all their hills. Like the noise of a hundred
mountain-streams, that burst, and roar, and foam! like the
clouds, that gather to a tempest on the blue face of the sky! so
met the sons of the desert, round the terrible voice of Fingal.
Pleasant was the voice of the king of Morven to the warriors of his
land. Often had he led them to battle; often returned with the
spoils of the foe.
	"Come to battle," said the king, "ye children of echoing
Selma! Come to the death of thousands! Comhal's son will see
the fight. My sword shall wave on the hill, the defence of my
people in war. But never may you need it, warriors; while the son
of Morni fights, the chief of mighty men! He shall lead my battle,
that his fame may rise in song! O ye ghosts of heroes dead! ye
riders of the storm of Cromla! receive my falling people with joy,
and bear them to your hills. And may the blast of Lena carry
them over my seas, that they may come to my silent dreams, and
delight my soul in rest. Fillan and Oscar of the dark-brown hair!
fair Ryno, with the pointed steel! advance with valor to the fight.
Behold the son of Morni! Let your swords be like his in strife:
behold the deeds of his hands. Protect the friends of your father.
Remember the chiefs of old. My children, I will see you yet,
though here you should fall in Erin. Soon shall our cold pale
ghosts meet in a cloud, on Cona's eddying winds."
	Now like a dark and stormy cloud, edged round with the
red lightning of heaven, flying westward from the morning's
beam, the king of Selma removed. Terrible is the light of his
armor; two spears are in his hand. His gray hair falls on the
wind. He often looks back on the war. Three bards attend the son
of fame, to bear his words to the chiefs high on Cromla's side he
sat, waving the Lightning of his sword, and as he waved we
moved.
	Joy rises in Oscar's face. His cheek is red. His eye sheds
tears. The sword is a beam of fire in his hand. He came, and
smiling, spoke to Ossian. "O ruler of the fight of steel! my father,
hear thy son! Retire with Morven's mighty chief. Give me the fame
of Ossian. If here I fall, O chief, remember that breast of snow,
the lonely sunbeam of my love, the white-handed daughter of
Toscar! For, with red cheek from the rock, bending over the
stream, her soft hair flies about her bosom, as she pours the sigh
for Oscar. Tell her I am on my hills, a lightly-bounding son of the
wind; tell her, that in a cloud I may meet the lovely maid of
Toscar." "Raise, Oscar, rather raise my tomb. I will not yield the
war to thee. The first and bloodiest in the strife, my arm shall
teach thee how to fight. But remember, my son, to place this
sword, this bow, the horn of my deer, within that dark and
narrow house, whose mark is one gray stone! Oscar, I have no
love to leave to the care of my son. Everallin is no more, the lovely
daughter of Branno!"
	Such were our words, when Gaul's loud voice came
growing on the wind. He waved on high the sword of his father.
We rushed to death and wounds. As waves, white bubbling over
the deep, come swelling, roaring on; as rocks of ooze meet roaring
waves; so foes attacked and fought. Man met with man, and steel
with steel. Shields sound and warriors fall. As a hundred
hammers on the red son of the furnace, so rose, so rung their
swords!
	Gaul rushed on, like a whirlwind in Ardven. The
destruction of heroes is on his sword. Swaran was like the fire of
the desert in the echoing heath of Gormal! How can I give to the
song the death of many spears? My sword rose high, and flamed
in the strife of blood. Oscar, terrible wert thou, my best, my
greatest son! I rejoiced in my secret soul, when his sword flamed
over the slain. They fled amain through Lena's heath. We
pursued and slew. As stones that bound from rock to rock; as
axes in echoing woods; as thunder rolls from hill to hill, in dismal
broken peals; so blow succeeded to blow, and death to death,
from the hand of Oscar and mine.
	But Swaran closed round Morni's son, as the strength of
the tide of Inistore. The king half rose from his hill at the sight.
He half-assumed the spear. "Go, Ullin, go, my aged bard," began
the king of Morven. "Remind the mighty Gaul of war. Remind him
of his fathers. Support the yielding fight with song; for song
enlivens war." Tall Ullin went, with step of age, and spoke to the
king of swords. "Son of the chief of generous steeds! high-
bounding king of spears! Strong arm in every perilous toil! Hard
heart that never yields! Chief of the pointed arms of death! Cut
down the foe; let no white sail bound round dark Inistore. Be
thine arm like thunder, thine eyes like fire, thy heart of solid
rock. Whirl round thy sword as a meteor at night: lift thy shield
like the flame of death. Son of the chief of generous steeds, cut
down the foe! Destroy!" The hero's heart beat high. But Swaran
came with battle. He cleft the shield of Gaul in twain. The sons of
Selma fled.
	Fingal at once arose in arms. Thrice he reared his dreadful
voice. Cromla answered around. The sons of the desert stood
still. They bent their blushing faces to earth, ashamed at the
presence of the king. He came like a cloud of rain in the day of
the sun, when slow it rolls on the hill, and fields expect the
shower. Silence attends its slow progress aloft; but the tempest is
soon to rise. Swaran beheld the terrible king of Morven. He
stopped in the midst of his course. Dark he leaned on his spear,
rolling his red eyes around. Silent and tall he seemed as an oak
on the banks of Lubar, which had its branches blasted of old by
the lightning of heaven. It bends over the stream: the gray moss
whistles in the wind: so stood the king. Then slowly he retired to
the rising heath of Lena. His thousands pour round the hero.
Darkness gathers on the hill!
	Fingal, like a beam of heaven, shone in the midst of his
people. His heroes gather around him. He sends forth the voice of
his power. "Raise my standards on high; spread them on Lena's
wind, like the flames of a hundred hills! Let them sound on the
wind of Erin, and remind us of the fight. Ye sons of the roaring
streams, that pour from a thousand hills be near the king of
Morven! attend to the words of his power! Gaul, strongest arm of
death! O Oscar, of the future fights! Connal, son of the blue
shields of Sora! Dermid, of the dark-brown hair! Ossian, king of
many songs, be near your father's arm!" We reared the sunbeam
<1> of battle; the standard of the king! Each hero exulted with
joy, as, waving, it flew on the wind. It was studded with gold
above, as the blue wide shell of the nightly sky. Each hero had
his standard too, and each his gloomy men!
	"Behold," said the king of generous shells, "how Lochlin
divides on Lena! They stand like broken clouds on a hill, or a
half-consumed grove of oaks, when we see the sky through its
branches, and the meteor passing behind! Let every chief among
the friends of Fingal take a dark troop of those that frown so
high: nor let a son of the echoing groves bound on the waves of
Inistore!"
	"Mine," said Gaul, "be the seven chiefs that came from
Lano's lake." "Let Inistore's dark king," said Oscar, "come to the
sword of Ossian's son." "To mine the king of Iniscon," said
Connal, heart of steel!" Or Mudan's chief or I," said brown-haired
Dermid, "shall sleep on clay-cold earth." My choice, though now
so weak and dark, was Terman's battling king; I promised with
my hand to win the hero's dark-brown shield, "Blest and
victorious be my chiefs," said Fingal of the mildest look. "Swaran,
king of roaring waves, thou art the choice of Fingal!"
	Now, like a hundred different winds that pour through
many vales, divided, dark the sons of Selma advanced. Cromla
echoed around! How can I relate the deaths, when we closed in
the strife of arms? O, daughter of Toscar, bloody were our hands!
The gloomy ranks of Lochlin fell like the banks of roaring Cona!
Our arms were victorious on Lena: each chief fulfilled his
promise. Beside the murmur of Branno thou didst often sit, O
maid! thy white bosom rose frequent, like the down of the swan
when slow she swims on the lake, and sidelong winds blow on
her ruffled wing. Thou hast seen the sun retire, red and slow
behind his cloud: night gathering round on the mountain, while
the unfrequent blast roared in the narrow vales. At length the
rain beats hard: thunder rolls in peals. Lightning glances on the
rocks! Spirits ride on beams of fire! The strength of the mountain
streams comes roaring down the hills. Such was the noise of
battle, maid of the arms of snow! Why. daughter of Toscar, why
that tear? The maids of Lochlin have cause to weep! The people of
their country fell. Bloody were the blue swords of the race of my
heroes! But I am sad, forlorn, and blind: no more the corn ion of
heroes! Give, lovely maid to me thy tears. I have seen the tombs
of all my friends!
	 It was then, by Fingal's hand, a hero fell, to his grief! Gray-
haired he rolled in the dust. He lifted his faint eyes to the king.
"And is it by me thou hast fallen," said the son of Comhal, "thou
friend of Agandecca? I have seen thy tears for the maid of my love
in the halls of the bloody Starno! Thou hast been the foe of the
foes of my love, and hast thou fallen by my hand? Raise Ullin,
raise the grave of Mathon, and give his name to Agandecca's
song. Dear to my soul hast thou been, thou darkly-dwelling maid
of Ardven!"
	Cuthullin, from the cave of Cromla, heard the noise of the
troubled war. He called to Connal, chief of swords: to Carril of
other times. The gray-haired heroes heard his voice. They took
their pointed spears. They came, and saw the tide of battle, like
ocean's crowded waves, when the dark wind blows from the deep,
and rolls the billows through the sandy vale! Cuthullin kindled at
the sight. Darkness gathered on his brow. His hand is on the
sword of his fathers: his red-rolling eyes on the foe. He thrice
attempted to rush to battle. He thrice was stopped by Connal.
"Chief of the isle of mist," he said, "Fingal subdues the foe. Seek
not a part of the fame of the king; himself is like the storm!"
	"Then, Carril, go," replied the chief, "go greet the king of
Morven. When Lochlin falls away like a stream after rain; when
the noise of the battle is past; then be thy voice sweet in his ear
to praise the king of Selma! Give him the sword of Caithbat.
Cuthullin is not worthy to lift the arms of his fathers! Come, o ye
ghosts of the lonely Cromla! ye souls of chiefs that are no more!
be near the steps of Cuthullin; talk to him in the cave of his grief.
Never more shall I be renowned among the mighty in the land. I
am a beam that has shone; a mist that has fled away when the
blast of the morning came, and brightened the shaggy side of the
hill. Connal, talk of arms no more! departed is my fame. My sighs
shall be on Cromla's wind, till my footsteps cease to be seen. And
thou, white-bosomed Bragla! mourn over the fall of my fame:
vanquished, I will never return to thee, thou sunbeam of my
soul!"

<1> Fingal's standard was distinguished by the name of
"sunbeam", probably on account of its bright colour, and its
being studded with gold. To begin a battle is expressed, in old
composition, by "lifting of the sunbeam."



FINGAL -- BOOK V.


ARGUMENT.

Cuthullin and Connal still remain on the hill. Fingal and Swaran
meet: the combat is described. Swaran is overcome, bound, and
delivered over as a prisoner to the care of Ossian, and Gaul, the
son of Morni; Fingal, his younger sons and Oscar still pursue the
enemy. The episode of Orla, a chief of Lochlin, who was mortally
wounded in the battle, is introduced. Fingal, touched with the
death of Orla, orders the pursuit to be discontinued; and calling
his sons together, he is informed that Ryno, the youngest of
them, was slain. He laments his death, hears the story of
Lamderg and Gelchossa, and returns towards the place where he
had left Swaran. Carril, who had been sent by Cuthullin to
congratulate Fingal on his victory, comes in the mean time to
Ossian. The conversation of the two poets closes the action of the
fourth day.


	On Cromla's resounding side Connal spoke to the chief of
the noble car. Why that gloom, son of Semo? Our friends are the
mighty in fight. Renowned art thou, O warrior! many were the
deaths of thy steel. Often has Bragla met, with blue-rolling eyes
of joy: often has she met her hero returning in the midst of the
valiant, when his sword was red with slaughter, when his foes
were silent in the fields of the tomb. Pleasant to her ears were thy
bards, when thy deeds, arose in song.
	But behold the king of Morven! He moves, below, like a
pillar of fire. His strength is like the stream of Lubar, or the wind
of the echoing Cromla, when the branchy forests of night are torn
from all their rocks. Happy are thy people, O Fingal! thine arm
shall finish their wars. Thou art the first in their dangers: the
wisest in the days of their peace. Thou speakest, and thy
thousands obey: armies tremble at the sound of thy steel. Happy
are thy people, O Fingal! king of resounding Selma. Who is that
so dark and terrible coming in the thunder of his course? who
but Starno's son, to meet the king of Morven? Behold the battle of
the chiefs! it is the storm of the ocean, when two spirits meet far
distant, and contend for the rolling of waves. The hunter hears
the noise on his bill. He sees the high billows advancing to
Ardven's shore.
	Such were the words of Connal when the heroes met in
fight. There was the clang of arms! there every blow, like the
hundred hammers of the furnace! Terrible is the battle of the
kings; dreadful the look of their eyes. Their dark-brown shields
are cleft in twain. Their steel flies, broken, from their helms. They
fling their weapons down. Each rushes to his hero's grasp; their
sinewy arms bend round each other: they turn from side to side,
and strain and stretch their large-spreading limbs below. But
when the pride of their strength arose they shook the hill with
their heels. Rocks tumble from their places on high; the green-
headed bushes are overturned. At length the strength of Swaran 
fell; the king of the groves is bound. Thus have I seen on Cona;
but Cona I behold no more! thus have I seen two dark hills
removed from their place by the strength of their bursting
stream. They turn from side to side in their fall; their tall oaks
meet one another on high. Then they tumble together with all
their rocks and trees. The streams are turned by their side. The
red ruin is seen afar.
"Sons of distant Morven, "said Fingal, "guard the king of Lochlin.
He is strong as his thousand waves. His hand is taught to war.
His race is of the times of old. Gaul, thou first of my heroes;
Ossian, king of songs attend. He is the friend of Agandecca; raise
to joy his grief. But Oscar, Fillan, and Ryno, ye children of the
race, pursue Lochlin over Lena, that no vessel may hereafter
bound on the dark-rolling waves of Inistore."
	They flew sudden across the heath. He slowly moved, like a
cloud of thunder, when the sultry plain of summer is silent and
dark. His sword is before him as a sunbeam; terrible as the
streaming meteor of night. He came towards a chief of Lochlin.
He spoke to the son of the wave. -- "Who is that so dark and sad,
at the rock of the roaring stream? He cannot bound over its
course. How stately is the chief! His bossy shield is on his side;
his spear like the tree f the desert. Youth of the dark-red hair, art
thou of the foes of Fingal?"
	"I am a son of Lochlin," he cries; "strong is my arm in war.
My spouse is weeping at home. Orla shall never return!" "Or
fights or yields the hero?" said Fingal of the noble deeds; "foes do
not conquer  in my presence: my friends are renowned in the
hall. Son of the wave, follow me: partake the feast of my shells:
pursue the deer of my desert: be thou the friend of Fingal." "No,"
said the hero: "I assist the feeble. My strength is with the weak in
arms. My sword has been always unmatched, O warrior! let the
king of Morven yield!" "I never yielded, Orla. Fingal never yielded
to man. Draw thy sword, and choose thy foe. Many are my
heroes!"
	"Does then the king refuse the fight?" said Orla of the dark-
brown shield. "Fingal is a match for Orla; and he alone of all his
race! But, king of Morven, if I shall fall, as one time the warrior
must die; raise my tomb in the midst: let it be the greatest on
Lena. Send over the dark-blue wave, the sword of Orla to the
spouse of his love, that she may show it to her son, with tears to
kindle his soul to war." "Son of the mournful tale," said Fingal,
"why dost thou awaken my tears! One day the warriors must die,
and the children see their useless arms in the hall. But, Orla, thy
tomb shall rise. Thy white-bosomed spouse shall weep over thy
sword."
	They fought on the heath of Lena. Feeble was the arm of
Orla. The sword of Fingal descended, and cleft his shield in
twain. It fell and glittered on the ground, as the moon on the
ruffled stream. "King of Morven," said the hero, "lift thy sword
and pierce my breast. Wounded and faint from battle, my friends
have left me here. The mournful tale shall come to my love on the
banks of the streamy Lota, when she is alone in the wood, and
the rustling blast in the leaves!"
	"No," said the king of Morven: "I will never wound thee,
Orla. On the banks of Lota let her see thee, escaped from the
hands of war. Let thy gray-haired father, who, perhaps, is blind
with age, let him hear the sound of thy voice, and brighten within
his hall. With joy let the hero rise, and search for the son with his
hands!" "But never will he find him, Fingal," said the youth of the
streamy Lota: "on Lena's heath I must die: foreign bards shall
talk of me. My broad belt covers my wound of death. I give it to
the wind!"
	The dark blood poured from his side; he fell pale on the
heath of Lena. Fingal bent over him as he died, and. called his
younger chiefs. "Oscar and Fillan, my sons, raise high the
memory of Orla. Here let the dark-haired hero rest, far from the
spouse of his love. Here let him rest in his narrow house, far from
the sound of Lota. The feeble will find his bow at home, but will
not be able to bend it. His faithful dogs howl on his hills; his
boars which he used to pursue, rejoice. Fallen is the arm of
battle! the mighty among the valiant is low! Exalt the voice, and
blow the horn, ye sons of the king of Morven! Let us go back to
Swaran, to send the night away in song. Fillan, Oscar, and Ryno,
fly over the heath of Lena. Where, Ryno, art thou, young son of
fame? thou art not wont to be the last to answer thy father's
voice!"
	"Ryno," said Ullin, first of bards, "is with the awful forms of
his fathers. With Trathal, king of shields; with Trenmor of mighty
deeds. The youth is low, the youth is pale, he lies on Lena's
heath!" "Fell the swiftest of the race," said the king, "the first to
bend the bow? Thou scarce hast been known to me! Why did
young Ryno fall? But sleep thou softly on Lena; Fingal shall soon
behold thee. Soon shall my voice be heard no more, and my
footsteps cease to be seen. The bards will tell of Fingal's name.
The stones will talk of me. But, Ryno, thou art low, indeed: thou
hast not received thy fame. Ullin, strike the harp for Ryno; tell
what the chief would have been. Farewell, thou first in every field.
No more shall I direct thy dart. Thou that hast been so fair! I
behold thee not. Farewell." The tear is on the cheek of the king,
for terrible was his son in war. His son that was like a beam of
fire by night on a hill, when the forests sink down in its course,
and the traveller trembles at the sound. But the winds drive it
beyond the steep. It sinks from sight, and darkness prevails.
	"Whose fame is in that dark-green tomb?" began the king of
generous shells: "four stones with their heads of moss stand
there. They mark the narrow house of death. Near it let Ryno
rest. A neighbor to the brave let him lie. Some chief of fame is
here, to fly with my son on clouds. O Ullin! raise the songs of old.
Awake their memory in their tomb. If in the field they never fled,
my son shall rest by their side. He shall rest, far distant from
Morven, on Lena's resounding plains."
	"Here," said the bard of song, "here rest the first of heroes.
Silent is Lamderg in this place, dumb is Ullin, king of swords.
And who, soft smiling from her cloud, shows me her face of love?
Why, daughter, why so pale art thou, first of the maids of
Cromla? Dost thou sleep with the foes in battle, white-bosomed
daughter of Tuathal? Thou hast been the love of thousands, but
Lamderg was thy love. He came to Tura's mossy towers, and
striking his dark buckler, spoke: 'Where is Gelchossa, my love,
the daughter of the noble Tuathal? I left her in the hall of Tura,
when I fought with the great Ulfada. Return soon, O Lamderg!
she said, for here I sit in grief. Her white breast rose with sighs.
Her cheek was wet with tears. But I see her not coming to meet
me to soothe my soul after war. Silent is the hull of my joy. I near
not the voice of the bard. Bran does not shake his chains at the
gate, glad at the coming of Lamderg. Where is Gelchossa, my
love, the mild daughter of generous Tuathal?'
	"'Lamderg,' says Ferchios, son of Aidon, 'Gelchossa moves
stately on Cromla. She and the maids of the bow pursue the
flying deer!' 'Ferchios!' replied the chief of Cromla, 'no noise meets
the ear of Lamderg! No sound is in the woods of Lena. No deer fly
in my sight. No panting dog pursues. I see not Gelchossa, my
love, fair as the full moon setting on the hills.. Go, Ferchios, go to
Allad, the gray-haired son of the rock. His dwelling is in the circle
of stones He may know of the bright Gelchossa!'
	"The son of Aidon went. He spoke to the ear of age. 'Allad,
dweller of rocks, thou that tremblest alone, what saw thine eyes
of age?' 'I saw,' answered Allad the old, 'Ullin the son of Cairbar.
He came, in darkness, from Cromla. He hummed a surly song,
like a blast in a leafless wood. He entered the hall of Tura.
"Lamderg," he said, "most dreadful of men, fight or yield to Ullin."
"Lamderg," replied Gelchossa, "the son of battle is not here. He
fights Ulfada, mighty chief. He is not here, thou first of men! But
Lamderg never yields. He will fight the son of Cairbar!" "Lovely
thou," said terrible Ullin, "daughter of the generous Tuathal. I
carry thee to Cairbar's halls. The valiant shall have Gelchossa.
Three days I remain on Cromla, to wait that son of battle,
Lamderg. On the fourth Gelchossa is mine, if the mighty Lamderg
flies."'
	"'Allad,' said the chief of Cromla, 'peace to thy dreams in
the cave! Ferchios, sound the horn of Lamderg, that Ullin may
hear in his halls.' Lamderg, like a roaring storm ascended the hill
from Tura. He hummed a surly song as he went, like the noise of
a falling stream. He darkly stood upon the hill, like a cloud
varying its form to the wind. He rolled a stone, the sign of war.
Ullin heard in Cairbar's hall. The hero heard, with joy, his foe. He
took his father's spear. A smile brightens his dark-brown cheek,
as he places his sword by his side. The dagger glittered in his
hand, he whistled as he went.
	"Gelchossa saw the silent chief, as a wreath of mist
ascending the hill. She struck her white and heaving breast; and
silent, tearful, feared for Lamderg. 'Cairbar, hoary chief of shells,'
said the maid of the tender hand, 'I must bend the bow on
Cromla. I see the dark-brown hinds.' She hasted up the hill. In
vain the gloomy heroes fought. Why should I tell to Selma's king
how wrathful heroes fight? Fierce Ullin fell. Young Lamderg came,
all pale, to the daughter of generous Tuathal! 'What blood, my
love;' she trembling said, 'what blood runs down my warrior's
side?' ' It is Ullin's blood,' the chief replied, 'thou fairer than the
snow! Gelchossa, let me rest here a little while.' The mighty
Lamderg died!  'And sleepest thou so soon on earth, O chief of
shady Tura?' Three days she mourned beside her love. The
hunters found her cold. They raised this tomb above the three.
Thy son, O king of Morven, may rest here with heroes!"
	"And here my son shall rest," said Fingal. "The voice of
their fame is in mine ears. Fillan and Fergus, bring hither Orla,
the pale youth of the stream of Lota! not unequalled shall Ryno
lie in earth, when Orla is by his side. Weep, ye daughters of
Morven! ye maids of the streamy Lota, weep! Like a tree they grew
on the hills. They have fallen like the oak of the desert, when it
lies across a stream, and withers in the wind. Oscar, chief of
every youth, thou seest how they have fallen. Be thou like them
on earth renowned. Like them the song of bards. Terrible were
their forms in battle; but calm was Ryno in the days of peace. He
was like the bow of the shower seen far distant on the stream,
when the sun is setting on Mora, when silence dwells on the hill
of deer. Rest, youngest of my sons! rest, O Ryno! on Lena. We too
shall be no more. Warriors one day must fall!"
	Such was thy grief, thou king of swords, when Ryno lay on
earth. What must the grief of Ossian be, for thou thyself art gone!
I hear not thy distant voice on Cona. My eyes perceive thee not.
Often forlorn and dark I sit at thy tomb, and feel it with my
hands. When I think I hear thy voice, it is but the passing blast.
Fingal has long since fallen asleep, the ruler of the war!
	Then Gaul and Ossian sat with Swaran, on the soft green
banks of Lubar. I touched the harp to please the king; but gloomy
was his brow. He rolled his red eyes towards Lena. The hero
mourned his host. I raised mine eyes to Cromla's brow. I saw the
son of generous Semo. Sad and slow he retired from his hilt,
towards the lonely cave of Tura. He saw Fingal victorious, and
mixed his joy with grief. The sun is bright on his armor. Connal
slowly strode behind. They sunk behind the hill, like two pillars
of the fire of night, when winds pursue them over the mountain,
and the flaming death resounds! Beside a stream of roaring foam
his cave is in a rock. One tree bends above it. The rushing winds
echo against its sides. Here rests the chief of Erin, the son of
generous Semo. His thoughts are on the battles he lost. The tear
is on his cheek. He mourned the departure of his fame, that fled
like the mist of Cona. O Bragla! thou art too far remote to cheer
the soul of the hero. But let him see thy bright form in his mind,
that his thoughts may return to the lonely sunbeam of his love!
	Who comes with the locks of age? It is the son of songs.
"Hail, Carril of other times! Thy voice is like the harp in the halls
of Tura. Thy words are pleasant as the shower which falls on the
sunny field. Carril of the times of old, why comest thou from the
son of the generous Semo?"
	"Ossian, king of swords," replied the bard, "thou best canst
raise the song. Long hast thou been known to Carril, thou ruler
of war! Often have I touched the harp to lovely Everallin. Thou
too hast often joined my voice in Branno's hall of generous shells.
And often, amidst our voices, was heard the mildest Everallin.
One day she sung of Cormac's fall, the youth who died for her
love. I saw the tears on her cheek, and on thine, thou chief of
men. Her soul was touched for the unhappy, though she loved
him not. How fair among a thousand maids was the daughter of
generous Branno!"
	Bring not, Carril," I replied, "bring not her memory to my
mind. My soul must melt at the remembrance. My eyes must
have their tears. Pale in the earth is she, the softly-blushing fair 
of my love! But sit thou on the heath, O bard! and let us hear thy
voice. It is pleasant as the gale of spring, that sighs on the
hunter's ear, when he awakens from dreams of joy, and has
heard the music of the spirits of the hill!"



FINGAL -- BOOK VI.


ARGUMENT.

Night comes on. Fingal gives a feast to his army, at which Swaran
is present. The king commands Ullin his bard to give "the song of
peace;" a custom always observed at the end of a war. Ullin
relates the actions of Trenmor, great-grandfather to Fingal, in
Scandinavia, and his marriage with Inibaca, the daughter of a
king of Lochlin, who was ancestor to Swaran; which
consideration, together with his being brother to Agandecca, with
whom Fingal was in love in his youth, induced the king to release
him, and permit him to return with the remains of his army into
Lochlin, upon his promise of never returning to Ireland in a
hostile manner. The night is spent in settling Swaran's departure,
in songs of bards, and in a conversation in which the story of
Grumal is introduced by Fingal. Morning comes. Swaran departs.
Fingal goes on a hunting party, and finding Cuthullin in the cave
of Tura, comforts him, and sets sail the next day for Scotland,
which concludes the poem.

	THE clouds of night came rolling down. Darkness rests on
the steeps of Cromla. The stars of the north arise over the rolling
of Erin's waves; they show their heads of fire through the flying
mist of heaven. A distant wind roars in the wood. Silent and dark
is the plain of death! Still on the dusky Lena arose in my ears the
voice of Carril. He sung of the friends of our youth; the days of
former years; when we met on the banks of Lego; when we sent
round the joy of the shell. Cromla answered to his voice. The
ghosts of those he sung came in their rustling winds. They were
seen to bend with joy, towards the sound of their praise!
	Be thy soul blest, O Carril! in the midst of thy eddying
winds. O that thou wouldst come to my hall, when I am alone by
night! And thou dost come, my friend. I hear often thy light hand
on my harp, when it hangs on the distant wall, and the feeble
sound touches my ear. Why dost thou not speak to me in my
grief: and tell when I shall behold my friends? But thou passest
away in thy murmuring blast; the wind whistles through the gray
hair of Ossian!
	Now, on the side of Mora, the heroes gathered to the feast.
A thousand aged oaks are burning to the wind. The strength of
the shell goes round. The souls of warriors brighten with joy. But
the king of Lochlin is silent. Sorrow reddens in the eyes of his
pride. He often turned towards Lena. He remembered that he fell.
Fingal leaned on the shield of his fathers. His gray locks slowly
waved on the wind, and glittered to the beam of night. He saw the
grief of Swaran, and spoke to the first of bards.
	"Raise, Ullin, raise the song of peace. O soothe my soul
from war! Let mine ear forget, in the sound, the dismal noise of
arms. Let a hundred harps be near to gladden the king of
Lochlin. He must depart from us with joy. None ever went sad
from Fingal. Oscar! the lightning of my sword is against the
strong in fight. Peaceful it lies by my side when warriors yield in
war."
	"Trenmor," said the mouth of songs, "lived in the days of
other years. He bounded over the waves of the north; companion
of the storm! The high reeks of the land of Lochlin, its groves of
murmuring sounds, appeared to the hero through mist; he
bound his white. bosomed sails. Trenmor pursued the boar that
roared through the woods of Gormal. Many had fled from its
presence; but it rolled in death on the spear of Trenmor. Three
chiefs, who beheld the deed, told of the mighty stranger. They
told that he stood, like a pillar of fire, in the bright arms of his
valor. The king of Lochlin prepared the feast. He called the
blooming Trenmor. Three days he feasted at Gormal's windy
towers, and received his choice in the combat. The land of
Lochlin had no hero that yielded not to Trenmor. The shell of joy
went round with songs in praise of the king of Morven. He that
came over the waves, the first of mighty men.
	"Now when the fourth gray morn arose, the hero launched
his ship. He walked along the silent shore, and called for the
rushing wind; for loud and distant he heard the blast murmuring
behind the groves. Covered over with arms of steel, a son of the
woody Gormal appeared. Red was his cheek, and fair his hair.
His skin was like the snow of Morven. Mild rolled his blue and
smiling eye, when he spoke to the king of swords.
	"'Stay, Trenmor, stay, thou first of men; thou hast not
conquered Lonval's son. My sword has often met the brave. The
wise shun the strength of my bow.' 'Thou fair-haired youth,'
Trenmor replied, 'I will not fight with Lonval's son. Thine arm is
feeble, sunbeam of youth! Retire to Gormal's dark-brown hinds.'
'But I will retire,' replied the youth, 'with the sword of Trenmor;
and exult in the sound of my fame. The virgins shall gather with
smiles around him who conquered mighty Trenmor. They shall
sigh with the sighs of love, and admire the length of thy spear:
when I shall carry it among thousands; when I lift the glittering
point to the sun.'
	"'Thou shalt never carry my spear,' said the angry king of
Morven. 'Thy mother shall find thee pale on the shore; and
looking over the dark-blue deep, see the sails of him that slew her
son!' 'I will not lift the spear,' replied the youth, 'my arm is not
strong with years. But with the feathered dart I have learned to
pierce a distant foe. Throw down that heavy mail of steel.
Trenmor is covered from death. I first will lay my mail on earth.
Throw now thy dart, thou king of Morven!' He saw the heaving of
her breast. It was the sister of the king. She had seen him in the
hall: and loved his face of youth. The spear dropt from the hand
of Trenmor: he bent his red cheek to the ground. She was to him
a beam of light that meets the sons of the cave; when they revisit
the fields of the sun, and bend their aching eyes!
	"'Chief of the windy Morven,' began the maid of the arms of
snow, 'let me rest in thy bounding ship, far from the love of Corlo.
For he, like the thunder of the desert, is terrible to Inibaca. He
loves me in the gloom of pride. He shakes ten thousand spears!' -
- ' Rest thou in peace,' said the mighty Trenmor, 'rest behind the
shield of my fathers. I will not fly from the chief, though he
shakes ten thousand spears.' Three days he waited on the shore.
He sent his horn abroad. He called Corlo to battle, from all his
echoing hills. But Corlo came not to battle. The king of Lochlin
descends from his hall. He feasted on the roaring shore. He gave
the maid to Trenmor!"
	"King of Lochlin," said Fingal, "thy blood flows in the veins
of thy foe. Our fathers met in battle, because they loved the strife
of spears. But often did they feast in the hall, and send round the
joy of the shell. Let thy thee brighten with gladness, and thine ear
delight in the harp. Dreadful as the storm of thine ocean, thou
hast poured thy valor forth; thy voice has been like the voice of
thousands when they engage in war. Raise, to-morrow, raise thy
white sails to the wind, thou brother of Agandecca! Bright as the
beam of noon, she comes on my mournful soul. I have seen thy
tears for the fair one. I spared thee in the halls of Starno; when
my sword was red with slaughter: when my eye was full of tears
for the maid. Or dost thou choose the fight? The combat which
thy fathers gave to Trenmor is thine! that thou mayest depart
renowned, like the sun setting in the west!"
	"King of the race of Morven!" said the chief of resounding
Lochlin, "never will Swaran fight with thee, first of a thousand
heroes! I have seen thee in the halls of Starno; few were thy years
beyond my own. When shall I, I said to my soul, lift the spear like
the noble Fingal? We have fought heretofore, O warrior, on the
side of the shaggy Malmor; after my waves had carried me to thy
halls, and the feast of a thousand shells was spread. Let the
bards send his name who overcame to future years, for noble was
the strife of Malmor! But many of the ships of Lochlin have lost
their youths on Lena. Take these, thou king of Morven, and be
the friend of Swaran! When thy sons shall come to Gormal, the
feast of shells shall be spread, and the combat offered on the
vale."
"Nor ship," replied the king, "shall Fingal take, nor land of many
hills. The desert is enough to me, with all its deer and woods.
Rise on thy waves again, thou noble friend of Agandecca! Spread
thy white sails to the beam of the morning; return to the echoing
hills of Gormal." -- "Blest be thy soul, thou king of shells," said
Swaran of the dark-brown shield." In peace thou art the gale of
spring; in war the mountain storm. Take now my hand in
friendship, king of echoing Selma! Let thy bards mourn those
who fell. Let Erin give the sons of Lochlin to earth. Raise high the
mossy stones of their fame: that the children of the north
hereafter may behold the place where their fathers fought. The
hunter may say, when he leans on a mossy tomb, Here Fingal
and Swaran fought, the heroes of other years. Thus hereafter
shall he say, and our fame shall last for ever."
	"Swaran," said the king of hills, "to-day our fame is
greatest. We shall pass away like a dream. No sound will remain
in our fields of war. Our tombs will be lost in the heath. The
hunter shall not know the place of our rest. Our names may be
heard in song. What avails it, when our strength hath ceased? O
Ossian, Carril, and Ullin! you know of heroes that are no more.
Give us the song of other years. Let the night pass away on the
sound, and morning return with joy."
	We gave the song to the kings. A hundred harps mixed
their sound with our voice. The face of Swaran brightened, like
the full moon of heaven; when the clouds vanish away, and leave
her calm and broad in the midst of the sky.
	"Where, Carril," said the great Fingal, "Carril of other times!
where is the son of Semo, the king of the isle of mist? Has he
retired like the meteor of death, to the dreary cave of Tura?" -- 
"Cuthullin," said Carril of other times, "lies in the dreary cave of
Tura. His hand is on the sword of his strength. His thoughts on
the battles he lost. Mournful is the king of spears: till now
unconquered in war. He sends his sword, to rest on the side of
Fingal: for, like the storm of the desert, thou hast scattered all
his foes. Take, O Fingal! the sword of the hero. His fame is
departed like mist, when it flies, before the rustling wind, along
the brightening vale."
	"No," replied the king, "Fingal shall never take his sword.
His arm is mighty in war: his fame shall never fail. Many have
been overcome in battle; whose renown arose from their fall. O
Swaran, king of resounding woods, give all thy grief away. The
vanquished, if brave, are renowned. They are like the sun in a
cloud, when he hides his face in the south, but looks again on
the hills of grass."
	"Grumal was a chief of Cona. He sought the battle on every
coast. His soul rejoiced in blood; his ear in the din of arms. He
poured his warriors on Craca; Craca's king met him from his
grove; for then, within the circle of Brumo, he spoke to the stone
of power. Fierce was the battle of the heroes, for the maid of the
breast of snow. The fame of the daughter of Craca had reached
Grumal at the streams of Cona; he vowed to have the white-
bosomed maid, or die on echoing Craca. Three days they strove
together, and Grumal on the fourth was bound. Far from his
friends they placed him in the horrid circle of Brumo; where
often, they said, the ghosts of the dead howled round the stone of
their fear. But he afterward shone, like a pillar of the light of
heaven. They fell by his mighty hand. Grumal had all his fame!
	"Raise, ye bards of other times," continued the great Fingal,
"raise high the praise of heroes: that my soul may settle on their
fame; that the mind of Swaran may cease to be sad." They lay in
the heath of Mora. The dark winds rustled over the chiefs. A
hundred voices, at once, arose; a hundred harps were strung.
They sung of other times; the mighty chiefs of former years! When
now shall I hear the bard? When rejoice at the fame of my
fathers? The harp is not strung on Morven. The voice of music
ascends not on Cona. Dead, with the mighty, is the bard. Fame is
in the desert no more."
	Morning trembles with the beam of the east; it glimmers on
Cromla's side. Over Lena is heard the horn of Swaran. The sons
of the ocean gather around. Silent and sad they rise on the wave.
The blast of Erin is behind their sails. White, as the mist of
Morven, they float along the sea. "Call," said Fingal, "call my
dogs, the long-bounding sons of the chase. Call white-breasted
Bran, and the surly strength of Luath! Fillan, and Ryno; -- but he
is not here! My son rests on the bed of death. Fillan and Fergus!
blow the horn, that the joy of the chase may arise; that the deer
of Cromla may hear, and start at the lake of roes."
	The shrill sound spreads along the wood. The sons of
heathy Cromla arise. A thousand dogs fly off at once, gray-
bounding through the heath. A deer fell by every dog; three by
the white-breasted Bran. He brought them, in their flight, to
Fingal, that the joy of the king might be great! One deer fell at the
tomb of Ryno. The grief of Fingal returned. He saw how peaceful
lay the stone of him, who was the first at the chase! "No more
shalt thou rise, O my son! to partake of the feast of Cromla. Soon
will thy tomb be hid, and the grass grow rank on thy grave. The
sons of the feeble shall pass along. They shall not know where
the mighty lie.
	"Ossian and Fillan, sons of my strength! Gaul, chief of the
blue steel of war! Let us ascend the hill to the cave of Tura. Let us
find the chief of the battles of Erin. Are these the walls of Tura?
gray and lonely they rise on the heath. The chief of shells is sad,
and the halls are silent and lonely. Come, let us find Cuthullin,
and give him all our joy. But is that Cuthullin, O Fillan, or a
pillar of smoke on the heath? The wind of Cromla is on my eyes. I
distinguish not my friend."
	"Fingal!" replied the youth, "it is the son of Semo! Gloomy
and sad is the hero! his hand is on his sword. Hail to the son of
battle, breaker of the shields!" "Hail to thee," replied Cuthullin,
"hail to all the sons of Morven! Delightful is thy presence, O
Fingal! it is the sun on Cromla: when the hunter mourns his
absence for a season, and sees him between the clouds. Thy sons
are like stars that attend thy course. They give light in the night!
It is not thus thou hast seen me, O Fingal! returning from the
wars of thy land: when the kings of the world had fled, and joy
returned to the hills of hinds!"
	"Many are thy words, Cuthullin," said Connan of small
renown. "Thy words are many, son of Semo, but where are thy
deeds in arms? Why did we come, over ocean, to aid thy feeble
sword? Thou fliest to thy cave of grief, and Connan fights thy
battles. Resign to me these arms of light. Yield them, thou chief
of Erin." -- "No hero," replied the chief," ever sought the arms of
Cuthullin! and had a thousand heroes sought them, it were in
vain, thou gloomy youth! I fled not to the cave of grief, till Erin
failed at her streams."
	"Youth of the feeble arm," said Fingal, "Connan, cease thy
words! Cuthullin is renowned in battle: terrible over the world.
Often have I heard thy fame, thou stormy chief of Inis-fail. Spread
now thy white sails for the isle of mist. See Bragla leaning on
her rock. Her tender eye is in tears, the winds lift her long hair
from her heaving breast. She listens to the breeze of night, to
hear the voice of thy rowers; to hear the song of the sea; the
sound of thy distant harps."
	"Long shall she listen in vain. Cuthullin shall never return.
How can I behold Bragla, to raise the sigh of her breast? Fingal,
I was always victorious, in battles of other spears." -- "And
hereafter thou shalt be victorious," said Fingal of generous shells.
"The fame of Cuthullin shall grow, like the branchy tree of
Cromla. Many battles await thee, O chief! Many shall be the
wounds of thy hand! Bring hither, Oscar, the deer! Prepare the
feast of shells; Let our souls rejoice after danger, and our friends
delight in our presence."
	We sat. We feasted. We sung. The soul of Cuthullin rose.
The strength of his arm returned. Gladness brightened along his
face. Ullin gave the song; Carril raised the voice. I joined the
bards, and sung of battles of the spear. Battles! where I often
fought. Now I fight no more! The fame of my former deeds is
ceased. I sit forlorn at the tombs of my friends!
	Thus the night passed away in song. We brought back the
morning with joy. Fingal arose on the heath, and shook his
glittering spear. He moved first to wards the plains of Lena. We
followed in all our arms.
"Spread the sail," said the king, "seize the winds as they pour
from Lena." We rose on the wave with songs. We rushed, with joy,
through the foam of the deep.



LATHMON.

ARGUMENT.

Lathmon, a British prince, taking advantage of Fingal's absence
on an expedition to Ireland, made a descent on Morven, and
advanced within sight of Selma, the royal residence. Fingal
arrived in the mean time, and Lathmon retreated to a hill, where
his army was surprised by night, and himself taken prisoner by
Ossian and Gaul the son of Morni. The poem opens with the first
appearance of Fingal on the coast of Morven, and ends, it may be
supposed, about noon the next day.

	SELMA, thy halls are silent. There is no sound in the
woods of Morven. The wave tumbles along on the coast. The
silent beam of the sun is on the field. The daughters of Morven
come forth, like the bow of the shower; they look towards green
Erin for the white sails of the king. He had promised to return,
but the winds of the north arose!
	Who pours from the eastern hill, like a stream of darkness?
It is the host of Lathmon. He has heard of the absence of Fingal.
He trusts in the winds of the north. His soul brightens with joy.
Why dost thou come, O Lathmon? The mighty are not in Selma.
Why comest thou with thy forward spear? Will the daughters of
Morven fight? But stop, O mighty stream, in thy course! Does not
Lathmon behold these sails? Why dost thou vanish, Lathmon,
like the mist of the lake? But the squally storm is behind thee;
Fingal pursues thy steps!
	The king of Morven had started from sleep, as we rolled on
the dark-blue wave. He stretched his hand to his spear, his
heroes rose around. We knew that he had seen his fathers, for
they often descended to his dreams, when the sword of the foe
rose over the land and the battle darkened before us. "Whither
hast thou fled, O wind?" said the king of Morven. "Dost thou
rustle in the chambers of the south? pursuest thou the shower in
other lands? Why dost thou not come to my sails? to the blue
face of my seas? The foe is in the land of Morven, and the king is
absent far. But let each bind on his mail, and each assume his
shield. Stretch every spear over the wave; let every sword be
unsheathed. Lathmon is before us with his host; he that fled
from Fingal on the plains of Lona. But he returns like a collected
stream, and his roar is between our hills."
	Such were the words of Fingal. We rushed into Carmon's
bay. Ossian ascended the hill! he thrice struck his bossy shield.
The rock of Morven replied: the bounding roes came forth. The
foe was troubled in my presence: he collected his darkened host.
I stood like a cloud on the hill, rejoicing in the arms of my youth.
	Morni sat beneath a tree on the roaring waters of Strumon:
his locks of age are gray: he leans forward on his staff; young
Gaul is near the hero, hearing the battles of his father. Often did
he rise in the fire of his soul, at the mighty deeds of Morni. The
aged heard the sound of Ossian's shield; he knew the sign of war.
He started at once from his place. His gray hair parted on his
back. lie remembered the deeds of other years.
	"My son," he said, to fair-haired Gaul, "I hear the sound of
war. The king of Morven is returned; his signals are spread on
the wind. Go to the halls of Strumon; bring his arms to Morni.
Bring the shield of my father's latter years, for my arm begins to
fail. Take thou thy armor, O Gaul! and rush to the first of thy
battles. Let thine arm reach to the renown of thy fathers. Be thy
course in the field like the eagle's wing. Why shouldst thou fear
death, my son? the valiant fall with fame; their shields turn the
dark stream of danger away; renown dwells on their aged hairs.
Dost thou not see, O Gaul! low the steps of my age are honored?
Morni moves forth. and the young men meet him, with silent joy,
on his course. But I never fled from danger, my son! my sword
lightened through the darkness of war. The stranger melted
before me; the mighty were blasted in my presence."
	Gaul brought the arms to Morni: the aged warrior is
covered with steel. He took the spear in his hand, which was
stained with the blood of the valiant. He came towards Fingal; his
son attended his steps. The son of Comhal arose before him with
joy, when he came in his locks of age.
	"Chief of the roaring Strumon!" said the rising soul of
Fingal; "do I behold thee in arms, after thy strength has failed?
Often has Morni shone in fight, like the beam of the ascending
sun; when he disperses the storms of the hill, and brings peace
to the glittering fields. But why didst thou not rest in thine age?
Thy renown is in the song. The people behold thee, and bless the
departure of mighty Morni. Why didst thou not rest in thine age?
The foe will vanish before Fingal!"
"Son of Comhal," replied the chief, "the strength of Morni's arm
has failed. I attempt to draw the sword of my youth, but it
remains in its place. I throw the spear, but it falls short of the
mark. I feel the weight of my shield. We decay like the grass of
the hill; our strength returns no more. I have a son, O Fingal! his
soul has delighted in Morni's deeds; but his sword has not been
lifted against a foe, neither has his fame begun. I come with him
to the war; to direct his arm in fight. His renown will be a light to
my soul in the dark hour of my departure. O that the name of
Morni were forgot among the people! that the heroes would only
say, 'Behold the father of Gaul!'"
	"King of Strumon," Fingal replied, "Gaul shall lift the sword
in fight. But he shall lift it before Fingal; my arm shall defend his
youth. But rest thou in the halls of Selma, and hear of our
renown. Bid the harp to be strung, and the voice of the bard to
arise, that those who fall may rejoice in their fame, and the soul
of Morni brighten with joy. Ossian, thou hast fought in battles:
the blood of strangers is on thy spear: thy course be with Gaul in
the strife; but depart not from the side of Fingal, lest the foe
should find you alone, and your fame fail in my presence."
	 [Ossian speaks ] "I saw Gaul in his arms; my soul was
mixed with his. The fire of the battle was in his eyes! he looked to
the foe with joy. We spoke the words of friendship in secret; the
lightning of our swords poured together; for we drew them behind
the wood, and tried the strength of our arms on the empty air!"
	Night came down on Morven. Fingal sat at the beam of the
oak. Morni sat by his side with all his gray-waving locks. Their
words were of other times, of the mighty deeds of their fathers.
Three bards, at times, touched the harp: Ullin was near with his
song. He sung of the mighty Comhal; but darkness gathered on
Morni's brow. He rolled his red eye on Ullin: at once ceased the
song of the bard. Fingal observed the aged hero, and he mildly
spoke: "Chief of Strumon, why that darkness? Let the days of
other years be forgot. Our fathers contended in war; but we meet
together at the feast. Our swords are turned on the foe of our
land: he melts before us on the field.  Let the days of our fathers
be forgot, hero of mossy Strumon!"
	King of Morven," replied the chief, "I remember thy father
with joy. He was terrible in battle, the rage of the chief was
deadly. My eyes were full of tears when the king of heroes fell.
The valiant fall, O Fingal! the feeble remain on the hills! How
many heroes have passed away in the days of Morni! Yet I did not
shun the battle; neither did I fly from the strife of the valiant.
Now let the friends of Fingal rest, for the night is around, that
they may rise with strength to battle against car-borne Lathmon.
I hear the sound of his host, like thunder moving on the hills.
Ossian! and fair-haired Gaul! ye are young and swift in the race.
Observe the foes of Fingal from that woody hill. But approach
them not: your fathers are near to shield you. Let not your fame
fall at once. The valor of youth may fail!"
	We heard the words of the chief with joy. We moved in the
clang of our arms. Our steps are on the woody hill. Heaven burns
with all its stars. The meteors of death fly over the field. The
distant noise of the foe reached our ears. It was than Gaul spoke,
in his valor: his hand half unsheathed his sword.
	"Son of Fingal!" he said, "why burns the soul of Gaul? my
heart beats high. My steps are disordered; my hand trembles on
my sword. When I look towards the foe, my soul lightens before
me. I see their sleeping host. Tremble thus the souls of the
valiant in battles of the spear? How would the soul of Morni rise
if we should rush on the foe? Our renown should grow in song:
our steps would be stately in the eyes of the brave."
	"Son of Morni," I replied, "my soul delights in war. I delight
to shine in battle alone, to give my name to the bards. But what if
the foe should prevail? can I behold the eyes of the king? They
are terrible in his displeasure, and like the flames of death. But I
will not behold them in his wrath! Ossian shall prevail or fall. But
shall the fame of the vanquished rise? They pass like a shade
away. But the fame of Ossian shall rise! His deeds shall be like
his father's. Let us rush in our arms; son of Morni, let us rush to
fight. Gaul, if thou shouldst return, go to Selma's lofty hall. Tell
to Everallin that I fell with fame; carry this sword to Branno's
daughter. Let her give it to Oscar, when the years of his youth
shall arise."
	"Son of Fingal," Gaul replied with a sigh, "shall I return
after Ossian is low? What would my father say? what Fingal, the
king of men? The feeble would turn their eyes and say, 'Behold
Gaul, who left his friend in his blood!' Ye shall not behold me, ye
feeble, but in the midst of my renown! Ossian, I have heard from
my father the mighty deeds of heroes; their mighty deeds when
alone! for the soul increases in danger!"
	"Son of Morni," I replied, and strode before him on the
heath, "our fathers shall praise our valor when they mourn our
fall. A beam of gladness shall rise on their souls, when their eyes
are full of tears. They will, say, 'Our sons have not fallen
unknown: they spread death around them.' But why should we
think of the narrow house? The sword defends the brave. But
death pursues the flight of the feeble; their renown is never
heard."
	We rushed forward through night; we came to the roar of a
stream, which bent its blue course round the foe, through trees
that echoed to its sound. We came to the bank of the stream, and
saw the sleeping host. Their fires were decayed on the plain: the
lonely steps of their scouts were distant far. I stretched my spear
before me, to support my steps over the stream. But Gaul took 
my hand, and spoke the words of the brave. "Shall the son of
Fingal rush on the sleeping foe? Shall he come like a blast by
night, when it overturns the young trees in secret? Fingal did no
receive his fame, nor dwells renown on the gray hairs of Morni,
for actions like these. Strike, Ossian, strike the shield, and let
their thousands rise! Let them meet Gaul in his first battle, that
he may try the strength of his arm."
	My soul rejoiced over the warrior; my bursting tears came
down. "And the foe shall meet thee, Gaul," I said: "the fame of
Morni's son shall arise. But rush not too far, my hero: let the
gleam of thy steel be near to Ossian. Let our hands join in
slaughter. Gaul! dost thou not behold that rock? Its gray side
dimly gleams to the stars. Should the foe prevail, let our back be
towards the rock. Then shall they fear to approach our spears; for
death is in our hands!"
	I struck thrice my echoing shield. The startling foe arose.
We rushed on in the sound of our arms. Their crowded steps fly
over the heath. They thought that the mighty Fingal was come.
The strength of their arms withered away. The sound of their
flight was like that of flame, when it rushes through the blasted
groves. It was then the spear of Gaul flew in its strength; it was
then his sword arose. Cramo fell; and mighty Leth! Dunthormo
struggled in his blood. The steel rushed through Crotho's side, as
bent he rose on his spear; the black stream poured from the
wound, and hissed on the half-extinguished oak. Cathmin saw
the steps of the hero behind him: he ascended a blasted tree; but
the spear pierced him from behind. Shrieking, panting, he fell.
Moss and withered branches pursue his fall, and strew the blue
arms of Gaul.
	Such were thy deeds, son of Morni, in the first of thy
battles. Nor slept the sword by thy side, thou last of Fingal's race!
Ossian rushed forward in his strength; the people fell before him;
as the grass by the stall of the boy, when he whistles along the
field, and the gray beard of the thistle falls. But careless the
youth moves on; his steps are towards the desert. Gray morning
rose around us; the winding streams are bright along the heath.
The foe gathered on a bill; and the rage of Lathmon rose. He bent
the red eye of his wrath: he is silent in his rising grief. He often
struck his bossy shield: and his steps are unequal on the heath. I
saw the distant darkness of the hero, and I spoke to Morni's son.
	"Car-borne chief of Strumon, dost thou behold the foe?
'They gather on the hill in their wrath. Let our steps be toward
the king. <1>  He shall rise in his strength, and the host of
Lathmon vanish. Our fame is around us, warrior; the eyes of the
aged <2> will rejoice. But let us fly, son of Morni, Lathmon
descends the hill." "Then let our steps be slow," replied the fair-
haired Gaul;" lest the foe say with a smile, 'Behold the warriors of
night! They are, like ghosts, terrible in darkness; they melt away
before the beam of the east.' Ossian, take the shield of Gormar,
who fell beneath thy spear. The aged heroes will rejoice,
beholding the deeds of their sons."
	Such were our words on the plain, when Sulmath came to
car-borne Lathmon: Sulmath chief of Datha, at the dark-rolling
stream of Duvranna." Why dost thou not rush, son of Nuth, with
a thousand of thy heroes? Why dost thou not descend with thy
host before the warriors fly? Their blue arms are beaming to the
rising light, and their steps are before us on the heath!"
"Son of the feeble hand," said Lathmon," shall my host descend?
They are but two, son of Dutha! shall a thousand lift the steel?
Nuth would mourn in his hall, for the departure of his fame. His
eyes would turn from Lathmon, when the tread of his feet
approached. Go thou to the heroes, chief of Dutha! I behold the
stately steps of Ossian. His fame is worthy of my steel! let us
contend in fight."
	The noble Sulmath came. I rejoiced in the words of the
king. I raised the shield on my arm: Gaul placed in my hand the
sword of Morni. We returned to the murmuring stream; Lathmon
came down in his strength. His dark host rolled, like clouds,
behind him; but the son of Nuth was bright in his steel.
	"Son of Fingal," said the hero, "thy fame has grown on our
fall. How many lie there of my people by thy hand, thou king of
men! Lift now thy spear against Lathmon; lay the son of Nuth
low! Lay him low among his warriors, or thou thyself must fall! It
shall never be told in my halls, that my people fell in my
presence: that they fell in the presence of Lathmon when his
sword rested by his side: the blue eyes of Couth would roll in
tears; her steps be lonely in the vales of Dunlathmon!"
	"Neither shall it be told," I replied, "that the son of Fingal
fled. Were his steps covered with darkness, yet would not Ossian
fly! His soul would meet him and say, 'Does the bard of Selma
fear the foe?" No: he does not fear the foe. His joy is in the midst
of battle."
	Lathmon came on with his spear. He pierced the shield of
Ossian. I felt the cold steel by my side. I drew the sword of Morni.
I cut the spear in twain. The bright point fell glittering on earth.
The son of Nuth burnt in his wrath. He lifted high his sounding
shield. His dark eyes rolled above it, as bending forward, it shone
like a gate of brass. But Ossian's spear pierced the brightness of
its bosses, and sunk in a tree that rose behind. The shield hung
on the quivering lance! But Lathmon still advanced! Gaul foresaw
the fall of the chief. He stretched his buckler before my sword,
when it descended, in a stream of light, over the king of
Dunlathmon!
	Lathmon beheld the son of Morni. The tear started from his
eye. He threw the sword of his fathers on the earth, and, spoke
the words of the brave.
	"Why should Lathmon fight against the first of men? Your
souls are beams from heaven; your swords the flames of death!
Who can equal the renown of the heroes, whose deeds are so
great in youth? O that ye were in the halls of Nuth, in the green
dwelling of Lathmon! Then would my father say that his son did
not yield to the weak. But who comes, a mighty stream, along the
echoing heath? The little hills are troubled before him. A
thousand ghosts are on the beams of his steel; the ghosts of
those who are to fall by the king of resounding Morven. Happy art
thou, O Fingal! thy son shall fight thy wars. They go forth before
thee: they return with the steps of their renown!"
	Fingal came in his mildness, rejoicing in secret over the
deeds of his son. Morni's face brightened with gladness. His aged
eyes look faintly through tears of joy. We came to the halls of
Selma. We sat around the feasts of shells. The maids of song
came in to our presence, and the mildly-blushing Everallin! Her
hair spreads on her neck of snow, her eye rolls in secret on
Ossian. She touched the harp of music! we blessed the daughter
of Branno!
	Fingal rose in his place, and spoke to Lathmon, king of
spears. The sword of Trenmor shook by his side, as high he
raised his mighty arm Son of Nuth," he said, "why dost thou
search for fame in Morven? We are not of the race of the feeble;
our swords gleam not over the weak. When did we rouse thee, O
Lathmon, with the sound of war? Fingal does not delight in
battle, though his arm is strong! My renown grows on the fall of
the haughty. The light of my steel pours on the proud in arms.
The battle comes! and the tombs of the valiant rise; the tombs of
my people rise, O my fathers! I at last must remain alone! But I
will remain renowned: the departure of my soul shall be a stream
of light. Lathmon! retire to thy place! Turn thy battles to other
lands! The race of Morven are renowned; their foes are the sons
of the unhappy."



DAR-THULA


ARGUMENT.

It may not be improper here to give the story which is the
foundation of this poem, as it is handed down by tradition.
Usnoth, lord of Etha, which is probably that part of Argyleshire
which is near Loch Eta, an arm of the sea in Lorn, had three
sons, Nathos, Althos, and Ardan, by Sliss ma, the daughter of
Semo, and sister to the celebrated Cuthullin. The three brothers,
when very young, were sent over to Ireland by their father, to
learn the use of arms under their uncle Cuthullin, who made a
great figure in that kingdom. They were just landed in Ulster,
when the news of Cuthullin's death arrived. Nathos, though very
young, took the command of Cuthullin's army, made head
against Cairbar the usurper, and defeated him in several battles.
Cairbar at last, having found means to murder Cormac, the
lawful king, the army of Nathos shifted sides, and he himself was
obliged to return into Ulster, in order to pass over into Scotland.
	Dar-thula, the daughter of Colla, with whom Cairbar was
in love, resided at that time in Sel ma, a castle in Ulster. She
saw, fell in love, and fled with Nathos; but a storm rising at sea,
they were unfortunately driven back on that part of the coast of
Ulster, where Cairbar was encamped with his army. The three
brothers, after having defended themselves for some time with
great bravery, were overpowered and slain, and the unfortunate
Dar-thula killed herself upon the body of her beloved Nathos.
The poem opens, on the night preceding the death of the sons of
Usnoth, and brings in, by way of episode, what passed before. it
relates the death of Dar-thula differently from the common
tradition. This account, is the most probable, as suicide seems to
have been unknown in those early times, for no traces of it are
found in the old poetry.

	DAUGHTER of heaven, fair art thou! the silence of thy face
is pleasant! Thou comest forth in loveliness. The stars attend thy
blue course in the east. The clouds rejoice in thy presence, O
moon! They brighten their dark-brown sides. Who is like thee in
heaven, light of the silent night? The stars are shamed in thy
presence. They turn away their sparkling eyes. Whither dost thou
retire from thy course when the darkness of thy countenance
grows?  Hast thou thy hall, like Ossian? Dwellest thou in the
shadow of grief? Have thy sisters fallen from heaven? Are they
who rejoiced with thee, at night, no more? Yes, they have fallen,
fair light! and thou dost often retire to mourn. But thou thyself
shalt fail one night and leave thy blue path in heaven. The stars
will then lift their heads: they who were ashamed in thy presence,
will rejoice. Thou art now clothed with thy brightness. Look from
thy gates in the sky. Burst the cloud, O wind! that the daughters
of night may look forth; that the shaggy mountains may brighten,
and the ocean roll its white waves in light!
	Nathos is on the deep, and Althos, that beam of youth!
Ardan is near his brothers. They move in the gloom of their
course. The sons of Usnoth move in darkness, from the wrath of
Cairbar of Erin. Who is that, dim by their side? The night has
covered her beauty! Her hair sighs on ocean's wind. Her robe
streams in dusky wreaths. She is like the fair spirit of heaven in
the midst of the shadowy mist. Who is it but Dar-thula, the first
of Erin's maids? She has fled from the love of Cairbar, with blue-
shielded Nathos. But the winds deceive thee, O Dar-thula! They
deny the woody Etha to thy sails. These are not the mountains of
Nathos; nor is that the roar of his climbing waves. The halls of
Cairbar are near: the towers of the foe lift their heads! Erin
stretches its green head into the sea. Tura's bay receives the
ship. Where have ye been, ye southern Winds, when the sons of
my love were deceived? But ye have been sporting on the plains,
pursuing the thistle's beard. O that ye had been rustling in the
sails of Nathos, till the hills of Etha arose! till they arose in their
clouds, and saw their returning chief! Long hast thou been
absent, Nathos! the day of thy return is past!
	But the land of strangers saw thee lovely! thou wast lovely
in the eyes of Dar-thula. Thy face was like the light of the
morning. Thy hair like the raven's wing. Thy soul was generous
and mild, like tho hour of the setting sun. Thy words were the
gale of the reeds; the gliding stream of Lora! But when the rage of
battle rose, thou wast a sea in a storm. The clang of thy arms
was terrible: the host vanished at the sound of thy course. It was
then Dar-thula beheld thee, from the top of her mossy tower;
from the tower of Sel ma, where her fathers dwelt.
	"Lovely art thou, O stranger!" she said, for her trembling
soul arose. "Fair art thou in thy battles, friend of the fallen
Cormac! Why dost thou rush on in thy valor, youth of the ruddy
look? Few are thy hands in fight against the dark-brown Cairbar!
O that I might be freed from his love, that I might rejoice in the
presence of Nathos! Blest are the rocks of Etha! they will behold
his steps at the chase; they will see his white bosom, when the
winds lift his flowing hair!" Such were thy words, Dar-thula, in
Sel ma's mossy towers. But now the night is around thee. The
winds have deceived thy sails- -- the winds have deceived thy
sails, Dar-thula! Their blustering sound is high. Cease a little
while, O north wind! Let me hear the voice of the lovely. Thy voice
is lovely, Dar-thula, between the rustling blasts!
	"Are these the rocks of Nathos?" she said, "this the roaring
of his mountain streams? Comes that beam of light from
Usnoth's nightly hall? The mist spreads around; the beam is
feeble and distant far. But the light of Dar-thula's soul dwells in
the chief of Etha! Son of the generous Usnoth, why that broken
sigh? Are we in the land of strangers, chief of echoing Etha?"
	"These are not the rocks of Nathos," he replied,  "nor this
the roar of his stream. No light comes from Etha's hall, for they
are distant far. We are in the land of strangers, in the land of
cruel Cairbar. The winds have deceived us, Dar-thula. Erin lifts
here her hills. Go towards the north, Althos: be thy steps, Ardan,
along the coast; that the foe may not come in darkness, and our
hopes of Etha fail. I will go towards that mossy tower, to see who
dwells about the beam. Rest, Dar-thula, on the shore! rest in
peace, thou lovely light! the sword of Nathos is around thee, like
the lightning of heaven!"
	He went. She sat alone: she heard the roiling of the wave.
The big tear is in her eye. She looks for returning Nathos. Her
soul trembles at the bast. She turns her ear towards the tread of
his feet. The tread of his feet is not heard. "Where art thou, son of
my love! The roar of the blast is around me. Dark is the cloudy
night. But Nathos does not return. What detains thee, chief of
Etha? Have the foes met the hero in the strife of the night?"
	He returned; but his face was dark. He had seen his
departed friend! it was the wall of Tura. The ghost of Cuthullin
stalked there alone; the sighing of his breast was frequent. The
decayed flame of his eyes was terrible! His spear was a column of
mist. The stars looked dim through his form. His voice was like
hollow wind in a cave: his eye a light seen afar. He told the tale of
grief. The soul of Nathos was sad, like the sun in the day of mist,
when his face  watery and dim.
	"Why art thou sad, O Nathos!" said the lovely daughter of
Colla. "Thou art a pillow of light to Dar-thula. The joy of her eyes
is in Etha's chief. Where is my friend, but Nathos? My father, my
brother is fallen! Silence dwells on Sel ma. Sadness spreads on
the blue streams of my land. My friends have fallen with Cormac.
The mighty were slain in the battles of Erin. Hear, son of Usnoth!
hear, O Nathos! my tale of grief.
	"Evening darkened on the plain. The blue streams failed
before mine eyes. The unfrequent blast came rustling in the tops
of Sel ma's groves. My seat was beneath a tree, on the walls of
my fathers. Truthil past before my soul; the brother of my love:
he that was absent in battle against the haughty Cairbar!
Bending on his spear, the gray-haired Colla came. His downcast
face is dark, and sorrow dwells in his soul. His sword is on the
side of the hero; the helmet of his fathers on his head. The battle
grows in his breast. He strives to hide the tear.
	"'Dar-thula, my daughter,' he said, 'thou art the last of
Colla's race! Truthil is fallen in battle. The chief of Sel ma is no
more! Cairbar comes, with his thousands, towards Sel ma's
walls. Colla will meet his pride, and revenge his son. But where
shall I find thy safety, Dar-thula with the dark-brown hair! thou
art lovely as the sunbeam of heaven, and thy friends are low!' 'Is
the son of battle fallen?' I said, with a bursting sigh. 'Ceased the
generous soul of Truthil to lighten through the field? My safety,
Colla, is in that bow. I have learned to pierce the deer. Is not
Cairbar like the hart of the desert, father of fallen Truthil?'
	"The face of age brightened with joy. The crowded tears of
his eyes poured down. The lips of Colla trembled. His gray beard
whistled in the blast. 'Thou art the sister of Truthil,' he said;
'thou burnest in the fire of his soul. Take, Dar-thula, take that
spear, that brazen shield, that burnished helm; they are the
spoils of a warrior, a son of early youth! When the light rises on
Sel ma, we go to meet the car-borne Cairbar. But keep thou near
the arm of Colla, beneath the shadow of my shield. Thy father,
Dar-thula, could once defend thee; but age is trembling On his
hand. The strength of his arm has failed. His soul is darkened
with grief.'
	"We passed the night in sorrow. The light of morning rose. I
shone in the arms of battle. The gray haired hero moved before.
The sons of Sel ma convened around the sounding shield of
Colla. But few were they in the plain, and their locks were gray.
The youths had fallen with Truthil, in the battle of car-borne
Cormac. 'Friends of my youth,' said Colla, 'it was not thus you
have seen me in arms. It was not thus I strode to battle when the
great Confaden fell. But ye are laden with grief. The darkness of
age comes like the mist of the desert. My shield is worn with
years! my sword is fixed in its place! <1> I said to my soul, Thy
evening shall be calm; thy departure like a fading light. But the
storm has returned. I bend like an aged oak. My boughs are
fallen on Sel ma. I tremble in my place. Where art thou, with thy
fallen heroes, O my beloved Truthil! Thou answerest not from thy
rushing blast. The soul of thy father is sad. But I will be sad no
more! Cairbar or Colla must fall! I feel the returning strength of
my arm. My heart leaps at the sound of war.'
	"The hero drew his sword. The gleaming blades of his
people rose. They moved along the plain. Their gray hair
streamed in the wind. Cairbar sat at the feast, in the silent plain
of Lena. He saw the coming of the heroes. He called his chiefs to
war. Why should I tell to Nathos how the strife of battle grew? I
have seen thee in the midst of thousands, like the beam of
heaven's fire: it is beautiful, but terrible; the people fall in its
dreadful course. The spear of Colla flew. He remembered the
battles of his youth. An arrow came with its sound. It pierced the
hero's side. He fell on his echoing shield. My soul started with
fear. I stretched my buckler over him: but my heaving breast was
seen! Cairbar came with his spear. He beheld Sel ma's maid. Joy
rose on his dark-brown Taco. He stayed his lifted steel. He raised
the tomb of Colla. He brought me weeping to Sel ma. He spoke
the words of love, but my soul was sad. I saw the shields of my
fathers; the sword of car-borne Truthil. I saw the arms of the
dead; the tear was on my cheek! Then thou didst come, O
Nathos! and gloomy Cairbar fled. He fled like the ghost of the
desert before the morning's beam. His host was not near; and
feeble was his arm against thy steel! Why art thou sad, O
Nathos?" said the lovely daughter of Colla.
	"I have met," replied the hero, "the battle in my youth. My
arm could not lift the spear when danger first arose. My soul
brightened in the presence of war, as the green narrow vale,
when the sun pours his streamy beams, before he hides his head
in a storm. The lonely traveller feels a mournful joy. He sees the
darkness that slowly comes. My soul brightened in danger before
I saw Sel ma's fair; before I saw thee, like a star that shines on
the hill at night; the cloud advances, and threatens the lovely
light! We are in the land of foes. The winds have deceived us,
Dar-thula! The strength of our friends is not near, nor the
mountains of Etha. Where shall I find thy peace, daughter of
mighty Colla! The brothers of Nathos are brave, and his own
sword has shone in fight. But what are the sons of Usnoth to the
host of dark-brown Cairbar! O that the winds had brought thy
sails, Oscar king of men! Thou didst promise to come to the
battles of fallen Cormac! Then would my hand be strong as the
flaming arm of death. Cairbar would tremble in his halls, and
peace dwell round the lovely Dar-thula. But why dost thou fall,
my soul? The sons of Usnoth may prevail!"
	"And they will prevail, O Nathos!" said the rising soul of the
maid. "Never shall Dar-thula behold the halls of gloomy Cairbar.
Give me those arms of brass, that glitter to the passing meteor. I 
see them dimly in the dark-bosomed ship. Dar-thula will enter
the battles of steel. Ghost of the noble Colla! do I behold thee on
that cloud! Who is that dim beside thee? Is it the car-borne
Truthil? Shall I behold the halls of him that slew Sel ma's chief?
No: I will not behold them, spirits of my love!"
	Joy rose in the face of Nathos when he heard the white-
bosomed maid. "Daughter of Sel ma! thou shinest along my soul.
Come, with thy thousands, Cairbar! the strength of Nathos is
returned! Thou O aged Usnoth! shalt not hear that thy son has
fled. I remembered thy words on Etha, when my sails began to
rise: when I spread them towards Erin, towards the mossy walls
of Tura! 'Thou goest,' he said, 'O Nathos, to the king of shields!
Thou goest to Cuthullin, chief of men, who never fled from
danger. Let not thine arm be feeble: neither be thy thoughts of
flight; lest the son of Semo should say that Etha's race are weak.
His words may come to Usnoth, and sadden his soul in the hall.'
The tear was on my father's cheek. He gave this shining sword!
	"I came to Tura's bay; but the halls of Tara were silent. I
looked around, and there was none to tell of the son of generous
Semo. I went to the hall of shells, where the arms of his fathers
hung. But the arms were gone, and aged Lamhor sat in tears.
'Whence are the arms of steel?' said the rising Lamhor. 'The light
of the spear has long been absent from Tura's dusky walls. Come
ye from the rolling sea? or from Temora's mournful halls?'
	"'We come from the sea,' I said, 'from Usnoth's rising
towers. We are the sons of Sliss ma, the daughter of car-borne
Semo. Where is Tura's chief, son of the silent hall? But why
should Nathos ask? for I behold thy tears. How did the mighty
fall, son of the lonely Tura?' 'He fell not,' Lamhor replied, 'like the
silent star of night, when it flies through darkness and is no
more. But he was like a meteor that shoots into a distant land.
Death attends its dreary course. Itself is the sign of wars.
Mournful are the banks of Lego; and the roar of streamy Lara!
There the hero fell, son of the noble Usnoth!' 'The hero fell in the
midst of slaughter,' I said with a bursting sigh. 'His hand was
strong in war. Death dimly sat behind his sword.'
	"We came to Lego's sounding banks. We found his rising
tomb. His friends in battle are there: his bards of many songs.
Three days we mourned over the hero: on the fourth I struck the
shield of Caithbat. The heroes gathered around with joy, and
shook their beamy spears. Corlath was near with his host, the
friend of car-borne Cairbar. We came like a stream by night. His
heroes fell before us. When the people of the valley rose, they saw
their blood with morning's light. But we rolled away, like wreaths
of mist, to Cormac's echoing hall. Our swords rose to defend the
king. But Temora's halls were empty. Cormac had fallen in his
youth. The king of Erin was no more!
	"Sadness seized the sons of Erin. They slowly gloomily
retired: like clouds that long having threatened rain, vanish
behind the hills. The sons of Usnoth moved, in their grief,
towards Tura's sounding bay. We passed by Sel ma. Cairbar
retired like Lena's mist, when driven before the winds. It was
then I beheld thee, O Dar-thula! like the light of Etha's sun.
'Lovely is that beam!' I said. The crowded sigh of my bosom rose.
Thou camest in thy beauty, Dar-thula, to Etha's mournful chief.
But the winds have deceived us, daughter of Colla, and the foe is
near!"
	"Yes, the foe is near," said the rushing strength of Althos." I
heard their clanging arms on the coast. I saw the dark wreaths of
Erin's standard. Distinct is the voice of Cairbar; loud as Cromla's
falling stream. He had seen the dark ship on the sea, before the
dusky night came down. His people watch on Lena's plain. They
lift ten thousand swords." "And let them lift ten thousand
swords," said Nathos with a smile." The sons of car-borne Usnoth
will never tremble in danger! Why dost thou roll with all thy foam,
thou roaring sea of Erin? Why do ye rustle on your dark wings, ye
whistling storms of the sky? Do ye think, ye storms, that ye keep
Nathos on the coast? No: his soul detains him, children of the
night! Althos, bring my father's arms: thou seest them beaming
to the stars. Bring the spear of Semo. It stands in the dark-
bosomed ship!"
	He brought the arms. Nathos covered his limbs in all their
shining steel. The stride of the chief is lovely. The joy of' his eyes
was terrible. He looks towards the coming of Cairbar. The wind is
rustling in his hair. Dar-thula is silent at his side. Her look is
fixed on the chief. She strives to hide the rising sigh. Two tears
swell in her radiant eyes!
"Althos!" said the child of Etha, "I see a cave in that rock. Place
Dar-thula there. Let thy arm, my brother, be strong. Ardan! we
meet the foe; call to battle gloomy Cairbar. O that he came in his
sounding steel, to meet the son of Usnoth! Dar-thula, if thou
shalt escape, look not on the fallen Nathos! Lift thy sails, O
Althos! towards the echoing groves of my land.
	"Tell the chief that his son fell with fame; that my sword did
not shun the fight. Tell him I fell in the midst of thousands. Let
the joy of his grief be great. Daughter of Colla! call the maids to
Etha's echoing hall! Let their songs arise for Nathos, when
shadowy autumn returns. O that the voice of Cona, that Ossian
might be heard in my praise! then would my spirit rejoice in the
midst of the rushing winds." "And my voice shall praise thee,
Nathos, chief of the woody Etha! The voice of Ossian shall rise in
thy praise, son of the generous Usnoth! Why was I not on Lena
when the battle rose? Then would the sword of Ossian defend
thee, or himself fall low!"
	We sat that night in Selma, round the strength of the shell.
The wind was abroad in the oaks. The spirit of the mountain <2>
roared. The blast came rustling through the hall, and gently
touched my harp. The sound was mournful and low, like the
song of the tomb. Fingal heard it the first. The crowded sighs of
his bosom rose. "Some of my heroes are low," said the gray-
haired king of Morven. "I hear the sound of death on the harp.
Ossian, touch the trembling string. Bid the sorrow rise, that their
spirits may fly with joy to Morven's woody hills!" I touched the
harp before the king; the sound was mournful and low. "Bend
forward from your clouds," I said, "ghosts of my fathers! bend.
Lay by the red terror of your course. Receive the fallen chief;
whether he comes from a distant land, or rises from the rolling
sea. Let his robe of mist be near; his spear that is formed of a
cloud. Place an half-extinguished meteor by his side, in the form
of the hero's sword. And, oh! let his countenance be lovely, that
his friends may delight in his presence. Bend from your clouds," I
said, "ghosts of my fathers! bend!"
	Such was my song in Selma, to the lightly-trembling harp.
But Nathos was on Erin's shore, surrounded by the night. He
heard the voice of the foe, amidst the roar of tumbling waves.
Silent he heard their voice, and rested on his spear! Morning
rose, with its beams. The sons of Erin appear: like gray rocks,
with all their trees, they spread along the coast. Cairbar stood in
the midst. He grimly smiled when he saw the foe. Nathos rushed
forward in his strength: nor could Dar-thula stay behind. She
came with the hero, lifting her shining spear. "And who are these,
in their armor, in the pride of youth? Who but the sons of
Usnoth, Althos and dark-haired Ardan?"
	"Come," said Nathos, "come, chief of high Temora! Let our
battle be on the coast, for the white bosomed maid. His people
are not with Nathos: they are behind these rolling seas. Why dost
thou bring thy thousands against the chief of Etha? Thou didst
fly from him in battle, when his friends were around his spear."
"Youth of the heart of pride, shall Erin's king fight with thee? Thy
fathers were not among the renowned, nor of the kings of men.
Are the arms of foes in their halls? or the shields of other times? 
Cairbar is renowned in Temora, nor does he fight with feeble men
	The tear started from car-borne Nathos. He turned his eyes
to his brothers. Their spears flew at once. Three heroes lay on
earth. Then the light of their swords gleamed on high. The ranks
of Erin yield, as a ridge of dark clouds before a blast of wind!
Then Cairbar ordered his people, and they drew a thousand
bows. A thousand arrows flew. The sons of Usnoth fell in blood.
They fell like three young oaks, which stood alone on the hill: the
traveller saw the lovely trees, and wondered how they grew so
lonely: the blast of the desert came by night, and laid their green
heads low. Next day he returned, but they were withered, and the
heath was bare!
	Dar-thula stood in silent grief, and beheld their fall! No tear
is in her eye. But her look is wildly sad. Pale was her cheek. Her
trembling lips broke short an half-formed word. Her dark hair
flew on wind. The gloomy Cairbar came. "Where is thy lover now?
the car-borne chief of Etha? Hast thou beheld the halls of
Usnoth? or the dark-brown hills of Fingal? My battle would have
roared on Morven, had not the winds met Dar-thula. Fingal
himself would have been low, and sorrow dwelling in Selma!" Her
shield fell from Dar-thula's arm. Her breast of snow appeared. It
appeared; but it was stained with blood. An arrow was fixed in
her side. She fell on the fallen Nathos, like a wreath of snow! Her
hair spreads wide on his face. Their blood is mixing round!
	"Daughter of Colla! thou art low!" said Cairbar's hundred
bards. "Silence is at the blue streams of Sel ma. Truthil's race
have failed. When wilt thou rise in thy beauty, first of Erin's
maids? Thy sleep is long in the tomb. The morning distant far.
The sun shall not come to thy bed and say, Awake, Dar-thula!
awake, thou first of women! the wind of spring is abroad. The
flowers shake their heads on the green hills. The woods wave
their growing leaves. Retire, O sun! the daughter of Colla is
asleep. She will not come forth in her beauty. She will not move
in the steps of her loveliness."
	Such was the song of the bards, when they raised the
tomb. I sung over the grave, when the king of Morven came: when
he came to green Erin to fight with car-borne Cairbar!

<1> It was the custom of ancient times, that every warrior, at a
certain age, or when he became unfit for the field, fixed his arms
in the great ball, where the tribes feasted upon joyful occasions.
He was afterward never to appear in battle; and this stage of life
was called "the time of fixing the arms."

<2> By the spirit of the mountain, is meant that deep and
melancholy sound which precedes a storm, well known to those
who live
in a high country.



THE DEATH OF CUTHULLIN.


ARGUMENT.

Cuthullin, after the arms of Fingal had expelled Swaran from
Ireland, continued to manage the affairs of that kingdom as the
guardian of Cormac the young king. In the third year of
Cuthullin's administration, Torlath, the son of Cantela, rebelled
in Connaught: and advanced to Temora to dethrone Cormac.
Cuthullin marched against him, came up with him at the lake of
Lego, and totally defeated his forces. Torlath fell in battle by
Cuthullin's hand; but as he too eagerly pressed on the enemy, he
was mortally wounded. The affairs of Cormac, though for some
time supported by Nathos, as mentioned in the preceding poem,
fell into confusion at the death of Cuthullin. Cormac himself was
slain by the rebel Cairbar; and the re-establishment of the royal
family of Ireland, by Fingal, furnishes the subject of the epic
poem of Temora.

	Is the wind on the shield of Fingal? Or is the voice of past
times in my hall? Sing on, sweet voice! for thou art pleasant.
Thou carriest away my night with joy. Sing on, O Bragla,
daughter of car-borne Sorglan!
	"It is the white wave of the rock, and not Cuthullin's sails.
Often do the mists deceive me for the ship of my love! when they
rise round some ghost, and spread their gray skirts on the wind.
Why dost thou delay thy coming, son of the generous Semo? Four
times has autumn returned with its winds, and raised the seas of
Togorma, <1> since thou hast been in the roar of battles, and
Bragla distant far! Hills of the isle of mist! when will ye answer
to his hounds? But ye are dark in your clouds. Sad Bragla calls
in vain! Night comes rolling down. The face of ocean falls. The
heath-cock's head is beneath his wing. The hind sleeps with the
hart of the desert. They shall rise with morning's light, and feed
by the mossy stream. But my tears return with the sun. My sighs
come on with the night. When wilt thou come in thine arms, O
chief of Erin's wars?"
	Pleasant is thy voice in Ossian's ear, daughter of car-borne
Sorglan! But retire to the hall of shells, to the beam of the
burning oak. Attend to the murmur of the sea: it rolls at
Dunsci's walls: let sleep descend on thy blue eyes. Let the hero
arise in thy dreams!
	Cuthullin sits at Lego's lake, at the dark rolling of waters.
Night is around the hero. His thousands spread on the heath. A
hundred oaks burn in the midst. The feast of shells is smoking
wide. Carril strikes the harp beneath a tree. His gray locks glitter
in the beam. The rustling blast of night is near, and lifts his aged
hair. His song is of the blue Togorma, and of its chief, Cuthullin's
friend! "Why art thou absent, Connal, in the days of the gloomy
storm? The chiefs of the south have convened against the car-
borne Cormac. The winds detain thy sails. Thy blue waters roll
around thee. But Cormac is not alone. The son of Semo fights his
wars! Semo's son his battles fights! the terror of the stranger! He
that is like the vapor of death, slowly borne by sultry winds. The
sun reddens in its presence; the people fall around."
	Such was the song of Carril, when a son of the foe
appeared. He threw down his pointless spear. He spoke the words
of Torlath; Torlath chief of heroes, from Lego's sable surge! He
that led his thousands to battle, against car-borne Cormac.
Cormac, who was distant far, in Temora's echoing halls: he
learned to bend the bow of his fathers; and to lift the spear. Nor
long didst thou lift the spear, mildly-shining beam of youth!
death stands dim behind thee, like the darkened half of the moon
behind its growing light. Cuthullin rose before the bard, that
came from generous Torlath. He offered him the shell of joy. He
honored the son of songs. "Sweet voice of Lego!" he said, "what
are the words of Torlath? Comes he to our feast or battle, the car-
borne son of Cantela?"
	"He comes to thy battle," replied the bard, "to the sounding
strife of spears. When morning is gray on Lego, Torlath will fight
on the plain. Wilt thou meet him, in thine arms, king of the isle of
mist? Terrible is the spear of Torlath! it is a meteor of night. He
lifts it, and the people fall! death sits in the lightning of his
sword!" --  "Do I fear," replied Cuthullin, "the spear of car-borne
Torlath? He is brave as a thousand heroes: but my soul delights
in war! The sword rests not by the side of Cuthullin, bard of the
times of old! Morning shall meet me on the plain, and gleam on
the blue arms of Semo's son. But sit thou on the heath, O bard,
and let us hear thy voice. Partake of the joyful shell: and hear the
songs of Temora!"
	"This is no time," replied the bard, "to hear the song of joy:
when the mighty are to meet in battle, like the strength of the
waves of Lego. Why art thou so dark, Slimora! with all thy silent
woods? No star trembles on thy top. No moonbeam on thy side.
But the meteors of death are there: the gray watery forms of
ghosts. Why art thou dark, Slimora! why thy silent woods?" He
retired, in the sound of his song. Carril joined his voice. The
music was like the memory of joys that are past, pleasant and
mournful to the soul. The ghosts of departed bards heard on
Slimora's side. Soft sounds spread along the wood. The silent
valleys of night rejoice. So when he sits in the silence of the day,
in the valley of his breeze, the humming of the mountain bee
comes to Ossian's ear: the gale drowns it in its course: but the 
pleasant sound returns again! Slant looks the sun on the field!
gradual grows the shade of the hill!
	"Raise," said Cuthullin to his hundred bards, "the song of
the noble Fingal: that song which he hears at night, when the
dreams of his rest descend; when the bards strike the distant
harp, and the faint light gleams on Selma's walls. Or let the grief
of Lara rise: the sighs of the mother of Calmar, when he was
sought, in vain, on his hills; when she beheld his bow in the hall.
Carril, place the shield of Caithbat on that branch. Let the spear
of Cuthullin be near; that the sound of my battle may rise, with
the gray beam of the east."
	The hero leaned on his father's shield: the song of Lara
rose! The hundred bards were distant far: Carril alone is near the
chief. The words of the song were his: the sound of his harp was
mournful.
	"Alcletha with the aged locks! mother of car-borne Calmar!
why dost thou look towards the desert, to behold the return of
thy son? These are not his heroes, dark on the heath: nor is that
the voice of Calmar. It is but the distant grove, Alcletha! but the
roar of the mountain-wind -- [Alcletha speaks] 'Who bounds over
Lara's stream, sister of the noble Calmar? Does not Alcletha
behold his spear? But her eyes are dim! Is it not the son of
Matha, daughter of my love?'
	"'It is but an aged oak, Alcletha!' replied the lovely weeping
Alona. 'It is but an oak, Alcletha, bent over Lara's stream. But
who comes along the plain? sorrow is in his speed. He lifts high
the spear of Calmar. Alcletha, it is covered with blood!' --
	"[Alcletha speaks] 'But it is covered with the blood of foes,
sister of car-borne Calmar! His spear never returned unstained
with blood: nor his bow from the strife of the mighty. The battle is
consumed in his presence: he is a flame of death, Alona! -- Youth
of the mournful speed! where is the son of Alcletha! Does he
return with his fame, in the midst of his echoing shields? Thou
art dark and silent! Calmar is then no more! Tell me not, warrior,
how he fell. I must not hear of his wound!' Why dost thou look
towards the desert, mother of low-laid Calmar?"
	Such was the song of Carril, when Cuthullin lay on his
shield. The bards rested on their harps. Sleep fell softly around.
The son of Semo was awake alone. His soul fixed on war. The
burning oaks began to decay. Faint red light is spread around. A
feeble voice is heard! The ghost of Calmar came! He stalked dimly
along the beam. Dark is the wound in his side. His hair is
disordered and loose. Joy sits pale on his face. He seems to invite
Cuthullin to his cave.
	"Son of the cloudy night!" said the rising chief of Erin; "why
dost thou bend thy dark eyes on me, ghost of the noble Calmar?
wouldst thou frighten me, O Matha's son! from the battles of
Cormac? Thy hand was not feeble in war: neither was thy voice
for peace. How art thou changed, chief of Lara! if thou now dost
advise to fly! But, Calmar, I never fled. I never feared the ghosts
of night. Small is their knowledge, weak their hands; their
dwelling is in the wind. But my soul grows in danger, and rejoices
in the noise of steel. Retire thou to thy cave. Thou art not
Calmar's ghost. He delighted in battle. His arm was like the
thunder of heaven! He retired in his blast with joy, for he had
heard the voice of his praise."
	The faint beam of the morning rose. The sound of
Caithbat's buckler spread. Green Erin's warriors convened, like
the roar of many streams. The horn of war is heard over Lego.
The mighty Torlath came! "Why dost thou come with thy
thousands, Cuthullin," said the chief of Lego." I know the
strength of thy arm. Thy soul is an unextinguished fire. Why fight
we not on the plain, and let our hosts behold our deeds? Let
them behold us like roaring waves, that tumble round a rock; the
mariners hasten away, and look on their strife with fear."
	"Thou risest like the sun, on my soul, replied the son of
Semo. Thine arm is mighty, O Torlath! and worthy of my wrath.
Retire, ye men of Ullin, to Slimora's shady side. Behold the chief
of Erin, in the day of his fame. Carril, tell to mighty Connal, if
Cuthullin must fall, tell him I accused the winds, which roar on
Togorma's waves. Never was he absent in battle, when the strife
of my fame arose. Let his sword be before Cormac, like the beam
of heaven. Let his counsel sound in Temora, in the day of
danger!"
	He rushed, in the sound of his arms, like the terrible spirit
of Loda, when he comes, in the roar of a thousand storms, and
scatters battles from his eyes. He sits on a cloud over Lochlin's
seas. His mighty hand is on his sword. Winds lift his flaming
locks! The waning moon half lights his dreadful face. His features
blended in darkness arise to view. So terrible was Cuthullin in
the day of his fame. Torlath fell by his hand. Lego's heroes
mourned. They gather around the chief, like the clouds of the
desert. A thousand swords rose at once; a thousand arrows flew;
but he stood like a rock in the midst of a roaring sea. They fell
around. He strode in blood. Dark Slimora echoed wide. The sons
of Ullin came on. The battle spread over Lego. The chief of Erin
overcame. He returned over the field with his fame. But pale he
returned! The joy of his face was dark. He rolled his eyes in
silence. The sword hung, unsheathed, in his hand. His spear
bent at every step!
	"Carril," said the chief in secret, "the strength of Cuthullin
fails. My days are with the years that are past. No morning of
mine shall arise. They shall seek me at Temora, but I shall not be
found. Cormac will weep in his hall, and say, Where is Erin's
chief? But my name is renowned! my fame in the song of bards.
The youth will say, in secret, O let me die as Cuthullin died!
Renown clothed him like a robe. The light of his fame is great. --
Draw the arrow from my side. Lay Cuthullin beneath that oak.
Place the shield of Caithbat near, that they may behold me
amidst the arms of my fathers!"
	"And is the son of Semo fallen?" said Carril with a sigh."
Mournful are Tura's walls. Sorrow dwells at Dunsci. Thy spouse
is left alone in her youth. The son of thy love is alone! He shall
come to Bragla and ask her why she weeps! He shalt lift his eyes
to the wall, and see his father's sword. Whose sword is that? he
will say. The soul of his mother is sad. Who is that, like the hart
of the desert, in the murmur of his course? His eyes look wildly
round in search of his friend. Connal, son of Colgar, where hast
thou been, when the mighty fell? Did the seas of Togorma roll
around thee? Was the wind of the south in thy sails? The mighty
have fallen in battle, and thou wast not there. Let none tell it in
Selma, nor in Morven's woody land. Fingal will be sad, and the
sons of the desert mourn!"
	By the dark-rolling waves of Lego they raised the hero's
tomb. Luath, at a distance, lies. The song of bards rose over the
dead.
	<2> Blest be thy soul, son of Semo! Thou wert mighty in
battle. Thy strength was like the strength of a stream; thy speed
like the eagle's wing. Thy path in battle was terrible: the steps of
death were behind thy sword. Blest be thy soul, son of Semo, car-
borne chief of Dunsci! Thou hast not fallen by the sword of the
mighty, neither was thy blood on the spear of the brave. The
arrow came, like the sting of death in a blast: nor did the feeble
hand, which drew the bow, perceive it. Peace to thy soul, in thy
cave, chief of the isle of mist!
	"The mighty are dispersed at Temora; there is none in
Cormac's hall. The king mourns in his youth. He does not behold
thy return. The sound of thy shield is ceased: his foes are
gathering round. Soft be thy rest in thy cave, chief of Erin's wars!
Bragla will not hope for thy return, or see thy sails in ocean's
foam. Her steps are not on the shore: nor her ear open to the
voice of thy rowers. She sits in the hall of shells. She sees the
arms of him that is no more. Thine eyes are full of tears,
daughter of car-borne Sorglan! Blest be thy soul in death, O chief
of shady Tura!"

<1> Togorma, i. e. "the island of blue waves," one of the Hebrides.

<2> This is the song of the bards over Cuthullin's tomb.



THE BATTLE OF LORA.


ARGUMENT

Fingal, at his return from Ireland, after he had expelled Swaran
from that kingdom, made a feast to all his heroes: he forgot to
invite Ma-Ronnan and Aldo, two chiefs, who had not been along
with him in his expedition. They resented his neglect; and went
over to Erragon, king of Sora, a country of Scandinavia, the
declared enemy of Fingal. The valor of Aldo soon gained him a
great reputation in Sora; and Lorma, the beautiful wife  of
Erragon, fell in love with him. He found means to escape with
her, and to come to Fingal, who resided then in Selma, on the
western coast. Erragon invaded Scotland, and was slain in battle
by Gaul the son of Morni, after he had rejected terms of peace
offered him by Fingal. In this war Aldo fell, in a single combat, by
the hands of his rival Erragon, and the unfortunate Lorma
afterward died of grief.

	SON of the distant land, who dwellest in the secret cell; do I
hear the sound of thy grove? or is it thy voice of songs? The
torrent was loud in my ear; but I heard a tuneful voice. Dost thou
praise the chiefs of thy land: or the spirits of the wind? But,
lonely dweller of rocks! look thou on that heathy plain. Thou
seest green tombs, with their rank, whistling grass, with their
stones of mossy heads. Thou seest them, son of the rock, but
Ossian's eyes have failed!
	A mountain-stream comes roaring down, and sends its
waters round a green hill. Four mossy stones, in the midst of
withered grass, rear their heads on the top. Two trees which the
storms have bent, spread their whistling branches around. This
is thy dwelling, Erragon; this thy narrow house; the sound of thy
shells has been long forgot in Sora. Thy shield is become dark in
thy hall. Erragon, king of ships, chief of distant Sora! how hast
thou fallen on our mountains? How is the mighty low? Son of the
secret cell! dost thou delight in songs? Hear the battle of Lora.
The sound of its steel is long since past. So thunder on the
darkened hill roars and is no more. The sun returns with his
silent beams. The glittering rocks, and the green heads of the
mountains, smile.
	The bay of Cona received our ships from Erin's rolling
waves. Our white sheets hung loose to the masts. The boisterous
winds roared behind the groves of Morven. The horn of the king is
sounded; the deer start from their rocks. Our arrows flew in the
woods. The feast of the hill is spread. Our joy was great on our
rocks, for the fall of the terrible Swaran. Two heroes were forgot
at our feast. The rage of their bosoms burned. They rolled their
red eyes in secret. The sigh bursts from their breasts. They were
seen to talk together, and to throw their spears on earth. They
were two dark clouds in the midst of our joy; like pillars of mist
on the settled sea: they glitter to the sun, but the mariners fear a
storm.
	"Raise my white sails," said Ma-Ronnan, "raise them to the
winds of the west. Let us rush, O Aldo! through the foam of the
northern wave. We are forgot at the feast: but our arms have
been red in blood. Let us leave the hills of Fingal, and serve the
king of Sora. His countenance is fierce. War darkens around his
spear. Let us be renowned, O Aldo, in the battles of other lands!"
	They took their swords, their shields of thongs. They
rushed to Lumar's resounding bay. They came to Sora's haughty
king, the chief of bounding steeds. Erragon had returned from
the chase. His spear was red in blood. He bent his dark face to
the ground; and whistled as he went. He took the strangers to his
feast: they fought and conquered in his wars.
	Aldo returned with his fame towards Sora's lofty walls.
From her tower looked the spouse of Erragon, the humid, rolling
eyes of Lorma. Her yellow hair flies on the wind of ocean. Her
white breast heaves, like snow on heath; when the gentle winds
arise, and slowly move it in the light. She saw young Aldo, like
the beam of Sora's setting sun. Her soft heart sighed. Tears filled
her eyes. Her white arm supported her head. Three days she sat
within the hall, and covered her grief with joy. On the fourth she
fled with the hero, along the troubled sea. They came to Cona's
mossy towers, to Fingal king of spears.
	"Aldo of the heart of pride!" said Fingal, rising in wrath;
"shall I defend thee from the rage of Sora's injured king? Who will
now receive my people into their halls? Who will give the feast of
strangers, since Aldo of the little soul has dishonored my name in
Sora? Go to thy hills, thou feeble hand! Go: hide thee in thy
caves. Mournful is the battle we must fight with Sora's gloomy
king. Spirit of the noble Trenmor! when will Fingal cease to fight?
I was born in the midst of battles, <1> and my steps must move
in blood to the tomb. But my hand did not injure the weak, my
steel did not touch the feeble in arms. I behold thy tempests, O
Morven! which will overturn my halls! when my children are dead
in battle, and none remains to dwell in Selma. Then will the
feeble come, but they will not know my tomb. My renown is only
in song. My deeds shall be as a dream to future times!"
	His people gathered around Erragon, as the storms round
the ghosts of night; when he calls them from the top of Morven,
and prepares to pour them on the land of the stranger. He came
to the shore of Cona. He sent his bard to the king to demand the
combat of thousands: or the land of many hills! Fingal sat in his
hall with the friends of his youth around him. The young heroes
were at the chase, far distant in the desert. The gray-haired
chiefs talked of other times; of the actions of their youth; when
the aged Nartmor came, the chief of streamy Lora.
	"This is no time," said Nartmor, "to hear the songs of other
years: Erragon frowns on the coast, and lifts ten thousand
swords. Gloomy is the king among his chiefs! he is like the
darkened moon amidst the meteors of night; when they sail along
her skirts, and give the light that has failed o'er her orb." "Come,"
said Fingal, "from thy hall, come, daughter of my love: come from
thy hall, Bosmina, maid of streamy Morven! Nartmor, take the
steeds of the strangers. Attend the daughter of Fingal! Let her bid
the king of Sora to our feast, to Selma's shaded wall. Offer him, O
Bosmina! the peace of heroes, and the wealth of generous Aldo.
Our youths are far distant. Age is on our trembling hands!"
	She came to the host of Erragon, like a beam of light to a
cloud. In her right hand was seen, a sparkling shell. In her left an
arrow of gold. The first, the joyful mark of peace! The latter, the
sign of war. Erragon brightened in her presence, as a rock before
the sudden beams of the sun; when they issue from a broken
cloud divided by the roaring wind!
	"Son of the distant Sora," began the mildly-blushing maid,"
come to the feast of Morven's king, to Selma's shaded walls. Take
the peace of heroes, O warrior! Let the dark sword rest by thy
side. Choosest thou the wealth of kings? Then hear the words of
generous Aldo. He gives to Erragon a hundred steeds, the
children of the rein; a hundred maids from distant lands; a
hundred hawks with fluttering wing, that fly across the sky. A
hundred girdles <2> shall also be thine, to bind high-bosomed
maids. The friends of the births of heroes. The cure of the sons of
toil. Ten shells, studded with gems, shall shine in Sora's towers:
the bright water trembles on their stars, and seems to be
sparkling wine. They gladdened once the kings of the world, <3>
in the midst of their echoing halls. These, O hero! shall be thine;
or thy white bosomed spouse. Lorma shall roll her bright eyes in
thy halls; though Fingal loves the generous Aldo: Fingal, who
never injured a hero, though his arm is strong!"
	"Soft voice of Cona!" replied the king, "tell him, he spreads
his feast in vain. Let Fingal pour his spoils around me. Let him
bend beneath my power. Let him give me the swords of his
fathers: the shields of other times; that my children may behold
them in my halls, and say, 'These are the arms of Fingal!'" "Never
shall they behold them in thy halls," said the rising pride of the
maid. "They are in the hands of heroes, who never yield in war.
King of echoing Sora! the storm is gathering on our hills. Dost
thou not foresee the fall of thy people, son of the distant land?"
	She came to Selma's silent halls. The king beheld her
downcast eyes. He rose from his place, in his strength. He shook
his aged locks. He took the sounding mail of Trenmor. The dark-
brown shield of his fathers. Darkness filled Selma's hall, when he 
stretched his hand to the spear: the ghosts of thousands were
near, and foresaw the death of the people. Terrible joy rose in the
face of the aged heroes. They rushed to meet the foe. Their
thoughts are on the deeds of other years: and on the fame that
rises from death!
	Now at Trathal's ancient tomb the dogs of the chase
appeared. Fingal knew that his young heroes followed. He
stopped in the midst of his course. Oscar appeared the first; then
Morni's son, and Nmi's race. Fercuth showed his gloomy form.
Dermid spread his dark hair on wind. Ossian came the last. I
hummed the song of other times. My spear supported my steps
over the little streams. My thoughts were of mighty men. Fingal
struck his bossy shield, and gave the dismal sign of war. A
thousand swords at once, unsheathed, gleam on the waving
heath. Three gray-haired sons of the song raise the tuneful,
mournful voice. Deep and dark, with sounding steps, we rush, a
gloomy ridge, along; like the shower of the storm when it pours
on a narrow vale.
	The king of Morven sat on his hill. The sunbeam of battle
flew on the wind. The friends of his youth are near, with all their
waving locks of age. Joy rose in the hero's eyes when he beheld
his sons in war; when he saw us amidst the lightning of swords,
mindful of the deeds of our fathers. Erragon came on, in his
strength, like the roar of a winter stream. The battle falls around
his steps: death dimly stalks along by his side.
	"Who comes," said Fingal, "like the bounding roe!; like the
hart of echoing Cona? His shield glitters on his side. The clang of
his armor is mournful. He meets with Erragon in the strife.
Behold the battle of the chiefs! It is like the contending of ghosts
in a gloomy storm. But fallest thou, son of the hill, and is thy
white bosom stained with blood? Weep, unhappy Lorma! Aldo is
no more!" The king took the spear of his strength. He was sad for
the fall at Aldo. He bent his deathful eyes on the foe: but Gaul
met the king of Sora. Who can relate the light of the chiefs? The
mighty stranger fell! "Sons of Cona!' Fingal cried aloud, "stop the
hand of death. Mighty was he that is low. Much is he mourned in
Sora! The stranger will come towards his hall, and wonder why it
is so silent. The king is fallen, O stranger! The joy of his house is
ceased. Listen to the sound of his woods! Perhaps his ghost is
murmuring there! But he is far distant, on Morven, beneath the
sword of a foreign foe." Such were the words of Fingal, when the
bard raised the song of peace. We stopped our uplifted swords.
We spared the feeble foe. We laid Erragon in a tomb. I raised the
voice of grief. The clouds of night came rolling down. The ghost of
Erragon appeared to some. His face was cloudy and dark; a half-
formed sigh in his breast. "Blest be thy soul, O king of Sora! thine
arm was terrible in war!"
	Lorma sat in Aldo's hall. She sat at the light of a flaming
oak. The night came down, but he did not return. The soul of
Lorma is sad! "What detains thee, hunter of Cona? Thou didst
promise to return. Has the deer been distant far? Do the dark
winds sigh, round! thee, on the heath? I am in the land of
strangers; who is my friend, but Aldo? Come from thy sounding
hills, O my best beloved!"
	Her eyes are turned towards the gate. She listens to the
rustling blast. She thinks it is Aldo's tread. Joy rises in her face!
But sorrow returns again, like a thin cloud on the moon. "Wilt
thou not return, my love? Let me behold the face of the hill. The
moon is in the east. Calm and bright is the breast of the lake!
When shall I behold his dogs, returning from the chase? When
shall I hear his voice, loud and distant on the wind? Come from
thy sounding hills, hunter of woody Cona!" His thin ghost
appeared, on a rock, like a watery beam of feeble light: when the
moon rushes sudden from between two clouds, and the midnight
shower is on the field. She followed the empty form over the
heath. She knew that her hero fell. I heard her approaching cries
on the wind, like the mournful voice of the breeze, when it sighs
on the grass of the cave
	She came. She found her hero! Her voice was heard no
more. Silent she rolled her eyes. She was pale and wildly sad!
Few were her days on Cona. She sunk into the tomb. Fingal
commanded his bards; they sung over the death of Lorma. The
daughters of Morven mourned her, for one day in the year, when
the dark winds of autumn returned!
	Son of the distant land! Thou dwellest in the field of fame!
O let the song arise, at times, in praise of those who fell! Let their
thin ghosts rejoice around thee; and the soul of Lorma come on a
feeble beam; when thou liest down to rest, and the moon looks
into thy cave. Then shalt thou see her lovely; but the tear is still
on her cheek!


<1> Comhal, the Father of Fingal, was slain in battle, against the
tribe of Morni, the very day that Fingal was born; so that he may
with propriety, be said to have been "born in the midst of battles."

<2> Sanctified girdles, till very lately were kept in many families
in the north of Scotland; they were bound about women in labor,
and were supposed to alleviate their pains, and to accelerate the
birth. They were impressed with several mystical figures, and the
ceremony of binding them about the woman's waist, was
accompanied with words and gestures, which showed the custom
to have come originally from the Druids.

<3> The kings of the world: the Roman emperors.



TEMORA.

AN EPIC POEM.


TEMORA -- BOOK I.


ARGUMENT.

Cairbar, the son of Borbar-duthul, lord of Atha, in Connaught,
the most Potent chief of the race of the Fir-bolg, having
murdered, at Temora, the royal palace, Cormac, the son of Artho,
the young king of Ireland, usurped the throne. Cormac was
lineally descended from Conar, the son of Trenmor, the great-
grandfather of Fingal, king of those Caledonians who inhabited
the western coast of Scotland. Fingal resented the behavior of
Cairbar, and resolved to pass over into Ireland with an army, to
re-establish the royal family on the Irish throne. Early
intelligence of his designs coming to Cairbar, he assembled some
of his tribes in Ulster, and at the same time ordered his brother
Cathmor to follow him speedily with an army from Temora. Such
was the situation of affairs when the Caledonian invaders
appeared on the coast of Ulster.
The poem opens in the morning. Cairbar is represented as retired
from the rest of the army, when one of his scouts brought him
news of the landing of Fingal. He assembles a council of his
chiefs. Foldath, the chief of Moma, haughtily despises the enemy;
and is reprimanded warmly by Malthos. Cairbar, after hearing
their debate, orders a feast to be prepared, to which, by his bard
Olla, he invites Oscar, the son of Ossian; resolving to pick a
quarrel with that hero, and so have some pretext for killing him.
Oscar came to the feast; the quarrel happened; the followers of
both fought, and Cairbar and Oscar fell by mutual wounds. The
noise of the battle reached Fingal's army. The king came on to
the relief of Oscar, and the Irish fell back to the army of Cathmor,
who was advanced to the banks of the river Lubar, on the heath
of Moi-lena. Fingal, after mourning over his grandson, ordered
Ullin, the chief of his bards, to carry his body to Morven, to be
there interred. Night coming on, Althan, the son of Conachar,
relates to the king the particulars of the murder of Cormac.
Fillan, the son of Fingal, is sent to observe the motions of
Cathmor, by night, which concludes the action of the first day.
The scene of this book is a plain, near the hill of Mora, which
rose on the borders of the heath of Moi-lena in Ulster.

	THE blue waves of Erin roll in light. The mountains are
covered with day. Trees shake their dusky heads in the breeze.
Gray torrents pour their noisy streams. Two green hills, with
aged oaks, surround a narrow plain. The blue course of a stream
is there. On its banks stood Cairbar of Atha. His spear supports
the king: the red eye of his fear is sad. Cormac rises in his soul,
with all his ghastly wounds. The gray form of the youth appears
in darkness. Blood pours from his airy side. Cairbar thrice threw
his spear on earth. Thrice he stroked his beard. His steps are
short. He often stops. He tosses his sinewy arms. He is like a
cloud in the desert, varying its form to every blast. The valleys are
sad around, and fear, by turns, the shower! The king at length
resumed his soul. He took his pointed spear. He turned his eye to
Moi-lena. The scouts of blue ocean came. They came with steps of
fear, and often looked behind. Cairbar knew that the mighty were
near. He called his gloomy chiefs.
	The sounding steps of his warriors came. They drew at
once their swords. There Morlath stood with darkened face.
Hidalla's long hair sighs in the wind. Red-haired Cormar bends
on his spear, and rolls his sidelong-looking eyes. Wild is the look
of Malthos, from beneath two shaggy brows. Foldath stands, like
an oozy rock, that covers its dark sides with foam. His spear is
like Slimora's fir, that meets the wind of heaven. His shield is
marked with the strokes of battle. His red eye despises danger.
These, and a thousand other chiefs, surrounded the king of Erin,
when the scout of ocean came, Mor-annal, from streamy Moi-
lena, His eyes hang forward from his face. His lips are trembling
pale!
	"Do the chiefs of Erin stand," he said, "silent as the grove of
evening? Stand they, like a silent wood, and Fingal on the coast?
Fingal, who is terrible in battle, the king of streamy Morven!"
"Hast thou seen the warrior?" said Cairbar with a sigh. "Are his
heroes many on the coast? Lifts he the spear of battle? or comes
the king in peace?" "In peace be comes not, king of Erin; I have
seen his forward spear. <1> It is a meteor of death. The blood of
thousands is on its steel. He came first to the shore, strong in the
gray hair of age. Full rose his sinewy limbs, as he strode in his
might. That sword is by his side, which gives no second wound.
His shield is terrible, like the bloody moon, ascending through a
storm. Then came Ossian, king of songs. Then Morni's son, the
first of men. Connal leaps forward on his spear. Dermid spreads
his dark-brown locks. Fillan bends his bow, the young hunter of
streamy Moruth. But who is that before them, like the terrible
course of a stream? It is the son of Ossian, bright between his
locks! His long hair falls on his back. His dark brows are half
enclosed in steel. His sword hangs loose on his side. His spear
glitters as he moves. I fled from his terrible eyes, king of high
Temora!"
	"Then fly, thou feeble man," said Foldath's gloomy wrath.
"Fly to the gray streams of thy land, son of the little soul! Have
not I seen that Oscar? I beheld the chief in war. He is of the
mighty in danger: but there are others who lift the spear. Erin 
has many sons as brave, king of Temora of groves. Let Foldath
meet him in his strength. Let me stop this mighty stream. My
spear is covered with blood. My shield is like the wall of Tura!"
	"Shall Foldath alone meet the foe?" replied the dark-browed
Malthos? "Are they not on our coast, like the waters of many
streams? Are not these the chiefs who vanquished Swaran, when
the sons of green Erin fled? Shall Foldath meet their bravest
hero? Foldath of the heart of pride! Take the strength of the 
people! and let Malthos come. My sword is red with slaughter,
but who has heard my words?"
	"Sons of green Erin," said Hidalla, "let not Fingal hear your
words. The foe might rejoice, and his arm be strong in the land.
Ye are brave, O warriors! Ye are tempests in war. Ye are like
storms, which meet the rocks without fear, and overturn the
woods! But let us move in our strength, slow as a gathered cloud!
Then shall the mighty tremble; the spear shall fall from the hand
of the valiant. We see the cloud of death, they will say, while
shadows fly over their face. Fingal will mourn in his age. He shall
behold his flying fame. The steps of his chiefs will cease in
Morven. The moss of years shall grow in Selma!"
	Cairbar heard their words in silence, like the cloud of a
shower: it stands dark on Cromla, till the lightning bursts its
side. The valley gleams with heaven's flame; the spirits of the
storm rejoice. So stood the silent king of Temora; at length his
words broke forth. "Spread the feast on Moi-lena. Let my hundred
bards attend. Thou red-haired Olla, take the harp of the king. Go
to Oscar, chief of swords. Bid Oscar to our joy. To-day we feast
and hear the song; to-morrow break the spears! Tell him that I
have raised the tomb of Cathol; that bards gave his friend to the
winds. Tell him that Cairbar has heard of his fame, at the stream
of resounding Carun. Cathmor, my brother, is not here. He is not
here with his thousands, and our arms are weak. Cathmor is a
foe to strife at the feast! His soul is bright as that sun! But
Cairbar must fight with Oscar, chiefs of woody Temora, His words
for Cathol were many! the wrath of Cairbar burns! He shall fall
on Moi-lena. My fame shall rise in blood!"
	Their faces brightened round with joy. They spread over
Moi-lena. The feast of shells is prepared. The songs of bards
arise. The chiefs of Selma heard their joy. We thought that
mighty Cathmor came. Cathmor, the friend of strangers! the
brother of red-haired Cairbar. Their souls were not the same. The
light of heaven was in the bosom of Cathmor. His towers rose on
the banks of Atha: seven paths led to his halls. Seven chiefs
stood on the paths, and called the stranger to the feast! But
Cathmor dwelt in the wood, to shun the voice of praise!
	Olla came with his songs. Oscar went to Cairbar's feast.
Three hundred warriors strode along Moi-lena of the streams.
The gray dogs bounded on the heath: their howling reached afar.
Fingal saw the departing hero. The soul of the king was sad. He
dreaded Cairbar's gloomy thoughts, amidst the feast of shells. My
son raised high the spear of Cormac. A hundred bards met him
with songs. Cairbar concealed, with smiles, the death that was
dark in his soul. The feast is spread. The shells resound. Joy
brightens the face of the host. But it was like the parting beam of
the sun, when he is to hide his red head in a storm!
	Cairbar rises in his arms. Darkness gathers on his brow.
The hundred harps cease at once. The clang of shields <2> is
heard. Far distant on the heath Olla raised a song of wo. My son
knew the sign of death; and rising seized his spear. "Oscar," said
the dark-red Cairbar, "I behold the spear of Erin. The spear of
Temora glitters in thy hand, son of woody Morven! It was the
pride of a hundred kings. The death of heroes of old. Yield it, son
of Ossian, yield it to car-borne Cairbar!"
	"Shall I yield," Oscar replied, "the gift of Erin's injured king;
the gift of fair-haired Cormac, when Oscar scattered his foes? I
came to Cormac's halls of joy, when Swaran fled from Fingal.
Gladness rose in the face of youth. He gave the spear of Temora.
Nor did he give it to the feeble: neither to the weak in soul. The
darkness of thy face is no storm to me: nor are thine eyes the
flame of death. Do I fear thy clanging shield? Tremble I at Olla's
song? No Cairbar, frighten the feeble; Oscar is a rock!"
	"Wilt thou not yield the spear?" replied the rising pride of
Cairbar." Are thy words so mighty, because Fingal is near? Fingal
with aged locks, from Morven's hundred groves! He has fought
with little men. But he must vanish before Cairbar, like a thin
pillar of mist before the winds of Atha!" --  "Were he who fought
with little men, near Atha's haughty chief, Atha's chief would
yield green Erin to avoid his rage! Speak not of the mighty, O
Cairbar! Turn thy sword on me. Our strength is equal: but Fingal
is renowned! the first of mortal men!"
	Their people saw the darkening chiefs. Their crowding
steps are heard. Their eyes roll in fire. A thousand swords are
half unsheathed. Red-haired Olla raised the song of battle. The
trembling joy of Oscar's soul arose: the wonted joy of his soul
when Fingal's horn was heard. Dark as the swelling wave of
ocean before the rising winds, when it bends its head near the
coast, came on the host of Cairbar!
	Daughter of Toscar! why that tear? He is not fallen yet.
Many were the deaths of his arm before my hero fell!
	Behold they fall before my son, like groves in the desert;
when an angry ghost rushes through night, and takes their green
heads in his hand! Morlath falls. Maronnan dies. Conachar
trembles in his blood. Cairbar shrinks before Oscar's sword! He
creeps in darkness behind a stone. He lifts the spear in secret, he
pierces my Oscar's side! He falls forward on his shield, his knee
sustains the chief. But still his spear is in his hand! See, gloomy
Cairbar falls! The steel pierced his forehead, and divided his red
hair behind. He lay like a shattered rock, which Cromla shakes
from its shaggy side, when the green-valleyed Erin shakes its
mountains from sea to sea!
	But never more shall Oscar rise! He leans on his bossy
shield. His spear is in his terrible hand. Erin's sons stand distant
and dark. Their shouts arise, like crowded streams. Moi-lena
echoes wide. Fingal heard the sound. He took the spear of Selma.
His steps are before us on the heath. He spoke the words of wo. "I
hear the noise of war. Young Oscar is alone. Rise, sons of
Morven: join the hero's sword!"
	Ossian rushed along the heath. Fillan bounded over Moi-
lena. Fingal strode in his strength. The light of his shield is
terrible. The sons of Erin saw it far distant. They trembled in
their souls. They knew that the wrath of the king arose: and they
foresaw their death. We first arrived. We fought. Erin's chiefs
withstood our rage. But when the king came, in the sound of his
course, what heart of steel could stand? Erin fled over Moi-lena.
Death pursued their flight. We saw Oscar on his shield. We saw
his blood around. Silence darkened on every face. Each turned
his back and wept. The king strove to hide his tears. His gray
beard whistled in the wind. He bends his head above the chief.
His words are mixed with sighs.
	"Art thou fallen, O Oscar! in the midst of thy course? the
heart of the aged beats over thee! He sees thy coming wars! The
wars which ought to come he sees! They are cut off from thy
fame! When shall joy dwell at Selma? When shall grief depart
from Morven? My sons fall by degrees: Fingal is the last of his
race. My fame begins to pass away. Mine age will be without
friends. I shall sit a gray cloud in my hall. I shall not hear the
return of a son, in his sounding arms. Weep, ye heroes of
Morven! never more shall Oscar rise!"
	And they did weep, O Fingal! Dear was the hero to their
souls. He went out to battle, and the foes vanished. He returned
in peace, amidst their joy. No father mourned his son slain in
youth: no brother his brother of love. They fell without tears, for
the chief of the people is low! Bran is howling at his feet: gloomy
Luath is sad; for he had often led them to the chase; to the
bounding roe of the desert!
	When Oscar saw his friends around, his heaving breast
arose. "The groans," he said, "of aged chiefs; the howling of my
dogs; the sudden bursts of the song of grief, have melted Oscar's
soul. My soul, that  never melted before. It was like the steel of
my sword. Ossian, carry me to my hills! Raise the stones of my
renown. Place the horn of a deer: place my sword by my side; The
torrent hereafter may raise the earth: the hunter may find the
steel, and say, 'This has been Oscar's sword, the pride of other
years!'" "Fallest thou, son of my fame? shall I never see thee,
Oscar? When others hear of their sons, shall I not hear of thee?
The moss is on thy four gray stones. The mournful wind is there.
The battle shall be fought without thee. Thou shalt not pursue
the dark-brown hinds. When the warrior returns from battles,
and tells of other lands; 'I have seen a tomb,' he will say, 'by the
roaring stream, the dark dwelling of a chief. He fell by car-borne
Oscar, the first of mortal men.' I, perhaps, shall hear his voice. A
beam of joy will rise in my soul."
	Night would have descended in sorrow, and morning
returned in the shadow of grief. Our chiefs would have stood, like
cold-dropping rocks on Moi-lena, and have forgot the war; did not
the king disperse his grief, and raise his mighty voice. The chiefs,
as new-wakened from dreams, lift up their heads around.
	"How long on Moi-lena shall we weep? How long pour in
Erin our tears? The mighty will not return. Oscar shall not rise in
his strength. The valiant must fall in their day, and be no more
known on their hills. Where are our fathers, O warriors! the
chiefs of the times of old? They have set, like stars that have
shone. We only hear the sound of their praise. But they were
renowned in their years: the terror of other times. Thus shall we
pass away, in the day of our fall. Then let us be renowned when
we may; and leave our fame behind us, like the last beams of the
sun, when he hides his red head in the west. The traveller
mourns his absence, thinking of the flame of his beams. Ullin,
my aged bard! take thou the ship of the king. Carry Oscar to
Selma of harps. Let the daughters of Morven weep. We must fight
in Erin, for the race of fallen Cormac. The days of my years begin
to fail. I feel the weakness of my arm. My fathers bend from their
clouds, to receive their gray-haired son. But before I go hence,
one beam of fame shall rise. My days shall end, as my years
began, in fame. My life shall be one stream of light to bards of
other times!"
	Ullin raised his white sails. The wind of the south came
forth. He bounded on the waves towards Selma. I remained in my
grief, but my words were not heard. The feast is spread on Moi-
lena. A hundred heroes reared the tomb of Cairbar. No song is
raised over the chief. His soul has been dark and bloody. The
bards remembered the fall of Cormac! what could they say in
Cairbar's praise?
	Night came rolling down. The light of a hundred oaks
arose. Fingal sat beneath a tree. Old Althan stood in the midst.
He told the tale of fallen Cormac. Althan the son of Conachar, the
friend of car-borne Cuthullin. He dwelt with Cormac in windy
Temora, when Semo's son fell at Lego's stream. The tale of Althan
was mournful. The tear was in his eye when he spoke.
	"The setting sun was yellow on Dora. Gray evening began
to descend. Temora's woods shook with the blast of the
inconstant wind. A cloud gathered in the west. A red star looked
from behind its edge. I stood in the wood alone. I saw a ghost on
the darkening air! His stride extended from hill to hill. His shield
was dim on his side. It was the son of Semo! I knew the warrior's
face. But he passed away in his blast; and all was dark around!
My soul was sad. I went to the hall of shells. A thousand lights
arose. The hundred bards had strung the harp. Cormac stood in
the midst, like the morning star, when it rejoices on the eastern
hill, and its young beams are bathed in showers. Bright and
silent is its progress aloft, but the cloud that shall hide it is near!
The sword of Artho was in the hand of the king. He looked with
joy on its polished studs; thrice he attempted to draw it, and
thrice he failed; his yellow locks are spread on his shoulders! his
cheeks of youth are red. I mourned over the beam of youth, for he
was soon to set!
	"'Althan!' He said with a smile, ' didst thou behold my
father? Heavy is the sword of the king; surely his arm was strong.
O that I were like him in battle, when the rage of his wrath arose!
then would I have met, with Cuthullin, the car-borne son of
Cantla! But years may come on, O Althan! and my arm be
strong. Hast thou heard of Semo's son, the ruler of high Temora?
he might have returned with his fame. He promised to return to-
night. My bards wait him with songs. My feast is spread in the
hall of kings.'
	"I heard Cormac in silence. My tears began to flow. I hid
them with my aged locks. The king perceived my grief. 'Son of 
Conachar!' he said, 'is the son of Semo low? Why bursts the sigh
in secret? Why descends the tear? Comes the car-borne Torlath?
Comes the sounds of red-haired Cairbar? They come! for I behold
thy grief. Mossy Tura's chief is low! Shall I not rush to battle? But
I cannot lift the spear! O had mine arm the strength of Cuthullin,
soon would Cairbar fly; the fame of my fathers would be renewed;
and the deeds of other times!'
	"He took his bow. The tears flow down from both his
sparkling eyes. Grief saddens round. The bards bend forward,
from their hundred harps. The lone blast touched their trembling
strings. <3> The sound  is sad and low! a voice is heard at a
distance, as of one in grief. It was Carril of other times, who came
from dark Slimora. He told of the fall of Cuthullin. He told of his
mighty deeds. The people were scattered round his tomb. Their
arms lay on the ground. They had forgot the war, for he their sire,
was seen no more!
	"'But who,' said the soft-voiced Carril, 'who come like
bounding roes? Their stature is like young trees in the valley,
growing in a shower! Soft and ruddy are their cheeks! Fearless
souls look forth from their eyes? Who but the sons of Usnoth,
chief of streamy Etha? The people rise on every side, like the
strength of an half-extinguished fire, when the winds come,
sudden, from the desert, on their rustling wings. Sudden glows
the dark brow of the hill; the passing mariner lags, on his winds.
The sound of Caithbat's shield was heard. The warriors saw
Cuthullin in Nathos. So rolled his sparkling eyes! his steps were
such on the heath. Battles are fought at Lego. The sword of
Nathos prevails. Soon shalt thou behold him in thy halls, king of
Temora of groves!'
	"'Soon may I behold the chief!' replied the blue-eyed king.
But my soul is sad for Cuthullin His voice was pleasant in mine
ear. Often have we moved, on Dora, to the chase of the dark-
brown hinds. His bow was unerring on the hills. He spoke of
mighty men. He told of the deeds of my fathers. I felt my rising
joy. But sit thou at thy feast, O Carril! I have often heard thy
voice. Sing in praise of Cuthullin. Sing of Nathos of Etha!'
	"Day rose on Temora, with all the beams of the east.
Crathin came to the hall, the son of old Gell ma. 'I behold,' he
said, 'a cloud in the desert, king of Erin! a cloud it seemed at
first, but now a crowd of men! One strides before them in his
strength. His red hair flies in the wind. His shield glitters to the
beam of the east. His spear is in his hand.' -- 'Call him to the
feast of Temora,' replied the brightening king. 'My hall is in the
house of strangers, son of generous Gell ma! It is perhaps the
chief of Etha, coming in all his renown. Hail, mighty stranger! art
thou of the friends of Cormac? But, Carril, he is dark and
unlovely. He draws his sword. Is that the son of Usnoth, bard of
the times of old?'
	"' It is not the son of Usnoth!' said Carril. 'It is Cairbar, thy
foe.' 'Why comest thou in thy arms to Temora? chief of the gloomy
brow. Let not thy sword rise against Cormac! 'Whither dost thou
turn thy speed?' he passed on in darkness.. He seized the hand of
the king. Cormac foresaw his death; the rage of his eyes arose.
'Retire, thou chief of Atha! Nathos comes with war. Thou art bold
in Cormac's hall, for his arm is weak.' The sword entered the side
of the king. He fell in the halls of his father. His fair hair is in the
dust. His blood is smoking round.
	"'Art thou fallen in thy halls?' said Carril, 'O son of noble
Artho! The shield of Cuthullin was not near. Nor the spear of thy
father. Mournful are the mountains of Erin, for the chief of the
people is low! Blest be thy soul, O Cormac! Thou art darkened in
thy youth!'"
	"His words came to the ears of Cairbar. He closed us in the
midst of darkness. He feared to stretch his sword to the bards,
though his soul was dark. Long we pined alone! At length the
noble Cathmor came. He heard our voice from the cave. He
turned the eye of his wrath on Cairbar.
	"'Brother of Cathmor,' he said, 'how long wilt thou pain my
soul? Thy heart is a rock. Thy thoughts are dark and bloody! But
thou art the brother of Cathmor; and Cathmor shall shine in thy
war. But my soul is not like thine; thou feeble hand in fight! The
light of my bosom is stained with thy deeds. Bards will not sing of
my renown; they may say, "Cathmor was brave, but he fought for
gloomy Cairbar. "They will pass over my tomb in silence. My fame
shall not be heard. Cairbar! loose the bards. They are the sons of
future times. Their voice shall be heard in other years; after the
kings of Temora have failed. We came forth at the words of the
chief. We saw him in his strength. He was like thy youth, O
Fingal! when thou first didst lift the spear. His face was like the
plain of the sun, when it is bright. No darkness travelled over his
brow. But he came with his thousands to aid the red-haired
Cairbar. Now he comes to revenge his death, O king of woody 
Morven!'
	"Let Cathmor come," replied the king," I love a foe so great.
His soul is bright. His arm is strong. His battles are full of fame.
But the little soul is a vapor that hovers round the marshy lake.
It never rises on the green hill, lest the winds should meet it
there. Its dwelling is in the cave: it sends forth the dart of death!
Our young heroes, O warriors! are like the renown of our fathers.
They fight in youth. They fall. Their names are in song. Fingal is
amid his darkening years. He must not fall, as an aged oak,
across a secret stream. Near it are the steps of the hunter, as it
lies beneath the wind. 'How has that tree fallen?' he says, and,
whistling, strides along. Raise the song of' joy, ye bards of
Morven! Let our souls forget the past. The red stars look on us
from the clouds, and silently descend. Soon shall the gray beam
of the morning rise, and show us the foes of Cormac. Fillan! my
son, take thou the spear of the king. Go to Mora's dark-brown
side. Let thine eyes travel over the heath. Observe the foes of
Fingal; observe the course of generous Cathmor. I hear a distant
sound, like falling rocks in the desert. But strike thou thy shield,
at times, that they may not come through night, and the fame of
Morven cease. I begin to be alone, my son. I dread the fall of my
renown!"
	The voice of bards arose. The king leaned on the shield of
Trenmor. Sleep descended on his eyes. His future battles arose in
his dreams. The host are sleeping around. Dark-haired Fillan
observes the foe. His steps are on the distant hill. We hear, at
time; his clanging shield.


<1> Mor-annal here alludes to the particular appearance of
Fingal's spear. If a man upon his first landing in a strange
country, kept the point of his spear forward, it denoted, in those
days, that he came in a hostile manner, and accordingly he was
treated as an enemy; if he kept the point behind him, it was a
token of friendship, and ht was immediately invited to the feast,
according to the hospitality of the times.


<2> The clang of shields: when a chief was determined to kill a
person already in his power, it was usual to signify that his death
was intended, by the pound of a shield struck with the blunt end
of a spear: at the same time that a bard at a distance raised the
death-song.

<3> The lone blast touched their trembling strings: that prophetic
sound mentioned in other poems, which the harps of the bards
emitted before the death of a person worthy and renowned.



TEMORA -- BOOK II


ARGUMENT.

This book opens, we may suppose, about midnight, with a
soliloquy of Ossian, who had retired from the rest of the army, to
mourn for his son Oscar. Upon hearing the noise of Cathmor's
army approaching, he went to find out his brother Fillan, who
kept the watch on the hill of Mora, in the front of Fingal's army.
In the conversation of the brothers, the episode of Conar, the son
of Trenmor, who was the first king of Ireland, is introduced,
which lays open the origin of the contests between the Gael and
the Fir-bolg, the two nations who first possessed themselves of
that island. Ossian kindles a fire on Mora: upon which Cathmor
desisted from the design he had formed of surprising the army of
the Caledonians. He calls a council of his chiefs: reprimands
Foldath for advising a night attack, as the Irish were so much
superior in number to the enemy. The bard Fonar introduces the
story of Crothar, the ancestor of the king, which throws further
light on the history of Ireland, and the original pretensions of the
family of Atha to the throne of that kingdom. The Irish chiefs lie
down to rest, and Cathmor himself undertakes the watch. In his
circuit round the army he is met by Ossian. The interview of the
two heroes is described. Cathmor obtains a promise from Ossian
to order a funeral elegy to be sung over the grave of Cairbar: it
being the opinion of the times, that the souls of the dead could
not be happy till their elegies were sung by a bard. Morning
comes. Cathmor and Ossian part; and the latter, casually
meeting with Carril the son of Kinfena, sends that bard, with a
funeral song, to the tomb of Cairbar.

	FATHER of heroes! O Trenmor! High dweller of eddying
winds! where the dark-red thunder marks the troubled clouds!
Open thou thy stormy halls. Let the bards of old be near. Let
them draw near with songs and their half viewless harps. No
dweller of misty valley comes! No hunter unknown at his
streams! It is the car-borne Oscar, from the field of war. Sudden
is thy change, my son, from what thou wert on dark Moi-lena!
The blast folds thee in its skirt, and rustles through the sky! Dost
thou not behold thy father, at the stream of night? The chiefs of
Morven sleep far distant. They have lost no son! But ye have lost
a hero, chiefs of resounding Morven! Who could equal his
strength, when battle rolled against his side, like the darkness of
crowded waters? Why this cloud on Ossian's soul? It ought to
burn in danger. Erin is near with her host. The king of Selma is
alone. Alone thou shalt not be, my father, while I can lift the
spear!
	I rose in all my arms. I rose and listened to the wind. The
shield of Fillan is not heard. I tremble for the son of Fingal. "Why
should the foe come by night? Why should the dark-haired
warrior fall?" Distant, sullen murmurs rise; like the noise of the
lake of Lego, when its waters shrink, in the days of frost, and all
its bursting ice resounds. The people of Lara look to heaven, and
foresee the storm! My steps are forward on the heath. The spear
of Oscar is in my hand? Red stars looked from high. I gleamed
along the night.
	I saw Fillan silent before me, bending forward from Mora's
rock. He heard the shout of the foe. The joy of his soul arose. He
heard my sounding tread, and turned his lifted spear. "Comest
thou, son of night, in peace? Or dost thou meet my wrath? The
foes of Fingal are mine. Speak, or fear my steel. I stand not, in
vain, the shield of Morven's race." "Never mayest thou stand in
vain, son of blue-eyed Clatho! Fingal begins to be alone.
Darkness gathers on the last of his days. Yet he has two sons
who ought to shine in war. Who ought to be two beams of light,
near the steps of his departure."
	"Son of Fingal," replied the youth, "it is not long since I
raised the spear. Few are the marks of my sword in war. But
Fillan's soul is fire! The chiefs of Bolga <1> crowd around the
shield of generous Cathmor. Their gathering is on the heath.
Shall my steps approach their host? I yielded to Oscar alone in
the strife of the race of Cona!"
	"Fillan, thou shalt not approach their host; nor fall before
thy fame is known. My name is heard in song; when needful, I
advance. From the skirts of night I shall view them over all their
gleaming tribes. Why, Fillan, didst thou speak of Oscar? Why
awake my sigh! I must forget the warrior, till the storm is rolled
away. Sadness ought not to dwell in danger, nor the tear in the
eye of war. Our fathers forgot their fallen sons, till the noise of
arms was past. Then sorrow returned to the tomb, and the song
of bards arose. The memory of those who fell quickly followed the
departure of war: when the tumult of battle is past, the soul in
silence melts away for the dead.
	"Conar was the brother of Trathal, first of mortal men. His
battles were on every coast. A thousand streams rolled down the
blood of. his foes. His fame filled green Erin, like a pleasant gale.
The nations gathered in Ullin, and they blessed the king; the king
of the race of their fathers, from the land of Selma.
	"The chiefs of the south were gathered, in the darkness of
their pride. In the horrid cave of Moma they mixed their secret 
words. Thither often, they said, the spirits of their fathers came;
showing their pale forms from the chinky rocks; reminding them
of the honor of Bolga. 'Why should Conar reign,' they said, 'the
son of resounding Morven?'
	"They came forth, like the streams of the desert, with the
roar of their hundred tribes. Cona was a rock before them:
broken, they rolled on every side. But often they returned, and
the sons of Selma fell. The king stood, among the tombs of his
warriors. He darkly bent his mournful face. His soul was rolled
into itself: and he had marked the place where he was to fall:
when Trathal came, in his strength, his brother from cloudy
Morven. Nor did he come alone. Colgar was at his side: Colgar the
son of the king and of white-bosomed Solin-corma.
	"As Trenmor, clothed with meteors, descends from the halls
of thunder, pouring the dark storm before him over the troubled
sea: so Colgar descended to battle, and wasted the echoing field.
His father rejoiced over the hero: but an arrow came! His tomb
was raised without a tear. The king was to revenge his son. He
lightened forward in battle, till Bolga yielded at her streams!
	"When peace returned to the land: when his blue waves
bore the king to Morven: then he remembered his son, and
poured the silent tear. Thrice did the bards, at the cave of
Furmono, call the soul of Colgar. They called him to the hills of
his land. He heard them in his mist. Trathal placed his sword in
the cave, that the spirit of his son might rejoice."
	"Colgar, son of Trathal," said Fillan, "thou wert renowned in
youth! but the king hath not marked my sword, bright streaming
on the field. I go forth with the crowd. I return without my fame.
But the foe approaches, Ossian! I hear their murmur on the
heath. The sound of their steps is like thunder, in the bosom of
the ground, when the rocking hills shake their groves, and not a
blast pours from the darkened sky!"
	Ossian turned sudden on his spear. He raised the flame of
an oak on high. I spread it large on Mora's wind. Cathmor stopt
in his course. Gleaming he stood, like a rock, on whose sides are
the wandering blasts; which seize its echoing streams, and clothe
them with ice. So stood the friend of strangers! The winds lift his
heavy locks. Thou art the tallest of the race of Erin, king of
streamy Atha!
	"First of bards" said Cathmor, "Fonar, call the chiefs of
Erin. Call red-haired Cormar: dark-browed Malthos: the sidelong-
looking gloom of Maronnan. Let the pride of Foldath appear. The
red-rolling eye of Turlotho. Nor let Hidalla be forgot; his voice, in
danger, is the sound of a shower, when it falls in the blasted vale,
near Atha's falling stream. Pleasant is its sound on the plain,
whilst broken thunder travels over the sky!"
	They came in their clanging arms. They bent forward to his
voice, as if a spirit of their fathers spoke from a cloud of night.
Dreadful shone they to the light, like the fall of the stream of
Bruno, <2> when the meteor lights it, before the nightly stranger.
Shuddering he stops in his journey, and looks up for the beam of
the morn!
	"Why delights Foldath," said the king, "to pour the blood of
foes by night? Fails his arm in battle, in the beams of day? Few
are the foes before us; why should we clothe us in shades? The
valiant delight to shine in the battles of their land! Thy counsel
was in vain, chief of Moma! The eyes of Morven do not sleep. They
are watchful as eagles on their mossy rocks. Let each collect
beneath his cloud the strength of his roaring tribe. To-morrow I
move, in light, to meet the foes of Bolga! Mighty was he that is
low, the race of Borbar-duthul!"
	"Not unmarked," said Foldath, "were my steps be. fare thy
race. In light, I met the foes of Cairbar. The warrior praised my
deeds. But his stone was raised without a tear! No bard sung
over Erin's king. Shall his foes rejoice along their mossy hills? No
they must not rejoice! He was the friend of Foldath. Our words
were mixed, in secret, in Moma's silent cave; whilst thou, a boy in
the field, pursued'st the thistle's beard. With Moma's sons I shall
rush abroad, and find the foe on his dusky hills. Fingal shall die
without his song, the gray-haired king of Selma."
	" Dost thou think, thou feeble man," replied Cathmor, half
enraged: "Dost thou think Fingal can fail, without his fame, in
Erin? Could the bards be silent at the tomb of Selma's king; the
song would burst in secret! the spirit of the king would rejoice! It
is when thou shalt fall, that the bard shall forget the song. Thou
art dark, chief of Moma, though thine arm is a tempest in war.
Do I forget the king of Erin, in his narrow house? My soul is not
lost to Cairbar, the brother of my love! I marked the bright beams
of joy which travelled over his cloudy mind, when I returned, with
fame, to Atha of the streams."
	Tall they removed, beneath the words of the king. Each to
his own dark tribe; where, humming, they rolled on the heath,
faint-glittering to the stars: like waves in a rocky bay, before the
nightly wind. Beneath an oak lay the chief of Atha. His shield, a
dusky round, hung high. Near him, against a rock, leaned the
fair stranger <3> of Inis-huna: that beam of light, with wandering
locks, from Lumon of the roes. At a distance rose the voice of
Fonar, with the deeds of the days of old. The song fails, at times,
in Lubar's growing roar.
	"Crothar," began the bard, first dwelt at Atha's mossy
stream! A thousand oaks, from the mountains, formed his
echoing hail. The gathering of the people
was there, around the feast of the blue-eyed king. But who,
among his chiefs, was like the stately Crothar? Warriors kindled
in his presence. The young sigh of the virgins rose. In Alnecma
<4> was the warrior honored: the first of the race of Bolga.
	"He pursued the chase in Ullin: on the moss-covered top of
Drumardo. From the wood looked the daughter of Cathmin, the
blue-rolling eye of Con-l ma. Her sigh rose in secret. She bent
her head, amidst her wandering locks. The moon looked in, at
night, and saw the white tossing of her arms; for she thought of
the mighty Crothar in the season of dreams.
	"Three days feasted Crothar with Cathmin. On the fourth
they awaked the hinds. Con-l ma moved to the chase, with all
her lovely steps. She met Crothar in the narrow path. The bow
fell at once from her hand. She turned her face away, and half
hid it with her locks. The love of Crothar rose. He brought the
white-bosomed maid to Atha. Bards raised the song in her
presence. Joy dwelt round the daughter of Cathmin.
	"The pride of Turloch rose, a youth who loved the white-
handed Con-l ma. He came, with battle, to Alnecma; to Atha of
the roes. Cormul went forth to the strife, the brother of car-borne
Crothar. He went forth, but he fell. The sigh of his people rose.
Silent and tall across the stream, came the darkening strength of
Crothar: he rolled the foe from Alnecma. He returned midst the
joy of Con-l ma.
	"Battle on battle comes. Blood is poured on blood. The
tombs of the valiant rise. Erin's clouds arc hung round with
ghosts. The chiefs of the South gathered round the echoing shield
of Crothar. He came, with death to the paths of the foe. The
virgins wept, by the streams of Ullin. They looked the mist of the
hill: no hunter descended from its folds. Silence darkened in the
land. Blasts sighed lonely on grassy tombs.
	"Descending like the eagle of heaven, with all his rustling
winds, when he forsakes the blast with joy, the son of Trenmor
came; Conar, arm of death, from Morven of the groves, lie poured
his might along green Erin. Death dimly strode behind his sword.
The sons of Bolga fled from his course, as from a stream, that,
bursting from the stormy desert, rolls the fields together, with all
their echoing woods Crothar met him in battle: but Alnecma's
warriors fled. The king of Atha slowly retired, in the grief of his
soul. He afterward shone in the south; but dim as the sun of
autumn, when he visits, in his robes of mist, Lara of dark
streams. 'The withered grass is covered with dew; the field,
though bright, is sad."
	"Why wakes the bard before me," said Cathmor, "the
memory of those who fled? Has some ghost, from his dusky
cloud, bent forward to thine ear; to frighten Cathmor from the
field, with the tales of old? Dwellers of the skirts of night, your
voice is but a blast to me; which takes the gray thistle's head,
and strews its beard on streams. Within my bosom is a voice.
Others hear it not. His soul forbids the king of Erin to shrink
back from war."
	Abashed, the bard sinks back on night; retired, lie bends
above a stream. His thoughts are on the days of Atha, when
Cathmor heard his song with joy. His tears came rolling down.
The winds are in his beard. Erin sleeps around. No sleep comes
down on Cathmor's eyes. Dark, in his soul, he saw the spirit of
low-laid Cairbar. He saw him, without his song, rolled in a blast
of night. He rose. His steps were round the host. He struck, at
times, his echoing shield. The sound reached Ossian's ear on
Mora's mossy brow.
	"Fillan," I said, "the foes advance. I hear the shield of war.
Stand thou in the narrow path. Ossian shall mark their course. if
over my fall the host should pour; then be thy buckler heard.
Awake the king on his heath, lest his fame should fly away." I
strode in all my rattling arms; wide bounding over a stream that
darkly winded in the field, before the king of Atha. Green Atha's
king with lifted spear, came forward on my course. Now would we
have mixed in horrid, fray, like two contending ghosts, that
bending forward from two clouds, send forth the roaring winds;
did not Ossian behold, on high, the helmet of Erin's kings. The
eagle's wing spread above it, rustling in the breeze. A red star
looked through the plumes. I stopt the lifted spear.
	"The helmet of kings is before me! Who art thou, son of
night? Shall Ossian's spear be renowned, when thou art lowly
laid?" At once he dropt the gleaming lance. Growing before me
seemed the form. He stretched his hand in night. He spoke the
words of kings.
	"Friend of the spirits of heroes, do I meet thee thus in
shades? I have wished for thy stately steps in Atha, in the days of
joy. Why should my spear now arise?' The sun must behold us,
Ossian, when we bend, gleaming in the strife. Future warriors
shall mark the place, and shuddering think of other years. They
shall mark it, like the haunt of ghosts, pleasant and dreadful to
the soul ."
	"Shall it then be forgot," I said, "where we meet in peace? Is
the remembrance of battles always pleasant to the soul? Do not
we behold, with joy, the place where our fathers feasted? But our
eyes are full of tears, on the fields of their war. This stone shall
rise with all its moss and speak to other years. 'Here Cathmor
and Ossian met; the warriors met in peace!' When thou, O stone,
shalt fail: when Lubar's stream shall roll away; then shall the
traveller come and bend here, perhaps, in rest. When the
darkened moon is rolled over his head, our shadowy forms may
come, and, mixing with his dreams, remind him of his place. But
why turnest thou so dark away; son of Borbar-duthul?"
	"Not forgot, son of Fingal, shall we ascend these winds. Our
deeds are streams of light, before the eyes of bards. But darkness
is rolled on Atha: the king is low without his song; still there was
a beam towards Cathmor, from his stormy soul; like the moon in
a cloud, amidst the dark-red course of thunder."
	"Son of Erin," I replied, "my wrath dwells not in his earth.
My hatred flies on eagle wings, from the foe that is low. He shall
hear the song of bards. Cairbar shall rejoice on his winds."
	Cathmor's swelling soul arose. He took the dagger from his
side, and placed it gleaming in my hand. He placed it in my hand,
with sighs, and silent strode away. Mine eyes followed his
departure. He dimly gleamed, like the form of a ghost, which
meets a traveller by night, on the dark-skirted heath. His words
are dark, like songs of old: with morning strides the unfinished
shade away!
	Who comes from Luba's vale? from the skirts of the
morning mist? The drops of heaven are on his head. His steps are
in the paths of the sad. It is Carril of other times. He comes from
Tura's silent cave. I behold it dark in the rock, through the thin
folds of mist. There, perhaps, Cuthullin sits, on the blast which
bends its trees. Pleasant is the song of the morning from the bard
of Erin.
	"The waves crowd away," said Carril." They crowd away for
fear. They hear the sound of thy coming forth, O sun! Terrible is
thy beauty, son of heaven, when death is descending on thy
locks: when thou rollest thy vapors before thee, over the blasted
host. But pleasant is thy beam to the hunter, sitting by the rock
in a storm, when thou showest thyself from the parted cloud, and
brightenest his dewy locks he looks down on the streamy vale,
and beholds the de. scent of roes! How long shalt thou rise on
war, and roll, a bloody shield, through heaven? I see the death of
heroes, dark wandering over thy face!"
	"Why wander the words of Carril?" I said. "Does the son of
heaven mourn? lie is unstained in his course, ever rejoicing in his
fire. Roll on, thou careless light. Thou too, perhaps, must fall.
Thy darkening hour may seize thee, struggling as thou rollest
through thy sky. But pleasant is the voice of the bard: pleasant to
Ossian's soul! It is like the shower of the morning, when it comes
through the rustling vale, on which the sun looks through mist,
just rising from his rocks. But this is no time, O bard! to sit
down, at the strife of song. Fingal is in arms on the vale. Thou
seest the flaming shield of the king. His face darkens between his
locks. He beholds the wide rolling of Erin. Does not Carril behold
that tomb, beside the roaring stream? Three stones lift their gray
heads, beneath a bending oak. A king is lowly laid! Give thou his
soul to the wind. He is the brother of Cathmor! Open his airy
hall! Let thy song be a stream of joy to Cairbar's darkened ghost!"



TEMORA -- BOOK III.


ARGUMENT.

Morning coming on, Fingal, after a speech to his people, devolved
the command on Gaul, the son of Morni; it being the custom of
the times, that the king should not engage, till the necessity of
affairs required his superior valor and conduct. The king and
Ossian retire to the hill of Cormul, which overlooked the field of
battle. The bards sing the war-song. The general conflict is
described. Gaul, the son of Morni, distinguishes himself; kills
Tur-lathon, chief of Moruth, and other chiefs of lesser name. On
the other hand, Foldath, who commanded the Irish army (for
Cathmor, after the example of Fingal, kept himself from battle,)
fights gallantly; kills Connal, chief of Dun-lora, and advances to
engage Gaul himself. Gaul, in the mean time, being wounded in
the hand, by a random arrow, is covered by Fillan the son of
Fingal, who performs prodigies of valor. Night comes on. The
horn of Fingal recalls his army. The bards meet them with a
congratulatory song, in which the praises of Gaul and Fillan are
particularly celebrated. The chiefs sit down at a feast; Fingal
misses Connal. The episode of Connal and Duth-caron is
introduced; which throws further light on the ancient history of
Ire land. Carril is despatched to raise the tomb of Connal. The
action of this book takes up the second day from the opening of
the poem.

	"Who is that at blue-streaming Lubar? Who, by the bending
hill of roes? Tall he leans on an oak torn from high, by nightly
winds. Who but Comhal's son, brightening in the last of his
fields? His gray hair is on the breeze. He half unsheathes the
sword of Luno. His eyes are turned to Moi-lena, to the dark
moving of foes. Dost thou hear the voice of the king? it is like the
bursting of a stream in the desert, when it comes, between its
echoing rocks, to the blasted field of the sun!
	Wide-skirted comes down the foe! Sons of woody Selma,
arise! Be ye like the rocks of our land, in whose brown sides are
the rolling of streams. A beam of joy comes on my soul. I see the
foe mighty before me. It is when he is feeble, that the sighs of
Fingal are heard: lest death should come without renown, and
darkness dwell on his tomb. Who shall lead the war, against the
host of Alnecma? It is only when danger grows, that my sword
shalt shine. Such was the custom, heretofore, of Trenmor the
ruler of winds! and thus descended to battle the blue-shielded
Trathal!"
	The chiefs bend towards the king. Each darkly seems to
claim the war. They tell, by halves, their mighty deeds. They turn
their eyes on Erin. But far before the rest the son of Morni
stands. Silent he stands, for who had not heard of the battles of
Gaul They rose within his soul. His hand, in secret, seized the
sword. The sword which he brought from Strumon, when the
strength of Morni failed. On his spear leans Fillan of Selma, in
the wandering of his locks. Thrice he raises his eyes to Fingal: his
voice thrice fails him as he speaks. My brother could not boast of
battles: at once he strides away. Bent over a distant stream he
stands: the tear hangs in his eye. He strikes, at times, the
thistle's head, with his inverted spear. Nor is he unseen of Fingal.
Sidelong he beholds his son. He beholds him with bursting joy;
and turns, amid his crowded soul. In silence turns the king
towards Mora of woods. He hides the big tear with his locks. At
length his voice is heard.
	"First of the sons of Morni! Thou rock that defiest the
storm! Lead thou my battle for the race of low-laid Cormac. No
boy's staff is thy spear: no harmless beam of light thy sword. Son
of Morni of steeds, behold the foe! Destroy! Fillan, observe the
chief! He is not calm in strife: nor burns he, heedless in battle.
My son, observe the chief! He is strong as Lubar's stream, but
never foams and roars. High on cloudy Mora, Fingal shall behold
the war. Stand, Ossian, near thy father, by the falling stream.
Raise the voice, O bards! Selma, move beneath the sound. It is
my latter field. Clothe it over with light."
	As the sudden rising of winds; or distant rolling of troubled
seas, when some dark ghost in wrath heaves the billows over an
isle: an isle the seat of mist on the deep, for many dark-brown
years! So terrible is the sound of the host, wide moving over the
field. Gaul is tall before them. The streams glitter within his
strides. The bards raise the song by his side. He strikes his shield
between. On the skirts of the blast the tuneful voices rise.
	"On Crona," said the bards, "there bursts a stream by
night. It swells in its own dark course, till morning's early beam.
Then comes it white from the hill, with the rocks and their
hundred groves. Far be my steps from Crona. Death is tumbling
there. Be ye a stream from Mora, sons of cloudy Morven!
	"Who rises, from his car, on Clutha? The hills are troubled
before the king! The dark woods echo round, and lighten at his
steel. See him amidst the foe, like Colgach's sportful ghost: when
he scatters the clouds and rides the eddying winds! It is Morni of
bounding steeds! Be like thy father, O Gaul!
	"Selma is opened wide. Bards take the trembling harps.
Ten youths bear the oak of the feast. A distant sunbeam marks
the hill. The dusky waves of the blast fly over the fields of grass.
Why art thou silent, O Selma? The king returns with all his fame.
Did not the battle roar? yet peaceful is his brow! It roared, and
Fingal overcame. Be like thy father, O Fillan!"
	They move beneath the song. High wave their arms, as
rushy fields beneath autumnal winds. On Mora stands the king
in arms. Mist flies round his buckler abroad; as aloft it hung on a
bough, on Cormul's mossy rock. In silence I stood by Fingal, and
turned my eyes on Cromla's wood: lest I should behold the host,
and rush amid my swelling soul. My foot is forward on the heath.
I glittered, tall in steel: like the falling stream of Tromo, which
nightly winds bind over with ice. The boy sees it on high gleaming
to the early beam: towards it he turns his ear, wonders why it is
so silent.
	Nor bent over a stream is Cathmor, like a youth in a
peaceful field. Wide he drew forward the war, a dark and troubled
wave. But when he beheld Fingal on Mora, his generous pride
arose. "Shall the chief of Atha fight, and no king in the field?
Foldath, lead my people forth, thou art a beam of fire."
	Forth issues Foldath of Moma, like a cloud, the robe of
ghosts. He drew his sword, a flame from his side. He bade the
battle move. The tribes, like ridgy waves, dark pour their strength
around. Haughty is his stride before them. His red eye rolls in
wrath. He calls Cormul, chief of Dun-ratho; and his words were
heard.
	"Cormul, thou beholdest that path. It winds green behind
the foe. Place thy people there; lest Selma should escape from my
sword. Bards of green-valleyed Erin, let no voice of yours arise.
The sons of Morven must fall without song. They are the foes of
Cairbar. Hereafter shall the traveller meet their dark, thick mist,
on Lena, where it wanders with their ghosts, beside the reedy
lake. Never shall they rise, without song, to the dwelling of
winds."
	Cormul darkened as he went. Behind him rushed his tribe.
They sunk beyond the rock. Gaul spoke to Fillan of Selma; as his
eye pursued the course of the dark-eyed chief of Dun-ratho.
"Thou beholdest the steps of Cormul! Let thine arm be strong!
When he is low, son of Fingal, remember Gaul in war. Here I fall
forward into baffle, amid the ridge of shields!"
	The sign of death ascends: the dreadful sound of Morni's
shield. Gaul pours his voice between. Fingal rises on Mora. He
saw them from wing to wing, bending at once in strife. Gleaming
on his own dark hill, stood Cathmor, of streamy Atha. The kings
were like two spirits of heaven, standing each on his gloomy
cloud: when they pour abroad the winds, and lift the roaring
seas. The blue tumbling of waves is before them, marked with the
paths of whales. They themselves are calm and bright. The gale
lifts slowly their locks of mist.
	What beam of light hangs high in air? What beam but
Morni's dreadful sword? Death is strewed on thy paths, O Gaul!
Thou foldest them together in thy rage. Like a young oak falls
Tur-lathon, with his branches round him. His high-bosomed
spouse stretches her white arms, in dreams, to the returning
chief, as she sleeps by gurgling Moruth, in her disordered locks.
It is his ghost, Oichoma. The chief is lowly laid. Hearken not to
the winds for Tur-lathon's echoing shield. It is pierced, by his
streams. Its sound is passed away.
	Not peaceful is the hand of Foldath. He winds his course in
blood. Connal met him in fight. They mixed their clanging steel.
Why should mine eyes behold them? Connal, thy locks are gray!
Thou wert the friend of strangers, at the moss-covered rock of
Dun-Ion. When the skies were rolled together: then thy feast was
spread. The stranger heard the winds without; and rejoiced at thy
burning oak. Why, son of Duth-caron, art thou laid in blood? the
blasted tree bends above thee. Thy shield lies broken near. Thy
blood mixes with the stream, thou breaker of the shields!
	Ossian took the spear, in his wrath. But Gaul rushed
forward on Foldath. The feeble pass by his side: his rage is
turned on Moma's chief. Now they had raised their deathful
spears: unseen an arrow came. it pierced the hand of Gaul. His
steel fell sounding to earth. Young Fillan came, with Cormul's
shield! lie stretched it large before the chief. Foldath sent his
shouts abroad, and kindled all the field: as a blast that lifts the
wide-winged flame over Lumon's echoing groves.
	"Son of blue-eyed Clatho," said Gaul, "O Fillan! thou art a
beam from heaven; that, coming on the troubled deep, binds up
the tempest's wing. Cormul is fallen before thee. Early art thou in
the fame of thy fathers. Rush not too far, my hero. I cannot lift
the spear to aid. I stand harmless in battle: but my voice shall be
poured abroad. The sons of Selma shall hear, and remember my
former deeds."
	His terrible voice rose on the wind. The host bends forward
in fight. Often had they heard him at Strumon, when he called
them to the chase of the hinds. He stands tall amid the war, as
an oak in the skins of a storm, which now is clothed on high, in
mist: then shows its broad waving head. The musing hunter lifts
his eye, from his own rushy field!
	My soul pursues thee, O Fillan! through the path of thy
fame. Thou rollest the foe before thee. Now Foldath, perhaps, may
fly: but night comes down with its clouds. Cathmor's horn is
heard on high. The sons of Selma hear the voice of Fingal, from
Mora's gathered mist. The bards pour their song, like den, on the
returning war.
	"Who comes from Strumon," they said, "amid her
wandering locks? She is mournful in her steps, and lifts her blue
eyes towards Erin. Why art thou sad, Evir-choma? Who is like
thy chief in renown? He descended dreadful to battle; he returns,
like a light from a cloud. He raised the sword in wrath: they
shrunk before blue-shielded Gaul!
	"Joy, like the rustling gale, comes on the soul of the king.
He remembers the battles of old; the days wherein his fathers
fought. The days of old return on Fingal's mind, as he beholds
the renown of his sons. As the sun rejoices, from his cloud, over
the tree his beams have raised, as it shades its lonely head on
the heath; so joyful is the king over Fillan!
	"As the rolling of thunder on hills when Lara's fields are
still and dark, such are the steps of Selma, pleasant and dreadful
to the ear. They return with their sound, like eagles to their dark-
browed rock, after the prey is torn on the field, the dun sons of
the bounding hind. Your fathers rejoice from their clouds, sons of
streamy Selma!"
	Such was the nightly voice of bards, on Mora of the hinds.
A flame rose, from a hundred oaks, which winds had torn from
Cormul's steep. The feast is spread in the midst; around sat the
gleaming chiefs. Fingal is there in his strength. The eagle wing of
his helmet sounds. The rustling blasts of the west unequal rush
through night. Long looks the king in silence round; at length his
words are heard.
	"My soul feels a want in our joy. I behold a breach among
my friends. The head of one tree is low. The squally wind pours in
on Selma. Where is the chief of Dun-lora? Ought Connal to be
forgot at the feast? When did he forget the stranger, in the midst
of his echoing hall? Ye are silent in my presence! Connal is then
no more! Joy meet thee, O warrior! like a stream of light. Swift be
thy course to thy fathers, along the roaring winds. Ossian, thy
soul is fire; kindle the memory of the king. Awake the, battles of
Connal, when first he shone in war. The locks of Connal were
gray. His days of youth were mixed with mine.. In one day Duth-
caron first strung bows against the roes of Dun-lora."
	"Many," I said, "are our paths to battle in green valleyed
Erin. Often did our sails arise, over tho blue tumbling waves;
when we came in other days, to aid the race of Cona. The strife
roared once in Alnecma, at the foam-covered streams of Duth-
ula. With Cormac descended to battle Duth-caron, from cloudy
Selma. Nor descended Duth-caron alone; his son was by his side,
the long-haired youth of Connal, lifting the first of his spears.
Thou didst command them, O Fingal! to aid the king of Erin.
	"Like the bursting strength of ocean, the sons of Bolga
rushed to war. Colc-ulla was before them, the chief of blue
stream Atha. The battle was mixed on the plain. Cormac shone in
his own strife, bright as the forms of his fathers. But, far before
the rest, Duth-caron hewed down the foe. Nor slept the arm of
Connal by his father's side. Colc-ulla prevailed on the plain: like
scattered mist fled the people of Cormac.
	"Then rose the sword of Duth-caron, and the steel of broad-
shielded Connal. They shaded their flying friends, like two rocks
with their heads of pine. Night came down on Duth-ula; silent
strode the chiefs over the field. A mountain-stream roared across
the path, nor could Duth-caron bound over its course. 'Why
stands my father?' said Connal, 'I hear the rushing foe.'
	"'Fly, Connal,' he said. 'Thy father's strength begins to fail. I
come wounded from battle. Here let me rest in night.' 'But thou
shalt not remain alone,' said Connal's bursting sigh. 'My shield is
an eagle's wing to cover the king of Dun-lora.' He bends dark
above his father. The mighty Duth-caron dies!
	"Day rose, and night returned. No lonely ban appeared,
deep musing on the heath: and could Connal leave the tomb of
his father, till lie should receive his fame? He bent the bow
against the roes of Duth-ula. He spread the lonely feast. Seven
nights he laid his head on the tomb, and saw his father in his
dreams. lie saw him rolled, dark in a blast, like the vapor of reedy
Lego. At length the steps of Colgan came, the bard of high
Temora. Duth-caron received his fame and brightened, as he rose
on the wind."
	"Pleasant to the ear," said Fingal, "is the praise of the kings
of men; when their bows are strong in battle; when they soften at
the sight of the sad. Thus let my name be renowned, when the
bards shall lighten my rising soul. Carril, son of Kinfena! take the
bards, and raise a tomb. To-night let Connal dwell within his
narrow house. Let not the soul of the valiant wander on the
winds. Faint glimmers the moon at Moi-lena, through the broad-
headed groves of the hill! Raise stones, beneath its beam, to all
the fallen in war. Though no chiefs were they, yet their hands
were strong in fight. They were my rock in danger: the mountain
from which I spread my eagle wings. Thence am I renowned.
Carril, forget not the low!"
	Loud, at once, from the hundred bards, rose the song of
the tomb. Carril strode before them; they are the murmur of
streams behind his steps. Silence dwells in the vales of Moi-lena,
where each, with its owl: dark rib, is winding between the hills. I
heard the voice of the bards, lessening, as they moved along. I
leaned forward from my shield, and felt the kindling of my soul.
Half formed, the words of my song burst forth upon the wind. So
hears a tree, on the vale, the voice of spring around. It pours its
green leaves to the sun. it shakes its lonely head. The hum of the
mountain bee is near it; the hunter sees it with joy, from the
blasted heath.
	Young Fillan at a distance stood. His helmet lay glittering
on the ground. His dark hair is loose to the blast. A beam of light
is Clatho's son! He heard the words of the king with joy. He
leaned forward on his spear.
	"My son," said car-borne Fingal, "I saw thy deeds, and my
soul was glad." "The fame of our fathers," I said, "bursts from its
gathering cloud. Thou art brave, son of Clatho! but headlong in
the strife. So did not Fingal advance, though he never feared a
foe. Let thy people be a ridge behind. They are thy strength in the
field. Then shalt thou be long renowned, and behold the tombs of
the old. The memory of the past returns, my deeds in other years:
when first I descended from ocean on the green-valleyed isle."
	We bend towards the voice of the king. The moon looks
abroad from her cloud. The gray-skirted mist is near: the dwelling
of the ghosts!

<1> The southern parts of Ireland went, for some time, under the
name of Bolga, from the Fir-bolg or Belgae of Britain, who settled
a colony there. "Bolg" signifies a "quiver," from which proceeds
"Fir-bolg," i. e., "bowmen:" so called from their using bows more
than any of the neighboring nations.

<2> Bruno was a place of worship, (Fing. b. 6.) in Craca, which is
supposed to be one of the isles of Shetland


<3> By "the stranger of Inis-huna," is meant Sul-malla. -- B iv.

<4> Alnecma, or Alnecmacht, was the ancient name of
Connaught. Ullin is still the Irish name of the province of Ulster



TEMORA -- BOOK IV


ARGUMENT

The second night continues. Fingal relates, at the feast, his own
first expedition into Ireland, and his marriage with Ros-cranna,
the daughter of Cormac, king of that island. The Irish chiefs
convene in the presence of Cathmor. The situation of the king
described. The story of Sul-malla, the daughter of Conmor, king
of Inis-huna, who, in the disguise of a young warrior, hath
followed Cathmor to the war. The sullen behavior of Foldath, who
had commanded in the battle of the preceding day, renews the
difference between him and Malthos: but Cathmor, interposing,
ends it. The chiefs feast, and hear the song of Fonar the bard.
Cathmor returns to rest, at a distance from the army. The ghost
of his brother Cairbar appears to him in a dream; and obscurely
foretells the issue of the war. The soliloquy of the king. He
discovers Sul-malla. Morning comes. Her soliloquy closes the
book.

	"BENEATH an oak," said the king, "I sat on Selma's
streamy rock, when Connal rose, from the sea, with the broken
spear of Duth-caron. Far distant stood the youth. He turned
away his eyes. He remembered the steps of his father, on his own
green hill. I darkened in my place. Dusky thoughts flew over my
soul. The kings of Erin rose before me. I half unsheathed the
sword. Slowly approached the chiefs. They lifted up their silent
eyes. Like a ridge of clouds, they wait for the bursting forth of my
voice. My voice was, to them, a wind from heaven, to roll the mist
away.
	"I bade my white sails to rise, before the roar of Cona's
wind. Three hundred youths looked, from their waves, on Fingal's
bossy shield. High on the mast it hung, and marked the dark-
blue sea. But when night came down, I struck, at times, the
warning boss: I struck, and looked on high, for fiery-haired Ul-
erin. <1> Nor absent was the star of heaven. It travelled red
between the clouds. I pursued the lovely beam, on the faint-
gleaming deep. With morning, Erin rose in mist. We came into
the bay of Moi-lena, where its blue waters tumbled, in the bosom
of echoing woods. Here Cormac, in his secret halls, avoids the
strength of Colc-ulla. Nor he alone, avoids the foe. The blue eye of
Ros-cranna is there: Ros-cranna, white-handed maid, the
daughter of the king!
	"Gray, on his pointless spear, came forth the aged steps of
Cormac. He smiled from his waving locks; but grief was in his
soul. He saw us few before him, and his sigh arose. 'I see the
arms of Trenmor,' he said; 'and these are the steps of the king!
Fingal! thou art a beam of light to Cormac's darkened soul! Early
is thy fame, my son: but strong are the foes of Erin. They are like
the roar of streams in the land, son of car-borne Comhal!' 'Yet
they may be rolled away,' I said, in my rising soul. 'We are not of
the race of the feeble, king of blue-shielded hosts! Why should
fear come amongst us, like a ghost of night? The soul of the
valiant grows when foes increase in the field. Roll no darkness,
king of Erin, on the young in war!'
	"The bursting tears of the king came down. He seized my
hand in silence. 'Race of the daring Trenmor!' at length he said, 'I
roll no cloud before thee. Thou burnest in the fire of thy fathers. I
behold thy fame. It marks thy course in battle, like a stream of
light. But wait the coming of Cairbar; my so must join thy sword.
He calls the sons of Erin from all their distant streams.'
	"We came to the hall of the king, where it rose in the midst
of rocks, on whose dark sides were the marks of streams of old.
Broad oaks bend around with their moss. The thick birch is
waving near. Half hid, in her shadowy grove, Ros-cranna raises
the song. Her white hands move on the harp. I beheld her blues
rolling eyes. She was like a spirit of heaven half folded in the skirt
of a cloud!
	Three days we feasted at Moi-lena. She rises bright in my
troubled soul. Cormac beheld me dark. He gave the white-
bosomed maid. She comes with bending eye, amid the wandering
of her heavy locks. She came! Straight the battle roared. Colc-ulla
appeared: I took my spear. My sword rose, with my people
against the ridgy foe. Alnecma fled. Colc-ulla fell. Fingal returned
with fame.
	"Renowned is he, O Fillan, who fights in the strength of his
host. The bard pursues his steps through the land of the foe. But
he who fights alone, few are his deeds to other times! He shines
to-day, a mighty light. To-morrow he is low. One song contains
his fame. His name is one dark field. He is forgot; but where his
tomb sends forth the tufted grass."
	Such are the words of Fingal, on Mora  of the roes. Three
bards, from the rock of Cormul, pour down the pleasing song.
Sleep descends in the sound, on the broad-skirted host. Carril
returned with the bards, from the tomb of Dunlora's chief. The
voice of morning shall not come to the dusky bed of Duth-caron.
No more shalt thou hear the tread of roes around thy narrow
house!
	As roll the troubled clouds, around a meteor of night, when
they brighten their sides with its light along the heaving sea; so
gathers Erin around the gleaming form of Cathmor. He, tall in the
midst, careless lifts, at times, his spear: as swells, or falls the
sound of Fonar's distant harp. Near him leaned, against a rock,
Sul-malla of blue eyes, the white-bosomed daughter of Conmor,
king of Inis-huna. To his aid came blue-shielded Cathmor, and
rolled his foes away. Sul-malla beheld him stately in the hail of
feasts. Nor careless rolled the eyes of Cathmor on the long-haired
maid!
	''The third day arose, when Fithil came, from Erin of the
streams. He told of the lifting up of the shield in Selma: he told of
the danger of Cairbar. Cathmor raised the sail at Cluba; but the
winds were in other lands. Three days he remained on the coast,
and turned his eyes on Conmor's halls. He remembered the
daughter of strangers, and his sigh arose. Now when the winds
awaked the wave: from the hill came a youth in arms; to lift the
sword with Cathmor, in his echoing fields. It was the white-
armed Sul-malla. Secret she dwelt beneath her helmet. Her steps
were in the path of the king: on him her blue eyes rolled with joy,
when he lay by his rolling streams: But Cathmor thought that on
Lumon she still pursued the roes. He thought, that fair on a rock,
she stretched her white hand to the wind; to feel its course from
Erin, the green dwelling of her love. He had promised to return,
with his white-bosomed sails. The maid is near thee, O Cathmor:
leaning on her rock.
	The tall forms of the chiefs stand around; all but dark-
browed Foldath. He leaned against a distant tree, rolled into his
haughty soul. His bushy hair whistles in the wind. At times,
bursts the hum of a song. He struck the tree at length, in wrath;
and rushed before the king! Calm and stately, to the beam of the
oak, arose the form of young Hidalla. His hair falls round his
blushing cheek, in the wreaths of waving light. Soft was his voice
in Clonra, in the valley of his fathers. Soft was his voice when he
touched the harp, in the hall near his roaring stream!
	"King of Erin," said Hidalla, "now is the time to feast. Bid
the voice of bards arise. Bid them roll the night away. The soul
returns, from song, more terrible to war. Darkness settles on
Erin. From hill to hill bend the skirted clouds. Far and gray, on
the heath, the dreadful strides of ghosts are seen: the ghosts of
those who fell bend forward to their song. Bid, O Cathmor! the
harps to rise, to brighten the dead, on their wandering blasts."
	"Be all the dead forgot," said Foldath's bursting wrath. "Did
not I fail in the field? Shall I then hear the song? Yet was not my
course harmless in war. Blood was a stream around my steps.
But the feeble were behind me. 'The foe has escaped from my
sword. In Conra's vale  touch thou the harp. Let Dura answer to
the voice of Hidalla. Let some maid look, from the wood, on thy
long yellow locks. Fly from Lubar's echoing plain. This is the field
of heroes!"
	"King of Erin," Malthos said, "it is thine to lead in war.
Thou art a fire to our eyes, on the dark-brown field. Like a blast
thou hast passed over hosts. Thou hast laid them low in blood.
But who has heard thy words returning from the field? The
wrathful delight in death; their remembrance rests on the
wounds of their spear. Strife is folded in their thoughts: their
words are ever heard. Thy course, chief of Moma, was like a
troubled stream. The dead were rolled on thy path: but others
also lift the spear. We were not feeble behind thee: but the foe
was strong."
	Cathmor beheld the rising rage and bending forward of
either chief: for, half unsheathed, they held their swords, and
rolled their silent eyes. Now would they have mixed in horrid fray,
had not the wrath of Cathmor burned. He drew his sword: it
gleamed through night, to the high-flaming oak! "Sons of pride,"
said the king," allay your swelling souls. Retire in night. Why
should my rage arise? Should I contend with both in arms! It is
no time for strife! Retire, ye clouds, at my feast. Awake my soul
no more."
	They sunk from the king on either side; like two columns of
morning mist, when the sun rises, between them, on his
glittering rocks. Dark is their rolling on either side: each towards
its reedy pool!
	Silent sat the chiefs at the feast. They look, at times, on
Atha's king, where he strode, on his rock, amid his settling soul.
The host lie along the field. Sleep descends on Moi-lena. The
voice of Fonar ascends alone, beneath his distant tree. It ascends
in the praise of Cathmor, son of Larthon of Lumon. But Cathmor
did not hear his praise. He lay at the roar of a stream. The
rustling breeze of night flew over his whistling locks.
	His brother came to his dreams, half seen from his low-
hung cloud. Joy rose darkly in his face. He had heard the song of
Carril . <2> A blast sustained his dark-skirted cloud: which he
seized in the bosom of night, as he rose, with his fame, towards
his airy hail. Half mixed with the noise of the stream, he poured
his feeble words.
	"Joy meet the soul of Cathmor. His voice was heard on Moi-
lena. The bard gave his song to Cairbar. He travels on the wind.
My form is in my father's hall, like the gliding of a terrible light,
which darts across the desert, in a stormy night. No bard shall be
wanting at thy tomb when thou art lowly laid. The sons of song
love the valiant. Cathmor, thy name is a pleasant gale. The
mournful sounds arise! On Lubar's field there is a voice! Louder
still, ye shadowy ghosts! The dead were full of fame! Shrilly swells
the feeble sound. The rougher blast alone is heard! Aid soon is
Cathmor low!" Rolled into himself he flew, wide on the bosom of
winds. The old oak felt his departure, and shook its whistling
head. Cathmor starts from rest. He takes his deathful spear. He
lifts his eyes around. He sees but dark-skirted night.
	"It was the voice of the king," he said. "But now his form is
gone. Unmarked is your path in the air, ye children of the night.
Often, like a reflected beam, are ye seen in the desert wild: but ye
retire in your blasts, before our steps approach. Go, then, ye
feeble race! Knowledge with you there is none! Your joys are
weak, and like the dreams of our rest, or the light winged
thought, that flies across the soul. Shall Cathmor soon be low?
Darkly laid in his narrow house! Where no morning comes, with
her half-opened eyes? Away, thou shade! to fight is mine! All
further thought away! I rush forth on eagles' wings, to seize my
beam of flame. In the lonely vale of streams, abides the narrow
soul. Years roll on, seasons return, but he is still unknown. In a
blast comes cloudy death, and lays his gray head low. His ghost
is folded in the vapor of the fenny field. Its course is never on
hills, nor mossy vales of wind. So shall not Cathmor depart. No
boy in the field was he, who only marks the bed of roes, upon the
echoing hills. My issuing forth was with kings. My joy in dreadful
plains: where broken hosts are rolled away, like seas before the
wind."
	So spoke the king of Alnecma, brightening in his rising
soul. Valor, like a pleasant flame, is gleaming within his breast.
Stately is his stride on the heath! The beam of east is poured
around. He saw his gray host on the field, wide spreading their
ridges in light. He rejoiced, like a spirit of heaven, whose steps
came forth on the seas, when he beholds them peaceful round,
and all the winds are laid. But soon he awakes the waves, and
rolls them large to some echoing shore.
	On the rushy bank of a stream slept the daughter of Inis-
huna. The helmet had fallen from her head. Her dreams were in
the lands of her fathers. There morning is on the field. Gray
streams leap down from the rocks. The breezes, in shadowy
waves, fly over the rushy fields. There is the sound that prepares
for the chase. There the moving of warriors from the hall. But tall
above the rest is seen the hero of streamy Atha. He bends his eye
of love on Sul-malla, from his stately steps. She turns, with pride,
her face away, and careless bends the bow.
	Such were the dreams of the maid when Cathmor of Atha
came. He saw her fair face before him, in the midst of her
wandering locks. He knew the maid of Lumon. What should
Cathmor do? His sighs arise. His tears come down. But straight
he turns away. "This is no time, king of Atha, to awake thy secret
soul. The battle is rolled before thee like a troubled stream."
	He struck that warning boss, <3> wherein dwelt the voice
of war. Erin rose around him, like the sound of eagle wing. Sul-
malla started from sleep, in her disordered locks. She seized the
helmet from earth. She trembled in her place. "Why should they
know in Erin of the daughter of Inis-huna?" She remembered the
race of kings. The pride of her soul arose! Her steps are behind a
rock, by the blue-winding stream of a vale; where dwelt the dark-
brown hind ere yet the war arose, thither came the voice of
Cathmor, at times, to Sul-malla's ear. Her soul is darkly sad. She
pours her words on wind.
	"The dreams of Inis-huna departed. They are dispersed
from my soul. I hear not the chase in my land. I am concealed in
the skirt of war. I look forth from my cloud. No beam appears to
light my path. I behold my warriors low; for the broad-shielded
king is near. He that overcomes in danger, Fingal, from Selma of
spears! Spirit of departed Conmor! are thy steps on the bosom of
winds? Comest thou, at times, to other lands, father of sad Sul-
malla? Thou dost come! I have heard thy voice at night; while yet
I rose on the wave to Erin of the streams. The ghosts of fathers,
they say, call away the souls of their race, while they behold them
lonely in the midst of wo. Call me, my father, away! When
Cathmor is low on earth, then shall Sul-malla be lonely in the
midst of wo!


<1> Ul-erin, "the guide to Ireland," was a star known by that
name in the days of Fingal

<2> The song of Carril: the funeral elegy at the tomb of Cairbar.

<3> He struck that warning boss: in order to understand this
passage, it is necessary to look to the description of Cathmor's
shield in the seventh book. This shield had seven principal
bosses, the sound of each of which, when struck with a spear,
conveyed a particular order from the king to his tribes. The
sound of one of them, as here, was the signal for the army to
assemble.



TEMORA -- BOOK V


ARGUMENT.

The poet, after a short address to the harp of Cona, describes the
arrangement of both armies on either side of the river Lubar.
Fingal gives the command to Fillan; but at the same time orders
Gaul, the son of Morni, who had been wounded in the hand in
the preceding battle, to assist him with his counsel. The army of
the Fir-bolg is commanded by Foldath. The general onset is
described. the great actions of Fillan. He kills Rothmar and
Culmin. But when Fillan conquers in one wing, Foldath presses
hard on the other. He wounds Dermid, the son of Duthno, and
puts the whole wing to flight. Dermid deliberates with himself.
and, at last, resolves to put a stop to the progress of Foldath, by
engaging him in single combat. When the two chiefs were
approaching towards one another, Fillan came suddenly to the
relief of Dermid; engaged Foldath, and killed him. The behavior of
Malthos towards the fallen Foldath. Fillan puts the whole army,
of the Fir-bolg to flight. The book closes with an address to
Clatho, the mother of that hero.


	THOU dweller between the shields that hang, on high, in
Ossian's hall! Descend from thy place, O harp, and let me hear
thy voice! Son of Alpin, strike the string. Thou must awake the 
soul of the bard. The murmur of Lora's stream has rolled the tale
away. I stand in the cloud of years. Few are its openings towards
the' past; and when the vision comes, it is but dim and dark. I
hear thee, harp of Selma! my soul returns like a breeze, which
the sun brings back to the vale, where dwelt the lazy mist.
	Lubar is bright before me in the windings of its vale. On
either side, on their hills, arise the tall forms of the kings. Their
people are poured around them, bending forward to their words:
as if their fathers spoke, descending from the winds. But they
themselves are like two rocks in the midst; each with its dark
head of pines, when they are seen in the desert, above low-sailing
mist. High on their face are streams which spread their foam on
blasts of wind!
	Beneath the voice of Cathmor pours Erin, like the sound of
flame. Wide they come down to Lubar. Before them is the stride
of Foldath. But Cathmor retires to his hill, beneath his bending
oak. The tumbling of a stream is near the king. He lifts, at times,
his gleaming spear. It is a flame to his people, in the midst of
war. Near him stands the daughter of Conmor, leaning on a rock.
She did not rejoice at the strife. Her soul delighted not in blood. A
valley spreads green behind the hill, with its three, blue streams.
The sun is there in silence. The dun mountain roes come down.
On these are turned the eyes of Sul-malla in her thoughtful
mood.
	Fingal beholds Cathmor, on high, the son of Borbar-
duthul! he beholds the deep rolling of Erin, on the darkened
plain. He strikes that warning boss, which bids the people to
obey, when he sends his chief before them, to the field of renown.
Wide rise their spears to the sun. Their echoing shields reply
around. Fear, like a vapor, winds not among the host: for he, the
king, is near, the strength of streamy Selma. Gladness brightens
the hero. We hear his words with joy.
	"Like the coming forth of winds, is the sound of Selma's
sons! They are mountain waters, determined in their course.
Hence is Fingal renowned. Hence is his name in other lands. He
was not a lonely beam in danger: for your steps were always near!
But never was Fingal a dreadful form, in your presence, darkened
into wrath. My voice was no thunder to your ears. Mine eyes sent
forth no death. When the haughty appeared, I beheld them not.
They were forgot at my feasts. Like mist they melted away. A
young beam is before you! Few are his paths to war! They are
few, but he is valiant. Defend my dark-haired son. Bring Fillan
back with joy. Hereafter he may stand alone. His form is like his
fathers. His soul is a flame of their fire. Son of car-borne Morni,
move behind the youth. Let thy voice reach his ear, from the
skirts of war. Not unobserved rolls battle before thee, breaker of
the shields."
	The king strode, at once, away to Cormul's lofty rock.
Intermitting darts the light from his shield, as slow the king of
heroes moves. Sidelong rolls his eye o'er the heath, as forming
advance the lines. Graceful fly his half-gray locks round his
kingly features, now lightened with dreadful joy. Wholly mighty is
the chief! Behind him dark and slow I moved. Straight came
forward the strength of Gaul. His shield hung loose on its thong.
He spoke, in haste, to Ossian. "Bind, son of Fingal, this shield!
Bind it high to the side of Gaul. The foe may behold it, and think
I lift the spear. If I should fall, let my tomb be hid in the field; for
fall I must without fame. Mine arm cannot lift the steel. Let not
Evir-choma hear it, to blush between her locks. Fillan, the mighty
behold us! Let us not forget the strife. Why should they come
from their hills, to aid our flying field!"
	He strode onward, with the sound of his shield. My voice
pursued him as he went. "Can the son of Morni fall, without his
fame in Erin? But the deeds of the mighty are forgot by
themselves. They rush carless over the fields of renown. Their
words are never heard!" I rejoiced over the steps of the chief. I
strode to the rock of the king, where he sat, in his wandering
locks, amid the mountain wind!
	In two dark ridges bend the host towards each other, at
Lubar Here Foldath rises a pillar of darkness: there brightens the
youth of Fillan. Each, with his spear in the stream, sent forth the
voice of war. Gaul struck, the shield of Selma. At once they
plunge in battle! Steel pours its gleam on steel: like the fall of
streams shone the field, when they mix their foam together, from
two dark-browed rocks! Behold he comes, the son of fame! He
lays the people low! Deaths sit on blasts around him! Warriors
strew thy paths, O Fillan!
	Rothmar, the shield of warriors, stood between two chinky
rocks. Two oaks, which winds had bent from high, spread their
branches on either side. He rolls his darkening eyes on Fillan,
and, silent, shades his friends. Fingal saw the approaching fight.
The hero's soul arose. But as the stone of Loda <1> falls, shook,
at once, from rocking Drumanard, when spirits heave the earth
in their wrath; so fell blue-shielded Rothmar.
	Near are the steps of Culmin; the youth came, bursting
into tears. Wrathful he cut the wind, ere yet he mixed his strokes
with Fillan. He had first bent the bow with Rothmar, at the rock
of his own blue streams. There they had marked the place of the
roe, as the sunbeam flew over the fern. Why, son of Cul-allin!
why, Culmin, dost thou rush on that beam of light? <2> It is a
fire that consumes. Son of Cul-allin, retire. Your fathers were not
equal in the glittering strife of the field. The mother of Culmin
remains in the hall. She looks forth on blue-rolling Strutha. A
whirlwind rises, on the stream, dark-eddying round the ghost of
her son. His dogs <3> are howling in their place. His shield is
bloody in the hall. "Art thou fallen, my fair-haired son, in Erin's
dismal war?"
	As a roe, pierced in secret, lies panting, by her wonted
streams; the hunter surveys her feet of wind! He remembers her
stately bounding before. So lay the son of Cul-allin beneath the
eye of Fillan. His hair is rolled in a little stream. His blood
wanders on his shield. Still his hand holds the sword, that failed
him in the midst of danger. "Thou art fallen," said Fillan, "ere yet
thy fame was heard. Thy father sent thee to war. He expects to
hear of thy deeds. He is gray, perhaps, at his streams. His eyes
are towards Moi-lena. But thou shalt not return with the spoil of
the fallen foe!"
	Fillan pours the flight of Erin before him, over the
resounding heath. But, man on man, fell Morven before the dark-
red rage of Foldath: for, far on the field, he poured the roar of half
his tribes. Dermid stands before him in wrath. The sons of Selma
gathered around. But his shield is cleft by Foldath. His people fly
over the heath.
	Then said the foe in his pride, "They have fled. My fame
begins! Go, Malthos, go bid Cathmor guard the dark rolling of
ocean; that Fingal may not escape from my sword. He must lie on
earth. Beside some fen shall his tomb be seen. It shall rise
without a song. His ghost shall hover, in mist, over the reedy
pool."
	Malthos heard, with darkening doubt. He rolled his silent
eyes. He knew the pride of Foldath. He looked up to Fingal on his
hills; then darkly turning, in doubtful mood, he plunged his
sword in war.
	In Clono's narrow vale, where bend two trees above the
stream, dark, in his grief, stood Duthno's silent son. The blood
pours from the side of Dermid. His shield is broken near. His
spear leans against a stone. Why, Dermid, why so sad? "I hear
the roar of battle. My people are alone. My steps are slow on the
heath and no shield is mine. Shall he then prevail? It is then after
Dermid is low! I will call thee forth, O Foldath, and meet thee yet
in fight."
	He took his spear, with dreadful joy. The son of Morni
came. "Stay, son of Duthno, stay thy speed. Thy steps are
marked with blood. No bossy shield is thine. Why shouldst thou
fall unarmed?" -- "Son of Morni, give thou thy shield. It has often
rolled back the war! I shall stop the chief in his course. Son of
Morni, behold that stone! It lifts its gray head through grass.
There dwells a chief of the race of Dermid. Place me there in
night."
	He slowly rose against the hill. He saw the troubled field:
the gleaming ridges of battle, disjointed and broken around. As
distant fires, on heath by night, now seem as lost in smoke: now
rearing their red streams on the hill, as blow or cease the winds;
so met the intermitting war the eye of broad-shielded Dermid.
Through the host are the strides of Foldath, like some dark ship
on wintry waves, when she issues from between two isles to sport
on resounding ocean!
	Dermid with rage beholds his course. He strives to rush
along. But he fails amid his steps; and the big tear comes down.
He sounds his father's horn. He thrice strikes his bossy shield.
He calls thrice the name of Foldath, from his roaring tribes.
Foldath, with joy, beholds the chief. He lifts aloft his bloody
spear. As a rock is marked with streams, that fell troubled down
its side in a storm; so streaked with wandering blood, is the dark
chief of Moma! The host on either side withdraw from the
contending kings. They raise, at once, their gleaming points.
Rushing comes Fillan of Selma. Three paces back Foldath
withdraws, dazzled with that beam of light, which came, as
issuing from a cloud, to save the wounded chief. Growing in his
pride he stands. He calls forth all his steel.
	As meet two broad-winged eagles, in their sounding strife,
in winds: so rush the two chiefs, on Moi-lena, into gloomy fight.
By turns are the steps of the kings [Fingal and Cathmor] forward
on their rocks above; for now the dusky war seems to descend on
their swords. Cathmor feels the joy of warriors!, on his mossy hill:
their joy in secret, when dangers rise to match their souls. His
eye is not turned on Lubar, but on Selma's dreadful king. He
beholds him, on Mora, rising in his arms.
	Foldath falls on his shield. The spear of Fillan pierced the
king. Nor looks the youth on the fallen, but onward rolls the war.
The hundred voices of death arise. "Stay, son of Fingal, stay thy
speed. Beholdest thou not that gleaming form, a dreadful sign of
death? Awaken not the king of Erin. Return, son of blue-eyed
Clatho."
	Malthos beholds Foldath low. He darkly stands above the
chief. Hatred is rolled from his soul. He seems a rock in a desert,
on whose dark side are the trickling of waters; when the slow-
sailing mist has left it, and all its trees are blasted with winds. He
spoke to the dying hero about the narrow house. "Whether shall
thy gray stones rise in Ullin, or in Moma's woody land; where the
sun looks, in secret, on the blue streams of Dalrutho? Them are
the steps of thy daughter, blue-eyed Dardu-lena!"
	"Rememberest thou her," said Foldath, "because no son is
mine; no youth to roll the battle before him, in revenge of me?
Malthos, I am revenged. I was not peaceful in the field. Raise the
tombs of those I have slain, around my narrow house. Often shall
I forsake the blast, to rejoice above their graves; when I behold
them spread around, with their long-whistling grass."
	His soul rushed to the vale of Moma, to Dardu-lena's
dreams, where she slept, by Dalrutho's stream, returning from
the chase of the hinds. Her bow is near the maid, unstrung. The
breezes fold her long hair on her breasts. Clothed in the beauty of
youth, the love of heroes lay. Dark bending, from the skirts of the
wood, her wounded father seemed to come. He appears, at times,
then hid himself in mist. Bursting into tears she arose. She knew
that the chief was low. To her came a beam from his soul, when
folded in its storms. Thou wert the last of his race, O blue-eyed
Dardu-lena.
	Wide spreading over echoing Lubar, the flight of Bolga is
rolled along. Fillan hangs forward on their steps. He strews, with
dead, the heath. Fingal rejoices over his son. Blue-shielded
Cathmor rose.
	Son of Alpin, bring the harp. Give Fillan's praise to the
wind. Raise high his praise in mine ear, while yet he shines in
war.
	"Leave, blue-eyed Clatho, leave thy hail! Behold that early
beam of thine! The host is withered in its course. No further look,
it is dark. Light trembling from the harp, strike, virgins, strike
the sound. No hunter he descends from the dewy haunt of the
bounding roe. He bends not his bow on the wind; nor sends his
gray arrow abroad.
	"Deep folded in red war! See battle roll against his side.
Striding amid the ridgy strife, he pours the death of thousands
forth. Fillan is like a spirit of heaven, hat descends from the skirt
of winds. The troubled ocean feels his steps, as he strides from
wave to wave. His path kindles behind him. Islands shake their
heads on the heaving seas! Leave, blue-eyed Clatho, leave thy
hall!"

<1> By "the stone of Loda" is meant a place of worship among the
Scandinavians.

<2> The poet metaphorically calls Fillan a beam of light.

<3> Dogs were thought to be sensible of the death of their
master, let it happen at ever so great a distance. It was also the
opinion of the times, that the arms, which warriors left at home,
became bloody when they themselves fell in battle.



TEMORA -- BOOK VI.


ARGUMENT

This book opens with a speech of Fingal, who sees Cathmor
descending to the assistance of his flying army. The king
despatches Ossian to the relief of Fillan. He himself retires
behind the rock of Cormul, to avoid the sight of the engagement
between his son and Cathmor. Ossian advances. The descent of
Cathmor described. He rallies the army, renews the battle, and,
before Ossian could arrive, engages Fillan himself. Upon the
approach of Ossian, the combat between the two heroes ceases.
Ossian and Cathmor prepare to fight, but night coming on pre
vents them. Ossian returns to the place where Cathmor and
Fillan fought. He finds Fillan mortally wounded, and leaning
against a rock. Their discourse. Fillan dies, his body is laid, by
Ossian, in a neighboring cave. The Caledonian army return to
Fingal. He questions them about his son, and understanding that
he was killed, retires, in silence, to the rock of Cormul. Upon the
retreat of the army of Fingal, the Fir-bolg advance. Cathmor finds
Bran, one of the dogs of Fingal, lying on the shield of Fillan,
before the entrance of the cave, where the body of that hero lay.
His reflection thereupon. He returns, in a melancholy mood, to
his army. Malthos endeavors to comfort him, by the example of
his father, Borbar-duthul. Cathmor retires to rest. The song of
Sul-malla concludes the book, which ends about the middle of
the third night from the opening of the poem.

	"Cathmor rises on his hill! Shall Fingal take the sword of
Luna? But what shall become of thy fame, son of white-bosomed
Clatho? Turn not thine eyes from Fingal, fair daughter of Inis-
tore. I shall not quench thy early beam. It shines along my soul.
Rise, wood-skirted Mora, rise between the war and me! Why
should Fingal behold the strife, lest his dark -haired warrior
should fall? Amidst the song, O Carril, pour the sound of the
trembling harp! Here are the voices of rocks! and there the bright
tumbling of waters. Father of Oscar! lift the spear! defend the
young in arms. Conceal thy steps from Fillan. He must not know
that I doubt his steel. No cloud of mine shall rise, my son, upon
thy soul of fire!"
	He sunk behind his rock, amid the sound of Carril's song.
Brightening in my growing soul, I took the spear of Temora. I
saw, along Moi-lena, the wild tumbling of battle; the strife of
death, in gleaming rows, disjointed and broken round. Fillan is a
beam of fire. From wing to wing is his wasteful course. The ridges
of war melt before him. They are rolled, in smoke, from the fields!
	Now is the coming forth of Cathmor, in the armor of kings!
Dark waves the eagle's wing, above his helmet of fire.
Unconcerned are his steps, as if they were to the chase of Erin.
He raises, at times, his terrible voice. Erin, abashed, gathers
round. Their souls return back, like a stream. They wonder at the
steps of their fear. He rose, like the beam of the morning, on a
haunted heath: the traveller looks back, with bending eye, on the
field of dreadful forms! Sudden from the rock of Moi-lena, are
Sul-malla's trembling steps. An oak takes the spear from her
hand. Half bent she looses the lance. But then are her eyes on
the king, from amid her wandering locks! No friendly strife is
before thee! No light contending of bows, as when the youth of
Inis-huna come forth beneath the eye of Conmor!
	As the rock of Runo, which takes the passing clouds as
they fly, seems growing, in gathered darkness, over the streamy
heath; so seems the chief of Atha taller, as gather his people
around. As different blasts fly over the sea, each behind its dark-
blue wave; so Cathmor's words, on every side, pour his warriors
forth. Nor silent on his hill is Fillan. He mixes his words with his
echoing shield. An eagle be seemed, with sounding wings, calling
the wind to his rock, when he sees the coming forth of the roes,
on Lutha's rushy field!
	Now they bend forward in battle. Death's hundred voices
arise. The kings, on either side, were like fires on the souls of the
host. Ossian bounded along. High rocks and trees rush tall
between the war and me. But I hear the noise of steel, between
my clanging arms. Rising, gleaming on the hill, I behold the
backward steps of hosts: their backward steps on either side, and
wildly-looking eyes. The chiefs were met in dreadful fight! The two
blue-shielded kings! Tall and dark, through gleams of steel, are
seen the striving heroes! I rush. My fears for Fillan fly, burning,
across my soul!
	I come. Nor Cathmor flies; nor yet comes on; he sidelong
stalks along. An icy rock, cold, tall, he seems. I call forth all my
steel. Silent awhile we stride, on either side of a rushing stream:
then, sudden turning, all at once, we raise our pointed spears.
We raise our spears, but night comes down. It is dark and silent
round; but where the distant steps of hosts are sounding over the
heath.
	I come to the place where Fillan fought. Nor voice nor
sound is there. A broken helmet lies on earth, a buckler cleft in
twain. Where, Fillan, where art thou, young chief of echoing
Morven? He hears me, leaning on a rock, which bends its gray
head over the stream. He hears; but sullen, dark he stands. At
length. I saw the hero.
	"Why standest thou, robed in darkness, son of woody
Selma! Bright is thy path, my brother in this dark-brown field!
Long has been thy strife in battle! Now the horn of Fingal is
heard. Ascend to the cloud of thy father, to his hill of feasts. In
the evening mists he sits, and hears the sound of Carril's harp.
Carry joy to the aged, young breaker of the shields!"
	"Can the vanquished carry joy? Ossian, no shield is mine!
It lies broken on the field. The eagle-wing of my helmet is torn. It
is when foes fly before them, that fathers delight in their sons.
But their sighs burst forth, in secret, when their young warriors
yield. No: Fillan shall not behold the king! Why should the hero
mourn?"
	"Son of blue-eyed Clatho! O Fillan, awake not my soul!
Wert thou not a burning fire before him? Shall he not rejoice?
Such fame belongs not to Ossian; yet is the king still a sun to me.
He looks on my steps with joy. Shadows never rise on his face.
Ascend, O Fillan, to Mora! His feast is spread in the folds of
mist."
	"Ossian! give me that broken shield: those feathers that are
rolled in the wind. Place them near to Fillan, that less of his fame
may fall. Ossian, I begin to fail. Lay me in that hollow rock. Raise
no stone above, lest one should ask about my fame. I am fallen in
the first of my fields, fallen without renown. Let thy voice alone
send joy to my flying soul. Why should the bard know where
dwells the lost beam of Clatho?"
	"Is thy spirit on the eddying winds, O Fillan, young breaker
of shields. Joy pursue my hero, through his folded clouds. The
forms of thy fathers, O Fillan, bend to receive their son! I behold
the spreading of their fire on Mora: the blue-rolling of their
wreaths. Joy meet thee, my brother! But we are dark and sad! I
behold the foe round the aged. I behold the wasting away of his
fame. Thou art left alone in the field, O gray-haired king of
Selma!"
	I laid him in the hollow rock, at the roar of the nightly
stream. One red star looked in on the hero. Winds lift, at times,
his locks. I listen. No sound is heard. The warrior slept! as
lightning on a cloud, a thought came rushing along my soul. My
eyes roll in fire: my stride was in the clang of steel. "I will find
thee, king of Erin! in the gathering of thy thousands find thee.
Why should that cloud escape, that quenched our early beam?
Kindle your meteors on your hills, my fathers. Light my daring
steps. I will consume in wrath. <1> -- But should not I return?
The king is without a son, gray-haired among his foes! His arm is
not as in the days of old. His fame grows dim in Erin. Let me not
behold him, laid low in his latter field -- But can I return to the
king? Will he not ask about his son?" Thou oughtest to defend
young Fillan." -- Ossian will meet the foe! Green Erin, thy
sounding tread is pleasant to my ear. I rush on thy ridgy host, to
shun the eyes of Fingal. I hear the voice of the king, on Mora's
misty top! He calls his two sons! I come, my father, in my grief. I
come like an eagle, which the flame of night met in the desert,
and spoiled of half his wings!
	Distant, round the king, on Mora, the broken ridges of
Morven are rolled. They turned their eyes: each darkly bends, on
his own ashen spear. Silent stood the king in the midst. Thought
on thought rolled over his soul: as waves on a secret mountain
lake, each with its back of foam. He looked; no son appeared,
with his long-beaming spear. The sighs rose, crowding, from his
soul; but he concealed his grief. At length I stood beneath an oak.
No voice of mine was heard.! What could I say to Fingal in this
hour of wo? His words rose, at length, in the midst: the people
shrunk backward as he spoke.
	"Where is the son of Selma; he who led in war? I behold not
his steps, among my people, returning from the field. Fell the
young bounding roe, who was so stately on my hills? He fell! for
ye are silent. The shield of war is cleft in twain. Let his armor be
near to Fingal; and the sword of dark-brown Luno. I am waked
on my hills; with morning I descend to war!"
	High on Cormul's rock, an oak is flaming to the wind. The
gray skirts of mist are rolled around; thither strode the king in
his wrath. Distant from the host he always lay, when battle burnt
within his soul. On two spears hung his shield on high; the
gleaming sign of death! that shield, which he was wont to strike,
by night, before he rushed to war. It was then his warriors knew
when the king was to lead in strife; for never was his buckler
heard, till the wrath of Fingal arose. Unequal were his steps on
high, as ho shone on the beam of the oak; he was dreadful as the
form of the spirit of night, when he clothes, on his wild gestures
with mist, and, issuing forth, on the troubled ocean, mounts the
car of winds.
	Nor settled, from the storm, is Erin's sea of war! they
glitter, beneath the moon, and, low humming, still roll on the
field. Alone are the steps of Cathmor, before them on the heath:
he hangs forward, with all his arms, on Morven's flying host. Now
had he come to the mossy cave, where Fillan lay in night. One
tree was bent above! the stream, which glittered over the rock.
There shone to the moon the broken shield of Clatho's son; and
near it, on grass, lay hairy-footed Bran. He had missed the chief
on Mora, and searched him along the wind. He thought that the
blue-eyed hunter slept; he lay upon his shield. No blast came
over the heath unknown to bounding Bran.
	Cathmor saw the white-breasted dog; he saw the broken
shield. Darkness is blown back on his soul; he remembers the
falling away of the people. They came, a stream; are rolled away;
another race succeeds. But some mark the fields, as they pass,
with their own mighty names. The heath, through dark brown
years, is theirs; some blue stream winds to their fame. Of these
be the chief of Atha, when he lays him down on earth. Often may
the voice of future times meet Cathmor in the air; when he
strides from wind to wind, or folds himself in the wing of a storm.
	Green Erin gathered round the king to hear the voice of his
power. Their joyful faces bend unequal, forward, in the light of
the oak. They who were terrible, were removed; Lubar winds
again in their host. Cathmor was that beam from heaven, which
shone when his people were dark. He was honored in the midst.
Their souls arose with ardor around! The king alone no gladness
showed; no stranger he to war!
	"Why is the king so sad?" said Malthos, eagle-eyed.
"Remains there a foe at Lubar t Lives there among them who can
lift the spear? Not so peaceful was thy father, Borbar-duthul,
king of spears. His rage was a fire that always burned: his joy
over fallen foes was great. Three days feasted the gray-haired
hero, when he heard that Calmar fell: Calmar who aided the race
of Ullin, from Lara of the streams. Often did he feel, with his
hands, the steel which they said had pierced his foe. He felt it
with his hands, for Borbar-duthul's eyes had failed. Yet was the
king a sun to his friends; a gale to lift their branches round. Joy
was around him in his halls: he loved the sons of Bolga. His
name remains in Atha, like the awful memory of ghosts whose
presence was terrible; but they blew the storm away. Now let the
voices of Erin <2> raise the soul of the king; he that shone when
war was dark, and laid the mighty low. Fonar, from that gray-
browed rock pour the tale of other times: pour it on wide-skirted
Erin, as it settles round.
	"To me," said Cathmor, "no song shall rise; nor Fonar sit on
the rock of Lubar. The mighty there are laid low. Disturb not
their rushing ghosts. Far, Malthos, far remove the sound of Erin's
song. I rejoice not over the foe, when he ceases to lift the spear.
With morning we pour our strength abroad. Fingal is wakened on
his echoing hill."
	Like waves, blown back by sudden winds, Erin retired, at
the voice of the king. Deep, rolled into the field of night, they
spread their humming tribes. Beneath his own tree, at intervals,
each bard sat down with his harp. They raised the song, and
touched the string: each to the chief he loved. Before a burning
oak Sul-malla touched, at times, the harp. She touched the harp,
and heard, between, the breezes in her hair. In darkness near lay
the king of Atha, beneath an aged tree. The beam of the oak was
turned from him; he saw the maid, but was not seen. His soul
poured forth, in secret, when he beheld her fearful eye. "But
battle is before thee, son of Borbar-duthul."
	Amidst the harp, at intervals, she listened whether the
warrior slept. Her soul was up; she longed, in secret, to pour her
own sad song. The field is silent. On their wings the blasts of
night retire. The bards had ceased; and meteors came, red-
winding with their ghosts. The sky grew dark: the forms of the
dead were blended with the clouds. But heedless bends the
daughter of Conmor over the decaying flame. Thou wert alone in
her soul, car-borne chief of Atha. She raised the voice of the song,
and touched the harp between.
	"Clun-galo <3> came; she missed the maid. Where art
thou, beam of light? Hunters from the mossy rock, saw ye the
blue-eyed fair? Are her steps on grassy Lumon; near the bed of
roes? Ah, me! I behold her bow in the hail. Where art thou, beam
of light?
	"Cease, love of Conmor, cease! I hear thee not on the ridgy
heath. My eye is turned to the king, whose path is terrible in war.
He for whom my soul is up, in the season of my rest. Deep-
bosomed in war he stands; he beholds me not from his cloud.
Why, sun of Sul-malla, dost thou not look forth? I dwell in
darkness here: wide over me flies the shadowy mist. Filled with
dew are my locks: look thou from thy cloud, O sun of Sul-malla's
soul!"

<1> "I will consume in wrath --" Here the sentence is designedly
left unfinished. The sense is, that he was resolved, like a
destroying fire, to consume Cathmor, who had killed his brother.
In the midst of this resolution, the situation of Fingal suggests
itself to him in a very strong light. He resolves to return to assist
the king in prosecuting the war. But then his shame for not
defending his brother recurs to him. He is determined again to go
and find out Cathmor. We may consider him as in the act of
advancing towards the enemy, when the horn of Fingal sounded
on Mora, and called back his people to his presence.

<2> The voices of Erin: A poetical expression for the bards of
Ireland.

<3> Clun-galo: the wife of Conmor, king of Inis-huna, and the
mother of Sul-malla. She is here represented as missing her
daughter, after she had fled with Cathmor.



TEMORA -- BOOK VII.


ARGUMENT.

This book begins about the middle of the third night from the
opening of the poem. The poet describes a kind of mist, which
rose by night from the Lake of Lego, and was the usual residence
of the souls of the dead, during the interval between their decease
and the funeral song. The appearance of the ghost of Fillan above
the cave where his body lay. His voice comes to Fingal on the
rock of Cormul. The king strikes the shield of Trenmor, which
was an infallible sign of his appearing in arms himself. The
extraordinary effect of the sound of the shield. Sul-malla, starting
from sleep, awakes Cathmor. Their affecting discourse. She
insists with him to sue for peace; he resolves to continue the war.
He directs her to retire to the neighboring valley of Lona, which
was the residence of an old Druid, until the battle of the next day
should be over. He awakes his army with the sound of his shield.
The shield described. Fonar, the bard, at the desire of Cathmor,
relates the first settlement of the Fir-bolg in Ireland, under their
leader Larthon. Morning comes. Sul-malla retires to the valley of
Lona. A lyric song concludes the book.

	From the wood-skirted waters of Lego ascend, at times,
gray-bosomed mists; when the gates of the west are closed, on
the sun's eagle eye. Wide, over Lara's stream, is poured the vapor
dark and deep: the moon, like a dim shield, lay swimming
through its folds. With this, clothe the spirits of old their sudden
gestures on the wind, when they stride, from blast to blast, along
the dusky night. Often, blended with the gale, to some warrior's
grave, they roll the mist a gray dwelling to his ghost, until the
songs arise.
	A sound came from the desert; it was Conar, king of Inis-
fail. He poured his mist on the grave of Fillan, at blue-winding
Lubar. Dark and mournful sat the ghost, in his gray ridge of
smoke. The blast, at times, rolled him together; but the form
returned again. It returned with bending eyes, and dark winding
of locks of mist.
	It was dark. The sleeping host were still in the skirts of
night. The flame decayed, on the hill of Fingal; the king lay lonely
on his shield. His eyes were half clothed in sleep: the voice of
Fillan came. "Sleeps the husband of Clatho? Dwells the father of
the fallen in rest? Am I forgot in the folds of darkness; lonely in
the season of night?"
	"Why dost thou mix," said the king, "with the dreams of my
father? Can I forget thee, my son, or thy path of fire in the field?
Not such come the deeds of the valiant on the soul of Fingal.
They are not a beam of lightning, which is seen and is then no
more. I remember thee, O Fillan! and my wrath begins to rise."
	The king took his deathful spear, and struck the deeply-
sounding shield: his shield, that hung high in night, the dismal
sign of war. Ghosts fled on every side, and rolled their gathered
forms on the wind. Thrice from the winding vales arose the voice
of deaths. The harps of the bards, untouched, sound mournful
over the hill.
	He struck again the shield; battles rose in the dreams of
his host. The wide-tumbling strife is gleaming over their souls.
Blue-shielded kings descended to war. Backward-looking armies
fly; and mighty deeds are half hid in the bright gleams of steel.
	But when the third sound arose, deer started from the
clefts of their rocks. The screams of fowl are heard in the desert,
as each flew frightened on his blast. The sons of Selma half rose
and half assumed their spears. But silence rolled back on the
host: they knew the shield of the king. Sleep returned to their
eyes; the field was dark and still.
	No sleep was thine in darkness, blue-eyed daughter of
Conmor! Sul-malla heard the dreadful shield, and rose, amid the
night. Her steps are towards the king of Atha. "Can danger shake
his daring soul?" In doubt, she stands with bending eyes. Heaven
burns with all its stars.
	Again the shield resounds! She rushed. She stopt. Her
voice half rose. It failed. She saw him, amidst his arms, that
gleamed to heaven's fire. She saw him dim in his locks, that rose
to nightly wind. Away, for fear, she turned her steps. "Why
should the king of Erin awake? Thou art not a dream to his rest,
daughter of Inis-huna."
	More dreadful rings the shield. Sul-malla starts. Her
helmet fails. Loud echoes Lubar's rock, as over it rolls the steel.
Bursting from the dreams of night, Cathmor half rose beneath
his tree. He saw the form of the maid above him, on the rock. A
red star, with twinkling beams, looked through her floating hair.
	"Who comes through night to Cathmor in the season of his
dreams? Bring'st thou aught of war? Who art thou, son of night?
Stand'st thou before me, a form of the times of old? a voice from
the fold of a cloud, to warn me of the danger of Erin?"
	"Nor lonely scout am I, nor voice from folded cloud," she
said, "but I warn thee of the danger of Erin. Dost thou hear that
sound? It is not the feeble, king of Atha, that rolls his signs on
night."
	"Let the warrior roll his signs," he replied, "To Cathmor
they are the sounds of harps. My joy is great, voice of night, and
burns over all my thoughts. This is the music of kings, on lonely
hills, by night; when they light their daring souls, the sons of
mighty deeds! The feeble dwell alone, in the valley of the breeze;
where mists lift their morning skirts, from the blue-winding
streams."
	"Not feeble, king of men, were they, the fathers of my race.
They dwelt in the folds of battle, in their distant lands. Yet
delights not my soul in the signs of death! Lie, who never yields,
comes forth: O send the bard of peace!"
	Like a dropping rock in the desert, stood Cathmor in his
tears. Her voice came, a breeze on his soul, and waked the
memory of her land; where she dwelt by her peaceful streams,
before he came to the war of Conmor.
	"Daughter of strangers," he said, (she trembling turned
away,) "long have I marked thee in thy steel, young pine of Inis-
huna. But my soul, I said, is folded in a storm. Why should that
beam arise, till my steps return in peace? Have I been pale in thy
presence, as thou bid'st me to fear the king? The time of danger,
O maid, is the season of my soul; for then it swells a mighty
stream, and rolls me on the foe.
	"Beneath the moss-covered rock of Lona, near his own loud
stream; gray in his locks of age, dwells Clonmal king of harps.
Above him is his echoing tree, and the dun bounding of roes. The
noise of our strife reaches his ear, as he bends in the thoughts of
years. There let thy rest be, Sul-malla, until our battle cease.
Until I return, in my arms, from the skirts of the evening mist,
that rises on Lona, round the dwelling of my love."
	A light fell on the soul of the maid: it rose kindled before
the king. She turned her face to Cathmor, from amidst her
waving locks. "Sooner shall the eagle of heaven be torn from the
stream of his roaring wind, when he sees the dun prey before
him, the young sons of the bounding roe, than thou, O Cathmor,
be turned from the strife of renown. Soon may I see thee, warrior,
from the skirts of the evening mist, when it is rolled around me,
on Lona of the streams. While yet thou art distant far, strike,
Cathmor, strike the shield, that joy may return to my darkened
soul, as I lean on the mossy rock. But if thou shouldst fall, I am
in the land of strangers; O send thy voice from thy cloud, to the
midst of Inis-huna!"
	"Young branch of green-headed Lumon, why dost thou
shake in the storm? Often has Cathmor returned, from darkly
rolling wars. The darts of death are but hail to me; they have
often rattled along my shield. I have risen brightened from battle,
like a meteor from a stormy cloud. Return not, fair beam, from
thy vale, when the roar of battle grows. Then might the foe
escape, as from my fathers of old.
	"They told to Son-mor, of Clunar, who was slain by Cormac
in fight. Three days darkened Son-mor, over his brother's fall. His
spouse beheld the silent king and foresaw his steps in war. She
prepared the bow, in secret, to attend her blue-shielded hero. To
her dwelt darkness at Atha, when he was not there. From their
hundred streams, by night, poured down the sons of Alnecma.
They had heard the shield of the king, and their rage arose. In
clanging arms, they moved along towards Ullin of the groves.
Son-mor struck his shield, at times the leader of the war.
	"Far behind followed Sul-allin, over the streamy hills. She
was a light on the mountain, when they crossed the vale below. 
Her steps were stately on the vale, when they rose on the mossy
hill. She feared to approach the king, who left her in echoing
Atha. But when the roar of battle rose; when host was rolled on
host, when Son-mor burnt, like the fire of heaven in clouds, with
her spreading hair came Sul-allin, for she trembled for her king.
He stopt the rushing strife to save the love of heroes. The foe fled
by night; Clunar slept without his blood; the blood which ought
to be poured upon the warrior's tomb.
	"Nor rose the rage of Son-mor, but his days were silent and
dark. Sul-allin wandered by her gray stream. with her tearful
eyes. Often did she look on the hero, when he was folded in his
thoughts. But she shrunk from his eyes, and turned her lone
steps away. Battles rose, like a tempest, and drove the mist from
his soul. He beheld with joy her steps in the hall, and the white
rising of her hands on the harp."
	In his arms strode the chief of Atha, to where his shield
hung, high, in night: high on a mossy bough over Lubar's
streamy roar. Seven bosses rose on the shield; the seven voices of
the king, which his warriors received, from the wind, and marked
over all the tribes.
	On each boss is placed a star of night: Canmathon with
beams unshorn; Col-derna rising from a cloud; U-leicho robed in
mist; and the soft beam of Cathlin glittering on a rock. Smiling,
on its own blue wave, Rel-durath half sinks its western light. The
red eye of Berthin looks, through a grove, on the hunter, as he
returns, by night, with the spoils of the bounding roe. Wide, in
the midst, rose the cloudless beams of Ton-thna, that star,
which looked by night on the course of the sea-tossed Larthon:
Larthon, the first of Bolga's race, who travelled on the winds.
White-bosomed spread the sails of the king, towards streamy
Inis-fail; dun night was rolled before him, with its skirts of mist.
Unconstant blew the winds, and rolled him from wave to wave.
Then rose the fiery-haired Ton-thna, and smiled from her parted
cloud. Larthon blessed the well-known beam, as it faint gleamed
on the deep.
	Beneath the spear of Cathmor rose that voice which
awakes the bards. They came, dark winding from every side: each
with the sound of his harp. Before him rejoiced the king, as the
traveller, in the day of the sun; when he hears, far rolling around,
the murmur of mossy streams: streams that burst in the desert
from the rock of roes.
	"Why," said Fonar, "hear we the voice of the king in the
season of his rest? Were the dim forms of thy fathers bending in
thy dreams? Perhaps they stand on that cloud, and wait for
Fonar's song; often they come to the fields where their sons are to
lift the spear. Or shall our voice arise for him who lifts the spear
no more; he that consumed the field, from Moma of the groves?"
	"Not forgot is that cloud in war, bard of other times. High
shall his tomb rise, on Moi-lena, the dwelling of renown. But,
now, roll back my soul to the times of my fathers: to the years
when first they rose, on Inis-huna's waves. Nor alone pleasant to
Cathmor is the remembrance of wood-covered Lumon. <1>
Lumon of the streams, the dwelling of white-bosomed maids."
	"Lumon  of the streams, thou risest on Fonar's soul! Thy
sun is on thy side, on the rocks of thy bending trees. The dun roe
is seen from thy furze; the deer lifts its branchy head; for he sees,
at times, the hound on the half-covered heath. Slow, on the vale,
are the steps of maids; the white-armed daughters of the bow:
they lift their blue eyes to the hill, from amidst their wandering
locks. Not there is the stride of Larthon, chief of Inis-huna. He
mounts the wave on his own dark oak, in Cluba's ridgy bay. That
oak which he cut from Lumon, to bound along the sea. The
maids turn their eyes away, lest the king should be lowly laid; for
never had they seen a ship, dark rider of the wave!
	"Now he dares to call the winds, and to mix with the mist of
ocean. Blue Inis-fail rose, in smoke; but dark-skirted night came
down. The sons of Bolga feared. The fiery-haired Ton-thna rose.
Culbin's bay received the ship, in the bosom of its echoing woods.
There issued a stream from Duthuma's horrid cave; where spirits
gleamed, at times, with their half finished forms.
	"Dreams descended on Larthon: he saw seven spirits of his
fathers. He heard their half-formed words, and dimly beheld the
times to come. He beheld the kings of Atha, the sons of future
days. They led their hosts along the field, like ridges of mist,
which winds pour in autumn, over Atha of the groves.
	Larthon raised the hall of Semla, to the music of the harp.
He went forth to the roes of Erin, to their wonted streams. Nor
did he forget green-headed Lumon; he often bounded over his
seas, to where white-handed Flathal looked from the hill of roes.
Lumon of the foamy streams, thou risest on Fonar's soul!"
	Mourning pours from the east. The misty heads of the
mountains rise. Valleys show, on every side, the gray winding of 
the streams. His host heard the shield of Cathmor: at once they
rose around; like a crowded sea, when first it feels the wings of
the wind, The waves know not whither to roll; they lift their
troubled heads.
	Sad and slow retired Sul-malla to Lona of the streams. She
went, and often turned; her blue eyes rolled in tears. But when
she came to the rock, that darkly covered Lona's vale, she looked,
from her bursting soul, on the king; and sunk, at once, behind.
	Son of Alpin, strike the string. Is there aught of joy in the
harp? Pour it then on the soul of Ossian: it is folded in mist. I
hear thee, O bard! in my night. But cease the lightly-trembling
sound. The joy of grief belongs to Ossian, amidst his dark-brown
years.
	Green thorn of the hill of ghosts, that shakest thy head to
nightly winds! I hear no sound in thee, is there no spirit's windy
skirt now rustling in thy leaves? Often are the steps of the dead,
in the dark-eddying blasts; when the moon, a dun shield, from
the east is rolled along the sky.
	Ullin, Carril, and Ryno, voices of the days of old! Let me
hear you, while yet it is dark, to please and awake my soul. I hear
you not, ye sons of song; in what hall of the clouds is your rest?
Do you touch the shadowy harp, robed with morning mist, where
the rustling sun comes forth from his green-headed waves?

<1> Lumon: A hill in Inis-huna, near the residence of Sul-malla.



TEMORA -- BOOK VIII


ARGUMENT.

The fourth morning from the opening of the poem comes on
Fingal, still continuing in the place to which he had retired on the
preceding sight, is seen, at intervals, through the mist which
covered the rock of Cormul. The descent of the king is described.
He orders Gaul, Dermid, and Carril the bard, to go to the valley of
China, and conduct from thence the Caledonian army, Ferad-
artho, the son of Cairbar, the only person remaining of the family
of Conar, the first king of Ireland. The king makes the command
of the army, and prepares for battle. Marching towards the
enemy, he comes to the cave of Lubar, where the body of Fillan
lay. Upon seeing his dog, Bran, who lay at the entrance of the
cave, his grief returns. Cathmor arranges the Irish army in order
of battle. The appearance of that hero. The general conflict is
described. The actions of Fingal and Cathmor. A storm. The total
rout of the Fir-bolg. The two kings engage, in a column of mist,
on the banks of Lubar, Their attitude and conference after the
combat. The death of Cathmor. Fingal resigns the spear of
Trenmor to Ossian. The ceremonies observed on that occasion.
The spirit of Cathmor, in the mean time, appears to Sul-malla, in
the valley of Lona. Her sorrow. Evening comes on. A feast is
prepared. The coming of Ferad-artho is announced by the songs
of a hundred bards. The poem closes with a speech of Fingal.

	As when the wintry winds have seized the waves of the
mountain lake, have seized them in stormy night, and clothed
them over with ice; white to the hunter's early eye, the billows
still seem to roll. He turns his ear to the sound of each unequal
ridge. But each is silent, gleaming, strewn with boughs, and tufts
of grass, which shake and whistle to the wind, over their gray
seats of frost. So silent shone to the morning the ridges of
Morven's host, as each warrior looked up from his helmet
towards the hill of the king; the cloud-covered hill of Fingal,
where he strode in the folds of mist. At times is the hero seen,
greatly dim in all his arms. From thought to thought tolled the
war, along his mighty soul.
	Now is the coming forth of the king. First appeared the
sword of Luno; the spear half issuing from a cloud, the shield still
dim in mist. But when the stride of the king came abroad, with
all his gray dewy locks in the wind; then rose the shouts of his
host over every moving tribe. They gathered, gleaming round,
with all their echoing shields. So rise the green seas round a
spirit, that comes down from the squally wind. The traveller
hears the sound afar, and lifts his head over the rock. He looks
on the troubled bay, and thinks he dimly sees the form. The
waves sport, unwieldy, round, with all their backs of foam.
	Far distant stood the son of Morni, Duthno's race, and
Cona's bard. We stood far distant; each beneath his tree. We
shunned the eyes of the king: we had not conquered in the field.
A little stream rolled at my feet: I touched its light wave, with my
spear. I touched it with my spear: nor there was the soul of
Ossian. It darkly rose, from thought to thought, and sent abroad
the sigh.
	"Son of Morni," said the king, "Dermid, hunter of roes! why
are ye dark, like two rocks, each with its trickling waters? No
wrath gathers on Fingal's soul, against the chiefs of men. Ye are
my strength in battle; the kindling of my joy in peace. My early
voice has been a pleasant gale to your years, when Fillan
prepared the bow. The son of Fingal is not here, nor yet the chase
of the bounding roes. But why should the breakers of shields
stand, darkened, far way?"
	Tall they strode towards the king: they saw him turned to
Morn's wind. His, tears came down for his blue-eyed son, no slept
in the cave of streams. But he brightened before them, and spoke
to the broad-shielded kings.
	"Crommal, with woody rocks, and misty top, the field of
winds, pours forth, to the sight, blue Lubar's streamy roar.
Behind it rolls clear-winding Lavath, in the still vale of deer. A
cave is dark in a rock; above it strong-winged eagles dwell; broad-
headed oaks, before it, sound in Cluna's wind. Within, in his
locks of youth, is Ferad-artho, blue-eyed king, the son of broad-
shielded Cairbar, from Ullin of the roes.  He listens to the voice of
Condan, as gray he bends in feeble light. He listens, for his foes
dwell in the echoing halls of Temora. He comes, at times, abroad
in the skirts of mist, to pierce the bounding roes. When the sun
looks on the field, nor by the rock, nor stream, is he! He shuns
the race of Bolga, who dwell in his father's hall. Tell him, that
Fingal lifts the spear, and that his foes, perhaps, may fail.
	"Lift up, O Gaul, the shield before him. Stretch, Dermid,
Temora's spear. Be thy voice in his ear, O Carril, with the deeds
of his fathers. Lead him to green Moi-lena, to the dusky field of
ghosts; for there, I fall forward, in battle, in the folds of war.
Before dun night descends, come to high Dunmora's top. Look,
from the gray skirts of mist, on Lena of the streams. If there my
standard shall float on wind, over Lubar's gleaming stream, then
has not Fingal failed in the last of his fields."
	Such were his words; nor aught replied the silent striding
kings. They looked sidelong on Erin's host, and darkened as they
went. Never before had they left the king, in the midst of the
stormy field. Behind them, touching at times his harp, the gray-
haired Carril moved. He foresaw the fall, of the people, and
mournful was the sound! It was like a breeze that comes, by fits,
over Lego's reedy lake; when sleep half descends on the hunter,
within his mossy cave.
	"Why bends the bard of Cona," said Fingal, "over his secret
stream? Is this a time for sorrow, father of low-laid Oscar? Be the
warriors remembered in peace; when echoing shields are heard
no more. Bend, then, in grief, over the flood, where blows the
mountain breeze. Let them pass on thy soul, the blue-eyed
dwellers of the tomb. But Erin rolls to war; wide tumbling, rough,
aid dark. Lift, Ossian, lift the shield. I am alone, my son
	As comes the sudden voice of winds to the becalmed ship of
Inis-huna, and drives it large, along the deep, dark rider of the
wave; so the voice of Fingal sent Ossian, tall along the heath. He
lifted high his shining shield, in the dusky wing of war; like the
broad, blank moon, in the skirt of a cloud, before the storms.
arise.
	Loud, from moss-covered Mora, poured down, at once, the
broad-winged war. Fingal led his people forth, king of Morven of
streams. On high spreads the eagle's wing. His gray hair is
poured on his shoulders broad. In thunder are his mighty
strides. He often stood, and saw, behind, the wide-gleaming
rolling of armor. A rock he seemed, gray over with ice, whose
woods are high in wind. Bright streams leapt from its head, and
spread their foam on blasts.
	Now he came to Lubar's cave, where Fillan darkly slept.
Bran still lay on the broken shield: the eagle-wing is strewed by
the winds. Bright, from withered furze, looked forth the hero's
spear. Then grief stirred the soul of the king, like whirlwinds
blackening on a lake. He turned his sudden step, and leaned on
his bending spear.
	White-breasted Bran came bounding with joy to the known
path of Fingal. He came, and looked towards the cave, where the
blue-eyed hunter lay, for he was wont to stride, with morning, to
the dewy bed of the roe. It was then the tears of the king came
down and all his soul was dark. But as the rising wind rolls away
the storm of rain, and leaves the white streams to the sun, and
high hills with their heads of grass; so the returning war
brightened the mind of Fingal. He bounded, on his spear, over
Lubar, and struck his echoing shield. His ridgy host bend
forward, at once, with all their pointed steel.
	Nor Erin heard, with fear, the sound: wide they come
rolling along. Dark Malthos, in the wing of war, looks forward
from shaggy brows. Next rose that beam of light, Hidalla! then the
sidelong-looking gloom of Maronnan. Blue-shielded Clonar lifts
the spear: Cormar shakes his bushy locks on the wind. Slowly,
from behind a rock, rose the bright form of Atha. First appeared
his two-pointed spears, then the half of his burnished shield: like
the rising of a nightly meteor, over the valley of ghosts. But when
ha shone all abroad, the hosts plunged, at once, into strife. The
gleaming waves of steel are poured on either side.
	As meet two troubled seas, with the rolling of all their
waves, when they feel the wings of contending winds, in the rock-
sided firth of Lumon; along the echoing hills in the dim course of
ghosts: from the blast fall the torn groves on the deep, amidst the
foamy path of whales. So mixed the hosts! Now Fingal; now
Cathmor came abroad. The dark tumbling of death is before
them: the gleam of broken steel is rolled on their steps, as, loud,
the high-bounding kings hewed down the ridge of shields.
	Maronnan fell, by Fingal, laid large across a stream. The
waters gathered by his side, and leapt gray over his bossy shield.
Clonar is pierced by Cathmor; nor yet lay the chief on earth. An
oak seized his hair in his fall. His helmet rolled on the ground. By
its thong, hung his broad shield; over it wandered his streaming
blood. Tla-min shall weep, in the hall, and strike her heaving
breast. 	Nor did Ossian forget the spear, in the wing of his
war. He strewed the field with dead. Young Hidallan  came. "Soft
voice of streamy Clonra! why dost thou lift the steel? O that we
met in the strife of song, in thine own rushy vale!" Malthos beheld
him low, and darkened as he rushed along. On either side of a
stream, we bent in the echoing strife. Heaven comes rolling down;
around burst the voices of squally winds. Hills are clothed, at
times, in fire. Thunder rolls in wreaths of mist. In darkness
shrunk the foe: Morven's warriors stood aghast. Still I bent over
the stream, amidst my whistling locks.
	Then rose the voice of Fingal, and the sound of the flying
foe. I saw the king, at times, in lightning, darkly striding in his
might. I struck my echoing shield, and hung forward on the steps
of Alnecma; the foe is rolled before me, like a wreath of smoke.
	The sun looked forth from his cloud. The hundred streams
of Moi-lena shone. Slow rose the blue columns of mist, against
the glittering hill. Where are the mighty kings? Nor by that
stream, nor wood, are they! I hear the clang of arms! Their strife
is in the bosom of that mist. Such is the contending of spirits in a
nightly cloud, when they strive for the wintry wings of winds, and
the rolling of the foam-covered waves.
	I rushed along. The gray mist rose. Tall, gleaming, they
stood at Lubar. Cathmor leaned against a rock. His half-fallen
shield received the stream, that leapt from the moss above.
Towards him is the stride of Fingal: he saw the hero's blood. His
sword fell slowly to his side. He spoke, amidst his darkening joy.
	"Yields the race of Borbar-duthul? Or still does he lift the
spear? Not unheard is thy name, at Atha, in the green dwelling of
strangers. It has come, like the breeze of his desert, to the ear of
Fingal. Come o my hill of feasts: the mighty fail, at times. No fire
am I to low-laid foes; I rejoice not over the fall of the brave. To
close the wound is mine: I have known the herbs of the hills. I
seized their fair heads, on high, as they waved by their secret
streams. Thou art dark and silent, king of Atha of strangers!"
	"By Atha of the stream," he said, "there rises a mossy rock.
On its head is the wandering of boughs, within the course of
winds. Dark, in its face, is a cave, with its own loud rill. There
have I heard the tread of strangers, when they passed to my hall
of shells. Joy rose, like a flame, on my soul; I blest the echoing
rock. Here be my dwelling, in darkness; in my grassy vale. From
this I shall mount the breeze, that pursues my thistle's beard; or
look down on blue-winding Atha, from its wandering mist."
	"Why speaks the king of the tomb? Ossian, the warrior has
failed! Joy meet thy soul, like a stream, Cathmor friend of
strangers! My son, I hear the call of years; they take my spear as
they pass along. Why does not Fingal, they seem to say, rest
within his hall? Dost thou always delight in blood? In the tears of
the sad? No; ye dark-rolling years, Fingal delights not in blood.
Tears are wintry streams that waste away my soul. But when I lie
down to rest, then comes the mighty voice of war. It awakes me
in my hall and calls forth all my steel. It shall call it forth no
more; Ossian, take thou thy father's spear. Lift it, in battle, when
the proud arise.
	"My fathers, Ossian, trace my steps; my deeds are pleasant
to their eyes. Wherever I come forth to battle, on my field, are
their columns of mist. But mine arm rescued the feeble! the
haughty found my rage was fire. Never over the fallen did mine
eye rejoice. For this, my fathers shall meet me, at the gates of
their airy halls, tall, with robes of light, with mildly-kindled eyes.
But to the proud in arms, they are darkened moons in heaven,
which send the fire of night red wandering over their face.
	"Father of heroes, Trenmor, dweller of eddying winds, I give
thy spear to Ossian: let thine eye rejoice. Thee have I seen, at
times, bright from between thy clouds; so appear to my son,
when he is to lift the spear: then shall he remember thy mighty
deeds, though thou art now but a blast."
	He gave the spear to my hand, and raised at once a stone
on high, to speak to future times, with its gray head of moss.
Beneath he placed a sword in earth, and one bright boss from his
shield. Dark in thought awhile he bends: his words at length
came forth.
	"When thou, O stone, shalt moulder down, and lose thee in
the moss of years, then shall the traveller come, and whistling
pass away. Thou knowest not, feeble man, that fame once shone
on Moi-lena. Here Fingal resigned his spear, after the last of his
fields. Pass away, thou empty shade! in thy voice there is no
renown. Thou dwellest by some peaceful stream; yet a few years,
and thou art gone. No one remembers thee, thou dweller of thick
mist! But Fingal shall be clothed with fame, a beam of light to
other times; for he went forth, with echoing steel, to save the
weak in arms."
	Brightening, in his fame, the king strode to Lubar's
sounding oak, where it bent, from its rock, over the bright
tumbling stream. Beneath it is a narrow plain, and the sound of
the fount of the rock. Here the standard of Morven poured its
wreaths on the wind, to mark the way of Ferad-artho from his
secret vale. Bright, from his parted west, the son of heaven
looked abroad. The hero saw his people, and heard their shouts
of joy. In broken ridges round, they glittered to the beam. The
king rejoiced, as a hunter in his own green vale, when, after the
storm is rolled away, he sees the gleaning sides of the rocks. The
green thorn shakes its head in their face; from their top look
forward the roes.
	Gray, at his mossy cave, is bent the aged form of Clonmal.
The eyes of the bard had failed. He leaned forward on his staff.
Bright in her locks, before him, Sul-malla listened to the tale; the
tale of the kings of Atha, in the days of old. The noise of battle
had ceased in his Sir: he stopt and raised the secret sigh. The
spirits of the dead, they said, often lightened along his soul. He
saw the king of Atha low, beneath his bending tree.
	"Why art thou dark?" said the maid." The strife of arms is
past. Soon shall he come to thy cave, over thy winding streams.
The sun looks from the rocks of the west. The mists of the lake
arise. Gray they spread on that hill, the rushy dwelling of roes.
From the mist shall my king appear! Behold, he comes in his
arms. Come to the cave of Clonmal, O my best beloved!"
	It was the spirit of Cathmor, stalking, large, a gleaming
form. He sunk by the hollow stream, that roared between the
hills. "It was but the hunter," she said," who searches for the bed
of the roe. His steps are not forth to war; his spouse expects him
with night. He shall, whistling, return with the spoils of the dark-
brown hinds." Her eyes were turned to the bill; again the stately
form came down. She rose in the midst of joy. He retired again in
mist. Gradual vanish his limbs of smoke, and mix with the
mountain wind. Then she knew that he fell! "King of Erin, art
thou low!" Let Ossian forget her grief; it wastes the soul of age.
	Evening came down on Moi-lena. Gray rolled the streams of
the land. Loud came forth the voice of Fingal: the beam of oaks
arose. The people gathered round with gladness, with gladness
blended with shades. They sidelong looked to the king, and
beheld his unfinished joy. Pleasant from the way of the desert,
the voice of music came. It seemed, at first, the noise of a stream,
far distant on its rocks. Slow it rolled along the hill, like the
ruffled wing of a breeze, when it takes the tufted beard of the
rocks, in the still season of night. It was the voice of Condon,
mixed with Carril's trembling harp. They came, with blue-eyed
Ferad-artho, to Mora of the streams.
	Sudden bursts the song from our bards, on Lena: the host
struck their shields midst the sound. Gladness rose brightening
on the king, like the beam of a cloudy day, when it rises on the
green hill, before the roar of winds. He struck the bossy shield of
kings; at once they cease around. The people lean forward, from
their spears, towards the voice of their land.
	"Sons of Morven, spread the feast; send the night away in
song. Ye have shone around me, and the dark storm is past. My
people are the windy rocks, from which I spread my eagle wings,
when I rush forth to renown, and seize it on its field. Ossian,
thou hast the spear of Fingal; it is not the staff of a boy with
which he strews the thistles round, young wanderer of the field.
No: it is the lance of the mighty, with which they stretched forth
their hands to death. Look to thy fathers, my son; they are awful
beams. With morning lead Ferad-artho forth to the echoing halls
of Temora. Remind him of the kings of Erin: the stately forms of
old. Let not the fallen be forgot: they were mighty in the field. Let
Carril pour his song, that the kings may rejoice in their mist. To
morrow I spread my sails to Selma's shaded walls: where streamy
Duth-ula winds through the seats of roes."



CONLATH AND CUTHONA.


ARGUMENT.

Conlath was the youngest of Morni's sons, and brother to the
celebrated Gaul. He was in love with Cuthona, the daughter of
Rumar, when Toscar, the son of Kenfena, accompanied by
Fercuth his friend, arrived from Ireland, at Mora, where Conlath
dwelt. He was hospitably received, and according to the custom
of the times, feasted three days with Conlath. On the fourth he
set sail, and coasting the island of waves, one of the Hebrides, be
saw Cuthona hunting, fell in love with her, and carried her away,
by force, in his ship. He was forced, by stress of weather, into I-
thona, a desert isle. In the mean time Conlath hearing of the
rape, sailed after him, and found him on the point of sailing for
the coast of Ireland. They fought: and they and their followers fell
by mutual wounds. Cuthona did not long survive: for she died of
grief the third day after. Fingal hearing of their unfortunate
death, sent Stormal the son of Moran to bury them, but forgot to
send a bard to sing the funeral song over their tombs. The ghost
of Conlath comes long after to Ossian, to entreat him to transmit
to posterity, his and Cuthona's fame. For it was the opinion of the
times, that the souls of the deceased were not happy, till their
elegies were composed by a bard.

	Did not Ossian hear a voice? or is it the sound of days that
are no more? Often does the memory of former times come, like
the evening sun, on my soul. The noise of the chase is renewed.
In thought, I lift the spear. But Ossian did hear a voice! Who art
thou, son of night? The children of the feeble are asleep. The
midnight wind is in my hall. Perhaps it is the shield of Fingal that
echoes to the blast. It hangs in Ossian's hall. He feels it
sometimes with his hands. Yes, I hear thee, my friend! Long has
thy voice been absent from mine ear! What brings thee, on thy
cloud, to Ossian, son of generous Morni! Are the friends of the
aged near thee? Where is Oscar, son of fame? He was often near
thee, O Conlath, when the sound of battle arose.
	Ghost of Conlath: Sleeps the sweet voice of Cona, in the
midst of his rustling hall? Sleeps Ossian in his hall, and his
friends without their fame? The sea rolls round dark I-thona. Our
tombs are not seen in our isle. How long shall our fame be
unheard, son of resounding Selma?
	Ossian: O that mine eyes could behold thee! Thou sittest,
dim on thy cloud! Art thou like the mist of Lano? An half-
extinguished meteor of fire? Of what are the skirts of thy robe? Of
what is thine airy bow? He is gone on his blast like the shade of a
wandering cloud. Come from thy wall, O harp! Let me hear thy
sound. Let the light of memory rise on I-thona! Let me behold
again my, friends! And Ossian does behold his friends, on the
dark-blue isle. The cave of Thona appears, with its mossy rocks
and bending trees. A stream roars at its mouth. Toscar bends
over its course. Fercuth is sad by his side. Cuthona sits at a
distance and weeps. Does the wind of the waves deceive me? Or
do I hear them speak?
	Toscar: The night was stormy. From their hills the groaning
oaks came down. The sea darkly tumbled beneath the blast. The
roaring waves climbed against our rocks. The lightning came
often and showed the blasted fern. Fercuth! I saw the ghost who
embroiled the night. Silent he stood, on that bank. His robe of
mist flew on the wind. I could behold his tears. An aged man he
seemed, and full of thought!
	Fercuth: It was thy father, O Toscar. He foresees some
death among his race. Such was his appearance on Cromla
before the great Maronnan fell. Erin of hills of grass! how
pleasant are thy vales! Silence is near thy blue streams. The sun
is on thy fields. Soft is the sound of the harp in Sel ma. Lovely
the cry of th hunter on Cromla. But we are in dark I-thona,
surrounded by the storm. The billows lift their white heads above
our rocks. We tremble amidst the night.
	Toscar:  Whither is the soul of battle fled, Fercuth, with
locks of age? I have seen thee undaunted in danger: thine eyes
burning with joy in the light. Whither is the soul of battle fled?
Our fathers never feared. Go; view the settling sea: the stormy
wind is laid. The billows still tremble on the deep. They seem to
fear the blast. Go; view the settling sea. Morning is gray on our
rocks. The sun will look soon from his east; in all his pride of
light! I lifted up my sails with joy before the halls of generous
Conlath. My course was by a desert isle: where Cuthona pursued
the deer. I saw her, like that beam of the sun that issues from the
cloud. Her hair was on her heaving breast. She, bending forward,
drew the bow. Her white arm seemed, behind her, like the snow
of Cromla. Come to my soul, I said, huntress of the desert isle!
But she wastes her time in tears. She thinks of the generous
Conlath. Where can I find thy peace, Cuthona, lovely maid?
	Cuthona: A distant steep bends over the sea, with aged
trees and mossy rocks. The billow rolls at its feet. On its side is
the dwelling of roes. The people call it Mora. There the towers of
my love arise. There Conlath looks over the sea for his only love.
The daughters of the chase returned. He beheld their downcast
eyes. "Where is the daughter of Rumar?" But they answered not.
My peace dwells on Mora, son of the distant land!
	Toscar: Cuthona shall return to her peace: to the towers of
generous Conlath. He is the friend of Toscar! I have feasted in his
halls! Rise, ye gentle breezes of Erin. Stretch my sails towards
Mora's shores. Cuthona shall rest on Mora; but the days of
Toscar must be sad. I shall sit in my cave in the field of the sun.
The blast will rustle in my trees, I shall think it is Cuthona's
voice. But she is distant far, in the halls of the mighty Conlath!
	Cuthona: Ha! what cloud is that? It carries the ghost of my
fathers. I see the skirts of their robes, like gray and watery mist.
When shall I fall, O Rumar? Sad Cuthona foresees her death. Will
not Conlath behold me, before I enter the narrow house?
	Ossian: He shall behold thee, O maid! He comes along the
heaving sea. The death of Toscar is dark on his spear. A wound is
in his side! He is pale at the cave of Thona. He shows his ghastly
wound. Where art thou with thy tears, Cuthona? The chief of
Mora dies. The vision grows dim on my mind. I behold the chiefs
no more! But, O ye bards of future times, remember the fall of
Conlath with tears. He fell before his day. Sadness darkened in
his hall. His mother looked to his shield on the wall, and it was
bloody. She knew that her hero fell. Her sorrow was heard on
Mora. Art thou pale on thy rock, Cuthona, beside the fallen
chiefs? Night comes, and day returns, but none appears to raise
their tomb. Thou frightenest the screaming fowls away. Thy tears
for ever flow. Thou art pale as a watery cloud, that rises from a
lake.
	The sons of green Selma came. They found Cuthona cold.
They raised a tomb over the heroes. She rests at the side of
Conlath! Come not to my dreams, O Conlath! Thou hast received
thy fame. Be thy voice far distant from my hail; that sleep may
descend at night. O that I could forget my friends; till my
footsteps should cease to be seen; till I come among them with
joy! and lay my aged limbs in the narrow house!



BERRATHON.


ARGUMENT.

Fingal, in his voyage to Lochlin, whither he had been invited by
Starno, the father of Agandecca, touched at Berrathon an island
of Scandinavia, where he was kindly entertained by Larthmor,
the petty king of the place, who was a vassal of the supreme
kings of Lochlin. The hospitality of Larthmor gained him Fingal's
friendship, which that hero manifested, after the imprisonment of
Larthmor by his own son, by sending Ossian and Toscar, the
father of Malvina, so often mentioned, to rescue Larthmor, and to 
punish the unnatural behavior of Uthal. Uthal was handsome,
and, by the ladies, much admired. Nina-thoma, the beautiful
daughter of Tor-thoma, a neighboring prince, fell in love and fled
with him. He proved inconstant; for another lady, whose name is
not mentioned, gaining his affections, he confined Nina-thoma to
a desert island, near the coast of Berrathon. She was relieved by
Ossian, who, in company with Toscar, landing on Berrathon,
defeated the forces of Uthal, and killed him in single combat.
Nina-thoma, whose love not all the bad behavior of Uthal could
erase, hearing of his death, died of grief. In the mean time
Larthmor is restored, and Ossian and Toscar return in triumph
to Fingal.
	The poem opens with an elegy on the death of Malvina, the
daughter of Toscar, and closes with the presages of Ossian's
death.

	BEND thy blue course, O stream! round the narrow plain
of Lutha. Let the green woods hang over it, from their hills; the
sun look on it at noon. The thistle is there on its rock, and
shakes its beard to the wind. The flower hangs its heavy head,
waving, at times, to the gale. "Why dost thou awake me, O gale?"
it seems to say: "I am covered with the drops of heaven. The time
of my fading is near, the blast that shall scatter my leaves. To-
morrow shall the traveller come; he that saw me in my beauty
shall come. His eyes will search the field, but they will not find
me." So shall they search in vain for the voice of Cona, after it
has failed in the field. The hunter shall come forth in the
morning, and thee vote a of my harp shall not be heard. "Where
is the son of car-borne Fingal?" The tear will be on his cheek!
Then come thou, O Malvina! with all thy music, come! Lay Ossian
in the plain of Lutha: let his tomb rise in the lovely field.
	Malvina! where art thou, with thy songs; with the soft
sound of thy steps? Son of Alpin, art thou near? where is the
daughter of Toscar? "I passed, O son of Fingal, by Torlutha's
mossy walls. The smoke of the hall was ceased. Silence was
among the trees of the hill. The voice of the chase was over. I saw
the daughters of the bow. I asked about Malvina, but they
answered not. They turned their faces away: thin darkness
covered their beauty. They were like stars, on a rainy hill, by
night, each looking faintly through the mist!"
	Pleasant be thy rest, O lovely beam! soon hast thou set on
our hills! The steps of thy departure were stately, like the moon,
on the blue-trembling wave. But thou hast left us in darkness,
first of the maids of Lutha! We sit, at the rock, and there is no
voice; no light but the meteor of fire! Soon hast thou set, O
Malvina, daughter of generous Toscar! But thou risest, like the
beam of the east, among the spirits of thy friends, where they sit,
in their stormy halls, the chambers of the thunder! A cloud
hovers over Cona. Its blue curling sides are high. The winds are
beneath it, with their wings. Within it is the dwelling of Fingal.
There the hero sits in darkness. His airy spear is in his hand. His
shield, half covered with clouds, is like the darkened moon; when
one half still remains in the wave, and the other looks sickly on
the field!
	His friends sit round the king, on mist! They hear the songs
of Ullin; he strikes the half-viewless harp. He raises the feeble
voice. The lesser heroes, with a thousand meteors, light the airy
hall. Malvina rises in the midst: a blush is on her cheek. She
beholds the unknown faces of her fathers. She turns aside her
humid eyes. "An thou come so soon," said Fingal, "daughter of
generous Toscar! Sadness dwells in the halls of Lutha. My aged
son is sad! I hear the breeze of Cona, that was wont to lift thy
heavy locks. It comes to the hall, but thou art not there. Its voice
is mournful among the arms of thy fathers! Go, with thy rustling
wing, O breeze! sigh on Malvina's tomb. It rises yonder beneath
the rock, at the blue stream of Lutha. The maids <1> are
departed to their place. Thou alone, O breeze, mournest there!"
	But who comes from the dusky west, supported on a
cloud? A smile is on his gray, watery face. His locks of mist fly on
wind. He bends forward on his airy spear. It is thy father,
Malvina! "Why shinest thou, so soon, on our clouds," he says, "O
lovely light of Lutha? But thou wert sad, my daughter. Thy
friends had passed away. The sons of little men were in the hail.
None remained of the heroes, but Ossian, king of spears!"
	And dost thou remember Ossian, car-borne Toscar, son of
Conloch? The battles of our youth were many. Our swords went
together to the field. They saw us coming like two falling rocks.
The sons of the stranger fled. "There come the warriors of Cona!"
they said. "Their steps are in the paths of the flying!" Draw near,
son of Alpin, to the song of the aged. The deeds of other times are
in my soul. My memory beams on the days that are past: on the
days of mighty Toscar, when our path was in the deep. Draw
near, son of Alpin, to the last sound of the voice of Cona!
	The king of Morven commanded. I raised my sails to the
wind. Toscar, chief of Lutha, stood at my side: I rose on the dark-
blue wave. Our course was to sea-surrounded Berrathon, the isle
of many storms. There dwelt, with his locks of age, the stately
strength of Larthmor. Larthmor, who spread the feast of shells to
Fingal, when he went to Starno's halls, in the days of Agandecca.
But when the chief was old, the pride of his son arose; the pride
of fair-haired Uthal, the love of a thousand maids. He bound the
aged Larthmor, and dwelt in his sounding halls!
	Long pined the king in his cave, beside his rolling sea. Day
did not come to his dwelling: nor the burning oak by night. But
the wind of ocean was there, and the parting beam of the moon.
The red star looked on the king, when it trembled on the western
wave. Snitho came to Selma's hall; Snitho, the friend of
Larthmor's youth. He told of the king of Berrathon: the wrath of
Fingal arose. Thrice he assumed the spear, resolved to stretch his
hand to Uthal. But the memory of his deeds rose before the king.
He sent his son and Toscar. Our joy was great on the rolling sea.
We often half unsheathed our swords. For never before had we
fought alone, in battles of the spear.
	Night came down on the ocean. The winds departed on
their wings. Cold and pale is the moon. The red stars lift their
heads on high. Our course is slow along the coast of Berrathon.
The white waves tumble on the rocks. "What voice is that," said
Toscar, "which comes between the sounds of the waves? It is soft
hut mournful, like the voice of departed bards. But I behold a
maid. She sits on the rock alone. Her head bends on her arms of
snow. Her dark hair is in the wind. Hear, son of Fingal, her song;
it is smooth as the gliding stream. We came to the silent bay, and
heard the maid of night.
	"How long will ye roll round me, blue-tumbling waters of
ocean? My dwelling was not always in caves, nor beneath the
whistling tree. The feast was spread in Tor-thoma's hall. My
father delighted in my voice. The youths beheld me in the steps of
my loveliness. They blessed the dark-haired Nina-thoma. It was
then thou didst come, O Uthal! like the sun 4 heaven! The souls
of the virgins are thine, son of generous Larthmor! But why dost
thou leave me alone, in the midst of roaring waters? Was my soul
dark with thy death? Did my while hand lift the sword? Why then
hast thou left me alone, king of high Fin-thormo?"
	The tear started from my eye, when I heard the voice of the
maid. I stood before her in my arms. I spoke the words of peace!
"Lovely dweller of the cave! what sigh is in thy breast? Shall
Ossian lift his sword in thy presence, the destruction of thy foes?
Daughter of Tor-thoma, rise! I have heard the words of thy grief.
The race of Morven are around thee, who never injured the weak.
Come to our dark bosomed ship, thou brighter than the setting
moon! Our course is to the rocky Berrathon, to the echoing walls
of Fin-thormo." She came in her beauty; she came with all her
lovely steps. Silent joy brightened in her face; as when the
shadows fly from the field of spring; the blue stream is rolling in
brightness, and the green bush bends over its course!
	The morning rose with its beams. We came to Rothma's
bay. A boar rushed from the wood: my spear pierced his side, and
he fell. I rejoiced over the blood. I foresaw my growing fame. But
now the sound of Uthal's train came, from the high Fin-thormo.
They spread over the heath to the chase of the boar. Himself
comes slowly on, in the pride of his strength. He lifts two pointed
spears. On his side is the hero's sword. Three youths carry his
polished bows. The bounding of five dogs is before him. His
heroes move on, at a distance, admiring the steps of the king.
Stately was the son of Larthmor! but his soul was dark! Dark as
the troubled face of the moon, when it foretells the storms.
	We rose on the heath before the king. He stopped in the
midst of his course. His heroes gathered around. A. gray-haired
bard advanced. "Whence are the sons of the strangers?" began
the bard of song. "The children of the unhappy come to
Berrathon: to the sword of car-borne Uthal. He spreads no feast
in his hall. The blood of strangers is on his streams. If from
Selma's walls ye come, from the mossy walls of Fingal, choose
three youths to go to your king to tell of the fall of his people.
Perhaps the hero may come and pour his blood on Uthal's sword.
So shall the fame of Fin-thormo arise; like the growing tree of the
vale!"
	"Never, will it rise, O bard!" I said, in the pride of my wrath.
"He would shrink from the presence of Fingal, whose eyes are the
flames of death. The son of Comhal comes, and kings vanish
before him. They are rolled together, like mist, by the breath of
his rage. Shall three tell to Fingal, that his people fell? Yes! they
may tell it, bard! but his people shall fall with fame!"
	I stood in the darkness of my strength. Toscar drew his
sword at my side. The foe came on like a stream. The mingled
sound of death arose. Man took man; shield met shield; steel
mixed its beams with steel. Darts hiss through air. Spears ring
on mails. Swords on broken bucklers bound. All the noise of an
aged grove beneath the roaring wind, when a thousand ghosts
break the trees by night, such was the din of arms! But Uthal fell
beneath my sword. The sons of Berrathon fled. It was then I saw
him in his beauty, and the tear hung in my eye! "Thou art fallen,
young tree, I said, with all thy beauty round thee. Thou art fallen
on thy plains, and the field is bare. The winds come from the
desert! there is no sound in thy leaves! Lovely art thou in death,
son of car-borne Larthmor"
	Nina-thoma sat on the shore. She heard the sound of
battle. She turned her red eyes on Lethmal, the gray-haired bard
of Selma. He alone had remained on the coast with the daughter
of Tor-thoma. "Son of the times of old!" she said, "I hear the noise
of death. Thy friends have met with Uthal, and the chief is low! O
that I had remained on the rock, enclosed with the tumbling
waves? Then would my soul be sad, but his death would not
reach my ear. Art thou fallen on the heath, O son of high Fin-
thormo? Thou didst leave me on a rock, but my soul was full of
thee. Son of high Fin-thormo! art thou fallen on thy heath?"
	She rose pale in her tears. She saw the bloody shield of
Uthal. She saw it in Ossian's hand. Her steps were distracted on
the heath. She flew. She found him. She fell. Her soul came forth
in a sigh. Her hair is spread on her face. My bursting tears
descend. A tomb arose on the unhappy. My song of wo was
heard. "Rest, hapless children of youth! Rest at the noise of that
mossy stream! The virgins will see your tomb, at the chase, and
turn away their weeping eyes. Your fame will be in song. The
voice of the harp will be heard in your praise. The daughters of
Selma shall hear it: your renown shall be in other lands. Rest,
children of youth, at the noise of the mossy stream!"
	Two days we remained on the coast. The heroes of
Berrathon convened. We brought Larthmor to his halls. The feast
of shells is spread. The joy of the aged was great. He looked to the
arms of his fathers; the arms which he left in his hall, when the
pride of Uthal rose. We were renowned before Larthmor. He
blessed the chiefs of Morven. He knew not that his son was low,
the stately strength of Uthal! They had told, that he had retired to
the woods, with the tears of grief. They had told it, but he was
silent in the tomb of Rothma's heath.
	On the fourth day we raised our sails, to the roar of the
northern wind. Larthmor came to the coast. His bards exalted the 
song. The joy of the king was great; he looked to Rothma's gloomy
heath. He saw the tomb of his son. The memory of Uthal rose.
"Who of my heroes," he said, "lies there? he seems to have been of
the kings of men. Was he renowned in my halls before the pride
of Uthal rose? Ye are silent, sons of Berrathon! is the king of
heroes low? My heart melts for thee, O Uthal! though thy hand
was against thy father. O that I had remained in the cave! that
my son had dwelt in Fin-thormo! I might have heard the tread of
his feet, when he went to the chase of the boar. I might have
heard his voice on the blast of my cave. Then would my soul be
glad; but now darkness dwells in my halls."
	Such were my deeds, son of Alpin, when the arm of my
youth was strong. Such the actions of Toscar, the car-borne son
of Conloch. But Toscar is on his flying cloud. I am alone at Lutha.
My voice is like the last sound of the wind, when it forsakes the
woods. But Ossian shall not be long alone. He sees the mist that
shall receive his ghost. He beholds the mist that shall form his
robe, when he appears on his hills. The Sons of feeble men shall
behold me, and admire the stature of the chiefs of old. They shall
creep to their caves. They shall look to the sky with fear: for my
steps shall be in the clouds. Darkness shall roll on my side.
	Lead, son of Alpin, lead the aged to his woods. The winds
begin to rise. The dark wave of the lake resounds. Bends there
not a tree from Mora with its branches bare? It bends, son of
Alpin, in the rustling blast. My harp hangs on a blasted branch.
The sound of its strings is mournful. Does the wind touch thee, O
harp, or is it some passing ghost? It is the hand of Malvina! Bring
me the harp, son of Alpin. Another song shall rise. My soul shall
depart in the sound. My fathers shall hear it in their airy hail.
Their dim faces shall hang, with joy, from their clouds; and their
hands receive their son. The aged oak bends over the stream. It
sighs with all its moss. The withered fern whistles near, and
mixes, as it waves, with Ossian's hair.
	"Strike the harp, and raise the song: be near, with all your
wings, ye winds. Bear the mournful sound away to Fingal's airy
hail. Bear it to Fingal's hall, that he may hear the voice of his
son: the voice of him that praised the mighty!
	"The blast of north opens thy gates, O king! I behold thee
sitting on mist dimly gleaming in all thine arms. Thy form now is
not the terror of the valiant. It is like a watery cloud, when we see
the stars behind it with their weeping eyes. Thy shield is the aged
moon: thy sword a vapor half kindled with fire. Dim and feeble is
the chief who travelled in brightness be fore! But thy steps are on
the winds of the desert. The storms are darkening in thy hand.
Thou takest the sun in thy wrath, and hidest him in thy clouds.
The sons of little men are afraid. A thousand showers descend.
But when thou comest forth in thy mildness, the gale of the
morning is near thy course. The sun laughs in his blue fields.
The gray stream winds in its vale. The bushes shake their green
heads in the wind. The roes bound towards the desert.
	"There is a murmur in the heath! the stormy winds abate! I
hear the voice of Fingal. Long has it been absent from mine ear!
'Come, Ossian, come away, he says. Fingal has received his fame.
We passed away, like flames that have shone for a season. Our
departure was in renown. Though the plains of our battles are
dark and silent; our fame is in the four gray stones. The voice of
Ossian has been heard. The harp has been strung in Selma.
'Come, Ossian, come away,' he says; 'come, fly with thy fathers
on clouds.' I come, I come, thou king of men! The life of Ossian
fails. I begin to vanish on Cona. My steps are not seen in Selma.
Beside the stone of Mora I shall fall asleep. The winds whistling
in my gray hair, shall not awaken me. Depart on thy wings, O
wind, thou canst not disturb the rest of the bard. The night is
long, but his eyes are heavy. Depart, thou rustling blast.
	"But why art thou sad, son of Fingal? Why grows the cloud
of thy soul? The chiefs of other times are departed. They have
gone without their fame. The sons of future years shall pass
away. Another race shall arise. The people are like the waves of
ocean; like the leaves of woody Morven, they pass away in the
rustling blast, and other leaves lift their green heads on high.
	"Did thy beauty last, O Ryno? Stood the strength of car-
borne Oscar! Fingal himself departed! The hails of his fathers
forgot his steps. Shalt thou then remain, thou aged bard? when
the mighty have failed? But my fame shall remain, and grow like
the oak of Morven; which lifts its broad head to the storm, and
rejoices in the course of the wind?"

<1> The maids: that is, the young virgins who sung the funeral
elegy over her tomb.


THE END

